EssEntials
of Corporate Finance
9e
Ross  Westerfeld  Jordan

i
Essentials of 
Corporate Finance

The McGraw-Hill/Irwin Series in Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate
Stephen A. Ross, Consulting Editor
Franco Modigliani Professor of Finance and Economics
Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Block, Hirt, and Danielsen
Foundations of Financial Management
Sixteenth Edition
Brealey, Myers, and Allen
Principles of Corporate Finance
Twelfth Edition
Brealey, Myers, and Allen
Principles of Corporate Finance, Concise
Second Edition
Brealey, Myers, and Marcus
Fundamentals of Corporate Finance
Eighth Edition
Brooks
FinGame Online 5.0
Bruner
Case Studies in Finance: Managing for 
Corporate Value Creation
Seventh Edition
Cornett, Adair, and Nofsinger
Finance: Applications and Theory
Third Edition
Cornett, Adair, and Nofsinger
M: Finance
Third Edition
DeMello
Cases in Finance
Second Edition
Grinblatt (editor)
Stephen A. Ross, Mentor: Influence through 
Generations
Grinblatt and Titman
Financial Markets and Corporate Strategy
Second Edition
Higgins
Analysis for Financial Management
Eleventh Edition
Kellison
Theory of Interest
Third Edition
Ross, Westerfield, Jaffe, and Jordan
Corporate Finance
Eleventh Edition
Ross, Westerfield, Jaffe, and Jordan
Corporate Finance: Core Principles and 
Applications
Fourth Edition
Ross, Westerfield, and Jordan
Essentials of Corporate Finance
Ninth Edition
Ross, Westerfield, and Jordan
Fundamentals of Corporate Finance
Eleventh Edition
Shefrin
Behavioral Corporate Finance: Decisions 
that Create Value
First Edition
White
Financial Analysis with an Electronic 
Calculator
Sixth Edition
INVESTMENTS
Bodie, Kane, and Marcus
Essentials of Investments
Tenth Edition
Bodie, Kane, and Marcus
Investments
Tenth Edition
Hirt and Block
Fundamentals of Investment Management
Tenth Edition
Jordan, Miller, and Dolvin
Fundamentals of Investments: Valuation and 
Management
Seventh Edition
Stewart, Piros, and Heisler
Running Money: Professional Portfolio 
Management
First Edition
Sundaram and Das
Derivatives: Principles and Practice
Second Edition
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND 
MARKETS
Rose and Hudgins
Bank Management and Financial Services
Ninth Edition
Rose and Marquis
Financial Institutions and Markets
Eleventh Edition
Saunders and Cornett
Financial Institutions Management: A Risk 
Management Approach
Eighth Edition
Saunders and Cornett
Financial Markets and Institutions
Sixth Edition
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE
Eun and Resnick
International Financial Management
Seventh Edition
REAL ESTATE
Brueggeman and Fisher
Real Estate Finance and Investments
Fifteenth Edition
Ling and Archer
Real Estate Principles: A Value Approach
Fourth Edition
FINANCIAL PLANNING AND 
INSURANCE
Allen, Melone, Rosenbloom, and 
Mahoney
Retirement Plans: 401(k)s, IRAs, and Other 
Deferred Compensation Approaches
Eleventh Edition
Altfest
Personal Financial Planning
Second Edition
Harrington and Niehaus
Risk Management and Insurance
Second Edition
Kapoor, Dlabay, Hughes, and Hart
Focus on Personal Finance: An active 
approach to help you achieve financial 
literacy
Fifth Edition
Kapoor, Dlabay, Hughes, and Hart
Personal Finance
Eleventh Edition
Walker and Walker
Personal Finance: Building Your Future
First Edition

Stephen A. Ross
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Randolph W. Westerfield
University of Southern California
Bradford D. Jordan
University of Kentucky
Essentials of 
Corporate Finance
Ninth Edition

ESSENTIALS OF CORPORATE FINANCE, NINTH EDITION 
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2017 by McGraw-Hill 
Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions © 2014, 2011, 2008, 
and 2007. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in 
a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of McGraw-Hill Education, including, but not 
limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the 
United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOW/DOW 1 0 9 8 7 6   
ISBN   978-1-259-27721-4
MHID 1-259-27721-6
Senior Vice President, Products & Markets:  
Kurt L. Strand
Vice President, General Manager, Products & 
Markets: Marty Lange
Vice President, Content Design & Delivery:  
Kimberly Meriwether David
Managing Director: James Heine
Brand Manager: Charles Synovec
Director, Product Development: Rose Koos
Lead Product Developer: Michele Janicek
Product Developer: Jennifer Upton
Marketing Manager: Melissa Caughlin
Director of Digital Content Development:  
Douglas Ruby
Digital Product Developer: Tobi Philips
Digital Product Analyst: Kevin Shanahan
Director, Content Design & Delivery: Linda Avenarius
Program Manager: Mark Christianson
Content Project Managers: Kathryn D. Wright,  
Bruce Gin, and Karen Jozefowicz
Buyer: Sandy Ludovissy
Design: Matt Diamond
Content Licensing Specialist: Beth Thole
Cover Image: © Philippe Intraligi/Getty Images
Compositor: Aptara®, Inc.
Printer: R. R. Donnelley
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Ross, Stephen A., author. | Westerfield, Randolph W., author. |
    Jordan, Bradford D., author.
Title: Essentials of corporate finance / Stephen A. Ross, Massachusetts
    Institute of Technology, Randolph W. Westerfield, University of Southern
    California, Bradford D. Jordan, University of Kentucky.
Description: Ninth edition. | New York, NY : McGraw-Hill/Irwin, [2015]
Identifiers: LCCN 2015046933 | ISBN 9781259277214 (alk. paper) | ISBN
    1259277216 (alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Corporations--Finance.
Classification: LCC HG4026 .R676 2015 | DDC 658.15--dc23 LC record available  
at http://lccn.loc.gov/2015046933
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website does 
not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-Hill Education does not 
guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
mheducation.com/highered

About the Authors
Stephen A. Ross
Sloan School of Management, Franco Modigliani Professor of Financial Economics, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Stephen A. Ross is the Franco Modigliani Professor of Financial Economics at the Sloan School 
of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. One of the most widely published authors 
in finance and economics, Professor Ross is recognized for his work in developing the Arbitrage 
Pricing Theory and his substantial contributions to the discipline through his research in signal-
ing, agency theory, option pricing, and the theory of the term structure of interest rates, among 
other topics. A past president of the American Finance Association, he currently serves as an as-
sociate editor of several academic and practitioner journals. He is a trustee of CalTech.
Randolph W. Westerfield
Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California
Randolph W. Westerfield is Dean Emeritus of the University of Southern California’s Marshall 
School of Business and is the Charles B. Thornton Professor of Finance Emeritus. He came to 
USC from the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, where he was the chairman of the 
finance department and a member of the finance faculty for 20 years. He is a member of the Board 
of Trustees of Oaktree Capital Management. His areas of expertise include corporate financial 
policy, investment management, and stock market price behavior.
Bradford D. Jordan
Gatton College of Business and Economics, University of Kentucky
Bradford D. Jordan is Professor of Finance and holder of the Richard W. and Janis H. Furst En-
dowed Chair in Finance at the University of Kentucky. He has a long-standing interest in both 
applied and theoretical issues in corporate finance and has extensive experience teaching all levels 
of corporate finance and financial management policy. Professor Jordan has published numerous 
articles on issues such as the cost of capital, capital structure, and the behavior of security prices. 
He is a past president of the Southern Finance Association, and he is coauthor of Fundamentals of 
Investments: Valuation and Management, 7th edition, a leading investments text, also published 
by McGraw-Hill Education.
v

From the Authors
W
hen we first wrote Essentials of Corporate Finance, we thought there might be a 
small niche for a briefer book that really focused on what students with widely vary-
ing backgrounds and interests needed to carry away from an introductory finance course. 
We were wrong. There was a huge niche! What we learned is that our text closely matches 
the needs of instructors and faculty at hundreds of schools across the country. As a result, 
the growth we have experienced through the first eight editions of Essentials has far ex-
ceeded anything we thought possible.
	
With the ninth edition of Essentials of Corporate Finance, we have continued to refine 
our focus on our target audience, which is the undergraduate student taking a core course in 
business or corporate finance. This can be a tough course to teach. One reason is that the class 
is usually required of all business students, so it is not uncommon for a majority of the stu-
dents to be nonfinance majors. In fact, this may be the only finance course many of them will 
ever have. With this in mind, our goal in Essentials is to convey the most important concepts 
and principles at a level that is approachable for the widest possible audience.
	
To achieve our goal, we have worked to distill the subject down to its bare essentials 
(hence, the name of this book), while retaining a decidedly modern approach to finance. 
We have always maintained that the subject of corporate finance can be viewed as the 
workings of a few very powerful intuitions. We also think that understanding the “why” is 
just as important, if not more so, than understanding the “how”—especially in an introduc-
tory course. Based on the gratifying market feedback we have received from our previous 
editions, as well as from our other text, Fundamentals of Corporate Finance (now in its 
eleventh edition), many of you agree.
	
By design, this book is not encyclopedic. As the table of contents indicates, we have 
a total of 18 chapters. Chapter length is about 30 pages, so the text is aimed squarely at a 
single-term course, and most of the book can be realistically covered in a typical semes-
ter or quarter. Writing a book for a one-term course necessarily means some picking and 
choosing, with regard to both topics and depth of coverage. Throughout, we strike a bal-
ance by introducing and covering the essentials (there’s that word again!) while leaving 
some more specialized topics to follow-up courses.
	
The other things we have always stressed, and have continued to improve with this 
edition, are readability and pedagogy. Essentials is written in a relaxed, conversational 
style that invites the students to join in the learning process rather than being a passive 
information absorber. We have found that this approach dramatically increases students’ 
willingness to read and learn on their own. Between larger and larger class sizes and the 
ever-growing demands on faculty time, we think this is an essential (!) feature for a text in 
an introductory course.
	
Throughout the development of this book, we have continued to take a hard look at 
what is truly relevant and useful. In doing so, we have worked to downplay purely theoreti-
cal issues and minimize the use of extensive and elaborate calculations to illustrate points 
that are either intuitively obvious or of limited practical use.
vi

	
As a result of this process, three basic themes emerge as our central focus in writing 
Essentials of Corporate Finance:
An Emphasis on Intuition  We always try to separate and explain the principles at work on 
a commonsense, intuitive level before launching into any specifics. The underlying ideas 
are discussed first in very general terms and then by way of examples that illustrate in more 
concrete terms how a financial manager might proceed in a given situation.
A Unified Valuation Approach  We treat net present value (NPV) as the basic concept 
underlying corporate finance. Many texts stop well short of consistently integrating this 
important principle. The most basic and important notion, that NPV represents the excess 
of market value over cost, often is lost in an overly mechanical approach that emphasizes 
computation at the expense of comprehension. In contrast, every subject we cover is firmly 
rooted in valuation, and care is taken throughout to explain how particular decisions have 
valuation effects.
A Managerial Focus  Students shouldn’t lose sight of the fact that financial management 
concerns management. We emphasize the role of the financial manager as decision maker, 
and we stress the need for managerial input and judgment. We consciously avoid “black 
box” approaches to finance, and, where appropriate, the approximate, pragmatic nature 
of financial analysis is made explicit, possible pitfalls are described, and limitations are 
discussed.
	
Today, as we prepare to once again enter the market, our goal is to stick with and build 
on the principles that have brought us this far. However, based on an enormous amount of 
feedback we have received from you and your colleagues, we have made this edition and 
its package even more flexible than previous editions. We offer flexibility in coverage and 
pedagogy by providing a wide variety of features in the book to help students learn about 
corporate finance. We also provide flexibility in package options by offering the most 
extensive collection of teaching, learning, and technology aids of any corporate finance 
text. Whether you use just the textbook, or the book in conjunction with other products, we 
believe you will find a combination with this edition that will meet your needs.
	
Stephen A. Ross
	
Randolph W. Westerfield
	
Bradford D. Jordan
vii
vii

Organization of the Text
W
e designed Essentials of Corporate Finance to be as flexible and modular as pos-
sible. There are a total of nine parts, and, in broad terms, the instructor is free to de-
cide the particular sequence. Further, within each part, the first chapter generally contains 
an overview and survey. Thus, when time is limited, subsequent chapters can be omitted. 
Finally, the sections placed early in each chapter are generally the most important, and later 
sections frequently can be omitted without loss of continuity. For these reasons, the instruc-
tor has great control over the topics covered, the sequence in which they are covered, and 
the depth of coverage.
	
Just to get an idea of the breadth of coverage in the ninth edition of Essentials, the follow-
ing grid presents for each chapter some of the most significant new features, as well as a few 
selected chapter highlights. Of course, in every chapter, figures, opening vignettes, boxed fea-
tures, and in-chapter illustrations and examples using real companies have been thoroughly 
updated as well. In addition, the end-of-chapter material has been completely revised.
Chapters
Selected Topics
Benefits to Users
PART ONE
Overview of Financial Management
Chapter 1
New opener discussing The Men’s 
Wearhouse
Updated Finance Matters box on 
corporate ethics
Describes ethical issues in the context of mortgage fraud, 
offshoring, and tax havens.
Updated information on executive and 
celebrity compensation
Highlights important development regarding the very current 
question of appropriate executive compensation.
Updated Work the Web box on stock 
quotes
Goal of the firm and agency problems
Stresses value creation as the most fundamental aspect of 
management and describes agency issues that can arise.
Ethics, financial management, and 
executive compensation
Brings in real-world issues concerning conflicts of interest 
and current controversies surrounding ethical conduct and 
management pay.
New proxy fight example involving 
Starboard Value and Darden Restaurants
New takeover battle discussion 
involving Jos. A. Bank and The Men’s 
Wearhouse
PART TWO
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
Chapter 2
New opener discussing large energy 
company write-offs due to falling oil prices
Cash flow vs. earnings
Clearly defines cash flow and spells out the differences 
between cash flow and earnings.
Market values vs. book values	
Emphasizes the relevance of market values over book values.
Updated Work the Web box on SEC 
filings
Discusses the information that public companies are required 
to file with the SEC, and how to find that information.
viii

Chapters
Selected Topics
Benefits to Users
Chapter 3
Additional explanation of alternative 
formulas for sustainable and internal 
growth rates
Expanded explanation of growth rate formulas clears up 
a common misunderstanding about these formulas and 
the circumstances under which alternative formulas are 
correct.
Updated opener on PE ratios
Updated examples on Lowe’s vs. Home 
Depot and Yahoo! vs. Google
Updated Work the Web box on financial 
ratios
Discusses how to find and analyze profitability ratios.
PART THREE
Valuation of Future Cash Flows	
Chapter 4
First of two chapters on time value of 
money
Relatively short chapter introduces just the basic ideas 
on time value of money to get students started on this 
traditionally difficult topic.
Updated Finance Matters box on 
collectibles
Chapter 5
Second of two chapters on time value 
of money
Covers more advanced time value topics with numerous 
examples, calculator tips, and Excel spreadsheet exhibits. 
Contains many real-world examples.
Updated opener on professional 
athletes’ salaries
Provides a real-world example why it’s important to properly 
understand how to value costs incurred today versus future 
cash inflows.
Updated Work the Web box on student 
loan payments
PART FOUR
Valuing Stocks and Bonds	
Chapter 6
New opener on negative interest on 
various sovereign bonds
Discusses the importance of interest rates and how they 
relate to bonds.
Bond valuation
Thorough coverage of bond price/yield concepts.
Updated bond features example using 
ExxonMobil issue
Interest rates and inflation
Highly intuitive discussion of inflation, the Fisher effect, and 
the term structure of interest rates.
New “fallen angels” example using 
Petrobas issue
“Clean” vs. “dirty” bond prices and 
accrued interest
Clears up the pricing of bonds between coupon payment 
dates and also bond market quoting conventions.
Updated Treasury quotes exhibit and 
discussion
Updated historic interest rates figure
FINRA’s TRACE system and transparency 
in the corporate bond market
Up-to-date discussion of new developments in fixed 
income with regard to price, volume, and transactions 
reporting.
“Make-whole” call provisions
Up-to-date discussion of relatively new type of call provision 
that has become very common.
Updated Treasury yield curve exhibit
ix

Chapters
Selected Topics
Benefits to Users
Chapter 7
Stock valuation
Thorough coverage of constant and nonconstant growth 
models.
Updated opener on difference in 
dividend payouts	
Updated discussion of the NYSE, 
including its acquisition by ICE
Up-to-date description of major stock market operations.
Updated Finance Matters box on the 
OTCBB and the Pink Sheets markets
PART FIVE
Capital Budgeting	
Chapter 8
Updated opener on GE’s 
“Ecomagination” program
Illustrates the growing importance of “green” business.
First of two chapters on capital 
budgeting
Relatively short chapter introduces key ideas on an intuitive 
level to help students with this traditionally difficult topic.
NPV, IRR, MIRR, payback, discounted 
payback, and accounting rate of 
return	
Consistent, balanced examination of advantages and 
disadvantages of various criteria.
Chapter 9
Project cash flow
Thorough coverage of project cash flows and the relevant 
numbers for a project analysis.
New opener on project failures and 
successes
Shows the importance of properly evaluating net present 
value.
Scenario and sensitivity “what-if” 
analyses
Illustrates how to actually apply and interpret these tools in a 
project analysis.
PART SIX
Risk and Return
Chapter 10
Updated opener on stock market 
performance
Discusses the relationship between risk and return as it 
relates to personal investing.
Capital market history
Extensive coverage of historical returns, volatilities, and risk 
premiums.
Market efficiency
Efficient markets hypothesis discussed along with common 
misconceptions.
Geometric vs. arithmetic returns
Discusses calculation and interpretation of geometric returns. 
Clarifies common misconceptions regarding appropriate use 
of arithmetic vs. geometric average returns.
Chapter 11
Diversification, systematic, and 
unsystematic risk
Illustrates basics of risk and return in a straightforward 
fashion.
Updated opener on stock price 
reactions to announcements
Updated beta coefficients exhibit and 
associated discussion
Develops the security market line with an intuitive approach 
that bypasses much of the usual portfolio theory and 
statistics.
PART SEVEN
Long-Term Financing
Chapter 12
Cost of capital estimation
Intuitive development of the WACC and a complete, web-
based illustration of cost of capital for a real company.
Updated WACC calculations for 
Eastman	
Geometric vs. arithmetic growth rates
Both approaches are used in practice. Clears up issues 
surrounding growth rate estimates.
New section on company valuation with 
the WACC
Explores the difference between valuing a project and 
valuing a company.
x

Chapters
Selected Topics
Benefits to Users
Chapter 13
Basics of financial leverage
Illustrates effect of leverage on risk and return.
Optimal capital structure
Describes the basic trade-offs leading to an optimal capital 
structure.
Updated Finance Matters box on recent 
pre-pack bankruptcies
Financial distress and bankruptcy
Briefly surveys the bankruptcy process.
Chapter 14
Updated opener with Qualcomm 
dividend announcement
Raises questions about why raising dividends and 
repurchasing stock would please investors.
Updated figures on aggregate 
dividends, stock repurchases, and 
proportion of firms paying dividends
Brings students the latest thinking and evidence on dividend 
policy.
Dividends and dividend policy
Describes dividend payments and the factors favoring higher 
and lower payout policies. Includes recent survey results on 
setting dividend policy.
Updated examples and Finance 
Matters box covering buyback activity
Explores the reasons that buybacks are gaining in popularity 
now, following the recent recession.
Chapter 15
IPO valuation
Extensive, up-to-date discussion of IPOs, including the  
1999–2000 period and the recent Facebook IPO.
Dutch auctions
Explains uniform price (“Dutch”) auctions using Google IPO 
as an example.
New subsection on crowdfunding
Discusses the JOBS Act and crowdfunding.
Updated tables and figures on IPO 
initial returns and number of offerings
PART EIGHT
Short-Term Financial Management	
Chapter 16
Operating and cash cycles
Stresses the importance of cash flow timing.
Short-term financial planning
Illustrates the creation of cash budgets and the potential 
need for financing.
New Finance Matters box discussing 
operating and cash cycles
Explores how comparing the cash cycles of companies can 
reveal whether a company is performing well.
Chapter 17
Cash collection and disbursement
Examination of systems used by firms to handle cash inflows 
and outflows.
Credit management
Analysis of credit policy and implementation.
Inventory management
Brief overview of important inventory concepts.
PART NINE
Topics in Business Finance	
Chapter 18
New opener on impact of U.S. dollar 
appreciation
Raises questions about how currency appreciation affects 
the broader economy.
Foreign exchange
Covers essentials of exchange rates and their 
determination.
International capital budgeting	
Shows how to adapt the basic DCF approach to handle 
exchange rates.
Updated discussion of exchange rates 
and political risk
Discusses hedging and issues surrounding sovereign risk.
xi

Learning Solutions
I
n addition to illustrating relevant concepts and presenting up-to-date coverage, Essen-
tials of Corporate Finance strives to present the material in a way that makes it engaging 
and easy to understand. To meet the varied needs of the intended audience, Essentials of 
Corporate Finance is rich in valuable learning tools and support.
	
Each feature can be categorized by the benefit to the student:
■ Real financial decisions
■ Application tools
■ Study aids
▼ CHAPTER-OPENING VIGNETTES
Each chapter begins with a contemporary real-world event to 
introduce students to chapter concepts.
▲ FINANCE MATTERS BOXES
Most chapters include at least one Finance 
­Matters box, which takes a chapter issue and 
shows how it is being used right now in every-
day financial decision making.
Exotic Bonds
B
onds come in many flavors. The unusual types are called 
“exotics” and can range from the fairly simple to the truly 
esoteric. Take the case of mortgage-backed securities (MBSs). 
MBSs are a type of securitized financial instrument. In securiti-
zation, cash flows from financial assets are pooled together 
into securities, and the securities are sold to investors. With 
an MBS, banks or mortgage brokers who originate mortgages 
sell the mortgages to a trust. The trust pools the mortgages 
and sells bonds to investors. Bondholders receive payments 
based on the mortgage payments made by homeowners. 
During 2008, problems with MBSs skyrocketed due to the 
precipitous drop in real estate values and the sharply in-
creased default rates on the underlying mortgages.
 
The reverse convertible is a relatively new type of 
structured note. One type generally offers a high coupon 
rate, but the redemption at maturity can be paid in cash at 
par value or paid in shares of stock. For example, one recent 
General Motors (GM) reverse convertible had a coupon rate 
of 16 percent, which is a very high coupon rate in today’s in-
terest rate environment. However, at maturity, if GM’s stock 
declined sufficiently, bondholders would receive a fixed 
number of GM shares that were worth less than par value. 
So, while the income portion of the bond return would be 
high, the potential loss in par value could easily erode the 
extra return.
 
CAT bonds are issued to cover insurance companies 
against natural catastrophes. The type of natural catastro-
phe is outlined in the bond. For example, about 30 percent 
of all CAT bonds protect against a North Atlantic hurricane. 
The way these issues are structured is that the borrowers 
can suspend payment temporarily (or even permanently) if 
they have significant hurricane-related losses. These CAT 
bonds may seem like pretty risky investments, but, to date, 
only four have not been paid in full. For example, because of 
Hurricane Katrina, CAT bondholders lost $190 million. CAT 
bondholders also lost $300 million due to the 2011 tsunami 
in Japan. During 2011, two other CAT bond issues, each 
worth $100 million, were triggered due to an unusually ac-
tive tornado season.
 
Perhaps the most unusual bond (and certainly the most 
ghoulish) is the “death bond.” Companies such as Stone 
Street Financial purchase life insurance policies from indi-
viduals who are expected to die within the next 10 years. 
They then sell bonds that are paid off from the life insurance 
proceeds received when the policyholders die. The return 
on the bonds to investors depends on how long the policy-
holders live. A major risk is that if medical treatment ad-
vances quickly, it will raise the life expectancy of the 
policyholders, thereby decreasing the return to the 
bondholder.
FINANCE MATTERS
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
L
ate 2014 and early 2015 proved to be a very unusual period for 
bonds. For example, in the last week of February 2015, the 
German government issued new five-year bonds with a yield to 
maturity of negative .08 percent. In other words, investors were will-
ing to put up money today and receive less money in the future! You 
would actually be better off burying your money in the backyard for 
the next five years. Germany wasn’t alone: Finland, the Netherlands, 
France, Belgium, Austria, and Italy all had government bonds out-
standing with a negative return.
So what happened? Central banks were in a race to the bot-
tom, lowering interest rates in an attempt to improve their domestic 
economies.
This chapter takes what we have learned about the time value 
of money and shows how it can be used to value one of the most 
common of all financial assets, a bond. It then discusses bond features, bond types, and the 
operation of the bond market.
What we will see is that bond prices depend critically on interest rates, so we will go on 
to discuss some very fundamental issues regarding interest rates. Clearly, interest rates are 
important to everybody because they underlie what businesses of all types—small and 
large—must pay to borrow money.
Interest Rates and  
Bond Valuation
6
PART FOUR 
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1  Identify important bond features 
and types of bonds.
LO 2  Describe bond values and why 
they fluctuate.
LO 3  Discuss bond ratings and what 
they mean.
LO 4  Evaluate the impact of inflation on 
interest rates.
LO 5  Explain the term structure of 
interest rates and the determinants 
of bond yields.
O
ur goal in this chapter is to introduce you to bonds. We begin by showing how 
the techniques we developed in Chapters 4 and 5 can be applied to bond valua-
tion. From there, we go on to discuss bond features and how bonds are bought and 
sold. One important thing we learn is that bond values depend, in large part, on inter-
est rates. Thus, we close out the chapter with an examination of interest rates and 
their behavior.
REAL FINANCIAL DECISIONS
We have included two key features that help students 
connect chapter concepts to how decision makers 
use this material in the real world.
xii

▼ WORK THE WEB
These in-chapter boxes show students how to 
research financial issues using the web and how 
to use the information they find to make business 
decisions. All the Work the Web boxes also include 
interactive follow-up questions and exercises.
▼ CHAPTER CASES
Located at the end of most chapters, these cases focus ­on 
­hypothetical company situations that embody corporate 
­finance topics. Each case presents a new scenario, data, and 
a dilemma. Several questions at the end of each case require 
students to analyze and focus on all of the material they 
learned from the chapters in that part. Great for homework or 
in-class exercises and discussions!
B
ond quotes have become more available with the rise of the web. One site where you can find 
current bond prices (from TRACE) is finra-markets.morningstar.com/BondCenter. We went to 
the site and entered “AZO” for AutoZone, the well-known auto parts company. We found a total of 
eight bond issues outstanding. Here you see the information we pulled up.
Most of the information is self-explanatory. The price and yield columns show the price and yield 
to maturity of the issues based on their most recent sales. If you need more information about a 
particular issue, clicking on it will give you more details such as coupon dates and call dates.
W
R K  TH E  WE B
QUESTIONS
 
1.  Go to this website and find the last bond shown in the accompanying table. When was 
this bond issued? What was the size of the bond issue? What were the yield to maturity 
and price when the bond was issued?
 
2.  When you search for Chevron bonds (CVX), you will find bonds for several companies 
listed. Why do you think Chevron has bonds issued with different corporate names?
EXPLANATORY WEB LINKS ►
These web links are provided in the margins of the text. 
They are specifically selected to accompany text material 
and provide students and instructors with a quick way to 
check for additional information using the Internet.
Bond Price Reporting
In 2002, transparency in the corporate bond market began to improve dramatically. Under 
new regulations, corporate bond dealers are now required to report trade information 
through what is known as the Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE). A 
nearby Work the Web box shows how to get TRACE prices.
As we mentioned before, the U.S. Treasury market is the largest securities market in 
the world. As with bond markets in general, it is an OTC market, so there is limited trans-
parency. However, unlike the situation with bond markets in general, trading in Treasury 
issues, particularly recently issued ones, is very heavy. Each day, representative prices for 
outstanding Treasury issues are reported.
Figure 6.3 shows a portion of the daily Treasury note and bond listings from The Wall 
Street Journal online. The only difference between a Treasury note and a Treasury bond is 
that notes have 10 years or less to maturity at the time of issuance. The entry that begins 
“5/15/2030” is highlighted. Reading from left to right, the “5/15/2030” tells us that the 
bond’s maturity is May 15, 2030. The 6.250 is the bond’s coupon rate. Treasury bonds all 
make semiannual payments and have a face value of $1,000, so this bond will pay $31.25 
per six months until it matures.
To learn more about 
TRACE, visit www.finra.
org.
To purchase newly issued 
corporate bonds, go to 
www.incapital.com.
204 
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
CHAPTER CASE
Financing S&S Air’s Expansion Plans with a Bond Issue
M
ark Sexton and Todd Story, the owners of S&S Air, 
have decided to expand their operations. They in-
structed their newly hired financial analyst, Chris Guthrie, 
to enlist an underwriter to help sell $20 million in new 
10-year bonds to finance construction. Chris has entered 
into discussions with Renata Harper, an underwriter from 
the firm of Crowe & Mallard, about which bond features 
S&S Air should consider and what coupon rate the issue 
will likely have.
 
Although Chris is aware of the bond features, he is 
uncertain as to the costs and benefits of some features, 
so he isn’t clear on how each feature would affect the 
coupon rate of the bond issue. You are Renata’s assis-
tant, and she has asked you to prepare a memo to Chris 
describing the effect of each of the following bond fea-
tures on the coupon rate of the bond. She would also 
like you to list any advantages or disadvantages of each 
feature.
Q U E ST I O N S
1. 
 The security of the bond—that is, whether the 
bond has collateral.
2. 
The seniority of the bond.
3. 
The presence of a sinking fund.
4. 
 A call provision with specified call dates and call 
prices.
5. 
 A deferred call accompanying the preceding call 
provision.
6. 
A make-whole call provision.
 7.  Any positive covenants. Also, discuss several pos-
sible positive covenants S&S Air might consider.
 8.  Any negative covenants. Also, discuss several 
possible negative covenants S&S Air might 
consider.
 9.  A conversion feature (note that S&S Air is not a 
publicly traded company).
10. A floating rate coupon.
APPLICATION TOOLS
Because there is more than one way to solve prob-
lems in corporate finance, we include many sections 
that encourage students to learn or brush up on dif-
ferent problem-solving methods, including financial 
calculator and Excel spreadsheet skills.
xiii

WHAT’S ON THE WEB? ►
These end-of-chapter activities show stu-
dents how to use and learn from the vast 
amount of financial resources available 
on the Internet.
EXCEL MASTER ICONS ►
Topics covered in the comprehensive 
Excel Master supplement (found in 
­Connect) are indicated by an icon in the 
margin.
SPREADSHEET STRATEGIES ►
The unique Spreadsheet Strategies feature 
is also in a self-contained section, showing 
students how to set up spreadsheets to solve 
problems—a vital part of every business 
­student’s education.
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
6.1 Bond Quotes. You can find current bond prices at finra-markets.morningstar.com/
BondCenter. You want to find the bond prices and yields for bonds issued by Pfizer. 
Enter the ticker symbol “PFE” to do a search. What is the shortest maturity bond issued 
by Pfizer that is outstanding? What is the longest maturity bond? What is the credit 
rating for Pfizer’s bonds? Do all of the bonds have the same credit rating? Why do you 
think this is?
BONDS AND BOND VALUATION
When a corporation (or government) wishes to borrow money from the public on a long-
term basis, it usually does so by issuing, or selling, debt securities that are generically 
called bonds. In this section, we describe the various features of corporate bonds and some 
of the terminology associated with bonds. We then discuss the cash flows associated with 
a bond and how bonds can be valued using our discounted cash flow procedure.
6.1
coverage online
Excel 
Master
HOW TO CALCULATE BOND PRICES AND YIELDS  
USING A SPREADSHEET
Like financial calculators, most spreadsheets have fairly elaborate routines available for calculating 
bond values and yields; many of these routines involve details that we have not discussed. However, 
setting up a simple spreadsheet to calculate prices or yields is straightforward, as our next two 
spreadsheets show:
SPREADSHEET 
STRATEGIES
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1
2
Using a spreadsheet to calculate bond yields
3
4
Suppose we have a bond with 22 years to maturity, a coupon rate of 8 percent, and a price of
5
$960.17. If the bond makes semiannual payments, what is its yield to maturity?
6
7
Settlement date:
1/1/00
8
Maturity date:
1/1/22
9
Annual coupon rate:
.08
10
Bond price (% of par):
96.017
11
Face value (% of par):
100
12
Coupons per year:
2
13
Yield to maturity:
.084
14
◄ CALCULATOR HINTS
Calculator Hints is a self-contained section  
­occurring in various chapters that first 
­introduces students to calculator basics and  
then illustrates how to solve problems with 
the ­calculator. Appendix D goes into more  
detailed ­instructions by solving problems  
with two ­specific calculators.
◄ SPREADSHEET TEMPLATES
Indicated by an Excel icon next to 
applicable end-of-chapter questions 
and problems, spreadsheet templates 
are available for selected problems in 
Connect. For even more spreadsheet 
examples, check out Excel Master, 
also available in Connect.
HOW TO CALCULATE BOND PRICES AND YIELDS USING A FINANCIAL 
CALCULATOR
Many financial calculators have fairly sophisticated built-in bond valuation routines. However, these vary 
quite a lot in implementation, and not all financial calculators have them. As a result, we will illustrate a 
simple way to handle bond problems that will work on just about any financial calculator.
 
To begin, of course, we first remember to clear out the calculator! Next, for Example 6.3, we have 
two bonds to consider, both with 12 years to maturity. The first one sells for $935.08 and has a 10 per-
cent coupon rate. To find its yield, we can do the following:
Enter 
12 
 
100 
−935.08 
1,000
 
I/ Y
I/ Y
Solve for 
 
11
Notice that here we have entered both a future value of $1,000, representing the bond’s face value, and 
a payment of 10 percent of $1,000, or $100, per year, representing the bond’s annual coupon. Also no-
tice that we have a negative sign on the bond’s price, which we have entered as the present value.
CALCULATOR 
HINTS
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 18–33)
LO 2  18. Bond Price Movements. Bond X is a premium bond making semiannual 
payments. The bond has a coupon rate of 8.5 percent, a YTM of 7 percent, 
and has 13 years to maturity. Bond Y is a discount bond making semiannual 
payments. This bond has a coupon rate of 7 percent, a YTM of 8.5 percent, 
and also has 13 years to maturity. What are the prices of these bonds today 
assuming both bonds have a $1,000 par value? If interest rates remain 
unchanged, what do you expect the prices of these bonds to be in one year? In 
three years? In eight years? In 12 years? In 13 years? What’s going on here? 
Illustrate your answers by graphing bond prices versus time to maturity.
LO 2  19. Interest Rate Risk. Both Bond Bill and Bond Ted have 6.2 percent 
coupons, make semiannual payments, and are priced at par value. Bond 
Bill has 5 years to maturity, whereas Bond Ted has 25 years to maturity.
If interest rates suddenly rise by 2 percent what is the percentage
xiv

xv
STUDY AIDS
We want students to get the most from this book and 
this course, and we realize that students have dif-
ferent learning styles and study needs. We therefore 
present a number of study features to appeal to a 
wide range of students.
▼ LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Each chapter begins with a number of learning objectives that 
are key to the student’s understanding of the chapter. Learn-
ing objectives are also linked to end-of-chapter problems and 
test bank questions.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS ►
Every chapter ends with a set of critical thinking 
­questions that challenge the students to apply the 
­concepts they learned in the chapter to new ­situations.
▼ PEDAGOGICAL USE OF COLOR
We continue to use a full-color palette in Essen-
tials not only to make the text more inviting, but, 
more important, as a functional element to help 
students follow the discussion. In almost every 
chapter, color plays an important, largely self-
evident role. A guide to the use of color is found 
on the back endsheets.
◄ CONCEPT QUESTIONS
Chapter sections are intentionally kept short to promote a 
step-by-step, building-block approach to learning. Each sec-
tion is then followed by a series of short concept questions 
that highlight the key ideas just presented. Students use these 
questions to make sure they can identify and understand the 
most important concepts as they read.
W
hat do professional athletes Russell Martin, Ndamukong 
Suh, and Colin Kaepernick have in common? All three 
signed big contracts in late 2014 or early 2015. The contract values 
were reported as $82 million, $114 million, and $121 million, respec-
tively. That’s definitely major league money, but, even so, reported 
numbers like these can be misleading. For example, in November 
2014, Martin signed with the Toronto Blue Jays. His contract called 
for a salary of $7 million in 2015, $15 million in 2016, and $20 mil-
lion per year for 2017 to 2019. Not bad, especially for someone who 
makes a living using the “tools of ignorance” (jock jargon for a 
catcher’s equipment).
A closer look at the numbers shows that Russell, Ndamukong, 
and Colin did pretty well, but nothing like the quoted figures. Using 
Colin’s contract as an example, although the value was reported to 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1  Determine the future and present 
value of investments with multiple 
cash flows.
LO 2  Calculate loan payments, and find 
the interest rate on a loan.
LO 3  Describe how loans are amortized 
or paid off.
LO 4  Explain how interest rates are 
quoted (and misquoted).
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 2  14.1 
Dividend Policy Irrelevance. How is it possible that dividends are so 
important, but, at the same time, dividend policy is irrelevant?
LO 4  14.2 
Stock Repurchases. What is the impact of a stock repurchase on a 
company’s debt ratio? Does this suggest another use for excess cash?
LO 1  14.3 
Life Cycle Theory of Dividends. Explain the life cycle theory of 
dividend payments. How does it explain corporate dividend payments 
that are seen in the stock market?
LO 1  14.4 
Dividend Chronology. On Friday, December 8, Hometown Power 
Co.’s board of directors declares a dividend of 75 cents per share 
payable on Wednesday, January 17, to shareholders of record as of 
Wednesday, January 3. When is the ex-dividend date? If a shareholder 
buys stock before that date, who gets the dividends on those shares, the 
buyer or the seller?
LO 1  14.5 
Alternative Dividends. Some corporations, like one British company 
that offers its large shareholders free crematorium use, pay dividends in 
kind (i.e., offer their services to shareholders at below-market cost). 
Should mutual funds invest in stocks that pay these dividends in kind? 
(The fundholders do not receive these services.)
f i g u r e 14.1
Example of the 
procedure for 
dividend payment
Thursday,
January
15
Declaration
date
Wednesday,
January
28
Ex-dividend
date
Friday,
January
30
Record
date
Monday,
February
16
Payment
date
1. Declaration date: The board of directors declares a payment of dividends.
2. Ex-dividend date: A share of stock goes ex dividend on the date the seller
is entitled to keep the dividend; under NYSE rules, shares are traded ex
dividend on and after the second business day before the record date. 
3. Record date: The declared dividends are distributable to those who are
shareholders of record as of this specific date. 
4. Payment date: The dividend checks are mailed to shareholders of record.
concept questions
6.1a 
What are the cash flows associated with a bond?
6.1b 
What is the general expression for the value of a bond?
6.1c 
Is it true that the only risk associated with owning a bond is that the issuer will not 
make all the payments? Explain.

xvi
◄ NUMBERED EXAMPLES
Separate numbered and titled examples are extensively 
­integrated into the chapters. These examples provide ­detailed 
applications and illustrations of the text material in a step-by-
step format. Each example is completely self-­contained so that 
students don’t have to search for ­additional information. Based 
on our classroom testing, these examples are among the most 
useful learning aids because they provide both detail and ex-
planation.
EXAMPLE
11.4  Portfolio Variance and Standard Deviation
In Example 11.3, what are the standard deviations on the two portfolios? To answer, we first have to 
calculate the portfolio returns in the two states. We will work with the second portfolio, which has 
50 percent in Stock A and 25 percent in each of Stocks B and C. The relevant calculations can be 
summarized as follows:
State of  
Economy
Probability  
of State 
Returns
Stock A 
Stock B 
 Stock C   
Portfolio   
Boom
.40
 10%
 15%
 20%
 13.75%
Bust
.60
8
4
0
5.00
The portfolio return when the economy booms is calculated as:
.50 × 10% + .25 × 15% + .25 × 20% = 13.75%
SUMMARY TABLES ►
These tables succinctly restate key principles, 
results, and equations. They appear whenever 
it is useful to emphasize and summarize a 
group of related concepts.
 I. 
Internal growth rate
 
Internal growth rate =
ROA × b
1 −ROA × b
where
  ROA = Return on assets = Net income/Total assets
    b = Plowback (retention) ratio
 
= Addition to retained earnings/Net income
 
= 1 – Dividend payout ratio
The internal growth rate is the maximum growth rate that can be achieved with no external 
financing of any kind.
II. 
Sustainable growth rate
Sustainable growth rate =
ROE × b
1 −ROE × b
where
  ROE = Return on equity = Net income/Total equity
    b = Plowback (retention) ratio
 
= Addition to retained earnings/Net income
 
= 1 – Dividend payout ratio
The sustainable growth rate is the maximum growth rate that can be achieved with no 
external equity financing while maintaining a constant debt–equity ratio.
table 3.9
Summary of internal 
and sustainable 
growth rates
◄ KEY TERMS
These are printed in blue the first time 
they appear and are defined within the 
text and in the margin.
RATIO ANALYSIS
Another way of avoiding the problems involved in comparing companies of different sizes 
is to calculate and compare financial ratios. Such ratios are ways of comparing and investi-
gating the relationships between different pieces of financial information. We cover some 
of the more common ratios next, but there are many others that we don’t touch on.
One problem with ratios is that different people and different sources frequently don’t 
compute them in exactly the same way, and this leads to much confusion. The specific 
3.2
financial ratios
Relationships determined 
from a firm’s financial 
information and used for 
comparison purposes.
KEY EQUATIONS ►
These are called out in the text and iden-
tified by equation numbers. Appendix B 
shows the key equations by chapter.
Key Equations
B
   7. The times interest earned (TIE) ratio: 
 
Times interest earned ratio = EBIT
Interest 
[3.7]
   8. The cash coverage ratio: 
 
Cash coverage ratio = 
EBIT + Depreciation
Interest
 
[3.8]
   9. The inventory turnover ratio:  
CHAPTER 2
 1. The balance sheet identity, or equation:  
Assets  =  Liabilities + Shareholders’ equity 
[2.1]
 2. The income statement equation:  
Revenues − Expenses = Income 
[2.2]
 3. The cash flow identity:  
Cash flow from assets = Cash flow to creditors  
[2.3] 
 
+ Cash flow to stockholders
◄ HIGHLIGHTED PHRASES
Throughout the text, important ideas are presented separately 
and printed in boxes to indicate their importance to the students.
Maximize the market value of the existing owners’ equity.

xvii
◄ CONNECT POP QUIZ
This end-of-chapter feature gives students 
a quick glimpse into how close they are to 
mastering the material. Students test their 
knowledge with practice questions from 
­McGraw-Hill’s SmartBook. This can be a 
great way to engage your Connect-using 
students!
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 4.1 If you invest $500 for one year at a rate of 8 percent per year, how 
much interest will you earn?
Section 4.2 What is the formula used to calculate the present value of a future 
amount?
Section 4.3 Suppose you invest $100 now and receive $259.37 in 10 years. What 
rate of interest did you earn?
CHAPTER SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS ►
These paragraphs review the chapter’s key points 
and provide closure to the chapter.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has described how to go about putting together a discounted cash flow analy-
sis and evaluating the results. In it, we covered:
 1. The identification of relevant project cash flows. We discussed project cash flows 
and described how to handle some issues that often come up, including sunk costs, 
opportunity costs, financing costs, net working capital, and erosion.
 2. Preparing and using pro forma, or projected, financial statements. We showed how pro 
forma financial statement information is useful in coming up with projected cash flows.
 3. The use of scenario and sensitivity analysis. These tools are widely used to evaluate 
the impact of assumptions made about future cash flows and NPV estimates.
 4. Additional issues in capital budgeting. We examined the managerial options implicit 
in many capital budgeting situations. We also discussed the capital rationing problem.
The discounted cash flow analysis we’ve covered here is a standard tool in the business 
world. It is a very powerful tool, so care should be taken in its use. The most important 
thing is to get the cash flows identified in a way that makes economic sense. This chapter 
gives you a good start on learning to do this.
◄ CHAPTER REVIEW AND  
SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
Review and self-test problems ­appear after 
the chapter summaries. Detailed answers 
to the self-test problems immediately 
­follow. These questions and answers allow 
students to test their abilities in solving 
key problems related to the content of 
the chapter. These problems are mapped 
to similar problems in the end-of-chapter 
material. The aim is to help students 
work through ­difficult problems using the 
­authors’ work as an example.
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
9.1 
Calculating Operating Cash Flow. Mater Pasta, Inc., has projected a sales volume 
of $1,432 for the second year of a proposed expansion project. Costs normally run 
70 percent of sales, or about $1,002 in this case. The depreciation expense will be 
$80, and the tax rate is 34 percent. What is the operating cash flow? (See Problem 9.)
9.2 
Scenario Analysis. A project under consideration costs $500,000, has a five-year 
life, and has no salvage value. Depreciation is straight-line to zero. The required 
return is 15 percent, and the tax rate is 34 percent. Sales are projected at 400 units 
per year. Price per unit is $3,000, variable cost per unit is $1,900, and fixed costs 
are $250,000 per year. No net working capital is required.
 
Suppose you think the unit sales, price, variable cost, and fixed cost projections 
are accurate to within 5 percent. What are the upper and lower bounds for these 
projections? What is the base-case NPV? What are the best- and worst-case scenario 
NPVs? (See Problem 19.)
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
9.1 
First, we can calculate the project’s EBIT, its tax bill, and its net income.
  
 EBIT = $1,432 − 1,002 − 80 = $350
   Taxes = $350 × .34 = $119
Net income = $350 − 119 = $231
 
With these numbers, operating cash flow is:
OCF = EBIT + Depreciation − Taxes     
   = $350 + 80 − 119
   =   $311
END-OF-CHAPTER QUESTIONS  
AND PROBLEMS ►
We have found that many students learn better 
when they have plenty of opportunity to practice. 
We therefore provide extensive end-of-chapter 
questions and problems linked to Learning  
Objectives. The questions and problems are  
generally separated into three levels—Basic,  
Intermediate, and Challenge. All problems are  
fully annotated so that students and instructors 
can readily identify particular types. Throughout 
the text, we have worked to supply interesting 
problems that illustrate real-world applications 
of chapter material. Answers to selected end-of-
chapter problems appear in Appendix C.
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the Preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–22)
LO 1  1. Calculating Payback. What is the payback period for the following set of 
cash flows?
Year
Cash Flow
0
−$6,700
1
     2,800
2
     3,200
3
     2,200
4
     1,400
LO 1  2. Calculating Payback. An investment project provides cash inflows of $935 
per year for eight years. What is the project payback period if the initial cost 
is $3,100? What if the initial cost is $4,300? What if it is $7,900?

Required=Results
®
McGraw-Hill Connect®		
 
Learn Without Limits
Connect is a teaching and learning platform 
that is proven to deliver better results for 
students and instructors. 
Connect empowers students by continually 
adapting to deliver precisely what they  
need, when they need it, and how they need 
it, so your class time is more engaging and 
effective.
88% of instructors who use Connect 
require it; instructor satisfaction increases 
by 38% when Connect is required.
 Using Connect improves passing rates 
by 10.8% and retention by 16.4%.
Connect Insight®	
Connect Insight is Connect’s new one-of-a-kind 
visual analytics dashboard—now available for both 
instructors and students—that provides at-a- 
glance information regarding student performance, which is 
immediately actionable. By presenting assignment, assessment,  
and topical performance results together with a time metric that is 
easily visible for aggregate or individual results, Connect Insight 
gives the user the ability to take a just-in-time approach to  
teaching and learning, which was never before available. Connect 
Insight presents data that empower students and help instructors 
improve class performance in a way that is efficient and effective.
Students can view  
their results for any 
Connect course.
Analytics
Mobile
Connect’s new, intuitive mobile interface gives students 
and instructors flexible and convenient, anytime–anywhere 
access to all components of the Connect platform.

SmartBook®  
Proven to help students improve grades and 
study more efficiently, SmartBook contains the 
same content within the print book, but actively 
tailors that content to the needs of the individual. 
SmartBook’s adaptive technology provides 
precise, personalized instruction on what the 
student should do next, guiding the student to 
master and remember key concepts, targeting 
gaps in knowledge and offering customized 
feedback, and driving the student toward 
comprehension and retention of the subject 
matter. Available on smartphones and tablets, 
SmartBook puts learning at the student’s 
fingertips—anywhere, anytime.
Adaptive
Over 4 billion questions have been 
answered, making McGraw-Hill 
Education products more intelligent, 
reliable, and precise.
THE FIRST AND ONLY 
ADAPTIVE READING 
EXPERIENCE DESIGNED 
TO TRANSFORM THE  
WAY STUDENTS READ
More students earn A’s and  
B’s when they use McGraw-Hill 
Education Adaptive products.
www.learnsmartadvantage.com

xx
T
his edition of Essentials has more options than ever in terms of the textbook, instructor 
supplements, student supplements, and multimedia products. Mix and match to create 
a package that is perfect for your course!
Assurance of Learning Ready
Assurance of learning is an important element of many accreditation standards. Essen-
tials of Corporate Finance, ninth edition, is designed specifically to support your as-
surance of learning initiatives. Each chapter in the book begins with a list of numbered 
learning objectives which appear throughout the end-of-chapter problems and exercises. 
Every test bank question is also linked to one of these objectives, in addition to level 
of difficulty, topic area, Bloom’s Taxonomy level, and AACSB skill area. Connect, 
McGraw-Hill’s online homework solution, and EZ Test, McGraw-Hill’s easy-to-use test 
bank software, can search the test bank by these and other categories, providing an en-
gine for targeted Assurance of Learning analysis and assessment.
AACSB Statement
McGraw-Hill Education is a proud corporate member of AACSB International. Un-
derstanding the importance and value of AACSB Accreditation, Essentials of Corpo-
rate Finance, ninth edition, has sought to recognize the curricula guidelines detailed 
in the AACSB standards for business accreditation by connecting selected questions 
in the test bank to the general knowledge and skill guidelines found in the AACSB 
standards.
	
The statements contained in Essentials of Corporate Finance, ninth edition, are 
provided only as a guide for the users of this text. The AACSB leaves content coverage 
and assessment within the purview of individual schools, the mission of the school, 
and the faculty. While Essentials of Corporate Finance, ninth edition, and the teaching 
package make no claim of any specific AACSB qualification or evaluation, we have, 
within the test bank, labeled selected questions according to the six general knowledge 
and skills areas.
Tegrity Campus: Lectures 24/7
Tegrity Campus is a service that makes class time available 24/7 
by automatically capturing every lecture in a searchable format 
for students to review when they study and complete assignments. With a simple one-
click start-and-stop process, you capture all computer screens and corresponding audio. 
Students can replay any part of any class with easy-to-use browser-based viewing on a PC 
or Mac.
	
Educators know that the more students can see, hear, and experience class resources, 
the better they learn. In fact, studies prove it. With Tegrity Campus, students quickly recall 
key moments by using Tegrity Campus’s unique search feature. This search helps stu-
dents efficiently find what they need, when they need it, across an entire semester of class 
®
Comprehensive Teaching  
and Learning Package

xxi
recordings. Help turn all your students’ study time into learning moments immediately 
supported by your lecture.
	
To learn more about Tegrity watch a two-minute demo at www.tegrity.com.
McGraw-Hill Customer Care Contact Information
At McGraw-Hill, we understand that getting the most from new technology can be chal-
lenging. That’s why our services don’t stop after you purchase our products. You can e-mail 
our Product Specialists 24 hours a day to get product training online. Or you can search 
our knowledge bank of Frequently Asked Questions on our support website. For Customer 
Support, call 800-331-5094, or visit mpss.mhhe.com. One of our Technical Support Ana-
lysts will be able to assist you in a timely fashion.
Instructor Supplements
■ Instructor’s Manual (IM)
 
Prepared by Steven Dolvin, Butler University
 
A great place to find new lecture ideas! This annotated outline for each chapter 
includes Lecture Tips, Real-World Tips, Ethics Notes, suggested PowerPoint slides, 
and, when appropriate, a video synopsis.
■ Solutions Manual (SM)
 
Prepared by Joseph Smolira, Belmont University
 
The Essentials Solutions Manual provides detailed solutions to the extensive end-of-
chapter material, including concept review questions, quantitative problems, and cases. 
Select chapters also contain calculator solutions.
■ Test Bank
 
Prepared by Kay Johnson
 
Great format for a better testing process! All questions closely link with the text 
material, listing section number, Learning Objective, Bloom’s Taxonomy Question 
Type, and AACSB topic when applicable. Each chapter covers a breadth of topics 
and types of questions, including questions that test the understanding of the key 
terms; questions patterned after the learning objectives, concept questions, chapter-
opening vignettes, boxes, and highlighted phrases; multiple-choice and true/false 
problems patterned after the end-of-chapter questions, in basic, intermediate, and 
challenge levels; and essay questions to test problem-solving skills and more advanced 
understanding of concepts. Each chapter also includes new problems that pick up 
questions directly from the end-of-chapter material and convert them into parallel test 
bank questions. For your reference, each test bank question in this part is linked with its 
corresponding question in the end-of-chapter section.
■ PowerPoint Presentation System
 
Prepared by Steven Dolvin, Butler University
 
Customize our content for your course! This presentation has been thoroughly 
revised to include more lecture-oriented slides, as well as exhibits and examples 
both from the book and from outside sources. Applicable slides have web links that 
take you directly to specific Internet sites or spreadsheet links to show an example 
in Excel. You can also go to the Notes Page function for more tips in presenting 
the slides. Additional PowerPoint slides work through example problems for 
instructors to show in class. If you already have PowerPoint installed on your 
computer, you have the ability to edit, print, or rearrange the complete presentation 
to meet your specific needs.

■ Videos (DVD Format)
	
Current set of videos on hot topics! McGraw-Hill Education has produced a series 
of finance videos that are 10-minute case studies on topics such as financial markets, 
careers, rightsizing, capital budgeting, EVA (Economic Value Added), mergers and 
acquisitions, and international finance.
Student Supplements
■ Student Support
 
A great resource for those seeking additional practice, students can access Excel 
template problems and the Excel Master tutorial designed by Brad Jordan and Joe 
Smolira.
■ Narrated PowerPoint Slides
 
The narrated PowerPoints provide real-world examples accompanied by step-by-step 
instructions and explanations for solving problems presented in the chapter. The 
Concept Checks from the text are also integrated into the slides to reinforce the key 
topics in the chapter. Designed specifically to appeal to different learning styles, 
the slides provide a visual and audio explanation of topics and problems. Click on a 
slide and listen to the accompanying narration! You can view a slide via computer or 
download it onto your mobile device.
Teaching Support
Along with having access to all of the same material your students can view through Con-
nect you also have password-protected access to the Instructor’s Manual, solutions to end-
of-chapter problems and cases, Instructor’s Excel Master, PowerPoint, Excel template 
solutions, video clips, and video projects and questions.
	
WebCT and Blackboard course cartridges allow instructors to manage their course and 
administer examinations online. Increase ease, organization, and efficiency and ask your 
representative for more details about course cartridges today!
xxii

xxiii
C
learly, our greatest debt is to our many colleagues (and their students) around the 
world who, like us, wanted to try an alternative to what they were using and made 
the switch to our text. Our plan for developing and improving Essentials, ninth edition, 
revolved around the detailed feedback we received from many of our colleagues over the 
years who had an interest in the book and regularly teach the introductory course. These 
dedicated scholars and teachers to whom we are very grateful are:
Vaughn S. Armstrong, Utah Valley University
Juan Avendano, Augsburg College
R. Brian Balyeat, Xavier University
John Barkoulas, Georgia Southern University
Laura Beal, University of Nebraska at Omaha
Stephen G. Buell, Lehigh University
Manfen Chen, University of Southern Indiana
Su-Jane Chen, Metropolitan University College of Denver
Ingyu Chiou, Eastern Illinois University
Paul Chiou, Northeastern University
Brandon Cline, Mississippi State University
Susan Coleman, University of Hartford
Bruce A. Costa, University of Montana
Maria E. de Boyrie, New Mexico State University
David Dineen, Seton Hall University
Alan Eastman, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
David Eckmann, University of Miami
Dan Ervin, Salisbury University
Jocelyn Evans, College of Charleston
Ramon T. Franklin, Clemson University
Sharon H. Garrison, University of Arizona
Victoria Geyfman, Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania
Kimberly R. Goodwin, University of Southern Mississippi
Michael Gunderson, Purdue University
Karen L. Hamilton, Lasell College
Mahfuzul Haque, Indiana State University
John J. Harrington Jr., Seton Hall University
John Hatem, Georgia Southern University
Rodrigo Hernandez, Radford University
Keith Jakob, University of Montana
Abu Jalal, Suffolk University
Acknowledgments

Marlin Jensen, Auburn University
Samuel Kyle Jones, Stephen F. Austin State University
Douglas Jordan, Sonoma State University
Ashok K. Kapoor, Augsburg College
Howard Keen, Temple University
Marvin Keene, Coastal Carolina University
James D. Keys, Florida International University
Ladd Kochman, Kennesaw State University
Denise Letterman, Robert Morris University–Pittsburgh, PA
Seongyeon (Sonya) Lim, DePaul University
Alethea Lindsay, Grambling State University
Qingfeng “Wilson” Liu, James Madison University
Angelo Luciano, Columbia College–Chicago
Suzan Murphy, University of Tennessee
Ohanes Paskelian, University of Houston Downtown
Milena Petrova, Syracuse University
Ted Pilger, Southern Illinois University–Carbondale
Alexandros P. Prezas, Suffolk University
Charles Reback, University of South Carolina Upstate
Thomas A. Rhee, California State University–Long Beach
Jong C. Rhim, University of Southern Indiana
Clarence C. Rose, Radford University
Camelia S. Rotaru, St. Edward’s University
Andrew Saporoschenko, St. Louis University
Michael J. Seiler, Old Dominion University
Roger Severns, Minnesota State University–Mankato
Gowri Shankar, University of Washington–Bothell
Luke Sparvero, SUNY–Oswego
Carolyn Spencer, Dowling College
Andrew Spieler, Hofstra University
Glenn Tanner, Texas State University
John Thornton, Kent State University
Hiep Tran, California State University–Sacramento
Cathyann Tully, Kean University
James A. Turner, Weber State University
John B. White, United States Coast Guard Academy
Susan White, University of Maryland
Fred Yeager, Saint Louis University
Tarek Saad Zaher, Indiana State University
	
We owe a special debt to our colleagues for their dedicated work on the many supple-
ments that accompany this text: Steven Dolvin, for his development of the Instructor’s 
Manual and PowerPoint slides, and Kay Johnson, for her extensive revision and improve-
ment of the Test Bank.
xxiv

	
We also thank Joseph C. Smolira, Belmont University, for his work on this edition. Joe 
worked closely with us to develop the solutions manual, along with many of the vignettes 
and real-world examples we have added to this edition.
	
Steve Hailey and Andrew Beeli of the University of Kentucky did outstanding work on 
this edition of Essentials. To them fell the unenviable task of technical proofreading, and, 
in particular, careful checking of each and every calculation throughout the text.
	
Finally, in every phase of this project, we have been privileged to have the complete 
and unwavering support of a great organization, McGraw-Hill Education. We especially 
thank the MHE sales organization. The suggestions they provided, their professionalism in 
assisting potential adopters, and their service to current adopters have been a major factor 
in our success.
	
We are deeply grateful to the select group of professionals who served as our develop-
ment team on this edition: Chuck Synovec, Executive Brand Manager; Jennifer Upton, 
Senior Product Developer; Melissa Caughlin, Executive Marketing Manager; Kathryn 
Wright and Bruce Gin, Content Project Managers; Matt Diamond, Senior Designer; and 
Michele Janicek, Lead Product Developer. Others at McGraw-Hill, too numerous to list 
here, have improved the book in countless ways.
	
Throughout the development of this edition, we have taken great care to discover and 
eliminate errors. Our goal is to provide the best textbook available on the subject. To ensure 
that future editions are error-free, we will gladly offer $10 per arithmetic error to the first 
individual reporting it as a modest token of our appreciation. More than this, we would like 
to hear from instructors and students alike. Please send your comments to Dr. Brad Jordan, 
c/o Editorial—Finance, McGraw-Hill Education, 1333 Burr Ridge Parkway, Burr Ridge, 
IL 60527.
	
Stephen A. Ross
	
Randolph W. Westerfield
	
Bradford D. Jordan
xxv

xxvi
part one  overview of financial management
  1	 Introduction to Financial Management  1
part two  understanding financial statements and cash flow
  2	 Financial Statements,  Taxes, and Cash Flow  22
  3	 Working with Financial Statements  51
part three  valuation of future cash flows
  4	 Introduction to Valuation:  The Time Value of Money  97
  5	 Discounted Cash  Flow Valuation  122
part four  valuing stocks and bonds
  6	 Interest Rates and  Bond Valuation  165
  7	 Equity Markets and  Stock Valuation  205
part five  capital budgeting
  8	 Net Present Value and  Other Investment Criteria  236
  9	 Making Capital  Investment Decisions  274
part six  risk and return
10	 Some Lessons from  Capital Market History  309
11	
Risk and Return  349
part seven  long-term financing
12	 Cost of Capital  388
13	 Leverage and  Capital Structure  423
14	 Dividends and  Dividend Policy  455
15	 Raising Capital  485
part eight  short-term financial management
16	 Short-Term Financial Planning  518
17	 Working Capital Management  550
part nine  topics in business finance
18	 International Aspects of Financial Management  586
appendices
A	
Mathematical Tables  612
B	
Key Equations  620
C	
Answers to Selected End-of-Chapter Problems  623
D	
Using the HP-10B and TI BA II Plus Financial Calculators  627
Name Index  630      Subject Index  631
Brief Contents

xxvii
Contents
part one   overview of financial management
1	
Introduction to Financial 
Management  1
1.1	
Finance: A Quick Look  1
The Four Basic Areas  2
Corporate Finance  2
Investments  2
Financial Institutions  2
International Finance  3
Why Study Finance?  3
Marketing and Finance  3
Accounting and Finance  3
Management and Finance  3
You and Finance  4
1.2	 Business Finance and the Financial Manager  4
What Is Business Finance?  4
The Financial Manager  4
Financial Management Decisions  5
Capital Budgeting  5
Capital Structure  6
Working Capital Management  6
Conclusion  6
1.3	 Forms of Business Organization  6
Sole Proprietorship  6
Partnership  7
Corporation  7
A Corporation by Another Name . . .  8
1.4	 The Goal of Financial Management  9
Profit Maximization  9
The Goal of Financial Management in a Corporation  9
A More General Financial Management Goal  10
Sarbanes-Oxley Act  10
1.5	 The Agency Problem and Control of  
the Corporation  12
Agency Relationships  12
Management Goals  12
Do Managers Act in the Stockholders’ Interests?  13
Managerial Compensation  13
Control of the Firm  13
Conclusion  14
Stakeholders  15
1.6	 Financial Markets and the Corporation  15
Cash Flows to and from the Firm  15
Primary versus Secondary Markets  15
Primary Markets  16
Secondary Markets  16
Summary and Conclusions  18
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  18
What’s on the Web?  20
CHAPTER CASE: The McGee Cake Company  21
2	 Financial Statements, Taxes,  
and Cash Flow  22
2.1	
The Balance Sheet  22
Assets: The Left-Hand Side  23
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity: The Right-Hand Side  23
Net Working Capital  24
Liquidity  25
Debt versus Equity  25
Market Value versus Book Value  25
2.2	 The Income Statement  27
GAAP and the Income Statement  28
Noncash Items  28
Time and Costs  28
Earnings Management  30
2.3	 Taxes  30
Corporate Tax Rates  30
Average versus Marginal Tax Rates  31
2.4	 Cash Flow  33
Cash Flow from Assets  34
Operating Cash Flow  34
Capital Spending  35
Change in Net Working Capital  35
Conclusion  36
A Note on “Free” Cash Flow  36
Cash Flow to Creditors and Stockholders  36
Cash Flow to Creditors  36
Cash Flow to Stockholders  37
Conclusion  37
An Example: Cash Flows for Dole Cola  37
part two   understanding financial statements and cash flow

xxviii	
C o n t e n t s
Operating Cash Flow  37
Net Capital Spending  38
Change in NWC and Cash Flow from Assets  38
Cash Flow to Creditors and Stockholders  39
Summary and Conclusions  40
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problem  40
Answer to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problem  41
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  43
Questions and Problems  43
What’s on the Web?  48
Excel Master It! Problem  48
CHAPTER CASE: Cash Flows and Financial Statements at 
Sunset Boards, Inc.  50
3	 Working with Financial Statements  51
3.1	
Standardized Financial Statements  52
Common-Size Balance Sheets  53
Common-Size Income Statements  54
3.2	 Ratio Analysis  55
Short-Term Solvency, or Liquidity, Measures  56
Current Ratio  56
Quick (or Acid-Test) Ratio  57
Cash Ratio  58
Long-Term Solvency Measures  58
Total Debt Ratio  58
Times Interest Earned  58
Cash Coverage  59
Asset Management, or Turnover, Measures  59
Inventory Turnover and Days’ Sales in Inventory  59
Receivables Turnover and Days’ Sales in Receivables  60
Total Asset Turnover  61
Profitability Measures  61
Profit Margin  62
Return on Assets  62
Return on Equity  62
Market Value Measures  63
Price–Earnings Ratio  63
Price–Sales Ratio  63
Market-to-Book Ratio  63
Enterprise Value–EBITDA Ratio  63
3.3	 The DuPont Identity  65
An Expanded DuPont Analysis  67
3.4	 Internal and Sustainable Growth  69
Dividend Payout and Earnings Retention  69
ROA, ROE, and Growth  70
The Internal Growth Rate  70
The Sustainable Growth Rate  70
Determinants of Growth  71
A Note on Sustainable Growth Rate Calculations  73
3.5	 Using Financial Statement Information  73
Why Evaluate Financial Statements?  73
Internal Uses  74
External Uses  74
Choosing a Benchmark  74
Time-Trend Analysis  74
Peer Group Analysis  74
Problems with Financial Statement Analysis  79
Summary and Conclusions  81
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  82
Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  83
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  84
Questions and Problems  86
What’s on the Web?  93
Excel Master It! Problem  94
CHAPTER CASE: Ratios and Financial Planning  
at S&S Air, Inc.  95
4	 Introduction to Valuation: The Time 
Value of Money  97
4.1	
Future Value and Compounding  98
Investing for a Single Period  98
Investing for More than One Period  98
4.2	 Present Value and Discounting  105
The Single-Period Case  105
Present Values for Multiple Periods  106
4.3	 More on Present and Future Values  108
Present versus Future Value  108
Determining the Discount Rate  109
Finding the Number of Periods  112
Summary and Conclusions  115
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  116
Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  116
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  117
Questions and Problems  118
What’s on the Web?  121
Excel Master It! Problem  121
5	 Discounted Cash Flow Valuation  122
5.1	
Future and Present Values of Multiple Cash Flows  123
Future Value with Multiple Cash Flows  123
part three   valuation of future cash flows

	
C o n t e n t s 	
xxix
Present Value with Multiple Cash Flows  126
A Note on Cash Flow Timing  130
5.2	 Valuing Level Cash Flows: Annuities and Perpetuities  131
Present Value for Annuity Cash Flows  132
Annuity Tables  133
Finding the Payment  134
Finding the Rate  136
Future Value for Annuities  137
A Note on Annuities Due  137
Perpetuities  138
5.3	 Comparing Rates: The Effect of Compounding Periods  140
Effective Annual Rates and Compounding  140
Calculating and Comparing Effective Annual Rates  141
EARs and APRs  142
EARs, APRs, Financial Calculators, and Spreadsheets  144
5.4	 Loan Types and Loan Amortization  145
Pure Discount Loans  145
Interest-Only Loans  145
Amortized Loans  146
Summary and Conclusions  150
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  151
Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  152
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  154
Questions and Problems  154
What’s on the Web?  162
Excel Master It! Problem  163
CHAPTER CASE: S&S Air’s Mortgage  164
6	 Interest Rates and Bond 
Valuation  165
6.1	
Bonds and Bond Valuation  166
Bond Features and Prices  166
Bond Values and Yields  166
Interest Rate Risk  169
Finding the Yield to Maturity: More Trial and Error  171
6.2	 More on Bond Features  175
Is It Debt or Equity?  176
Long-Term Debt: The Basics  176
The Indenture  177
Terms of a Bond  178
Security  178
Seniority  179
Repayment  179
The Call Provision  179
Protective Covenants  180
6.3	 Bond Ratings  180
6.4	 Some Different Types of Bonds  182
Government Bonds  182
Zero Coupon Bonds  183
Floating-Rate Bonds  184
Other Types of Bonds  185
6.5	 Bond Markets  186
How Bonds Are Bought and Sold  186
Bond Price Reporting  187
A Note on Bond Price Quotes  188
6.6	 Inflation and Interest Rates  190
Real versus Nominal Rates  190
The Fisher Effect  190
6.7	 Determinants of Bond Yields  192
The Term Structure of Interest Rates  192
Bond Yields and the Yield Curve: Putting It All Together  193
Conclusion  195
Summary and Conclusions  196
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  196
Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  197
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  197
Questions and Problems  199
What’s on the Web?  202
Excel Master It! Problem  203
CHAPTER CASE: Financing S&S Air’s Expansion Plans with 
a Bond Issue  204
7	 Equity Markets and Stock 
Valuation  205
7.1	
Common Stock Valuation  206
Cash Flows  206
Some Special Cases  207
Zero Growth  208
Constant Growth  208
Nonconstant Growth  211
Components of the Required Return  213
Stock Valuation Using Comparables, or Comps  214
7.2	 Some Features of Common and Preferred Stock  216
Common Stock Features  216
Shareholder Rights  216
Proxy Voting  217
Classes of Stock  217
part four   valuing stocks and bonds

xxx	
C o n t e n t s
Other Rights  218
Dividends  218
Preferred Stock Features  219
Stated Value  219
Cumulative and Noncumulative Dividends  219
Is Preferred Stock Really Debt?  219
7.3	 The Stock Markets  220
Dealers and Brokers  220
Organization of the NYSE  220
Members  220
Operations  221
Floor Activity  221
NASDAQ Operations  223
ECNs  223
Stock Market Reporting  225
Summary and Conclusions  227
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  227
Answers to Chapter Review and Self- 
Test Problems  228
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  228
Questions and Problems  229
What’s on the Web?  234
Excel Master It! Problem  234
CHAPTER CASE: Stock Valuation at  
Ragan, Inc.  235
8	 Net Present Value and Other 
Investment Criteria  236
8.1	
Net Present Value  237
The Basic Idea  237
Estimating Net Present Value  238
8.2	 The Payback Rule  241
Defining the Rule  241
Analyzing the Rule  243
Redeeming Qualities of the Rule  243
Summary of the Rule  244
8.3	 The Average Accounting Return  245
8.4	 The Internal Rate of Return  247
Problems with the IRR  250
Nonconventional Cash Flows  250
Mutually Exclusive Investments  252
Redeeming Qualities of the IRR  254
The Modified Internal Rate of Return (MIRR)  255
Method 1: The Discounting Approach  255
Method 2: The Reinvestment Approach  255
Method 3: The Combination Approach  255
MIRR or IRR: Which Is Better?  256
8.5	 The Profitability Index  256
8.6	 The Practice of Capital Budgeting  257
Summary and Conclusions  260
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  261
Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  261
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  262
Questions and Problems  265
What’s on the Web?  271
Excel Master It! Problem  271
CHAPTER CASE: Bullock Gold Mining  273
9	 Making Capital Investment 
Decisions  274
9.1	
Project Cash Flows: A First Look  275
Relevant Cash Flows  275
The Stand-Alone Principle  275
9.2	 Incremental Cash Flows  276
Sunk Costs  276
Opportunity Costs  276
Side Effects  277
Net Working Capital  277
Financing Costs  277
Other Issues  278
9.3	 Pro Forma Financial Statements and  
Project Cash Flows  278
Getting Started: Pro Forma Financial  
Statements  278
Project Cash Flows  279
Project Operating Cash Flow  279
Project Net Working Capital and  
Capital Spending  280
Projected Total Cash Flow and Value  280
The Tax Shield Approach  281
9.4	 More on Project Cash Flow  282
A Closer Look at Net Working Capital  282
Depreciation  283
Modified ACRS (MACRS) Depreciation  284
Book Value versus Market Value  285
An Example: The Majestic Mulch  
and Compost Company (MMCC)  286
Operating Cash Flows  287
Changes in NWC  288
Capital Spending  288
Total Cash Flow and Value  288
Conclusion  290
part five   capital budgeting

	
C o n t e n t s 	
xxxi
9.5	 Evaluating NPV Estimates  290
The Basic Problem  290
Forecasting Risk  291
Sources of Value  292
9.6	 Scenario and Other What-If Analyses  292
Getting Started  292
Scenario Analysis  293
Sensitivity Analysis  294
9.7	 Additional Considerations in Capital Budgeting  296
Managerial Options and Capital Budgeting  296
Contingency Planning  296
Strategic Options  298
Conclusion  298
Capital Rationing  298
Soft Rationing  298
Hard Rationing  299
Summary and Conclusions  299
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  300
Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  300
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  301
Questions and Problems  302
Excel Master It! Problem  307
CHAPTER CASE: Conch Republic Electronics  308
10	 Some Lessons from Capital Market 
History  309
10.1	 Returns  310
Dollar Returns  310
Percentage Returns  312
10.2	The Historical Record  314
A First Look  315
A Closer Look  315
10.3	 Average Returns: The First Lesson  320
Calculating Average Returns  320
Average Returns: The Historical Record  320
Risk Premiums  321
The First Lesson  321
10.4	 The Variability of Returns: The Second Lesson  322
Frequency Distributions and Variability  322
The Historical Variance and Standard Deviation  323
The Historical Record  325
Normal Distribution  326
The Second Lesson  327
2008: The Bear Growled and Investors Howled  328
Using Capital Market History  329
More on the Stock Market Risk Premium  331
10.5	More on Average Returns  333
Arithmetic versus Geometric Averages  333
Calculating Geometric Average Returns  333
Arithmetic Average Return  
or Geometric Average Return?  335
10.6	 Capital Market Efficiency  336
Price Behavior in an Efficient Market  336
The Efficient Markets Hypothesis  337
Some Common Misconceptions about the EMH  338
The Forms of Market Efficiency  339
Summary and Conclusions  340
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  340
Answers to Chapter Review and  
Self-Test Problems  341
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  341
Questions and Problems  342
What’s on the Web?  346
Excel Master It! Problem  346
CHAPTER CASE: A Job at S&S Air  347
11	 Risk and Return  349
11.1	 Expected Returns and Variances  350
Expected Return  350
Calculating the Variance  352
11.2	 Portfolios  354
Portfolio Weights  354
Portfolio Expected Returns  354
Portfolio Variance  356
11.3	 Announcements, Surprises, and  
Expected Returns  357
Expected and Unexpected Returns  358
Announcements and News  358
11.4	 Risk: Systematic and Unsystematic  360
Systematic and Unsystematic Risk  360
Systematic and Unsystematic Components of Return  360
11.5	 Diversification and Portfolio Risk  361
The Effect of Diversification: Another Lesson from Market 
History  361
The Principle of Diversification  362
Diversification and Unsystematic Risk  362
Diversification and Systematic Risk  363
11.6	 Systematic Risk and Beta  364
The Systematic Risk Principle  364
Measuring Systematic Risk  364
Portfolio Betas  367
part six   risk and return

xxxii	
C o n t e n t s
11.7	 The Security Market Line  368
Beta and the Risk Premium  368
The Reward-to-Risk Ratio  369
The Basic Argument  369
The Fundamental Result  370
The Security Market Line  372
Market Portfolios  372
The Capital Asset Pricing Model  373
11.8	 The SML and the Cost of Capital: A Preview  375
The Basic Idea  375
The Cost of Capital  375
Summary and Conclusions  376
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  377
Answers to Chapter Review and  
Self-Test Problems  377
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  379
Questions and Problems  380
What’s on the Web?  384
Excel Master It! Problem  385
CHAPTER CASE: The Beta for FLIR Systems  387
12	 Cost of Capital  388
12.1	 The Cost of Capital: Some Preliminaries  389
Required Return versus Cost of Capital  389
Financial Policy and Cost of Capital  390
12.2	The Cost of Equity  391
The Dividend Growth Model Approach  391
Implementing the Approach  391
Estimating g  392
Advantages and Disadvantages of the Approach  392
The SML Approach  393
Implementing the Approach  393
Advantages and Disadvantages of the Approach  394
12.3	The Costs of Debt and Preferred Stock  394
The Cost of Debt  395
The Cost of Preferred Stock  395
12.4	The Weighted Average Cost of Capital  396
The Capital Structure Weights  396
Taxes and the Weighted Average Cost of Capital  397
Solving the Warehouse Problem and Similar Capital Budgeting 
Problems  399
Calculating the WACC for Eastman Chemical  400
Eastman’s Cost of Equity  402
Eastman’s Cost of Debt  403
Eastman’s WACC  404
12.5	Divisional and Project Costs of Capital  406
The SML and the WACC  407
Divisional Cost of Capital  408
The Pure Play Approach  408
The Subjective Approach  409
12.6	 Company Valuation with the WACC  410
Summary and Conclusions  413
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  413
Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  413
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  414
Questions and Problems  415
What’s on the Web?  421
Excel Master It! Problem  421
CHAPTER CASE: Cost of Capital for Layton Motors  422
13	 Leverage and Capital Structure  423
13.1	 The Capital Structure Question  424
13.2	The Effect of Financial Leverage  425
The Impact of Financial Leverage  425
Financial Leverage, EPS, and ROE: An Example  425
EPS versus EBIT  426
Corporate Borrowing and Homemade Leverage  428
13.3	 Capital Structure and the Cost of  
Equity Capital  430
M&M Proposition I: The Pie Model  430
The Cost of Equity and Financial Leverage:  
M&M Proposition II  430
Business and Financial Risk  432
13.4	 Corporate Taxes and Capital Structure  433
The Interest Tax Shield  433
Taxes and M&M Proposition I  434
Conclusion  434
13.5	Bankruptcy Costs  436
Direct Bankruptcy Costs  436
Indirect Bankruptcy Costs  436
13.6	 Optimal Capital Structure  437
The Static Theory of Capital Structure  437
Optimal Capital Structure and the Cost of Capital  438
Capital Structure: Some Managerial Recommendations  440
Taxes  440
Financial Distress  440
13.7	 Observed Capital Structures  441
13.8	A Quick Look at the Bankruptcy Process  443
Liquidation and Reorganization  443
Bankruptcy Liquidation  443
Bankruptcy Reorganization  444
Financial Management and the Bankruptcy Process  446
Agreements to Avoid Bankruptcy  447
part seven   long-term financing

	
C o n t e n t s 	
xxxiii
Summary and Conclusions  447
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  448
Answers to Chapter Review and  
Self-Test Problems  448
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  449
Questions and Problems  450
What’s on the Web?  453
Excel Master It! Problem  453
CHAPTER CASE: Stephenson Real Estate 
Recapitalization  454
14	 Dividends and Dividend Policy  455
14.1	 Cash Dividends and Dividend Payment  456
Cash Dividends  456
Standard Method of Cash Dividend Payment  457
Dividend Payment: A Chronology  457
More on the Ex-Dividend Date  458
14.2	Does Dividend Policy Matter?  460
An Illustration of the Irrelevance of  
Dividend Policy  460
Current Policy: Dividends Set Equal to  
Cash Flow  460
Alternative Policy: Initial Dividend Greater than  
Cash Flow  460
A Test  461
Some Real-World Factors Favoring a Low Payout  461
Taxes  461
Flotation Costs  462
Dividend Restrictions  462
Some Real-World Factors Favoring a High Payout  462
Desire for Current Income  462
Tax and Legal Benefits from High Dividends  463
Clientele Effects: A Resolution of Real-World Factors?  464
14.3	 Stock Repurchases: An Alternative to  
Cash Dividends  464
Cash Dividends versus Repurchase  466
Real-World Considerations in a Repurchase  467
Share Repurchase and EPS  468
14.4	 What We Know and Do Not Know about Dividend and 
Payout Policies  469
Dividends and Dividend Payers  469
Corporations Smooth Dividends  471
Putting It All Together  472
Some Survey Evidence on Dividends  474
14.5	Stock Dividends and Stock Splits  475
Value of Stock Splits and Stock Dividends  476
The Benchmark Case  476
Popular Trading Range  476
Reverse Splits  476
Summary and Conclusions  477
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problem  478
Answer to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problem  479
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  479
Questions and Problems  480
What’s on the Web?  483
CHAPTER CASE: Electronic Timing, Inc.  484
15	 Raising Capital  485
15.1	 The Financing Life Cycle of a Firm: Early-Stage Financing 
and Venture Capital  486
Venture Capital  486
Some Venture Capital Realities  487
Choosing a Venture Capitalist  487
Conclusion  488
15.2	Selling Securities to the Public:  
The Basic Procedure  488
Crowdfunding  489
15.3	Alternative Issue Methods  491
15.4	Underwriters  492
Choosing an Underwriter  492
Types of Underwriting  492
Firm Commitment Underwriting  492
Best Efforts Underwriting  493
Dutch Auction Underwriting  493
The Green Shoe Provision  494
The Aftermarket  494
Lockup Agreements  494
The Quiet Period  495
15.5	IPOS and Underpricing  495
Evidence on Underpricing  496
IPO Underpricing: The 1999–2000 Experience  497
The Partial Adjustment Phenomenon  501
Why Does Underpricing Exist?  502
15.6	 New Equity Sales and the Value of the Firm  504
15.7	 The Cost of Issuing Securities  505
15.8	Issuing Long-Term Debt  509
15.9	Shelf Registration  510
Summary and Conclusions  511
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problem  512
Answer to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problem  512
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  512
Questions and Problems  515
What’s on the Web?  516
CHAPTER CASE: S&S Air Goes Public  517

xxxiv	
C o n t e n t s
16	 Short-Term Financial Planning  518
16.1	 Tracing Cash and Net Working Capital  519
16.2	The Operating Cycle and the Cash Cycle  521
Defining the Operating and Cash Cycles  521
The Operating Cycle  521
The Cash Cycle  522
The Operating Cycle and the Firm’s  
Organizational Chart  522
Calculating the Operating and Cash Cycles  523
The Operating Cycle  524
The Cash Cycle  524
Interpreting the Cash Cycle  525
16.3	Some Aspects of Short-Term Financial Policy  527
The Size of the Firm’s Investment in Current Assets  527
Alternative Financing Policies for Current Assets  529
Which Financing Policy Is Best?  531
Current Assets and Liabilities in Practice  532
16.4	The Cash Budget  533
Sales and Cash Collections  533
Cash Outflows  534
The Cash Balance  534
16.5	Short-Term Borrowing  536
Unsecured Loans  536
Secured Loans  536
Accounts Receivable Financing  536
Inventory Loans  537
Other Sources  537
16.6	 A Short-Term Financial Plan  538
Summary and Conclusions  539
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  539
Answers to Chapter Review and  
Self-Test Problems  540
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  541
Questions and Problems  542
What’s on the Web?  548
Excel Master It! Problem  548
CHAPTER CASE: Piepkorn Manufacturing Working Capital 
Management, Part 1  549
17	 Working Capital Management  550
17.1	 Float and Cash Management  550
Reasons for Holding Cash  551
The Speculative and Precautionary Motives  551
The Transaction Motive  551
Benefits of Holding Cash  551
Understanding Float  552
Disbursement Float  552
Collection Float and Net Float  552
Float Management  553
Ethical and Legal Questions  554
Electronic Data Interchange and Check 21: The End of 
Float?  554
17.2	 Cash Management: Collection, Disbursement, and 
Investment  555
Cash Collection and Concentration  555
Components of Collection Time  555
Cash Collection  556
Lockboxes  556
Cash Concentration  556
Managing Cash Disbursements  557
Increasing Disbursement Float  558
Controlling Disbursements  558
Investing Idle Cash  559
Temporary Cash Surpluses  560
Characteristics of Short-Term Securities  560
Some Different Types of Money Market Securities  561
17.3	 Credit and Receivables  562
Components of Credit Policy  562
Terms of Sale  563
The Basic Form  563
The Credit Period  563
Cash Discounts  564
Credit Instruments  565
Optimal Credit Policy  566
The Total Credit Cost Curve  566
Organizing the Credit Function  566
Credit Analysis  567
Credit Information  567
Credit Evaluation and Scoring  568
Collection Policy  568
Monitoring Receivables  568
Collection Effort  569
17.4	 Inventory Management  570
The Financial Manager and Inventory Policy  570
Inventory Types  570
Inventory Costs  571
17.5	 Inventory Management Techniques  571
The ABC Approach  571
The Economic Order Quantity Model  572
Inventory Depletion  573
Carrying Costs  573
Shortage Costs  574
Total Costs  574
Extensions to the EOQ Model  576
Safety Stocks  576
Reorder Points  576
part eight   short-term financial management

	
C o n t e n t s 	
xxxv
Managing Derived-Demand Inventories  576
Materials Requirements Planning  577
Just-in-Time Inventory  578
Summary and Conclusions  579
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  579
Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  580
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  580
Questions and Problems  582
What’s on the Web?  584
CHAPTER CASE: Piepkorn Manufacturing Working Capital 
Management, Part 2  585
18	 International Aspects of Financial 
Management  586
18.1	 Terminology  587
18.2	Foreign Exchange Markets and Exchange Rates  588
Exchange Rates  589
Exchange Rate Quotations  590
Cross-Rates and Triangle Arbitrage  590
Types of Transactions  592
18.3	Purchasing Power Parity  593
Absolute Purchasing Power Parity  593
Relative Purchasing Power Parity  595
The Basic Idea  595
The Result  596
Currency Appreciation and Depreciation  597
18.4	Exchange Rates and Interest Rates  597
Covered Interest Arbitrage  597
Interest Rate Parity  598
18.5	Exchange Rate Risk  599
Short-Run Exposure  599
Long-Run Exposure  600
Translation Exposure  601
Managing Exchange Rate Risk  602
18.6	 Political Risk  602
Summary and Conclusions  603
Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  604
Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems  604
Critical Thinking and Concepts Review  605
Questions and Problems  607
What’s on the Web?  609
Excel Master It! Problem  610
CHAPTER CASE: S&S Air Goes International  611
Appendix A  Mathematical Tables  612
Appendix B  Key Equations  620
Appendix C  Answers to Selected End-of-Chapter Problems  623
Appendix D  Using the HP-10B and TI BA II Plus Financial 
Calculators  627
Name Index  630
Subject Index  631
part nine   topics in business finance

xxxvi
FINANCE MATTERS
	 chapter 1	
Corporate Ethics   11
	 chapter 2	
What Is Warren Buffett’s Tax Rate?  33
	 chapter 3	
How Fast Is Too Fast?  72
	
	
What’s in a Ratio?  80
	 chapter 4	
Collectibles as Investments?  111
	 chapter 5	
Jackpot!  128
	
	
An Unwelcome Christmas Present  150
	 chapter 6	
Exotic Bonds  186
	 chapter 7	
The Wild, Wild West of Stock Trading  226
	 chapter 9	
When Things Go Wrong . . .  291
	chapter 10	
The Super Guide to Investing  330
	
	
Can the Pros Beat the Market?  338
	 chapter 11	
Beta, Beta, Who’s Got the Beta?  366
	chapter 12	
EVA: An Old Idea Moves into the Modern Age  398
	
	
The Cost of Capital, Texas Style  401
	chapter 13	
Bankruptcy, “Prepack” Style  446
	chapter 14	
Stock Buybacks: No End in Sight  468
	chapter 15	
IPO Underpricing around the World  499
	
	
The (Mis)pricing of Palm, Inc.  501
	
	
Anatomy of an IPO  507
	chapter 16	
Cash Cycle Comparison  526
	chapter 17	
Supply Chain Management  578
	chapter 18	
McPricing  595
List of Boxes

xxxvii
Essentials of 
Corporate Finance


1
G
eorge Zimmer, founder of The Men’s Wearhouse, for years ap-
peared in television ads promising “You’re going to like the 
way you look. I guarantee it.” But, in mid-2013, Zimmer evidently 
didn’t look so good to the company’s board of directors, which 
abruptly fired him. It was reported that Zimmer had a series of dis-
agreements with the board, including a desire to take the company 
private. Evidently, Zimmer’s ideas did not “suit” the board. 
Understanding Zimmer’s journey from the founder of a clothing 
store that used a cigar box as a cash register, to corporate execu-
tive, and finally to ex-employee takes us into issues involving the 
corporate form of organization, corporate goals, and corporate con-
trol, all of which we discuss in this chapter. You’re going to learn a 
lot if you read it. We guarantee it.
T
o begin our study of financial management, we address two central issues. First: What 
is corporate, or business, finance, and what is the role of the financial manager? 
Second: What is the goal of financial management?
FINANCE: A QUICK LOOK
Before we plunge into our study of “corp. fin.,” we think a quick overview of the finance 
field might be a good idea. Our goal is to clue you in on some of the most important areas 
in finance and some of the career opportunities available in each. We also want to illustrate 
some of the ways finance fits in with other areas such as marketing, management, and 
accounting.
1.1
Introduction to Financial 
Management
1
PART ONE 
Overview of Financial Management
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should 
be able to:
LO 1 	 Discuss the basic types of financial 
management decisions and the 
role of the financial manager.
LO 2 	 Identify the goal of financial 
management.
LO 3 	 Compare the financial implications 
of the different forms of business 
organizations.
LO 4 	 Describe the conflicts of interest 
that can arise between managers 
and owners.

2	
p a r t  1
Overview of Financial Management
The Four Basic Areas
Traditionally, financial topics are grouped into four main areas:
  1.	 Corporate finance
  2.	 Investments
  3.	 Financial institutions
  4.	 International finance
We discuss each of these next.
Corporate Finance 
The first of these four areas, corporate finance, is the main sub-
ject of this book. We begin covering this subject with our next section, so we will wait until 
then to get into any details. One thing we should note is that the term corporate finance 
seems to imply that what we cover is only relevant to corporations, but the truth is that 
­almost all of the topics we consider are much broader than that. Maybe business finance 
would be a little more descriptive, but even this is too narrow because at least half of the 
subjects we discuss in the pages ahead are really basic financial ideas and principles 
­applicable across all the various areas of finance and beyond.
Investments 
Broadly speaking, the investments area deals with financial assets such 
as stocks and bonds. Some of the more important questions include:
  1.	 What determines the price of a financial asset, such as a share of stock?
  2.	 What are the potential risks and rewards associated with investing in financial assets?
  3.	 What is the best mixture of the different types of financial assets to hold?
Students who specialize in the investments area have various career opportunities. Being a 
stockbroker is one of the most common. Stockbrokers often work for large companies such 
as Merrill Lynch, advising customers on what types of investments to consider and helping 
them make buy and sell decisions. Financial advisers play a similar role, but are not neces-
sarily brokers.
Portfolio management is a second investments-related career path. Portfolio managers, 
as the name suggests, manage money for investors. For example, individual investors fre-
quently buy into mutual funds. Such funds are simply a means of pooling money that is 
then invested by a portfolio manager. Portfolio managers also invest and manage money for 
pension funds, insurance companies, and many other types of institutions.
Security analysis is a third area. A security analyst researches individual investments, 
such as stock in a particular company, and makes a determination as to whether the price is 
right. To do so, an analyst delves deeply into company and industry reports, along with a 
variety of other information sources. Frequently, brokers and portfolio managers rely on 
security analysts for information and recommendations.
These investments-related areas, like many areas in finance, share an interesting fea-
ture. If they are done well, they can be very rewarding financially (translation: You can 
make a lot of money). The bad news, of course, is that they can be very demanding and 
very competitive, so they are definitely not for everybody.
Financial Institutions 
Financial institutions are basically businesses that deal pri-
marily in financial matters. Banks and insurance companies would probably be the most 
familiar to you. Institutions such as these employ people to perform a wide variety of 
­finance-related tasks. For example, a commercial loan officer at a bank would evaluate 
whether a particular business has a strong enough financial position to warrant extending a 
For job descriptions in 
finance and other areas, 
visit www.careers-in-
business.com.

	
c h a p t e r  1
Introduction to Financial Management	
3
loan. At an insurance company, an analyst would decide whether a particular risk was 
­suitable for insuring and what the premium should be.
International Finance 
International finance isn’t so much an area as it is a special-
ization within one of the main areas we described earlier. In other words, careers in inter-
national finance generally involve international aspects of either corporate finance, 
investments, or financial institutions. For example, some portfolio managers and security 
analysts specialize in non-U.S. companies. Similarly, many U.S. businesses have extensive 
overseas operations and need employees familiar with such international topics as ­exchange 
rates and political risk. Banks frequently are asked to make loans across country lines, so 
international specialists are needed there as well.
Why Study Finance?
Who needs to know finance? In a word, you. In fact, there are many reasons you need a 
working knowledge of finance even if you are not planning a finance career. We explore 
some of these next.
Marketing and Finance 
If you are interested in marketing, you need to know 
­finance because, for example, marketers constantly work with budgets, and they need to 
understand how to get the greatest payoff from marketing expenditures and programs. 
­Analyzing costs and benefits of projects of all types is one of the most important aspects of 
finance, so the tools you learn in finance are vital in marketing research, the design of mar-
keting and distribution channels, and product pricing, just to name a few areas.
Financial analysts rely heavily on marketing analysts, and the two frequently work to-
gether to evaluate the profitability of proposed projects and products. As we will see in a 
later chapter, sales projections are a key input in almost every type of new product analysis, 
and such projections are often developed jointly between marketing and finance.
Beyond this, the finance industry employs marketers to help sell financial products 
such as bank accounts, insurance policies, and mutual funds. Financial services marketing 
is one of the most rapidly growing types of marketing, and successful financial services 
marketers are very well compensated. To work in this area, you obviously need to under-
stand financial products.
Accounting and Finance 
For accountants, finance is required reading. In smaller 
businesses in particular, accountants are often required to make financial decisions as well 
as perform traditional accounting duties. Further, as the financial world continues to grow 
more complex, accountants have to know finance to understand the implications of many 
of the newer types of financial contracts and the impact they have on financial statements. 
Beyond this, cost accounting and business finance are particularly closely related, sharing 
many of the same subjects and concerns.
Financial analysts make extensive use of accounting information; they are some of the 
most important end users. Understanding finance helps accountants recognize what types 
of information are particularly valuable and, more generally, how accounting information 
is actually used (and abused) in practice.
Management and Finance 
One of the most important areas in management is 
strategy. Thinking about business strategy without simultaneously thinking about financial 
strategy is an excellent recipe for disaster, and, as a result, management strategists must 
have a very clear understanding of the financial implications of business plans.
In broader terms, management employees of all types are expected to have a strong 
understanding of how their jobs affect profitability, and they are also expected to be able to 

4	
p a r t  1
Overview of Financial Management
work within their areas to improve profitability. This is precisely what studying finance 
teaches you: What are the characteristics of activities that create value?
You and Finance 
Perhaps the most important reason to know finance is that you will 
have to make financial decisions that will be very important to you personally. Today, for 
example, when you go to work for almost any type of company, you will be asked to decide 
how you want to invest your retirement funds. We’ll see in a later chapter that what you 
choose to do can make an enormous difference in your future financial well-being. On a 
different note, is it your dream to start your own business? Good luck if you don’t under-
stand basic finance before you start; you’ll end up learning it the hard way. Want to know 
how big your student loan payments are going to be before you take out that next loan? 
Maybe not, but we’ll show you how to calculate them anyway.
These are just a few of the ways that finance will affect your personal and business 
lives. Whether you want to or not, you are going to have to examine and understand finan-
cial issues, and you are going to have to make financial decisions. We want you to do so 
wisely, so keep reading.
concept questions
1.1a 	
What are the major areas in finance?
1.1b 	
Besides wanting to pass this class, why do you need to understand finance?
BUSINESS FINANCE AND  
THE FINANCIAL MANAGER
Now we proceed to define business finance and the financial manager’s job.
What Is Business Finance?
Imagine you were to start your own business. No matter what type you started, you would 
have to answer the following three questions in some form or another:
  1.	 What long-term investments should you take on? That is, what lines of business will 
you be in, and what sorts of buildings, machinery, and equipment will you need?
  2.	 Where will you get the long-term financing to pay for your investments? Will you 
bring in other owners, or will you borrow the money?
  3.	 How will you manage your everyday financial activities, such as collecting from 
customers and paying suppliers?
These are not the only questions, but they are among the most important. Business finance, 
broadly speaking, is the study of ways to answer these three questions. We’ll be looking at 
each of them in the chapters ahead.
The Financial Manager
The financial management function is usually associated with a top officer of the firm, 
often called the chief financial officer (CFO) or vice president of finance. Figure 1.1 is a 
simplified organizational chart that highlights the finance activity in a large firm. As 
shown, the vice president of finance coordinates the activities of the treasurer and the con-
troller. The controller’s office handles cost and financial accounting, tax payments, and 
1.2
For current issues facing 
CFOs, see www.cfo.com.

	
c h a p t e r  1
Introduction to Financial Management	
5
management information systems. The treasurer’s office is responsible for managing the 
firm’s cash and credit, its financial planning, and its capital expenditures. These treasury 
activities are all related to the three general questions raised above, and the chapters ahead 
deal primarily with these issues. Our study thus bears mostly on activities usually associ-
ated with the treasurer’s office. In a smaller firm, the treasurer and controller might be the 
same person, and there would be only one office.
Financial Management Decisions
As our preceding discussion suggests, the financial manager must be concerned with three 
basic types of questions. We consider these in greater detail next.
Capital Budgeting 
The first question concerns the firm’s long-term investments. 
The process of planning and managing a firm’s long-term investments is called capital 
budgeting. In capital budgeting, the financial manager tries to identify investment oppor-
tunities that are worth more to the firm than they cost to acquire. Loosely speaking, this 
means that the value of the cash flow generated by an asset exceeds the cost of that asset.
Regardless of the specific investment under consideration, financial managers must be 
concerned with how much cash they expect to receive, when they expect to receive it, and how 
likely they are to receive it. Evaluating the size, timing, and risk of future cash flows is the 
­essence of capital budgeting. In fact, whenever we evaluate a business decision, the size, tim-
ing, and risk of the cash flows will be, by far, the most important things we will consider.
capital budgeting
The process of planning 
and managing a firm’s 
long-term investments.
Board of Directors
Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer (CEO)
President and Chief
Operations Officer (COO)
Vice President
Production
Treasurer
Controller
Cash Manager
Credit Manager
Tax Manager
Cost Accounting
Manager 
Capital
Expenditures
Financial
Planning
Financial
Accounting
Manager
Data Processing
Manager
Vice President
Finance (CFO) 
Vice President
Marketing
f i g u r e  1.1
A simplified 
organizational chart
The exact titles and 
organization differ from 
company to company.

6	
p a r t  1
Overview of Financial Management
Capital Structure 
The second question for the financial manager concerns how the 
firm obtains the financing it needs to support its long-term investments. A firm’s capital 
structure (or financial structure) refers to the specific mixture of long-term debt and equity 
the firm uses to finance its operations. The financial manager has two concerns in this area. 
First: How much should the firm borrow? Second: What are the least expensive sources of 
funds for the firm?
In addition to deciding on the financing mix, the financial manager has to decide 
­exactly how and where to raise the money. The expenses associated with raising long-term 
financing can be considerable, so different possibilities must be carefully evaluated. Also, 
businesses borrow money from a variety of lenders in a number of different ways. Choos-
ing among lenders and among loan types is another job handled by the financial manager.
Working Capital Management 
The third question concerns working capital man-
agement. The term working capital refers to a firm’s short-term assets, such as inventory, 
and its short-term liabilities, such as money owed to suppliers. Managing the firm’s work-
ing capital is a day-to-day activity that ensures the firm has sufficient resources to continue 
its operations and avoid costly interruptions. This involves a number of activities related to 
the firm’s receipt and disbursement of cash.
Some questions about working capital that must be answered are the following: 
(1) How much cash and inventory should we keep on hand? (2) Should we sell on credit to 
our customers? (3) How will we obtain any needed short-term financing? (4) If we borrow 
in the short term, how and where should we do it? This is just a small sample of the issues 
that arise in managing a firm’s working capital.
Conclusion 
The three areas of corporate financial management we have 
­described—capital budgeting, capital structure, and working capital management—are 
very broad categories. Each includes a rich variety of topics, and we have indicated 
only a few of the questions that arise in the different areas. The chapters ahead contain 
greater detail.
concept questions
1.2a 	
What is the capital budgeting decision?
1.2b 	
What do you call the specific mixture of long-term debt and equity that a firm 
chooses to use?
1.2c 	
Into what category of financial management does cash management fall?
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANIZATION
Large firms in the United States, such as IBM and Apple, are almost all organized as cor-
porations. We examine the three different legal forms of business organization—sole pro-
prietorship, partnership, and corporation—to see why this is so.
Sole Proprietorship
A sole proprietorship is a business owned by one person. This is the simplest type of busi-
ness to start and is the least regulated form of organization. For this reason, there are more 
proprietorships than any other type of business, and many businesses that later become 
large corporations start out as small proprietorships.
capital structure
The mixture of debt and 
equity maintained by a firm.
working capital
A firm’s short-term assets 
and liabilities.
1.3
sole proprietorship
A business owned by a 
single individual.

	
c h a p t e r  1
Introduction to Financial Management	
7
The owner of a sole proprietorship keeps all the profits. That’s the good news. The bad 
news is that the owner has unlimited liability for business debts. This means that creditors 
can look to the proprietor’s personal assets for payment. Similarly, there is no distinction 
between personal and business income, so all business income is taxed as personal income.
The life of a sole proprietorship is limited to the owner’s life span, and, importantly, 
the amount of equity that can be raised is limited to the proprietor’s personal wealth. This 
limitation often means that the business is unable to exploit new opportunities because of 
insufficient capital. Ownership of a sole proprietorship may be difficult to transfer because 
this requires the sale of the entire business to a new owner.
Partnership
A partnership is similar to a proprietorship, except that there are two or more owners 
(partners). In a general partnership, all the partners share in gains or losses, and all have 
unlimited liability for all partnership debts, not just some particular share. The way 
­partnership gains (and losses) are divided is described in the partnership agreement. This 
agreement can be an informal oral agreement, such as “let’s start a lawn mowing 
­business,” or a lengthy, formal written document.
In a limited partnership, one or more general partners will run the business and have 
unlimited liability, but there will be one or more limited partners who do not actively par-
ticipate in the business. A limited partner’s liability for business debts is limited to the 
amount that partner contributes to the partnership. This form of organization is common in 
real estate ventures, for example.
The advantages and disadvantages of a partnership are basically the same as those for 
a proprietorship. Partnerships based on a relatively informal agreement are easy and inex-
pensive to form. General partners have unlimited liability for partnership debts, and the 
partnership terminates when a general partner wishes to sell out or dies. All income is 
taxed as personal income to the partners, and the amount of equity that can be raised is 
limited to the partners’ combined wealth. Ownership by a general partner is not easily 
transferred because a new partnership must be formed. A limited partner’s interest can be 
sold without dissolving the partnership, but finding a buyer may be difficult.
Because a partner in a general partnership can be held responsible for all partnership 
debts, having a written agreement is very important. Failure to spell out the rights and du-
ties of the partners frequently leads to misunderstandings later on. Also, if you are a lim-
ited partner, you must not become deeply involved in business decisions unless you are 
willing to assume the obligations of a general partner. The reason is that if things go badly, 
you may be deemed to be a general partner even though you say you are a limited partner.
Based on our discussion, the primary disadvantages of sole proprietorships and partner-
ships as forms of business organization are (1) unlimited liability for business debts on the 
part of the owners, (2) limited life of the business, and (3) difficulty of transferring owner-
ship. These three disadvantages add up to a single, central problem: The ability of such 
businesses to grow can be seriously limited by an inability to raise cash for investment.
Corporation
The corporation is the most important form (in terms of size) of business organization in 
the United States. A corporation is a legal “person” separate and distinct from its owners, 
and it has many of the rights, duties, and privileges of an actual person. Corporations can 
borrow money and own property, can sue and be sued, and can enter into contracts. A cor-
poration can even be a general partner or a limited partner in a partnership, and a corpora-
tion can own stock in another corporation.
For more information 
on forms of business 
organization, visit  
www.nolo.com.
partnership
A business formed by two 
or more individuals or 
entities.
corporation
A business created as a 
distinct legal entity owned 
by one or more individuals 
or entities.

8	
p a r t  1
Overview of Financial Management
Not surprisingly, starting a corporation is somewhat more complicated than starting 
the other forms of business organization. Forming a corporation involves preparing articles 
of incorporation (or a charter) and a set of bylaws. The articles of incorporation must con-
tain a number of things, including the corporation’s name, its intended life (which can be 
forever), its business purpose, and the number of shares that can be issued. This informa-
tion must normally be supplied to the state in which the firm will be incorporated. For 
most legal purposes, the corporation is a “resident” of that state.
The bylaws are rules describing how the corporation regulates its own existence. For 
example, the bylaws describe how directors are elected. The bylaws may be amended or 
extended from time to time by the stockholders.
In a large corporation, the stockholders and the managers are usually separate groups. 
The stockholders elect the board of directors, who then select the managers. Management 
is charged with running the corporation’s affairs in the stockholders’ interests. In principle, 
stockholders control the corporation because they elect the directors.
As a result of the separation of ownership and management, the corporate form has 
several advantages. Ownership (represented by shares of stock) can be readily transferred, 
and the life of the corporation is, therefore, not limited. The corporation borrows money in 
its own name. As a result, the stockholders in a corporation have limited liability for corpo-
rate debts. The most they can lose is what they have invested.
The relative ease of transferring ownership, the limited liability for business debts, 
and the unlimited life of the business are the reasons the corporate form is superior when 
it comes to raising cash. If a corporation needs new equity, it can sell new shares of stock 
and attract new investors. The number of owners can be huge; larger corporations have 
many thousands or even millions of stockholders. For example, the General Electric 
Company (better known as GE) has about 10 billion shares outstanding and 4 million 
shareholders.
The corporate form has a significant disadvantage. Because a corporation is a legal 
person, it must pay taxes. Moreover, money paid out to stockholders in the form of divi-
dends is taxed again as income to those stockholders. This is double taxation, meaning that 
corporate profits are taxed twice: at the corporate level when they are earned and again at 
the personal level when they are paid out.
Today all 50 states have enacted laws allowing for the creation of a relatively new 
form of business organization, the limited liability company (LLC). The goal of this en-
tity is to operate and be taxed like a partnership but retain limited liability for owners. 
Thus, an LLC is essentially a hybrid of a partnership and a corporation. Although states 
have differing definitions for LLCs, the more important scorekeeper is the Internal Rev-
enue Service (IRS). The IRS will consider an LLC a corporation, thereby subjecting it to 
double taxation, unless it meets certain specific criteria. In essence, an LLC cannot be 
too corporation-like, or it will be treated as one by the IRS. LLCs have become common. 
For example, Goldman Sachs, one of Wall Street’s last remaining partnerships, decided 
to convert from a private partnership to an LLC (it later “went public,” becoming a pub-
licly held corporation). Large accounting firms and law firms by the score have con-
verted to LLCs.
A Corporation by Another Name . . .
The corporate form has many variations around the world. Exact laws and regulations dif-
fer, of course, but the essential features of public ownership and limited liability remain. 
These firms are often called joint stock companies, public limited companies, or limited 
liability companies.

	
c h a p t e r  1
Introduction to Financial Management	
9
Table 1.1 gives the names of a few well-known international corporations, their coun-
try of origin, and a translation of the abbreviation that follows the company name.
concept questions
1.3a 	
What are the three forms of business organization?
1.3b 	
What are the primary advantages and disadvantages of sole proprietorships and 
partnerships?
1.3c 	
What is the difference between a general and a limited partnership?
1.3d 	
Why is the corporate form superior when it comes to raising cash?
THE GOAL OF FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
To study financial decision making, we first need to understand the goal of financial man-
agement. Such an understanding is important because it leads to an objective basis for 
making and evaluating financial decisions.
Profit Maximization
Profit maximization would probably be the most commonly cited business goal, but this is 
not a very precise objective. Do we mean profits this year? If so, then actions such as defer-
ring maintenance, letting inventories run down, and other short-run, cost-cutting measures 
will tend to increase profits now, but these activities aren’t necessarily desirable.
The goal of maximizing profits may refer to some sort of “long-run” or “average” 
profits, but it’s unclear exactly what this means. First, do we mean something like account-
ing net income or earnings per share? As we will see, these numbers may have little to do 
with what is good or bad for the firm. Second, what do we mean by the long run? As a fa-
mous economist once remarked: “In the long run, we’re all dead!” More to the point, this 
goal doesn’t tell us the appropriate trade-off between current and future profits.
The Goal of Financial Management in a Corporation
The financial manager in a corporation makes decisions for the stockholders of the firm. 
Given this, instead of listing possible goals for the financial manager, we really need to 
1.4
ta b l e  1.1
International 
corporations
Company
Country of Origin
Type of Company
Translation
Bayerische Motoren 
Werke (BMW) AG
Germany
Aktiengesellschaft
Corporation
Montblanc GmbH
Germany
Gesellschaft mit 
beschränkter Haftung
Company with limited 
liability
Rolls-Royce PLC
United Kingdom
Public limited company
Public limited company
Shell UK Ltd.
United Kingdom
Limited
Corporation
Unilever NV
Netherlands
Naamloze Vennootschap
Limited liability 
company
Fiat SpA
Italy
Società per Azioni
Public limited company
Saab AB
Sweden
Aktiebolag
Joint stock company
Peugeot SA
France
Société Anonyme
Joint stock company
You can find the  
translation for any  
business type at  
www.corporate 
information.com.

10	
p a r t  1
Overview of Financial Management
answer a more fundamental question: From the stockholders’ point of view, what is a good 
financial management decision?
If we assume stockholders buy stock because they seek to gain financially, then the 
answer is obvious: Good decisions increase the value of the stock, and poor decisions de-
crease it.
Given our observations, it follows that the financial manager acts in the shareholders’ 
best interests by making decisions that increase the value of the stock. The appropriate goal 
for the financial manager in a corporation can thus be stated quite easily:
Find a business finance 
magazine site that 
discusses current issues 
facing the financial 
executive at www.
businessfinancemag.com.
The goal of financial management is to maximize the current value per share of the 
­existing stock.
Maximize the market value of the existing owners’ equity.
The goal of maximizing the value of the stock avoids the problems associated with the 
different goals we discussed earlier. There is no ambiguity in the criterion, and there is no 
short-run versus long-run issue. We explicitly mean that our goal is to maximize the cur-
rent stock value. Of course, maximizing stock value is the same thing as maximizing the 
market price per share.
A More General Financial Management Goal
Given our goal as stated earlier (maximize the value of the stock), an obvious question 
comes up: What is the appropriate goal when the firm has no traded stock? Corporations 
are certainly not the only type of business, and the stock in many corporations rarely 
changes hands, so it’s difficult to say what the value per share is at any given time.
As long as we are dealing with for-profit businesses, only a slight modification is 
needed. The total value of the stock in a corporation is simply equal to the value of the 
owners’ equity. Therefore, a more general way of stating our goal is:
With this goal in mind, it doesn’t matter whether the business is a proprietorship, a 
partnership, or a corporation. For each of these, good financial decisions increase the mar-
ket value of the owners’ equity and poor financial decisions decrease it.
Finally, our goal does not imply that the financial manager should take illegal or un-
ethical actions in the hope of increasing the value of the equity in the firm. What we mean 
is that the financial manager best serves the owners of the business by identifying goods 
and services that add value to the firm because they are desired and valued in the free mar-
ketplace. Our nearby Finance Matters box discusses some recent ethical issues and prob-
lems faced by well-known corporations.
Sarbanes-Oxley Act
In response to corporate scandals involving companies such as Enron, WorldCom, 
Tyco, and Adelphia, Congress enacted the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in 2002. The act, which 
is better known as “Sarbox,” is intended to strengthen protection against corporate 
­accounting fraud and financial malpractice. Key elements of Sarbox took effect on 
­November 15, 2004.
Sarbox contains a number of requirements designed to ensure that companies tell the 
truth in their financial statements. For example, the officers of a public corporation must 
Business ethics are 
considered at www.
thecro.com.
To find out more about 
Sarbanes-Oxley, go to 
www.soxlaw.com.

11
review and sign the annual report. They must attest that the annual report does not contain 
false statements or material omissions and also that the financial statements fairly repre-
sent the company’s financial results. In essence, Sarbox makes management personally 
responsible for the accuracy of a company’s financial statements.
Because of its extensive requirements, compliance with Sarbox can be very costly, 
which has led to some unintended results. Since its implementation, hundreds of public 
firms have chosen to “go dark,” meaning that their shares are no longer traded in the major 
stock markets, in which case Sarbox does not apply. Most of these companies stated that 
their reason was to avoid the cost of compliance. Ironically, in such cases, the law had the 
effect of eliminating public disclosure instead of improving it.
Sarbox has also probably affected the number of companies going public in the United 
States. Recently, many U.S.-based companies have chosen to go public on the London 
Stock Exchange’s Alternative Investment Market (AIM) instead. The cost savings can be 
enormous, especially for small companies. For example, Protonex Technologies, a fuel cell 
developer based in Southborough, Massachusetts, estimated that it costs about $1 million 
per year in compliance costs and mailings to stockholders to be listed on the AIM. In con-
trast, the annual cost to be listed on the NASDAQ would be about $3 million, with a large 
part of the increase due to Sarbox compliance costs.
Corporate Ethics
L
arge companies are sometimes guilty of unethical behav-
ior. Often, this unethical behavior takes the form of false 
or misleading financial statements. In one of the largest cor-
porate fraud cases in history, energy giant Enron Corpora-
tion was forced to file for bankruptcy in December 2001 
amid allegations that the company’s financial statements 
were deliberately misleading and false. Enron’s bankruptcy 
not only destroyed that company, but its auditor Arthur 
­Andersen as well.
	
Often, unethical behavior is also illegal and can result 
in a jail sentence for an individual or fines for a corpora-
tion. For example, in February 2015, the investment bank 
Morgan Stanley reached a settlement with the U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice (DOJ). The DOJ claimed that Morgan 
­Stanley had misrepresented the quality of the mortgages 
it  packaged and sold to investors. To settle the claim, 
­Morgan Stanley agreed to pay $2.6 billion. Morgan Stanley 
was not the first bank to settle a mortgage-related claim 
with the DOJ. In fact, settlements totaled about $130 billion 
by early 2015! Banks with particularly large settlements 
with the DOJ regarding mortgages were Bank of America 
($61.2 billion), JPMorgan ($31.5 billion), and ­Citigroup  
($10.1 billion).
	
The difference between ethical and unethical behavior 
can sometimes be murky. For example, many U.S. compa-
nies have relocated to Bermuda for reasons beyond the 
beautiful pink beaches; namely, Bermuda has no corporate 
income taxes. With a population of less than 65,000, the 
­island is home to more than 13,000 international companies. 
Stanley Works, the well-known maker of Stanley tools, was 
among the U.S. corporations that chose to move to the 
­island paradise. By doing so, Stanley estimated that it would 
save $30 million per year in taxes. Because the goal of the 
corporation is to maximize shareholder wealth, this would 
seem like a good move, and the practice is entirely legal. But 
is it ethical? What are the issues?
	
Another corporate activity that has generated much 
controversy is the practice of outsourcing, or offshoring, 
jobs to other countries. U.S. corporations engage in this 
practice when labor costs in another country are substan-
tially lower than they are domestically. Again, this is done to 
maximize shareholder wealth. But, the ethical dilemma in 
this case is even trickier. Some U.S. workers do lose jobs 
when ­offshoring occurs. On the other hand, the Milken Insti-
tute ­estimated that every $1 spent on offshoring a service 
job to India generated a net value to the United States of 
$1.13, along with another $.33 to India. And it gets even 
more complicated: What about foreign companies such as 
BMW and Toyota that “insource” jobs by building plants in 
the United States? Is it unethical to outsource U.S. jobs 
while, at the same time, insourcing jobs from other 
countries?
FINANCE MATTERS

12	
p a r t  1
Overview of Financial Management
concept questions
1.4a 	
What is the goal of financial management?
1.4b 	
What are some shortcomings of the goal of profit maximization?
THE AGENCY PROBLEM AND CONTROL 
OF THE CORPORATION
We’ve seen that the financial manager in a corporation acts in the best interests of the 
stockholders by taking actions that increase the value of the firm’s stock. However, we’ve 
also seen that in large corporations, ownership can be spread over a huge number of stock-
holders. This dispersion of ownership arguably means that management effectively con-
trols the firm. In this case, will management necessarily act in the best interests of the 
stockholders? Put another way, might not management pursue its own goals at the stock-
holders’ expense? We briefly consider some of the arguments in this section.
Agency Relationships
The relationship between stockholders and management is called an agency relationship. 
Such a relationship exists whenever someone (the principal) hires another (the agent) to 
represent his or her interest. For example, you might hire someone (an agent) to sell a car 
that you own while you are away at school. In all such relationships, there is a possibility 
of conflict of interest between the principal and the agent. Such a conflict is called an 
agency problem.
Suppose you hire someone to sell your car and you agree to pay her a flat fee when she 
sells the car. The agent’s incentive in this case is to make the sale, not necessarily to get 
you the best price. If you paid a commission of, say, 10 percent of the sales price instead of 
a flat fee, then this problem might not exist. This example illustrates that the way an agent 
is compensated is one factor that affects agency problems.
Management Goals
To see how management and stockholder interests might differ, imagine that a corporation 
is considering a new investment. The new investment is expected to favorably affect the 
stock price, but it is also a relatively risky venture. The owners of the firm will wish to take 
the investment (because the share value will rise), but management may not because there 
is the possibility that things will turn out badly and management jobs will be lost. If man-
agement does not take the investment, then the stockholders may lose a valuable opportu-
nity. This is one example of an agency cost.
It is sometimes argued that, left to themselves, managers would tend to maximize the 
amount of resources over which they have control, or, more generally, business power or 
wealth. This goal could lead to an overemphasis on business size or growth. For example, 
cases where management is accused of overpaying to buy another company just to increase 
the size of the business or to demonstrate corporate power are not uncommon. Obviously, 
if overpayment does take place, such a purchase does not benefit the owners of the pur-
chasing company.
Our discussion indicates that management may tend to overemphasize organizational 
survival to protect job security. Also, management may dislike outside interference, so in-
dependence and corporate self-sufficiency may be important goals.
1.5
agency problem
The possibility of conflict 
of interest between the 
owners and management 
of a firm.

	
c h a p t e r  1
Introduction to Financial Management	
13
Do Managers Act in the Stockholders’ Interests?
Whether managers will, in fact, act in the best interests of stockholders depends on two 
factors. First, how closely are management goals aligned with stockholder goals? This 
question relates to the way managers are compensated. Second, can management be 
­replaced if they do not pursue stockholder goals? This issue relates to control of the firm. 
As we will discuss, there are a number of reasons to think that, even in the largest firms, 
management has a significant incentive to act in the interests of stockholders.
Managerial Compensation 
Management will frequently have a significant eco-
nomic incentive to increase share value for two reasons. First, managerial compensation, 
particularly at the top, is usually tied to financial performance in general and oftentimes 
to share value in particular. For example, managers are frequently given the option to buy 
stock at a fixed price. The more the stock is worth, the more valuable is this option. The 
second incentive managers have relates to job prospects. Better performers within the 
firm will tend to get promoted. More generally, those managers who are successful in 
pursuing stockholder goals will be in greater demand in the labor market and thus com-
mand higher salaries.
In fact, managers who are successful in pursuing stockholder goals can reap enormous 
rewards. For example, David Zaslav, CEO of Discovery Communications, received about 
$156 million in 2014 alone, which is less than Floyd Mayweather ($300 million) and about 
the same as Manny Pacquiao ($160 million). Information on executive compensation, 
along with a ton of other information, can be easily found on the web for almost any public 
company. Our nearby Work the Web box shows you how to get started.
Control of the Firm 
Control of the firm ultimately rests with stockholders. They 
elect the board of directors, who, in turn, hires and fires management. The mechanism by 
which unhappy stockholders can act to replace existing management is called a proxy fight. 
A proxy is the authority to vote someone else’s stock. A proxy fight develops when a group 
solicits proxies in order to replace the existing board, and thereby replace existing 
management.
For example, during 2013 and 2014, New York hedge fund Starboard Value was in a 
protracted battle with Darden Restaurants, operator of chains such as Red Lobster and 
­Olive Garden. Starboard had problems with Olive Garden’s restaurant operations, such as 
the fact that Olive Garden stopped putting salt in its pasta water in order to extend the 
­warranty on its cooking pots. In October 2014, the proxy battle ended when Starboard 
convinced enough shareholders to vote to replace all 12 members of Darden’s board of 
­directors. Although replacing an entire board of directors does happen, it usually occurs 
with smaller companies. This episode was unique because Darden is the largest full-­service 
restaurant company in the United States, with 2014 sales of $8.76 billion.
Another way that management can be replaced is by takeover. Firms that are poorly 
managed are more attractive as acquisitions than well-managed firms because a greater 
profit potential exists. Thus, avoiding a takeover by another firm gives management an-
other incentive to act in the stockholders’ interests. 
For example, in the chapter opener, we discussed George Zimmer’s firing by the board 
of The Men’s Wearhouse. A few months later, rival Jos. A. Bank made a bid to buy the 
company, despite the fact that Bank was a significantly smaller firm. The offer was rejected. 
But, in an interesting turn of events, The Men’s Wearhouse offered to buy Jos. A. Bank! 
After months of back and forth, the two companies announced in March 2014 that a deal 
had been finalized, with The Men’s Wearhouse buying Jos. A. Bank for $65 per share. That 

14	
p a r t  1
Overview of Financial Management
price was about 38 percent higher than Bank’s stock price when talks began, so The Men’s 
Wearhouse made an excellent “suit-or.”
Conclusion 
The available theory and evidence are consistent with the view that stock-
holders control the firm and that stockholder wealth maximization is the relevant goal of 
the corporation. Even so, there will undoubtedly be times when management goals are 
pursued at the expense of the stockholders, at least temporarily.
Agency problems are not unique to corporations; they exist whenever there is a sepa-
ration of ownership and management. This separation is most pronounced in corporations, 
but it certainly exists in partnerships and proprietorships as well.
T
he web is a great place to learn about individual companies, and there are a slew of sites avail-
able to help you. Try pointing your web browser to finance.yahoo.com. Once there, you should 
see something like this on the page:
	
To look up a company, you need its “ticker symbol” (or just ticker for short), which is a unique 
one-to-four letter identifier. Or, you can just type in a company’s name to find the ticker. For ex-
ample, we typed in “SIRI,” which is the ticker symbol for Sirius XM Radio, the satellite radio pro-
vider. Here is a portion of what we found:
There is a lot of information here and a lot of other links for you to explore, so have at it. By the end 
of the term, we hope it all makes sense to you!
QUESTIONS
	
1.	 Go to finance.yahoo.com and find the current stock prices for Southwest Airlines (LUV), 
Harley-Davidson (HOG), and Starwood Hotels & Resorts (HOT).
	
2.	 Get a quote for American Express (AXP) and follow the “Key Statistics” link. What  
information is available on this link? What do mrq, ttm, yoy, and lfy mean? 
W
RK THE  WE B

	
c h a p t e r  1
Introduction to Financial Management	
15
Stakeholders
Our discussion thus far implies that management and stockholders are the only parties with 
an interest in the firm’s decisions. This is an oversimplification, of course. Employees, 
customers, suppliers, and even the government all have a financial interest in the firm.
These various groups are called stakeholders in the firm. In general, a stakeholder is 
someone other than a stockholder or creditor who potentially has a claim on the cash flows 
of the firm. Such groups will also attempt to exert control over the firm, perhaps to the 
detriment of the owners.
concept questions
1.5a 	
What is an agency relationship?
1.5b 	
What are agency problems, and how do they arise? What are agency costs?
1.5c 	
What incentives do managers in large corporations have to maximize share value?
FINANCIAL MARKETS AND 
THE CORPORATION
We’ve seen that the primary advantages of the corporate form of organization are that 
­ownership can be transferred more quickly and easily than with other forms and that money 
can be raised more readily. Both of these advantages are significantly enhanced by the 
­existence of financial markets, and financial markets play an extremely important role in 
corporate finance.
Cash Flows to and from the Firm
The interplay between the corporation and the financial markets is illustrated in Figure 1.2. 
The arrows in Figure 1.2 trace the passage of cash from the financial markets to the firm 
and from the firm back to the financial markets.
Suppose we start with the firm selling shares of stock and borrowing money to raise cash. 
Cash flows to the firm from the financial markets (A). The firm invests the cash in current and 
fixed (or long-term) assets (B). These assets generate some cash (C), some of which goes to 
pay corporate taxes (D). After taxes are paid, some of this cash flow is reinvested in the firm 
(E). The rest goes back to the financial markets as cash paid to creditors and shareholders (F).
A financial market, like any market, is just a way of bringing buyers and sellers to-
gether. In financial markets, it is debt and equity securities that are bought and sold. Finan-
cial markets differ in detail, however. The most important differences concern the types of 
securities that are traded, how trading is conducted, and who the buyers and sellers are. 
Some of these differences are discussed next.
Primary versus Secondary Markets
Financial markets function as both primary and secondary markets for debt and equity 
­securities. The term primary market refers to the original sale of securities by governments 
and corporations. The secondary markets are those in which these securities are bought 
and sold after the original sale. Equities are, of course, issued solely by corporations. Debt 
securities are issued by both governments and corporations. In the discussion that follows, 
we focus on corporate securities only.
stakeholder
Someone other than a 
stockholder or creditor 
who potentially has a 
claim on the cash flows 
of the firm.
1.6

16	
p a r t  1
Overview of Financial Management
Primary Markets 
In a primary market transaction, the corporation is the seller, and 
the transaction raises money for the corporation. Corporations engage in two types of pri-
mary market transactions: public offerings and private placements. A public offering, as 
the name suggests, involves selling securities to the general public, whereas a private 
placement is a negotiated sale involving a specific buyer.
By law, public offerings of debt and equity must be registered with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC). Registration requires the firm to disclose a great deal of 
information before selling any securities. The accounting, legal, and selling costs of public 
offerings can be considerable.
Partly to avoid the various regulatory requirements and the expense of public offerings, 
debt and equity are often sold privately to large financial institutions such as life insurance 
companies or mutual funds. Such private placements do not have to be registered with the 
SEC and do not require the involvement of underwriters (investment banks that specialize in 
selling securities to the public).
Secondary Markets 
A secondary market transaction involves one owner or creditor 
selling to another. It is, therefore, the secondary markets that provide the means for trans-
ferring ownership of corporate securities. Although a corporation is only directly involved 
in a primary market transaction (when it sells securities to raise cash), the secondary mar-
kets are still critical to large corporations. The reason is that investors are much more will-
ing to purchase securities in a primary market transaction when they know that those 
securities can later be resold if desired.
Dealer versus auction markets  There are two kinds of secondary markets: auction mar-
kets and dealer markets. Generally speaking, dealers buy and sell for themselves, at their 
To learn more about the 
SEC, visit www.sec.gov.
To learn more about 
stock exchanges, visit 
www.nyse.com and 
www.nasdaq.com.
B. Firm invests
 
in assets
Current assets
Fixed assets
Financial
markets
Short-term debt
Long-term debt
Equity shares
A. Firm issues securities
E. Reinvested cash flows
F. Dividends and
 debt payments
C. Cash flow from
 
firm’s assets
D. Government
 
Other stakeholders
A. Firm issues securities to raise cash.
E. Reinvested cash flows are plowed back
B. Firm invests in assets.
into firm.
C. Firm’s operations generate cash flow.
F.
Cash is paid out to investors in the form
D. Cash is paid to government as taxes.
of interest and dividends.
Other stakeholders may receive cash.
Total value of the firm
to investors in
the financial markets
Total value of
firm’s assets
f i g u r e  1.2
Cash flows between 
the firm and the 
financial markets

	
c h a p t e r  1
Introduction to Financial Management	
17
own risk. A car dealer, for example, buys and sells automobiles. In contrast, brokers and 
agents match buyers and sellers, but they do not actually own the commodity that is bought 
or sold. A real estate agent, for example, does not normally buy and sell houses.
Dealer markets in stocks and long-term debt are called over-the-counter (OTC) mar-
kets. Most trading in debt securities takes place over the counter. The expression over the 
counter refers to days of old when securities were literally bought and sold at counters in 
offices around the country. Today, a significant fraction of the market for stocks and almost 
all of the market for long-term debt have no central location; the many dealers are con-
nected electronically.
Auction markets differ from dealer markets in two ways. First, an auction market, or 
exchange, has a physical location (like Wall Street). Second, in a dealer market, most of the 
buying and selling is done by the dealer. The primary purpose of an auction market, on the 
other hand, is to match those who wish to sell with those who wish to buy. Dealers play a 
limited role.
Trading in corporate securities  The equity shares of most of the large firms in the United 
States trade in organized auction markets. The largest such market is the New York Stock 
Exchange (NYSE), which accounts for more than 85 percent of all the shares traded in auc-
tion markets.
In addition to the stock exchanges, there is a large OTC market for stocks. In 1971, 
the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) made available to dealers and 
brokers an electronic quotation system called NASDAQ (NASD Automated Quotations 
system, pronounced “naz-dak”). There are more companies listed on NASDAQ than 
there are on NYSE, but they tend to be much smaller in size and trade less actively. 
There are exceptions, of course. Both Microsoft and Intel trade OTC, for example. None-
theless, the total value of NASDAQ stocks is significantly less than the total value of 
NYSE stocks.
There are many large and important financial markets outside the United States, of 
course, and U.S. corporations are increasingly looking to these markets to raise cash. The 
Tokyo Stock Exchange and the London Stock Exchange (TSE and LSE, respectively) are 
two well-known examples. The fact that OTC markets have no physical location means that 
national borders do not present a great barrier, and there is now a huge international OTC 
debt market. Because of globalization, financial markets have reached the point where 
trading in many instruments never stops; it just travels around the world.
Listing  Stocks that trade on an organized exchange (or market) are said to be listed on that 
exchange. In order to be listed, firms must meet certain minimum criteria concerning, for 
example, asset size and number of shareholders. These criteria differ for different 
exchanges.
NYSE has the most stringent requirements of the stock markets in the United States. 
There are minimums on earnings, assets, and number and market value of shares 
outstanding.
concept questions
1.6a 	
What is a dealer market? How do dealer and auction markets differ?
1.6b 	
What is the largest auction market in the United States?
1.6c 	
What does OTC stand for? What is the large OTC market for stocks called?
The Tokyo Stock Exchange 
in English: www.jpx.co.jp/
english/.
The London Stock 
Exchange: www.
londonstockexchange. 
com.

18	
p a r t  1
Overview of Financial Management
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has introduced you to some of the basic ideas in business finance. In it, we 
saw that:
   1.	 Business finance has three main areas of concern: 
a.	
Capital budgeting. What long-term investments should the firm take?
b.	 Capital structure. Where will the firm get the long-term financing to pay for its 
investments? In other words, what mixture of debt and equity should we use to 
fund our operations?
c.	
Working capital management. How should the firm manage its everyday 
financial activities?
  2.	 The goal of financial management in a for-profit business is to make decisions that 
increase the value of the stock, or, more generally, increase the market value of the 
equity.
  3.	 The corporate form of organization is superior to other forms when it comes to 
raising money and transferring ownership interests, but it has the significant 
disadvantage of double taxation.
  4.	 There is the possibility of conflicts between stockholders and management in a large 
corporation. We called these conflicts agency problems and discussed how they 
might be controlled and reduced.
Of the topics we’ve discussed thus far, the most important is the goal of financial manage-
ment. Throughout the text, we will be analyzing many different financial decisions, but we 
always ask the same question: How does the decision under consideration affect the value 
of the equity in the firm?
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 1.2 What are the three main questions to be addressed if you wanted to 
start your own business?
Section 1.3 What characteristics are important when considering a partnership?
Section 1.4 What does the Sarbanes-Oxley Act require of corporate officers?
Section 1.5 Who are the stakeholders in a firm?
Section 1.6 What are the defining features of a primary market?
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 1 	 1.1	
The Financial Management Decision Process.  What are the three types 
of financial management decisions? For each type of decision, give 
an example of a business transaction that would be relevant.
LO 3 	 1.2	
Sole Proprietorships and Partnerships.  What are the four primary 
disadvantages to the sole proprietorship and partnership forms of business 

	
c h a p t e r  1
Introduction to Financial Management	
19
organization? What benefits are there to these types of business 
organization as opposed to the corporate form?
LO 3 	 1.3 	 Corporations.  What is the primary disadvantage of the corporate form 
of organization? Name at least two of the advantages of corporate 
organization.
LO 3 	 1.4 	 Corporate Finance Organization.  In a large corporation, what are the two 
distinct groups that report to the chief financial officer? Which group is 
the focus of corporate finance?
LO 2 	 1.5 	 Goal of Financial Management.  What goal should always motivate the 
actions of the firm’s financial manager?
LO 4 	 1.6 	 Agency Problems.  Who owns a corporation? Describe the process 
whereby the owners control the firm’s management. What is the main 
reason that an agency relationship exists in the corporate form of 
organization? In this context, what kinds of problems can arise?
LO 3 	 1.7 	 Primary versus Secondary Markets.  You’ve probably noticed coverage 
in the financial press of an initial public offering (IPO) of a company’s 
securities. Social networking company Facebook is a relatively recent 
example. Is an IPO a primary market transaction or a secondary market 
transaction?
LO 3 	 1.8 	 Auction versus Dealer Markets.  What does it mean when we say the 
New York Stock Exchange is an auction market? How are auction markets 
different from dealer markets? What kind of market is NASDAQ?
LO 2 	 1.9 	 Not-for-Profit Firm Goals.  Suppose you were the financial manager of a 
not-for-profit business (a not-for-profit hospital, perhaps). What kinds of 
goals do you think would be appropriate?
LO 2 	 1.10 	 Ethics and Firm Goals.  Can our goal of maximizing the value of the stock 
conflict with other goals, such as avoiding unethical or illegal behavior? In 
particular, do you think subjects such as customer and employee safety, 
the environment, and the general good of society fit in this framework, or 
are they essentially ignored? Try to think of some specific scenarios to 
illustrate your answer.
LO 2 	 1.11 	 International Firm Goal.  Would our goal of maximizing the value of the 
stock be different if we were thinking about financial management in a 
foreign country? Why or why not?
LO 4 	 1.12 	 Agency Problems.  Suppose you own stock in a company. The current 
price per share is $25. Another company has just announced that it wants 
to buy your company and will pay $35 per share to acquire all the 
outstanding stock. Your company’s management immediately begins 
fighting off this hostile bid. Is management acting in the shareholders’ 
best interests? Why or why not?
LO 4 	 1.13 	 Agency Problems and Corporate Ownership.  Corporate ownership 
varies around the world. Historically, individuals have owned the majority 
of shares in public corporations in the United States. In Germany and 
Japan, however, banks, other large financial institutions, and other 
companies own most of the stock in public corporations. Do you think 
agency problems are likely to be more or less severe in Germany and 
Japan than in the United States? Why? In recent years, large financial 
institutions such as mutual funds and pension funds have been becoming 

20	
p a r t  1
Overview of Financial Management
the dominant owners of stock in the United States, and these institutions 
are becoming more active in corporate affairs. What are the implications 
of this trend for agency problems and corporate control?
LO 4 	 1.14 	 Executive Compensation.  Critics have charged that compensation to top 
management in the United States is simply too high and should be cut 
back. For example, focusing on large corporations, in 2014, Liberty Global 
CEO Michael Fries made about $112 million and Gamco Investors CEO 
Mario Gabelli made about $89 million. Are such amounts excessive? In 
answering, it might be helpful to recognize that superstar athletes such as 
LeBron James, top entertainers such as Oprah Winfrey, and many others 
at the top of their respective fields earn at least as much, if not more.
LO 4 	 1.15 	 Sarbanes-Oxley.  In response to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, many small firms 
in the United States have opted to “go dark” and delist their stock. Why 
might a company choose this route? What are the costs of “going dark”?
1.1 Listing Requirements.  This chapter discussed some of the listing requirements for 
the NYSE and NASDAQ. Find the complete listing requirements for the New York 
Stock Exchange at www.nyse.com and NASDAQ at www.nasdaq.com. Which has more 
stringent listing requirements? Why don’t they have the same listing requirements?
1.2 Business Formation.  As you may (or may not) know, many companies incorporate 
in Delaware for a variety of reasons. Visit BizFilings at www.bizfilings.com to find out 
why. Which state has the highest fee for incorporation? For an LLC? While at the site, 
look at the FAQ section regarding corporations and LLCs.
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?

	
c h a p t e r  1
Introduction to Financial Management	
21
1.	
What are the advantages and disadvantages of 
changing the company organization from a sole 
proprietorship to an LLC?
2.	
What are the advantages and disadvantages of 
changing the company organization from a sole 
proprietorship to a corporation?
3.	
Ultimately, what action would you recommend the 
company undertake? Why?
QU E ST I O N S
	
Because of the increased sales, Doc left his other 
job, followed shortly by Lyn. The company hired addi-
tional workers to meet demand. Unfortunately, the fast 
growth experienced by the company led to cash flow 
and capacity problems. The company is currently pro-
ducing as many cakes as possible with the assets it 
owns, but demand for its cakes is still growing. Further, 
the company has been approached by a national super-
market chain with a proposal to put four of its cakes in 
all of the chain’s stores, and a national restaurant chain 
has contacted the company about selling McGee cakes 
in its restaurants. The restaurant would sell the cakes 
without a brand name.
	
Doc and Lyn have operated the company as a sole 
proprietorship. They have approached you to help man-
age and direct the company’s growth. Specifically, they 
have asked you to answer the following questions:
I
n early 2010, Doc and Lyn McGee formed the ­McGee 
Cake Company. The company produced a full line of 
cakes, and its specialties included chess cake,* lemon 
pound cake, and double-iced, double-chocolate cake. 
The couple formed the company as an outside interest, 
and both continued to work at their current jobs. Doc did 
all the baking, and Lyn handled the marketing and distri-
bution. With good product quality and a sound market-
ing plan, the company grew rapidly. In early 2014, the 
company was featured in a widely distributed entrepre-
neurial magazine. Later that year, the company was fea-
tured in Gourmet Desserts, a leading specialty food 
magazine. After the article appeared in Gourmet Des-
serts, sales exploded, and the company began receiving 
orders from all over the world.
 *Chess cake is quite delicious and distinct from cheesecake. The origin 
of the name is obscure.
CHAPTER CASE
The McGee Cake Company

22
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
PART TWO  Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
2
I
n late 2014 and early 2015, consumers were excited at the pump as 
gas prices fell dramatically. However, for many oil producers, the 
drop in oil prices was a negative. For example, in January 2015, Tullow 
Oil PLC, a British oil company noted for finding oil and gas in Africa, 
announced that it was writing off $2.7 billion. The write-off was due to 
unsuccessful exploration drilling as well as a general decline in the 
company’s asset value due to falling oil prices. Write-offs also reached 
Russia. In March 2015, Lukoil announced it was writing off $2.3 billion 
related to a lowering of the value of the company’s assets. And Maersk 
Oil wrote off $1.7 billion in 2014. The company had purchased parts of 
three Brazilian oil companies in 2011, but the value of the companies 
had fallen drastically as oil wells came up short of expectations.
So did stockholders in these companies lose billions of dollars 
because of the write-offs? The answer is probably not. Understanding 
why ultimately leads us to the main subject of this chapter: that all-­
important substance known as cash flow.
Financial Statements,  
Taxes, and Cash Flow
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Differentiate between accounting 
value (or “book” value) and market 
value.
LO 2 	 Distinguish accounting income 
from cash flow.
LO 3 	 Explain the difference between 
average and marginal tax rates.
LO 4 	 Determine a firm’s cash flow from 
its financial statements.
I
n this chapter, we examine financial statements, taxes, and cash flow. Our emphasis is not 
on preparing financial statements. Instead, we recognize that financial statements are 
frequently a key source of information for financial decisions, so our goal is to briefly ex-
amine such statements and point out some of their more relevant features. We pay special 
attention to some of the practical details of cash flow.
As you read, pay particular attention to two important differences: (1) the difference 
between accounting value and market value and (2) the difference between accounting in-
come and cash flow. These distinctions will be important throughout the book.
THE BALANCE SHEET
The balance sheet is a snapshot of the firm. It is a convenient means of organizing and 
summarizing what a firm owns (its assets), what a firm owes (its liabilities), and the differ-
ence between the two (the firm’s equity) at a given point in time. Figure 2.1 illustrates how 
2.1
balance sheet
Financial statement 
showing a firm’s 
accounting value on a 
particular date.

	
c h a p t e r  2
Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow	
23
the balance sheet is constructed. As shown, the left-hand side lists the assets of the firm, 
and the right-hand side lists the liabilities and equity.
Assets: The Left-Hand Side
Assets are classified as either current or fixed. A fixed asset is one that has a relatively long 
life. Fixed assets can either be tangible, such as a truck or a computer, or intangible, such 
as a trademark or patent. A current asset has a life of less than one year. This means that the 
asset will normally convert to cash within 12 months. For example, inventory would nor-
mally be purchased and sold within a year and is thus classified as a current asset. Obvi-
ously, cash itself is a current asset. Accounts receivable (money owed to the firm by its 
customers) is also a current asset.
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity: The Right-Hand Side
The firm’s liabilities are the first thing listed on the right-hand side of the balance sheet. 
These are classified as either current or long term. Current liabilities, like current assets, 
have a life of less than one year (meaning they must be paid within the year), and they are 
listed before long-term liabilities. Accounts payable (money the firm owes to its suppliers) 
is one example of a current liability.
A debt that is not due in the coming year is classified as a long-term liability. A loan 
that the firm will pay off in five years is one such long-term debt. Firms borrow over the 
long term from a variety of sources. We will tend to use the terms bonds and bondholders 
generically to refer to long-term debt and long-term creditors, respectively.
Finally, by definition, the difference between the total value of the assets (current and 
fixed) and the total value of the liabilities (current and long-term) is the shareholders’ eq-
uity, also called common equity or owners’ equity. This feature of the balance sheet is in-
tended to reflect the fact that, if the firm were to sell all of its assets and use the money to 
pay off its debts, then whatever residual value remained would belong to the shareholders. 
So, the balance sheet “balances” because the value of the left-hand side always equals the 
value of the right-hand side. That is, the value of the firm’s assets is equal to the sum of its 
liabilities and shareholders’ equity:1
Assets = Liabilities + Shareholders’ equity	
[2.1]
Two excellent sites for 
company financial 
information are  
finance.yahoo.com  
and  
money.cnn.com.
Disney has a good 
investor site at 
thewaltdisneycompany 
.com.
Current liabilities
Long-term debt
Shareholders’ equity
Net
Working
Capital
Total Value of Assets
Total Value of Liabilities
and Shareholders’ Equity
Current assets
Fixed assets
1.  Tangible fixed
 
assets
2.  Intangible fixed
     assets
f i g u r e  2 .1
The balance sheet
Left side: Total value 
of assets.  
Right side: Total value 
of liabilities and 
shareholders’ equity.
coverage online
Excel 
Master
1 The terms owners’ equity, shareholders’ equity, and stockholders’ equity are used interchangeably to refer to 
the equity in a corporation. The term net worth is also used. Variations exist in addition to these.

24	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
This is the balance sheet identity, or equation, and it always holds because shareholders’ 
equity is defined as the difference between assets and liabilities.
Net Working Capital
As shown in Figure 2.1, the difference between a firm’s current assets and its current lia-
bilities is called net working capital. Net working capital is positive when current assets 
exceed current liabilities. Based on the definitions of current assets and current liabilities, 
this means that the cash that will become available over the next 12 months exceeds the 
cash that must be paid over that same period. For this reason, net working capital is usually 
positive in a healthy firm.
Table 2.1 shows a simplified balance sheet for the fictitious U.S. Corporation. There 
are three particularly important things to keep in mind when examining a balance sheet: 
liquidity, debt versus equity, and market value versus book value.
net working capital
Current assets less current 
liabilities.
ta b l e  2.1
Balance sheets for 
U.S. Corporation
U.S. CORPORATION
Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2015 and 2016
($ in Millions)
2015
2016
2015
2016
Assets
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Current assets
Current liabilities
  Cash
$   104 $   160   Accounts payable
$   232
$   266
  Accounts receivable
     455
    688   Notes payable
      196
     123
  Inventory
     553      555     Total
$   428
$   389
    Total
$1,112 $1,403
Fixed assets
  Net fixed assets
$1,644 $1,709 Long-term debt
$   408
$   454
Owners’ equity
  Common stock and paid-in surplus
     600
      640
  Retained earnings
   1,320
  1,629
    Total
$1,920
$2,269
Total assets
$2,756 $3,112 Total liabilities and owners’ equity
$2,756
$3,112
EXAMPLE
2.1
 Building the Balance Sheet
A firm has current assets of $100, net fixed assets of $500, short-term debt of $70, and long-term 
debt of $200. What does the balance sheet look like? What is shareholders’ equity? What is net 
working capital?
	
In this case, total assets are $100 + 500 = $600 and total liabilities are $70 + 200 = $270, so 
shareholders’ equity is the difference: $600 − 270 = $330. The balance sheet would thus look like:
Assets
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Current assets
	
$ 100
Current liabilities
$  70
Net fixed assets
  500
Long-term debt
200
Shareholders’ equity
  330
Total assets
$600
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
$600
Net working capital is the difference between current assets and current liabilities, or $100 − 70 = $30.

	
c h a p t e r  2
Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow	
25
Liquidity
Liquidity refers to the speed and ease with which an asset can be converted to cash. Gold is 
a relatively liquid asset; a custom manufacturing facility is not. Liquidity really has two 
dimensions: ease of conversion versus loss of value. Any asset can be converted to cash 
quickly if we cut the price enough. A highly liquid asset, therefore, is one that can be 
quickly sold without significant loss of value. An illiquid asset is one that cannot be quickly 
converted to cash without a substantial price reduction.
Assets are normally listed on the balance sheet in order of decreasing liquidity, mean-
ing that the most liquid assets are listed first. Current assets are relatively liquid and in-
clude cash and those assets that we expect to convert to cash over the next 12 months. 
Accounts receivable, for example, represent amounts not yet collected from customers on 
sales already made. Naturally, we hope these will convert to cash in the near future. Inven-
tory is probably the least liquid of the current assets, at least for many businesses.
Fixed assets are, for the most part, relatively illiquid. These consist of tangible things 
such as buildings and equipment that don’t convert to cash at all in normal business activity 
(they are, of course, used in the business to generate cash). Intangible assets, such as a 
trademark, have no physical existence but can be very valuable. Like tangible fixed assets, 
they won’t ordinarily convert to cash and are generally considered illiquid.
Liquidity is valuable. The more liquid a business is, the less likely it is to experience 
financial distress (i.e., difficulty in paying debts or buying needed assets). Unfortunately, 
liquid assets are generally less profitable to hold. For example, cash holdings are the most 
liquid of all investments, but they sometimes earn no return at all—they just sit there. There 
is, therefore, a trade-off between the advantages of liquidity and forgone potential profits.
Debt versus Equity
To the extent that a firm borrows money, it usually gives first claim to the firm’s cash flow 
to creditors. Equity holders are only entitled to the residual value, the portion left after 
creditors are paid. The value of this residual portion is the shareholders’ equity in the firm, 
which is just the value of the firm’s assets less the value of the firm’s liabilities:
Shareholders’ equity = Assets − Liabilities
This is true in an accounting sense because shareholders’ equity is defined as this residual 
portion. More importantly, it is true in an economic sense: If the firm sells its assets and 
pays its debts, whatever cash is left belongs to the shareholders.
The use of debt in a firm’s capital structure is called financial leverage. The more debt 
a firm has (as a percentage of assets), the greater is its degree of financial leverage. As we 
discuss in later chapters, debt acts like a lever in the sense that using it can greatly magnify 
both gains and losses. So, financial leverage increases the potential reward to shareholders, 
but it also increases the potential for financial distress and business failure.
Market Value versus Book Value
The true value of any asset is its market value, which is simply the amount of cash we 
would get if we actually sold it. In contrast, the values shown on the balance sheet for the 
firm’s assets are book values and generally are not what the assets are actually worth. Un-
der Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), audited financial statements in the 
United States generally show assets at historical cost. In other words, assets are “carried on 
the books” at what the firm paid for them (minus accumulated depreciation), no matter 
how long ago they were purchased or how much they are worth today.
For current assets, market value and book value might be somewhat similar because 
current assets are bought and converted into cash over a relatively short span of time. 
Annual and quarterly 
financial statements (and 
lots more) for most public 
U.S. corporations can be 
found in the EDGAR 
database at www.sec.gov.
The home page for the 
Financial Accounting 
Standards Board (FASB) is 
www.fasb.org.
Generally Accepted 
Accounting 
Principles (GAAP)
The common set of 
standards and procedures 
by which audited financial 
statements are prepared.

26	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
In other circumstances, they might differ quite a bit. Moreover, for fixed assets, it would be 
purely a coincidence if the actual market value of an asset (what the asset could be sold for) 
were equal to its book value. For example, a railroad might own enormous tracts of land 
purchased a century or more ago. What the railroad paid for that land could be hundreds or 
thousands of times less than what it is worth today. The balance sheet would nonetheless 
show the historical cost. There are exceptions to this practice.
Managers and investors will frequently be interested in knowing the market value of 
the firm. This information is not on the balance sheet. The fact that balance sheet assets are 
listed at cost means that there is no necessary connection between the total assets shown 
and the market value of the firm. Indeed, many of the most valuable assets that a firm 
might have—good management, a good reputation, talented employees—don’t appear on 
the balance sheet at all. To give one example, one of the most valuable assets for many 
well-known companies is their brand name. According to one source, the names 
“Coca-Cola,” “Microsoft,” and “IBM” are all worth in excess of $50 billion.
Similarly, the owners’ equity figure on the balance sheet and the true market value of 
the equity need not be related. For financial managers, then, the accounting value of the 
equity is not an especially important concern; it is the market value that matters. Hence-
forth, whenever we speak of the value of an asset or the value of the firm, we will normally 
mean its market value. So, for example, when we say the goal of the financial manager is 
to increase the value of the stock, we mean the market value of the stock.
EXAMPLE
2.2  Market versus Book Values
The Klingon Corporation has fixed assets with a book value of $700 and an appraised market value 
of about $1,000. Current assets are $400 on the books, but approximately $600 would be realized 
if they were liquidated. Klingon has $500 in long-term debt, both book value and market value, and 
no current liabilities of any kind. What is the book value of the equity? What is the market value?
	
We can construct two simplified balance sheets, one in accounting (book value) terms and one 
in economic (market value) terms:
KLINGON CORPORATION 
Balance Sheets 
Market Value versus Book Value
Book
Market
Book
Market
Assets
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Current assets
$  400
$  600
Long-term debt
$  500
$  500
Net fixed assets
      700
  1,000
Shareholders’ equity
    600
  1,100
$1,100
$1,600
$1,100
$1,600
In this example, shareholders’ equity is actually worth almost twice as much as what is shown on the 
books. The distinction between book and market values is important precisely because book val-
ues can be so different from true economic values.
concept questions
2.1a	
What is the balance sheet identity?
2.1b	
What is liquidity? Why is it important?
2.1c	
What do we mean by financial leverage?
2.1d	
Explain the difference between accounting value and market value. Which is more 
important to the financial manager? Why?

	
c h a p t e r  2
Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow	
27
THE INCOME STATEMENT
The income statement measures performance over some period of time, usually a quarter 
or a year. The income statement equation is:
Revenues − Expenses = Income	
[2.2]
If you think of the balance sheet as a snapshot, then you can think of the income statement 
as a video recording covering the period between a before and an after picture. Table 2.2 gives 
a simplified income statement for U.S. Corporation.
2.2
income statement
Financial statement 
summarizing a firm’s 
performance over a period 
of time.
ta b l e  2.2
Income statement for 
U.S. Corporation
U.S. CORPORATION
2016 Income Statement
($ in Millions)
Net sales
$1,509
Cost of goods sold
750
Depreciation
    65
Earnings before interest and taxes
$   694
Interest paid
    70
Taxable income
$   624
Taxes
     212
Net income
$   412
  Dividends
$103
  Addition to retained earnings
309
The first thing reported on an income statement is usually revenue and expenses from 
the firm’s principal operations. Subsequent parts include, among other things, financing 
expenses such as interest paid. Taxes paid are reported separately. The last item is net income 
(the so-called bottom line). Net income is often expressed on a per-share basis and called 
earnings per share (EPS).
As indicated, U.S. paid cash dividends of $103. The difference between net income 
and cash dividends, $309, is the addition to retained earnings for the year. This amount is 
added to the cumulative retained earnings account on the balance sheet. If you look back at 
the two balance sheets for U.S. Corporation, you’ll see that retained earnings did go up by 
this amount, $1,320 + 309 = $1,629.
coverage online
Excel 
Master
EXAMPLE
2.3  Earnings and Dividends per Share
Suppose U.S. Corporation had 200 million shares outstanding at the end of 2016. Based on the  
income statement in Table 2.2, what was EPS? What were dividends per share?
	
From the income statement, U.S. Corporation had a net income of $412 million for the year. 
Total dividends were $103 million. Because 200 million shares were outstanding, we can calculate 
earnings per share and dividends per share as follows:
  Earnings per share = Net income/Total shares outstanding     
	
= $412/200 = $2.06 per share
Dividends per share = Total dividends/Total shares outstanding     
	
= $103/200 = $.515 per share
When looking at an income statement, the financial manager needs to keep three 
things in mind: GAAP, cash versus noncash items, and time and costs.

28	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
GAAP and the Income Statement
An income statement prepared using GAAP will show revenue when it accrues. This is not 
necessarily when the cash comes in. The general rule (the recognition principle) is to rec-
ognize revenue when the earnings process is virtually complete and the value of an ex-
change of goods or services is known or can be reliably determined. In practice, this 
principle usually means that revenue is recognized at the time of sale, which need not be 
the same as the time of collection.
Expenses shown on the income statement are based on the matching principle. The basic 
idea here is to first determine revenues as described earlier and then match those revenues with 
the costs associated with producing them. So, if we manufacture a product and then sell it on 
credit, the revenue is recognized at the time of sale. The production and other costs associated 
with the sale of that product would likewise be recognized at that time. Once again, the actual 
cash outflows may have occurred at some very different times. Thus, as a result of the way rev-
enues and expenses are reported, the figures shown on the income statement may not be at all 
representative of the actual cash inflows and outflows that occurred during a particular period.
Noncash Items
A primary reason that accounting income differs from cash flow is that an income state-
ment contains noncash items. The most important of these is depreciation. Suppose a firm 
purchases a fixed asset for $5,000 and pays in cash. Obviously, the firm has a $5,000 cash 
outflow at the time of purchase. However, instead of deducting the $5,000 as an expense, 
an accountant might depreciate the asset over a five-year period.
If the depreciation is straight-line and the asset is written down to zero over that pe-
riod, then $5,000/5 = $1,000 would be deducted each year as an expense.2 The important 
thing to recognize is that this $1,000 deduction isn’t cash—it’s an accounting number. The 
actual cash outflow occurred when the asset was purchased.
The depreciation deduction is simply another application of the matching principle in 
accounting. The revenues associated with an asset would generally occur over some length 
of time. So, the accountant seeks to match the expense of purchasing the asset with the 
benefits produced from owning it.
As we will see, for the financial manager, the actual timing of cash inflows and out-
flows is critical in coming up with a reasonable estimate of market value, so we need to 
learn how to separate the cash flows from the noncash accounting entries. In reality, the 
difference between cash flow and accounting income can be pretty dramatic. For example, 
in November 2014, Arch Coal reported a loss of $97.2 million for the third quarter. Sounds 
bad, but Arch Coal reported a positive cash flow of $80.3 million! In large part, the loss 
was due to noncash restructuring charges and other special items.
Time and Costs
It is often useful to think of the future as having two distinct parts: the short run and the 
long run. These are not precise time periods. The distinction has to do with whether costs 
are fixed or variable. In the long run, all business costs are variable. Given sufficient time, 
assets can be sold, debts can be paid, and so on.
If our time horizon is relatively short, however, some costs are effectively fixed—they 
must be paid no matter what (e.g., property taxes). Other costs, such as wages to laborers 
and payments to suppliers, are still variable. As a result, even in the short run, the firm can 
vary its output level by varying expenditures in these areas.
noncash items
Expenses charged against 
revenues that do not 
directly affect cash flow, 
such as depreciation.
2 By “straight-line,” we mean that the depreciation deduction is the same every year. By “written down to zero,” 
we mean that the asset is assumed to have no value at the end of five years.

	
c h a p t e r  2
Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow	
29
The distinction between fixed and variable costs is important, at times, to the financial 
manager, but the way costs are reported on the income statement is not a good guide as to 
which costs are which. The reason is that, in practice, accountants tend to classify costs as 
either product costs or period costs.
Product costs include such things as raw materials, direct labor expense, and manufac-
turing overhead. These are reported on the income statement as costs of goods sold, but they 
include both fixed and variable costs. Similarly, period costs are incurred during a particular 
time period and might be reported as selling, general, and administrative expenses. Once 
again, some of these period costs may be fixed and others may be variable. The company 
president’s salary, for example, is a period cost and is probably fixed, at least in the short run.
The balance sheets and income statement we have been using thus far are hypothetical. 
Our nearby Work the Web box shows how to find actual balance sheets and income state-
ments online for almost any public company.
T
he U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requires that most public companies file 
regular reports, including annual and quarterly financial statements. The SEC has a public site 
named EDGAR that makes these reports available free at www.sec.gov. We went to “Company 
Filings Search” and searched for “Microsoft.” When we got our results, we limited our search to 
Form 10-K. Here is what we got:
As of the date of this search, EDGAR had 21 of these reports for Microsoft available for downloading. 
The 10-K is the annual report filed with the SEC. It includes, among other things, the list of officers 
and their salaries, financial statements for the previous fiscal year, and an explanation by the com-
pany for the financial results. Here is an exercise for you: Go to the “Descriptions of SEC Forms” 
page and find the different forms companies must file with the SEC. What is a 10-Q report?
W
RK TH E W E B
QUESTIONS
	
1.	 As you can imagine, electronic filing of documents with the SEC has not been around 
for very long. Go to www.sec.gov and find the filings for General Electric. What is the 
date of the oldest 10-K available on the website for General Electric? Look up the 10-K 
forms for IBM and Apple to see if the year of the first electronic filing is the same for 
these companies.
	
2.	 Go to www.sec.gov and find out when the following forms are used: Form DEF 14A, 
Form 8-K, and Form 6-K.

30	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
Earnings Management
The way that firms are required by GAAP to report financial results is intended to be 
objective and precise. In reality, there is plenty of wiggle room, and, as a result, compa-
nies have significant discretion over their reported earnings. For example, corporations 
frequently like to show investors that they have steadily growing earnings. To do this, 
they might take steps to overstate or understate earnings at various times to smooth out 
dips and surges. Doing so is called earnings management, and it is a controversial 
practice.
With the increasing globalization of business, accounting standards need to be 
more alike across countries. In recent years, U.S. accounting standards have increas-
ingly become more closely tied to International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS). In particular, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (in charge of U.S. 
GAAP) and the IASB (in charge of IFRS), have been working toward a convergence 
of policies. Although GAAP and IFRS have become similar in several areas, as of late 
2014, it appears that a full convergence of accounting policies is off the table, at least 
for now.
For more information 
about IFRS, check out the 
website www.ifrs.org.
concept questions
2.2a	
What is the income statement equation?
2.2b	
What are the three things to keep in mind when looking at an income statement?
2.2c	
Why is accounting income not the same as cash flow?
TAXES
Taxes can be one of the largest cash outflows that a firm experiences. For example, for the 
fiscal year 2015, Walmart’s earnings before taxes were about $24.8 billion. Its tax bill, 
including all taxes paid worldwide, was a whopping $8 billion, or about 32 percent of its 
pretax earnings. The size of the tax bill is determined through the tax code, an often-
amended set of rules. In this section, we examine corporate tax rates and how taxes are 
calculated. Taxes for partnerships and proprietorships are computed using the personal 
income tax schedules; we don’t discuss these here, but the general procedures are the 
same as for corporate taxes.
If the various rules of taxation seem a little bizarre or convoluted to you, keep in mind 
that the tax code is the result of political, not economic, forces. As a result, there is no rea-
son why it has to make economic sense.
Corporate Tax Rates
Corporate tax rates in effect for 2015 are shown in Table 2.3. A peculiar feature is that 
corporate tax rates are not strictly increasing. As shown, corporate tax rates rise from 15 
percent to 39 percent, but they drop back to 34 percent on income greater than $335,000. 
They then rise to 38 percent and subsequently fall to 35 percent.
According to the originators of the current tax rules, there are only four corporate 
rates: 15 percent, 25 percent, 34 percent, and 35 percent. The 38 and 39 percent brackets 
arise because of “surcharges” applied on top of the 34 and 35 percent rates. A tax is a tax 
is a tax, however, so there are really six corporate tax rates, as we have shown.
2.3
The IRS has a great 
website! (www.irs.gov)
coverage online
Excel 
Master

	
c h a p t e r  2
Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow	
31
Average versus Marginal Tax Rates
In making financial decisions, it is frequently important to distinguish between average and 
marginal tax rates. Your average tax rate is your tax bill divided by your taxable income, 
in other words, the percentage of your income that goes to pay taxes. Your marginal tax 
rate is the extra tax you would pay if you earned one more dollar. The percentage tax rates 
shown in Table 2.3 are all marginal rates. Put another way, the tax rates in Table 2.3 apply 
to the part of income in the indicated range only, not all income.
The difference between average and marginal tax rates can be best illustrated with a 
simple example. Suppose our corporation has a taxable income of $200,000. What is the 
tax bill? From Table 2.3, we can figure our tax bill as:
.15($  50,000) 	
=	$  7,500
.25($  75,000 − 50,000)	
=	
6,250
.34($100,000 − 75,000)	
=	
8,500
.39($200,000 − 100,000)	 =	   39,000
	
	
$61,250
Our total tax is thus $61,250.
In our example, what is the average tax rate? We had a taxable income of $200,000 
and a tax bill of $61,250, so the average tax rate is $61,250/200,000 = 30.625%. What is 
the marginal tax rate? If we made one more dollar, the tax on that dollar would be 39 cents, 
so our marginal rate is 39 percent.
Table 2.4 summarizes some different taxable incomes, marginal tax rates, and average 
tax rates for corporations. Notice how the average and marginal tax rates come together at 
35 percent.
average tax rate
Total taxes paid divided by 
total taxable income.
marginal tax rate
Amount of tax payable on 
the next ­dollar earned.
ta b l e  2.3
Corporate tax rates
Taxable Income
Tax Rate
$	
0− 	
50,000
15%
	
50,001− 	
75,000
25   
	
75,001−	
100,000
34   
	
100,001−	
335,000
39   
	
335,001−	 10,000,000
34   
	 10,000,001−	 15,000,000
35   
	 15,000,001−	 18,333,333
38   
	 18,333,334+
35  
ta b l e  2.4
Corporate taxes and 
tax rates
(1)
(2)
(3)
(3)/(1)
Taxable Income
Marginal Tax Rate
Total Tax
Average Tax Rate
$          45,000  
15%
$          6,750
15.00%
        70,000
25
          12,500
17.86
        95,000
34
          20,550
21.63
      250,000
39
         80,750
32.30
   1,000,000
34
       340,000
34.00
 17,500,000
38
    6,100,000
34.86
  50,000,000
35
  17,500,000
35.00
100,000,000
35
  35,000,000
35.00

32	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
With a flat-rate tax, there is only one tax rate, and this rate is the same for all income 
levels. With such a tax, the marginal tax rate is always the same as the average tax rate. As 
it stands now, corporate taxation in the United States is based on a modified flat-rate tax, 
which becomes a true flat rate for the highest incomes.
In looking at Table 2.4, notice that the more a corporation makes, the greater is the per-
centage of taxable income paid in taxes. Put another way, under current tax law, the average 
tax rate never goes down, even though the marginal tax rate does. As illustrated, for corpora-
tions, average tax rates begin at 15 percent and rise to a maximum of 35 percent.
It will normally be the marginal tax rate that is relevant for financial decision making. 
The reason is that any new cash flows will be taxed at that marginal rate. Because financial 
decisions usually involve new cash flows or changes in existing ones, this rate will tell us 
the marginal effect on our tax bill.
There is one last thing to notice about the tax code as it affects corporations. It’s easy 
to verify that the corporate tax bill is just a flat 35 percent of taxable income if our taxable 
income is more than $18.33 million. Also, for the many midsize corporations with taxable 
incomes in the $335,000 to $10,000,000 range, the tax rate is a flat 34 percent. Because we 
will usually be talking about large corporations, you can assume that the average and mar-
ginal tax rates are 35 percent unless we explicitly say otherwise.
We should note that we have simplified the U.S. tax code in our discussions. In real-
ity, the tax code is much more complex, and it is riddled with various tax deductions and 
loopholes allowed for certain industries. As a result, the average corporate tax rate can be 
far from 35 percent for many companies. Table 2.5 displays average tax rates for various 
industries.
As you can see, the average tax rate ranges from 33.8 percent for electric utilities to 
4.5 percent for biotechnology firms. For a discussion of one of the complexities of the tax 
code, see our nearby Finance Matters box.
EXAMPLE
2.4  Deep in the Heart of Taxes
Algernon, Inc., has a taxable income of $85,000. What is its tax bill? What is its average tax rate? Its 
marginal tax rate?
	
From Table 2.3, the tax rate applied to the first $50,000 is 15 percent; the rate applied to the 
next $25,000 is 25 percent; and the rate applied after that up to $100,000 is 34 percent. So, Alger-
non must pay .15 × $50,000 + .25 × 25,000 + .34 × (85,000 − 75,000) = $17,150. The average tax 
rate is thus $17,150/85,000 = 20.18%. The marginal rate is 34 percent since Algernon’s taxes would 
rise by 34 cents if it had another dollar in taxable income.
ta b l e  2.5
Average tax rates for 
various industries
Industry
Number of 
Companies
Average  
Tax Rate
Electric utilities (Eastern U.S.)
 24
  33.8%
Trucking
 33
32.7 
Railroad
 15
27.4 
Securities brokerage
 30
20.5 
Banking
481
17.5 
Medical supplies
264
11.2 
Internet
239
 5.9
Pharmaceutical
337
 5.6
Biotechnology
121
 4.5

33
CASH FLOW
At this point, we are ready to discuss perhaps one of the most important pieces of financial 
information that can be gleaned from financial statements: cash flow. By cash flow, we 
simply mean the difference between the number of dollars that came in and the number 
that went out. For example, if you were the owner of a business, you might be very inter-
ested in how much cash you actually took out of your business in a given year. How to 
determine this amount is one of the things we discuss next.
2.4
What Is Warren Buffett’s Tax Rate?
I
n 2011, famed investor Warren Buffett, one of the wealthi-
est individuals in the world, created a stir when he publicly 
stated that his tax rate was lower than the tax rate paid by 
his secretary. The previous year, Buffett’s gross income was 
about $63 million, on which he paid only a 15 percent tax 
rate. His secretary (with a substantially lower income) had a 
31 percent marginal tax rate. Also in 2011, when Republican 
presidential contender Mitt Romney released his income 
taxes, it was revealed that he too paid an income tax rate of 
only 15 percent on his $21 million annual income.
	
Why do Buffett’s and Romney’s tax rates appear so 
low? Currently, under the U.S. tax system, wage income is 
taxed at a much higher rate than dividends and long-term 
capital gains. In fact, in the highest tax bracket, wage income 
is taxed at 35 percent, while dividends and long-term capital 
gains are taxed at 15 percent. For Buffett and Romney, most 
of their annual income comes from their investments, not 
wages, hence the 15 percent rate.
	
So do rich guys get all the (tax) breaks? U.S. President 
Barack Obama seems to think so. In his 2012 State of the 
Union Address, with Buffett’s secretary Debbie Bosanek 
joining First Lady Michelle Obama in her box as a special 
guest, he called for the creation of a “Buffett tax.” As he de-
scribed it, such a tax would be an extra tax paid by very 
high-income individuals. Maybe President Obama was mad 
about the fact that he and the first lady paid (in 2013) $98,169 
in federal taxes on their joint income of $481,098, implying 
an average tax rate of 20.4 percent.
	
Of course, you know that income received from divi-
dends is already taxed. Dividends are paid from corporate 
income, which is taxed at 35 percent for larger dividend-
paying companies. Effectively, any tax on dividends is dou-
ble taxation on that money. The tax code realizes this. The 
lower tax rate on dividends simply lowers the double tax 
rate. The same thing is true for capital gains; taxes are paid 
on the money before the investment is made.
	
In Buffett’s case, most of his wealth stems from his ap-
proximately 30 percent ownership of Berkshire Hathaway 
Corporation. Based on its 23,000 (no typo!)-page tax return, 
Berkshire’s 2014 corporate tax bill was $7.9 billion on pretax 
income of $28.1 billion, a 28 percent average rate. Buffett’s 
share of Berkshire’s tax bill therefore amounts to something 
on the order of $2.37 billion! If we include Berkshire’s corpo-
rate taxes, Buffett’s average tax rate is more like 28 + 15 = 43 
percent.
	
To give another example, consider the situation de-
scribed by N. Gregory Mankiw, the well-known economist 
and textbook author. Mankiw considers taking a writing job 
for $1,000. He figures that if he earns an 8 percent return 
and there are no taxes, he would be able to leave his chil-
dren about $10,000 in 30 years when he passes on. How-
ever, because of federal, state, and Medicare taxes, he 
would receive only about $523 after taxes today. And be-
cause of corporate taxes and personal income taxes, his 
return on the same investment would be only about 4 per-
cent, which will result in a balance of $1,700 in 30 years. 
When he dies, his account will be taxed using the marginal 
estate tax rate, which is as high as 55 percent. As a result, 
his children will receive only about $1,000, implying a tax 
rate of 90 percent!
FINANCE MATTERS
concept questions
2.3a	
What is the difference between a marginal and an average tax rate?
2.3b	
Do the wealthiest corporations receive a tax break in terms of a lower tax rate? Explain.

34	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
There is no standard financial statement that presents this information in the way that 
we wish. We will, therefore, discuss how to calculate cash flow for U.S. Corporation and 
point out how the result differs from that of standard financial statement calculations. Im-
portant note: There is a standard financial accounting statement called the statement of 
cash flows, but it is concerned with a somewhat different issue that should not be confused 
with what is discussed in this section.
From the balance sheet identity, we know that the value of a firm’s assets is equal to 
the value of its liabilities plus the value of its equity. Similarly, the cash flow from the 
firm’s assets must equal the sum of the cash flow to creditors and the cash flow to stock-
holders (or owners, if the business is not a corporation):
Cash flow from assets = Cash flow to creditors + Cash flow to stockholders	
[2.3]
This is the cash flow identity. What it reflects is the fact that a firm generates cash through 
its various activities, and that cash either is used to pay creditors or else is paid out to the 
owners of the firm. We discuss the various things that make up these cash flows next.
Cash Flow from Assets
Cash flow from assets involves three components: operating cash flow, capital spending, 
and change in net working capital. Operating cash flow refers to the cash flow that results 
from the firm’s day-to-day activities of producing and selling. Expenses associated with 
the firm’s financing of its assets are not included because they are not operating expenses.
In the normal course of events, some portion of the firm’s cash flow is reinvested in 
the firm. Capital spending refers to the net spending on fixed assets (purchases of fixed 
assets less sales of fixed assets). Finally, the change in net working capital is the amount 
spent on net working capital. It is measured as the change in net working capital over the 
period being examined and represents the net increase or decrease in current assets over 
current liabilities. The three components of cash flow are examined in more detail next. In 
all our examples, all amounts are in millions of dollars.
Operating Cash Flow 
To calculate operating cash flow (OCF), we want to calculate 
revenues minus costs, but we don’t want to include depreciation because it’s not a cash 
outflow, and we don’t want to include interest because it’s a financing expense. We do want 
to include taxes because taxes are, unfortunately, paid in cash.
If we look at U.S. Corporation’s income statement (Table 2.2), we see that earnings 
before interest and taxes (EBIT) are $694. This is almost what we want because it doesn’t 
include interest paid. We need to make two adjustments. First, recall that depreciation is a 
noncash expense. To get cash flow, we first add back the $65 in depreciation because it 
wasn’t a cash deduction. The other adjustment is to subtract the $212 in taxes because 
these were paid in cash. The result is operating cash flow:
U.S. CORPORATION
2016 Operating Cash Flow
Earnings before interest and taxes	
$694
+ Depreciation	
65
− Taxes	
  212
    Operating cash flow	
$547
U.S. Corporation thus had a 2016 operating cash flow of $547.
coverage online
Excel 
Master
cash flow from 
assets
The total of cash flow to 
creditors and cash flow to 
stockholders, consisting of 
the following: operating 
cash flow, capital 
spending, and change in 
net working capital.
operating cash flow
Cash generated from a 
firm’s normal business 
activities.

	
c h a p t e r  2
Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow	
35
Operating cash flow is an important number because it tells us, on a very basic level, 
whether or not a firm’s cash inflows from its business operations are sufficient to cover its 
­everyday cash outflows. For this reason, a negative operating cash flow is often a sign of 
trouble.
There is an unpleasant possibility for confusion when we speak of operating cash flow. In 
accounting practice, operating cash flow is often defined as net income plus depreciation. For 
U.S. Corporation, this would amount to $412 + 65 = $477. The accounting definition of oper-
ating cash flow differs from ours in one important way: Interest is deducted when net income 
is computed. Notice that the difference between the $547 operating cash flow we calculated 
and this $477 is $70, the amount of interest paid for the year. This definition of cash flow thus 
considers interest paid to be an operating expense. Our definition treats it properly as a financ-
ing expense. If there were no interest expense, the two definitions would be the same.
To finish our calculation of cash flow from assets for U.S. Corporation, we need to 
consider how much of the $547 operating cash flow was reinvested in the firm. We con-
sider spending on fixed assets first.
Capital Spending 
Net capital spending is just money spent on fixed assets less 
money received from the sale of fixed assets. At the end of 2015, net fixed assets for U.S. 
Corporation (Table 2.1) were $1,644. During the year, we wrote off (depreciated) $65 
worth of fixed assets on the income statement. So, if we didn’t purchase any new fixed as-
sets, net fixed assets would have been $1,644 − 65 = $1,579 at year’s end. The 2016 bal-
ance sheet shows $1,709 in net fixed assets, so we must have spent a total of $1,709 − 1,579 
= $130 on fixed assets during the year:
Ending net fixed assets	
$1,709
− Beginning net fixed assets	
1,644
+ Depreciation	
        65
    Net investment in fixed assets	
$  130
This $130 is our net capital spending for 2016.
Could net capital spending be negative? The answer is yes. This would happen if the 
firm sold off more assets than it purchased. The net here refers to purchases of fixed assets 
net of any sales of fixed assets.
Change in Net Working Capital 
In addition to investing in fixed assets, a firm 
will also invest in current assets. For example, going back to the balance sheet in Table 2.1, 
we see that at the end of 2016, U.S. had current assets of $1,403. At the end of 2015, cur-
rent assets were $1,112, so, during the year, U.S. invested $1,403 − 1,112 = $291 in cur-
rent assets.
As the firm changes its investment in current assets, its current liabilities will usually 
change as well. To determine the change in net working capital, the easiest approach is just 
to take the difference between the beginning and ending net working capital (NWC) figures. 
Net working capital at the end of 2016 was $1,403 − 389 = $1,014. Similarly, at the end of 
2015, net working capital was $1,112 − 428 = $684. So, given these figures, we have:
Ending NWC	
$1,014
− Beginning NWC	
      684
    Change in NWC	
$  330
Net working capital thus increased by $330. Put another way, U.S. Corporation had a net 
investment of $330 in NWC for the year.

36	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
Conclusion 
Given the figures we’ve come up with, we’re ready to calculate cash flow 
from assets. The total cash flow from assets is given by operating cash flow less the 
amounts invested in fixed assets and net working capital. So, for U.S., we have:
U.S. CORPORATION
2016 Cash Flow from Assets
Operating cash flow	
$547
− Net capital spending	
130
− Change in NWC	
  330
    Cash flow from assets	
$  87
From the cash flow identity above, this $87 cash flow from assets equals the sum of 
the firm’s cash flow to creditors and its cash flow to stockholders. We consider these 
next.
It wouldn’t be at all unusual for a growing corporation to have a negative cash flow. As 
we shall see below, a negative cash flow means that the firm raised more money by bor-
rowing and selling stock than it paid out to creditors and stockholders that year.
A Note on “Free” Cash Flow 
Cash flow from assets sometimes goes by a different 
name, free cash flow. Of course, there is no such thing as “free” cash (we wish!). Instead, 
the name refers to cash that the firm is free to distribute to creditors and stockholders be-
cause it is not needed for working capital or fixed asset investments. We will stick with 
“cash flow from assets” as our label for this important concept because, in practice, there 
is some variation in exactly how free cash flow is computed; different users calculate it in 
different ways. Nonetheless, whenever you hear the phrase “free cash flow,” you should 
understand that what is being discussed is cash flow from assets or something quite 
similar.
Cash Flow to Creditors and Stockholders
The cash flows to creditors and stockholders represent the net payments to creditors and 
owners during the year. They are calculated in a similar way. Cash flow to creditors is in-
terest paid less net new borrowing; cash flow to stockholders is dividends paid less net 
new equity raised.
Cash Flow to Creditors 
Looking at the income statement in Table 2.2, we see that 
U.S. Corporation paid $70 in interest to creditors. From the balance sheets in Table 2.1, 
long-term debt rose by $454 − 408 = $46. So, U.S. Corporation paid out $70 in interest, 
but it borrowed an additional $46. Net cash flow to creditors is thus:
U.S. CORPORATION
2016 Cash Flow to Creditors
Interest paid	
$70
− Net new borrowing	
  46
    Cash flow to creditors	
$24
Cash flow to creditors is sometimes called cash flow to bondholders; we will use these 
terms interchangeably.
free cash flow
Another name for cash 
flow from assets.
cash flow to 
creditors
A firm’s interest payments 
to creditors less net new 
borrowing.
cash flow to 
stockholders
Dividends paid out by a 
firm less net new equity 
raised.

	
c h a p t e r  2
Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow	
37
Cash Flow to Stockholders 
From the income statement, dividends paid to stock-
holders amount to $103. To get net new equity raised, we need to look at the common stock 
and paid-in surplus account. This account tells us how much stock the company has sold. 
During the year, this account rose by $40, so $40 in net new equity was raised. Given this, 
we have:
U.S. CORPORATION
2016 Cash Flow to Stockholders
Dividends paid	
$103
− Net new equity raised	
    40
    Cash flow to stockholders	
$  63
The cash flow to stockholders for 2016 was thus $63.
Conclusion
The last thing that we need to do is to verify that the cash flow identity holds to be sure that 
we didn’t make any mistakes. From above, cash flow from assets is $87. Cash flow to 
creditors and stockholders is $24 + 63 = $87, so everything checks out. Table 2.6 contains 
a summary of the various cash flow calculations for future reference.
An Example: Cash Flows for Dole Cola
This extended example covers the various cash flow calculations discussed in the chapter. 
It also illustrates a few variations that may arise.
Operating Cash Flow 
During the year, Dole Cola, Inc., had sales and cost of goods 
sold of $600 and $300, ­respectively. Depreciation was $150, and interest paid was $30. 
   I.	 The cash flow identity
	
Cash flow from assets	 =	 Cash flow to creditors (bondholders) 
+ Cash flow to stockholders (owners)
  II.	 Cash flow from assets
	
Cash flow from assets	 =	 Operating cash flow  
– Net capital spending  
– Change in net working capital (NWC)
	
where
	
Operating cash flow	 =	 Earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT)  
+ Depreciation – Taxes
	
Net capital spending	=	 Ending net fixed assets – Beginning net fixed assets  
+ Depreciation
	
Change in NWC = Ending NWC – Beginning NWC
III.	 Cash flow to creditors (bondholders)
	
Cash flow to creditors = Interest paid – Net new borrowing
IV.	 Cash flow to stockholders (owners)
	
Cash flow to stockholders = Dividends paid – Net new equity raised
ta b l e  2.6
Cash flow summary

38	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
Taxes were calculated at a straight 34 percent. Dividends were $30. (All figures are in mil-
lions of dollars.) What was operating cash flow for Dole? Why is this different from net 
income?
The easiest thing to do here is to go ahead and create an income statement. We can 
then pick up the numbers we need. Dole Cola’s income statement is given here:
DOLE COLA
2016 Income Statement
Net sales	
	
$600
Cost of goods sold	
	
300
Depreciation	
	
  150
Earnings before interest and taxes	
	
$150
Interest paid	
	
     30
Taxable income	
	
$120
Taxes	
	
    41
Net income	
	
$   79
  Dividends	
$30
    Addition to retained earnings	
49
Net income for Dole was thus $79. We now have all the numbers we need. Referring 
back to the U.S. Corporation example and Table 2.6, we have:
DOLE COLA
2016 Operating Cash Flow
Earnings before interest and taxes	
$150
+ Depreciation	
150
− Taxes	
 
41
    Operating cash flow	
$259
As this example illustrates, operating cash flow is not the same as net income because 
depreciation and interest are subtracted out when net income is calculated. If you recall our 
earlier discussion, we don’t subtract these out in computing operating cash flow because 
depreciation is not a cash expense and interest paid is a financing expense, not an operating 
expense.
Net Capital Spending 
Suppose beginning net fixed assets were $500 and ending net 
fixed assets were $750. What was the net capital spending for the year?
From the income statement for Dole, depreciation for the year was $150. Net  
fixed assets rose by $250. Dole thus spent $250 along with an additional $150, for a total 
of $400.
Change in NWC and Cash Flow from Assets 
Suppose Dole Cola started the 
year with $2,130 in current assets and $1,620 in current liabilities. The corresponding end-
ing figures were $2,260 and $1,710. What was the change in NWC during the year? What 
was cash flow from assets? How does this compare to net income?
Net working capital started out as $2,130 − 1,620 = $510 and ended up at $2,260 − 
1,710 = $550. The change in NWC was thus $550 − 510 = $40. Putting together all the 
information for Dole Cola, we have:

	
c h a p t e r  2
Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow	
39
DOLE COLA
2016 Cash Flow From Assets
Operating cash flow	
$259
− Net capital spending	
400
− Change in NWC	
     40
    Cash flow from assets	
−$181
Dole had cash flow from assets of −$181. Net income was positive at $79. Is the fact that 
cash flow from assets was negative a cause for alarm? Not necessarily. The cash flow here 
is negative primarily because of a large investment in fixed assets. If these are good invest-
ments, then the resulting negative cash flow is not a worry.
Cash Flow to Creditors and Stockholders 
We saw that Dole Cola had cash 
flow from assets of −$181. The fact that this is negative means that Dole raised more 
money in the form of new debt and equity than it paid out for the year. For example, sup-
pose we know that Dole didn’t sell any new equity for the year. What was cash flow to 
stockholders? To creditors?
Because it didn’t raise any new equity, Dole’s cash flow to stockholders is just equal to 
the cash dividend paid:
DOLE COLA
2016 Cash Flow to Stockholders
Dividends paid	
$30
− Net new equity	
    0
    Cash flow to stockholders	
$30
Now, from the cash flow identity, the total cash paid to creditors and stockholders 
was −$181. Cash flow to stockholders is $30, so cash flow to creditors must be equal to 
−$181 − 30 = −$211:
Cash flow to creditors + Cash flow to stockholders	 =  –$181
Cash flow to creditors + $30 	
=  –$181
Cash flow to creditors 	
=  –$211
Because we know that cash flow to creditors is −$211 and interest paid is $30 (from 
the income statement), we can now determine net new borrowing. Dole must have bor-
rowed $241 during the year to help finance the fixed asset expansion:
DOLE COLA
2016 Cash Flow to Creditors
Interest paid	
$   30
− Net new borrowing	
   241
    Cash flow to creditors	
−$211
concept questions
2.4a 	 What is the cash flow identity? Explain what it says.
2.4b 	 What are the components of operating cash flow?
2.4c 	
Why is interest paid not a component of operating cash flow?

40	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has introduced you to some of the basics of financial statements, taxes, and 
cash flow. In it, we saw that:
   1.	 The book values on an accounting balance sheet can be very different from market 
values. The goal of financial management is to maximize the market value of the 
stock, not its book value.
   2.	 Net income as it is computed on the income statement is not cash flow. A primary 
reason is that depreciation, a noncash expense, is deducted when net income is 
computed.
   3.	 Marginal and average tax rates can be different, and it is the marginal tax rate that is 
relevant for most financial decisions.
   4.	The marginal tax rate paid by the corporations with the largest incomes is  
35 percent.
   5.	 There is a cash flow identity much like the balance sheet identity. It says that cash 
flow from assets equals cash flow to creditors and stockholders.
The calculation of cash flow from financial statements isn’t difficult. Care must be 
taken in handling noncash expenses, such as depreciation, and in not confusing operating 
costs with financing costs. Most of all, it is important not to confuse book values with 
market values and accounting income with cash flow.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 2.1 What is the relationship between current assets and current liabilities in 
a healthy firm?
Section 2.2 What is the purpose of the income statement?
Section 2.3 If you make an extra $1,000 in income and your marginal tax rate is 
30 percent while your average tax rate is 20 percent, what will you pay in taxes on 
this extra income?
Section 2.4 What are the components of cash flow from assets?
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEM
2.1 	
Cash Flow for Rasputin Corporation.  This problem will give you some practice 
working with financial statements and figuring cash flow. Based on the following 
information for Rasputin Corporation, prepare an income statement for 2016 and 
balance sheets for 2015 and 2016. Next, following our U.S. Corporation examples 
in the chapter, calculate cash flow from assets for Rasputin, cash flow to creditors, 
and cash flow to stockholders for 2016. Use a 34 percent tax rate throughout. You 
can check your answers below. (See Problem 21.)

	
c h a p t e r  2
Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow	
41
	
2015	
2016
Sales	
$3,790	
$3,990
Cost of goods sold	
  2,043	
  2,137
Depreciation	
    975	
 1,018
Interest	
     225	
    267
Dividends	
    200	
     225
Current assets	
  2,140	
 2,346
Net fixed assets	
 6,770	
  7,087
Current liabilities	
    994	
 1,126
Long-term debt	
  2,869	
 2,956
■ Answer to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problem
2.1  	 In preparing the balance sheets, remember that shareholders’ equity is the residual. 
With this in mind, Rasputin’s balance sheets are as follows:
RASPUTIN CORPORATION
Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2015 and 2016
	
2015	
2016	
	
2015	
2016
Current assets	
$2,140	
$2,346	
Current liabilities	
$  994	
$1,126
Net fixed assets	
  6,770	
   7,087	
Long-term debt	
  2,869	
  2,956
	
	
	
Equity	
   5,047	
  5,351
	
	
	
  Total liabilities and
  Total assets	
$8,910	
$9,433	
  shareholders’ equity	
$8,910	
$9,433
The income statement is straightforward:
RASPUTIN CORPORATION
2016 Income Statement
Sales	
	
$3,990
Cost of goods sold	
	
2,137
Depreciation	
	
  1,018
Earnings before interest and taxes	
	
$   835
Interest paid	
	
     267
Taxable income	
	
$   568
Taxes (34%)	
	
    193
Net income	
	
$   375
  Dividends	
$225
  Addition to retained earnings	
150
Notice that we’ve used a flat 34 percent tax rate. Also, notice that the addition to 
­retained earnings is just net income less cash dividends.
We can now pick up the figures we need to get operating cash flow:
RASPUTIN CORPORATION
2016 Operating Cash Flow
Earnings before interest and taxes	
$  835
+ Depreciation	
1,018
− Current taxes	
    193
    Operating cash flow	
$1,660

42	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
Next, we get the capital spending for the year by looking at the change in fixed assets, 
remembering to account for the depreciation:
Ending fixed assets	
$7,087
− Beginning fixed assets	
6,770
+ Depreciation	
  1,018
    Net investment in fixed assets	
$1,335
After calculating beginning and ending NWC, we take the difference to get the change 
in NWC:
Ending NWC	
$1,220
− Beginning NWC	
  1,146
    Change in NWC	
$      74
We now combine operating cash flow, net capital spending, and the change in net 
working capital to get the total cash flow from assets:
RASPUTIN CORPORATION
2016 Cash Flow from Assets
Operating cash flow	
$1,660
− Net capital spending	
1,335
− Change in NWC	
        74
    Cash flow from assets	
$   251
To get cash flow to creditors, notice that long-term borrowing increased by $87 during 
the year and that interest paid was $267, so:
RASPUTIN CORPORATION
2016 Cash Flow to Creditors
Interest paid	
$267
− Net new borrowing	
    87
    Cash flow to creditors	
$180
Finally, dividends paid were $225. To get net new equity, we have to do some extra 
calculating. Total equity was up by $5,351 − 5,047 = $304. Of this increase, $150 was 
from additions to retained earnings, so $154 in new equity was raised during the year. Cash 
flow to stockholders was thus:
RASPUTIN CORPORATION
2016 Cash Flow to Stockholders
Dividends paid	
$225
− Net new equity	
   154
    Cash flow to stockholders	
$   71
As a check, notice that cash flow from assets ($251) does equal cash flow to creditors plus 
cash flow to stockholders ($180 + 71 = $251).

	
c h a p t e r  2
Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow	
43
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 1 	 2.1 	 Liquidity.  What does liquidity measure? Explain the trade-off a firm 
faces between high-liquidity and low-liquidity levels.
LO 2 	 2.2 	 Accounting and Cash Flows.  Why is it that the revenue and cost figures 
shown on a standard income statement may not be representative of the 
actual cash inflows and outflows that occurred during a period?
LO 1 	 2.3 	 Book Values versus Market Values.  In preparing a balance sheet, why do 
you think standard accounting practice focuses on historical cost rather 
than market value?
LO 2 	 2.4 	 Operating Cash Flow.  In comparing accounting net income and 
operating cash flow, what two items do you find in net income that are not 
in operating cash flow? Explain what each is and why it is excluded in 
operating cash flow.
LO 1 	 2.5 	 Book Values versus Market Values.  Under standard accounting rules, it 
is possible for a company’s liabilities to exceed its assets. When this 
occurs, the owners’ equity is negative. Can this happen with market 
values? Why or why not?
LO 4 	 2.6 	 Cash Flow from Assets.  Suppose a company’s cash flow from assets was 
negative for a particular period. Is this necessarily a good sign or a bad 
sign?
LO 4 	 2.7 	 Operating Cash Flow.  Suppose a company’s operating cash flow was 
negative for several years running. Is this necessarily a good sign or a bad 
sign?
LO 4 	 2.8 	 Net Working Capital and Capital Spending.  Could a company’s change 
in NWC be negative in a given year? (Hint: Yes.) Explain how this might 
come about. What about net capital spending?
LO 4 	 2.9 	 Cash Flow to Stockholders and Creditors.  Could a company’s cash flow 
to stockholders be negative in a given year? (Hint: Yes.) Explain how this 
might come about. What about cash flow to creditors?
LO 4 	 2.10 	Firm Values.  Referring back to the examples used at the beginning of the 
chapter, note that we suggested that stockholders probably didn’t suffer as 
a result of the reported loss. What do you think was the basis for our 
conclusion?
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–12)
LO 1 	 1. 	 Building a Balance Sheet.  Bear Tracks, Inc., has current assets of $2,030, 
net fixed assets of $9,780, current liabilities of $1,640, and long-term debt 
of $4,490. What is the value of the shareholders’ equity account for this 
firm? How much is net working capital?
LO 2 	 2. 	 Building an Income Statement.  Pharrell, Inc., has sales of $634,000, costs 
of $328,000, depreciation expense of $73,000, interest expense of $38,000, 
and a tax rate of 35 percent. What is the net income for this firm?

44	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
LO 2 	 3. 	 Dividends and Retained Earnings.  Suppose the firm in Problem 2 paid out 
$43,000 in cash dividends. What is the addition to retained earnings?
LO 2 	 4. 	 Per-Share Earnings and Dividends.  Suppose the firm in Problem 3 had 
35,000 shares of common stock outstanding. What is the earnings per share, 
or EPS, figure? What is the dividends per share figure?
LO 3 	 5. 	 Calculating Taxes.  The SGS Co. had $243,000 in taxable income. Using the 
rates from Table 2.3 in the chapter, calculate the company’s income taxes.
LO 3 	 6. 	 Tax Rates.  In Problem 5, what is the average tax rate? What is the 
marginal tax rate?
LO 2 	 7.	 Calculating OCF.  Hailey, Inc., has sales of $38,530, costs of $12,750, 
depreciation expense of $2,550, and interest expense of $1,850. If the tax 
rate is 35 percent, what is the operating cash flow, or OCF?
LO 4 	 8.	 Calculating Net Capital Spending.  Rotweiler Obedience School’s December 
31, 2015, balance sheet showed net fixed assets of $1,975,000, and the 
December 31, 2016, balance sheet showed net fixed assets of $2,134,000. The 
company’s 2016 income statement showed a depreciation expense of 
$325,000. What was the company’s net capital spending for 2016?
LO 4 	 9.	 Calculating Additions to NWC.  The December 31, 2015, balance sheet of 
Maria’s Tennis Shop, Inc., showed current assets of $1,530 and current 
liabilities of $1,270. The December 31, 2016, balance sheet showed current 
assets of $1,685 and current liabilities of $1,305. What was the company’s 
2016 change in net working capital, or NWC?
LO 4 	 10. 	Cash Flow to Creditors.  The December 31, 2015, balance sheet of Schism, 
Inc., showed long-term debt of $1,410,000, and the December 31, 2016, 
balance sheet showed long-term debt of $1,551,000. The 2016 income 
statement showed an interest expense of $102,800. What was the firm’s 
cash flow to creditors during 2016?
LO 4 	 11. 	Cash Flow to Stockholders.  The December 31, 2015, balance sheet of 
Schism, Inc., showed $130,000 in the common stock account and 
$2,332,000 in the additional paid-in surplus account. The December 31, 
2016, balance sheet showed $148,000 and $2,618,000 in the same two 
accounts, respectively. If the company paid out $148,500 in cash dividends 
during 2016, what was the cash flow to stockholders for the year?
LO 4 	 12. 	Calculating Cash Flows.  Given the information for Schism, Inc., in 
Problems 10 and 11, suppose you also know that the firm’s net capital 
spending for 2016 was $705,000, and that the firm reduced its net working 
capital investment by $115,000. What was the firm’s 2016 operating cash 
flow, or OCF?
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 13–23)
LO 1 	 13. 	Market Values and Book Values.  Klingon Widgets, Inc., purchased new 
cloaking machinery three years ago for $6 million. The machinery can be 
sold to the Romulans today for $4.8 million. Klingon’s current balance sheet 
shows net fixed assets of $3.3 million, current liabilities of $850,000, and 
net working capital of $220,000. If all the current accounts were liquidated 
today, the company would receive $1.05 million cash. What is the book 
value of Klingon’s total assets today? What is the sum of NWC and the 
market value of fixed assets?

	
c h a p t e r  2
Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow	
45
LO 4 	 14.	Calculating Cash Flows.  Weiland Co. shows the following information on 
its 2016 income statement: sales = $173,000; costs = $91,400; other 
expenses = $5,100; depreciation expense = $12,100; interest expense = 
$8,900; taxes = $21,090; dividends = $9,700. In addition, you’re told that 
the firm issued $2,900 in new equity during 2016 and redeemed $4,000 in 
outstanding long-term debt.
a.	
What is the 2016 operating cash flow?
b.	 What is the 2016 cash flow to creditors?
c.	
What is the 2016 cash flow to stockholders?
d.	 If net fixed assets increased by $23,140 during the year, what was the 
addition to NWC?
LO 2 	 15.	Using Income Statements.  Given the following information for Sookie’s 
Cookies Co., calculate the depreciation expense: sales = $67,000; costs = 
$49,200; addition to retained earnings = $3,500; dividends paid = $2,170; 
interest expense = $1,980; tax rate = 40 percent.
LO 1 	 16.	Preparing a Balance Sheet.  Prepare a balance sheet for Alaskan 
Strawberry Corp. as of December 31, 2016, based on the following 
information: cash = $197,000; patents and copyrights = $863,000; accounts 
payable = $288,000; accounts receivable = $265,000; tangible net fixed 
assets = $5,150,000; inventory = $563,000; notes payable = $194,000; 
accumulated retained earnings = $4,586,000; long-term debt = $1,590,000.
LO 1 	 17.	 Residual Claims.  Chevelle, Inc., is obligated to pay its creditors $8,400 
during the year.
a.	
What is the value of the shareholders’ equity if assets equal $9,300?
b.	 What if assets equal $6,900?
LO 3 	 18.  Marginal versus Average Tax Rates.  (Refer to Table 2.3.) Corporation 
Growth has $76,500 in taxable income, and Corporation Income has 
$7,650,000 in taxable income.
a. 	 What is the tax bill for each firm?
b. 	 Suppose both firms have identified a new project that will increase 
taxable income by $10,000. How much in additional taxes will each 
firm pay? Why is this amount the same?
LO 2 	 19.	Net Income and OCF.  During the year, Belyk Paving Co. had sales of 
$2,350,000. Cost of goods sold, administrative and selling expenses, and 
depreciation expense were $1,295,000, $530,000, and $420,000, 
respectively. In addition, the company had an interest expense of $245,000 
and a tax rate of 35 percent. (Ignore any tax loss carryback or carryforward 
provisions.)
a. 	 What is the company’s net income?
b. 	 What is its operating cash flow?
c. 	 Explain your results in parts (a) and (b).
LO 2 	 20.	Accounting Values versus Cash Flows.  In Problem 19, suppose Belyk 
Paving Co. paid out $395,000 in cash dividends. Is this possible? If net 
capital spending was zero, no new investments were made in net working 
capital, and no new stock was issued during the year, what do you know 
about the firm’s long-term debt account?

46	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
LO 4 	  21.	Calculating Cash Flows.  Titan Football Manufacturing had the following 
operating results for 2016: sales = $28,476; cost of goods sold = $20,136; 
depreciation expense = $3,408; interest expense = $497; dividends paid = 
$739. At the beginning of the year, net fixed assets were $19,872, current 
assets were $3,528, and current liabilities were $3,110. At the end of the 
year, net fixed assets were $22,608, current assets were $4,234, and current 
liabilities were $2,981. The tax rate for 2016 was 40 percent.
a. 	 What is net income for 2016?
b. 	 What is the operating cash flow for 2016?
c. 	 What is the cash flow from assets for 2016? Is this possible? Explain.
d. 	 If no new debt was issued during the year, what is the cash flow to 
creditors? What is the cash flow to stockholders? Explain and interpret 
the positive and negative signs of your answers in parts (a) through (d).
LO 4 	 22.	Calculating Cash Flows.  Consider the following abbreviated financial 
statements for Cabo Wabo, Inc.:
CABO WABO, INC.
Partial Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2015 and 2016
2015
2016
2015
2016
Assets
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Current assets
  $   2,718
$  2,881
Current liabilities
$1,174
$1,726
Net fixed assets
  12,602
13,175
Long-term debt
  6,873
  8,019
CABO WABO, INC.
2016 Income Statement
Sales
$40,664
Costs
20,393
Depreciation
3,434
Interest paid
938
a.	
What is owners’ equity for 2015 and 2016?
b.	 What is the change in net working capital for 2016?
c.	
In 2016, Cabo Wabo purchased $7,160 in new fixed assets. How much 
in fixed assets did the company sell? What is the cash flow from assets 
for the year? (The tax rate is 40 percent.)
d.	 During 2016, Cabo Wabo raised $2,155 in new long-term debt. How 
much long-term debt must the company have paid off during the year? 
What is the cash flow to creditors?
LO 4 	 23.	Cash Flow Identity.  Graffiti Advertising, Inc., reported the following 
financial statements for the last two years. Construct the cash flow identity 
for the company. Explain what each number means.
2016 Income Statement
Sales
$714,978
Cost of goods sold
384,591
Selling and administrative
157,787
Depreciation
     69,038
EBIT
$103,562
Interest
    24,410
EBT
$   79,152
Taxes
     27,703
Net income
$  51,449
Dividends
$  16,200
Addition to retained earnings
  35,249

	
c h a p t e r  2
Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow	
47
GRAFFITI ADVERTISING, INC.
Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2015
Cash
$  16,849
Accounts payable
$  12,115
Accounts receivable
24,027
Notes payable
    18,237
Inventory
    17,449
Current liabilities
$   30,352
Current assets
$  58,325
Long-term debt
$173,100
Net fixed assets 
  Total assets
$ 435,670 
$493,995
Owners’ equity
  Total liabilities and  
  owners’ equity
$290,543 
$493,995
GRAFFITI ADVERTISING, INC.
Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2016
Cash
$  18,098
Accounts payable
$  13,297
Accounts receivable
26,690
Notes payable
     20,830
Inventory
    28,783
Current liabilities
$  34,127
Current assets
$  73,571
Long-term debt
$192,300
Net fixed assets 
  Total assets
$513,980 
$587,551
Owners’ equity
  Total liabilities and  
  owners’ equity
$361,124 
$587,551
CHALLENGE (Questions 24–25)
LO 4 	 24.	Net Fixed Assets and Depreciation.  On the balance sheet, the net fixed 
assets (NFA) account is equal to the gross fixed assets (FA) account (which 
records the acquisition cost of fixed assets) minus the accumulated 
depreciation (AD) account (which records the total depreciation taken by 
the firm against its fixed assets). Using the fact that NFA = FA − AD,  
show that the expression given in the chapter for net capital spending, 
NFAend − NFAbeg + D (where D is the depreciation expense during the 
year), is equivalent to FAend − FAbeg.
LO 3 	 25.	Tax Rates.  Refer to the corporate marginal tax rate information in  
Table 2.3.
a.	 Why do you think the marginal tax rate jumps up from 34 percent to 
39 percent at a taxable income of $100,001, and then falls back to a  
34 percent marginal rate at a taxable income of $335,001?
b.	 Compute the average tax rate for a corporation with exactly $335,001 in 
taxable income. Does this confirm your explanation in part (a)? What is 
the average tax rate for a corporation with exactly $18,333,334 in 
taxable income? Is the same thing happening here?
c.	
Both the 39 percent and 38 percent tax rates represent what is 
called a tax “bubble.” Suppose the government wanted to lower the 
upper threshold of the 39 percent marginal tax bracket from 
$335,000 to $200,000. What would the new 39 percent bubble rate 
have to be?

48	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
Using Excel to find the marginal tax rate can be accomplished using the VLOOKUP func-
tion. However, calculating the total tax bill is a little more difficult. Here we show a copy 
of the IRS tax table for an individual from a recent year. Often, tax tables are presented in 
this format.
If taxable income  
is over…
 
But not over…
 
The tax is:
$             0  
$    9,225  
10% of the amount over $0
    9,225
  37,450
$922.50 plus 15% of the amount over $9,225
  37,450
  90,750
$5,156.25 plus 25% of the amount over $37,450
  90,750
189,300
$18,481.25 plus 28% of the amount over $90,750
189,300
411,500
$46,075.25 plus 33% of the amount over $189,300
411,500
413,200
$119,401.25 plus 35% of the amount over $411,500
413,200
$119,996.25 plus 39.6% of the amount over $413,200
In reading this table, the marginal tax rate for taxable income less than $9,225 is 10%. 
If the taxable income is between $9,225 and $37,450, the tax bill is $922.50 plus the mar-
ginal taxes. The marginal taxes are calculated as the taxable income minus $9,225 times 
the marginal tax rate of 15%.
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
2.1 Change in Net Working Capital.  Visit Alcoa at www.alcoa.com. Find the most 
recent annual report and locate the balance sheets for the past two years. Use these 
balance sheets to calculate the change in net working capital. How do you interpret 
this number?
2.2 Book Values versus Market Values.  The home page for The Coca-Cola Company 
can be found at www.coca-cola.com. Locate the most recent annual report, which 
contains a balance sheet for the company. What is the book value of equity for Coca-
Cola? The market value of a company is the number of shares of stock outstanding 
times the price per share. This information can be found at finance.yahoo.com using the 
ticker symbol for Coca-Cola (KO). What is the market value of equity? Which number 
is more relevant for shareholders?
2.3 Net Working Capital.  Duke Energy is one of the world’s largest energy companies. 
Go to the company’s home page at www.dukeenergy.com, follow the link to the 
investor’s page, and locate the annual reports. What was Duke Energy’s net working 
capital for the most recent year? Does this number seem low to you given Duke’s 
current liabilities? Does this indicate that Duke Energy may be experiencing financial 
problems? Why or why not?
2.4 Cash Flows to Stockholders and Creditors.  Cooper Tire & Rubber Company 
provides financial information for investors on its website at www.coopertires.com. 
Follow the “Investors” link and find the most recent annual report. Using the 
consolidated statement of cash flows, calculate the cash flow to stockholders and the 
cash flow to creditors.

	
c h a p t e r  2
Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow	
49
Next, we have the corporate tax table as shown in the textbook.
Taxable income is greater 
than or equal to…
 
But less than…
 
Tax rate
$                  0 
 $       50,000
15%
        50,001
          75,000
25  
        75,001
        100,000
34  
      100,001
        335,000
39  
      335,001
   10,000,000
34  
 10,000,001
   15,000,000
35  
 15,000,001
   18,333,333
38  
18,333,334
   
35 
a.	
Create a tax table in Excel for corporate taxes similar to the individual 
tax table shown earlier. Your spreadsheet should then calculate the 
marginal tax rate, the average tax rate, and the tax bill for any level of 
taxable income input by a user.
b.	 For a taxable income of $1,350,000, what is the marginal tax rate?
c.	
For a taxable income of $1,350,000, what is the total tax bill?
d.	 For a taxable income of $1,350,000, what is the average tax rate?

50	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
CHAPTER CASE
Cash Flows and Financial Statements at Sunset Boards, Inc.
S
unset Boards is a small company that manufactures 
and sells surfboards in Malibu. Tad Marks, the 
founder of the company, is in charge of the design and 
sale of the surfboards, but his background is in surfing, 
not business. As a result, the company’s financial re-
cords are not well maintained.
	
The initial investment in Sunset Boards was pro-
vided by Tad and his friends and family. Because the ini-
tial investment was relatively small, and the company 
has made surfboards only for its own store, the investors 
haven’t required detailed financial statements from Tad. 
But thanks to word of mouth among professional surf-
ers, sales have picked up recently, and Tad is consider-
ing a major expansion. His plans include opening 
another surfboard store in Hawaii, as well as supplying 
his “sticks” (surfer lingo for boards) to other sellers.
	
Tad’s expansion plans require a significant invest-
ment, which he plans to finance with a combination of 
additional funds from outsiders plus some money bor-
rowed from banks. Naturally, the new investors and 
creditors require more organized and detailed financial 
statements than Tad has previously prepared. At the 
urging of his investors, Tad has hired financial analyst 
Jameson Reid to evaluate the performance of the com-
pany over the past year.
	
After rooting through old bank statements, sales re-
ceipts, tax returns, and other records, Jameson has as-
sembled the following information:
2015
2016
Cost of goods sold
$203,963
$257,528
Cash
   29,429
   31,267
Depreciation
  57,576
  65,076
Interest expense
  12,530
  14,345
Selling and administrative  
  expenses
  40,110
  52,351
Accounts payable
  52,015
  57,708
Net fixed assets
254,017
316,825
Sales
400,111
487,712
Accounts receivable
  20,854
  27,050
Notes payable
  23,708
  25,885
Long-term debt
128,218
143,971
Inventory
 43,884
  60,222
New equity
         0
 24,192
Sunset Boards currently pays out 50 percent of net in-
come as dividends to Tad and the other original inves-
tors, and has a 20 percent tax rate. You are Jameson’s 
assistant, and he has asked you to prepare the 
following:
1.	
An income statement for 2015 and 2016.
2.	
A balance sheet for 2015 and 2016.
3.	
Operating cash flow for each year.
4.	
Cash flow from assets for 2016.
5.	
Cash flow to creditors for 2016.
6.	
Cash flow to stockholders for 2016.
Q U E ST I ONS
1.	
How would you describe Sunset Boards’ cash 
flows for 2016? Write a brief discussion.
2.	
In light of your discussion in the previous question, 
what do you think about Tad’s expansion plans?

51
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the  world of corporate finance.
51
I
n February 2015, shares of famed motorcycle manufacturer 
­Harley-Davidson, Inc., were trading for about $62. At that price, 
Harley-Davidson had a price–earnings, or PE, ratio of 16, meaning 
that investors were willing to pay $16 for every dollar in income 
earned by Harley-Davidson. At the same time, investors were will-
ing to pay $252 for each dollar earned by 3D printer company 3D 
Systems Corporation, but only a meager $6 and $9 for each dollar 
earned by Marathon Oil and Citigroup, respectively. And then there 
were stocks like Amazon which, despite having no earnings (a loss 
actually), had a stock price of about $370 per share. Meanwhile, 
the average stock in the Standard & Poor’s (S&P) 500 index, which 
contains 500 of the largest publicly traded companies in the United 
States, had a PE ratio of about 17, so Harley-Davidson was average 
in this regard.
As we look at these numbers, an obvious question arises: Why were investors willing to 
pay so much for a dollar of 3D Systems’ earnings but so much less for a dollar earned by 
Harley-Davidson? To understand the answer, we need to delve into subjects such as relative 
profitability and growth potential, and we also need to know how to compare financial and 
operating information across companies. By a remarkable coincidence, that is precisely what 
this chapter is about.
The PE ratio is just one example of a financial ratio. As we will see in this chapter, there 
are a wide variety of such ratios, all designed to summarize specific aspects of a firm’s finan-
cial position. In addition to discussing financial ratios and what they mean, we will have quite 
a bit to say about who uses this information and why.
Everybody needs to understand ratios. Managers will find that almost every business 
characteristic, from profitability to employee productivity, is summarized in some kind of ra-
tio. Marketers examine ratios dealing with costs, markups, and margins. Production 
Working with Financial 
Statements
3
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should 
be able to:
LO 1 	 Standardize financial statements 
for comparison purposes.
LO 2 	 Compute and, more importantly, 
interpret some common ratios.
LO 3 	 Assess the determinants of a firm’s 
profitability and growth.
LO 4 	 Identify and explain some of the 
problems and pitfalls in financial 
statement analysis.
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.

I
n Chapter 2, we discussed some of the essential concepts of financial statements and 
cash flows. This chapter continues where our earlier discussion left off. Our goal here 
is to expand your understanding of the uses (and abuses) of financial statement 
information.
A good working knowledge of financial statements is desirable simply because 
such statements, and numbers derived from those statements, are the primary means of 
communicating financial information both within the firm and outside the firm. In 
short, much of the language of business finance is rooted in the ideas we discuss in this 
chapter.
In the best of all worlds, the financial manager has full market value information about 
all of the firm’s assets. This will rarely (if ever) happen. So, the reason we rely on account-
ing figures for much of our financial information is that we are almost always unable to 
obtain all (or even part) of the market information that we want. The only meaningful 
yardstick for evaluating business decisions is whether or not they create economic value 
(see Chapter 1). However, in many important situations, it will not be possible to make this 
judgment directly because we can’t see the market value effects.
We recognize that accounting numbers are often just pale reflections of economic re-
ality, but they frequently are the best available information. For privately held corpora-
tions, not-for-profit businesses, and smaller firms, for example, very little direct market 
value information exists at all. The accountant’s reporting function is crucial in these 
circumstances.
Clearly, one important goal of the accountant is to report financial information to the 
user in a form useful for decision making. Ironically, the information frequently does not 
come to the user in such a form. In other words, financial statements don’t come with a 
user’s guide. This chapter is a first step in filling this gap.
STANDARDIZED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
One obvious thing we might want to do with a company’s financial statements is to com-
pare them to those of other, similar companies. We would immediately have a problem, 
however. It’s almost impossible to directly compare the financial statements for two com-
panies because of differences in size.
For example, Ford and GM are obviously serious rivals in the auto market, but GM 
was historically much larger (in terms of assets), so it was difficult to compare them di-
rectly. For that matter, it’s difficult to even compare financial statements from different 
points in time for the same company if the company’s size has changed. The size problem 
is compounded if we try to compare GM and, say, Toyota. If Toyota’s financial statements 
are denominated in yen, then we have a size and a currency difference.
Company financial 
information can be found 
in many places on the 
web, including www.
financials.com and 
finance.google.com.
3.1
coverage online
Excel 
Master
52
personnel focus on ratios dealing with issues such as operating efficiency. Accountants need 
to understand ratios because, among other things, ratios are one of the most common and 
important forms of financial statement information.
In fact, regardless of your field, you may very well find that your compensation is tied to 
some ratio or group of ratios. Perhaps that is the best reason to study up!

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
53
To start making comparisons, one obvious thing we might try to do is to somehow 
standardize the financial statements. One very common and useful way of doing this is to 
work with percentages instead of total dollars. The resulting financial statements are called 
common-size statements. We consider these next.
Common-Size Balance Sheets
For easy reference, Prufrock Corporation’s 2015 and 2016 balance sheets are provided in 
Table 3.1. Using these, we construct common-size balance sheets by expressing each item 
as a percentage of total assets. Prufrock’s 2015 and 2016 common-size balance sheets are 
shown in Table 3.2.
Notice that some of the totals don’t check exactly because of rounding errors. Also 
notice that the total change has to be zero because the beginning and ending numbers must 
add up to 100 percent.
In this form, financial statements are relatively easy to read and compare. For ex-
ample, just looking at the two balance sheets for Prufrock, we see that current assets 
were 19.7 percent of total assets in 2016, up from 19.0 percent in 2015. Current liabili-
ties declined from 16.1 percent to 15.1 percent of total liabilities and equity over that 
same time. Similarly, total equity rose from 68.2 percent of total liabilities and equity to 
72.2 percent.
Overall, Prufrock’s liquidity, as measured by current assets compared to current liabil-
ities, increased over the year. Simultaneously, Prufrock’s indebtedness diminished as a 
percentage of total assets. We might be tempted to conclude that the balance sheet has 
grown “stronger.”
common-size 
statements
A standardized financial 
statement presenting all 
items in percentage terms. 
Balance sheet items are 
shown as a percentage of 
assets and income 
statement items as a 
percentage of sales.
IBM’s website has a  
good guide to reading 
financial statements. Visit 
www.ibm.com/investor.
ta b l e  3.1
PRUFROCK CORPORATION
Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2015 and 2016
($ in millions)
	
2015	
2016
Assets
Current assets
  Cash	
$     84	
$      98
  Accounts receivable	
     165	
    188
  Inventory	
     393	
      422
    Total	
$   642	
$    708
Fixed assets
  Net plant and equipment	
$2,731	
$2,880
Total assets	
$3,373	
$3,588
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Current liabilities
  Accounts payable	
$   312	
$    344
  Notes payable	
      231	
      196
    Total	
$   543	
$    540
Long-term debt	
$   531	
$    457
Owners’ equity
  Common stock and paid-in surplus	
$   500	
$   550
  Retained earnings	
  1,799	
  2,041
    Total	
$2,299	
$2,591
Total liabilities and owners’ equity	
$3,373	
$3,588

54	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
ta b l e  3.2
PRUFROCK CORPORATION
Common-Size Balance Sheets
December 31, 2015 and 2016
	
2015	
2016	
Change
Assets
Current assets
  Cash	
    2.5%	
    2.7%	
+   .2%
  Accounts receivable	
  4.9	
 5.2	
+   .3   
  Inventory	
  11.7   	
  11.8   	
+   .1   
    Total	
  19.0   	
  19.7   	
+   .7   
Fixed assets
  Net plant and equipment	
  81.0	
  80.3   	
−   .7   
Total assets	
100.0%	
100.0%	
    0%
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Current liabilities
  Accounts payable	
    9.2%	
    9.6%	
+   .3%
  Notes payable	
    6.8  	
    5.5   	
− 1.4   
    Total	
  16.1 	
  15.1   	
− 1.0   
Long-term debt	
  15.7  	
  12.7   	
− 3.0   
Owners’ equity
  Common stock and paid-in surplus	
14.8	
15.3 	
+   .5   
  Retained earnings	
  53.3  	
  56.9   	
+ 3.5   
    Total	
  68.2  	
  72.2   	
+ 4.1   
Total liabilities and owners’ equity	
100.0%	
100.0%	
   0%
ta b l e  3.3
PRUFROCK CORPORATION
2016 Income Statement
($ in millions)
Sales	
	
$2,311
Cost of goods sold	
	
1,344
Depreciation	
	
      276
Earnings before interest and taxes	
	
$   691
Interest paid	
	
      141
Taxable income	
	
$     550
Taxes (34%)	
	
     187
Net income	
	
$    363
  Dividends	
$121
  Addition to retained earnings	
242
Common-Size Income Statements
A useful way of standardizing the income statement shown in Table 3.3 is to express each 
item as a percentage of total sales, as illustrated for Prufrock in Table 3.4.
This income statement tells us what happens to each dollar in sales. For Prufrock, 
interest expense eats up $.061 out of every sales dollar, and taxes take another $.081. 
When all is said and done, $.157 of each dollar flows through to the bottom line (net in-
come), and that amount is split into $.105 retained in the business and $.052 paid out in 
dividends.

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
55
These percentages are very useful in comparisons. For example, a very relevant figure 
is the cost percentage. For Prufrock, $.582 of each $1.00 in sales goes to pay for goods 
sold. It would be interesting to compute the same percentage for Prufrock’s main competi-
tors to see how Prufrock stacks up in terms of cost control.
concept questions
3.1a 	
Why is it often necessary to standardize financial statements?
3.1b 	
Describe how common-size balance sheets and income statements are formed.
RATIO ANALYSIS
Another way of avoiding the problems involved in comparing companies of different sizes 
is to calculate and compare financial ratios. Such ratios are ways of comparing and investi-
gating the relationships between different pieces of financial information. We cover some 
of the more common ratios next, but there are many others that we don’t touch on.
One problem with ratios is that different people and different sources frequently don’t 
compute them in exactly the same way, and this leads to much confusion. The specific 
definitions we use here may or may not be the same as ones you have seen or will see else-
where. If you are ever using ratios as a tool for analysis, you should be careful to document 
how you calculate each one, and, if you are comparing your numbers to those of another 
source, be sure you know how their numbers are computed.
We will defer much of our discussion of how ratios are used and some problems that 
come up with using them until a bit later in the chapter. For now, for each of the ratios we 
discuss, several questions come to mind:
  1.	 How is it computed?
  2.	 What is it intended to measure, and why might we be interested?
  3.	 What is the unit of measurement?
  4.	 What might a high or low value be telling us? How might such values be misleading?
  5.	 How could this measure be improved?
3.2
financial ratios
Relationships determined 
from a firm’s financial 
information and used for 
comparison purposes.
ta b l e  3.4
PRUFROCK CORPORATION
Common-Size Income Statement
2016
Sales	
	
100.0%
Cost of goods sold	
	
  58.2
Depreciation	
	
  11.9 
Earnings before interest and taxes	
	
  29.9
Interest paid	
	
    6.1 
Taxable income	
	
  23.8
Taxes (34%)	
	
    8.1
Net income	
	
  15.7%
  Dividends	
  5.2%
  Addition to retained earnings	
10.5
coverage online
Excel 
Master

56	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
Financial ratios are traditionally grouped into the following categories:
  1.	 Short-term solvency, or liquidity, ratios.
  2.	 Long-term solvency, or financial leverage, ratios.
  3.	 Asset management, or turnover, ratios.
  4.	 Profitability ratios.
  5.	 Market value ratios.
We will consider each of these in turn. In calculating these numbers for Prufrock, we will 
use the ending balance sheet (2016) figures unless we explicitly say otherwise. Also 
notice that the various ratios are color keyed to indicate which numbers come from the 
income statement and which come from the balance sheet.
Short-Term Solvency, or Liquidity, Measures
As the name suggests, short-term solvency ratios as a group are intended to provide infor-
mation about a firm’s liquidity, and these ratios are sometimes called liquidity measures. 
The primary concern is the firm’s ability to pay its bills over the short run without undue 
stress. Consequently, these ratios focus on current assets and current liabilities.
For obvious reasons, liquidity ratios are particularly interesting to short-term creditors. 
Because financial managers are constantly working with banks and other short-term lend-
ers, an understanding of these ratios is essential.
One advantage of looking at current assets and liabilities is that their book values and 
market values are likely to be similar. Often (though not always), these assets and liabilities 
just don’t live long enough for the two to get seriously out of step. On the other hand, like 
any type of near cash, current assets and liabilities can and do change fairly rapidly, so to-
day’s amounts may not be a reliable guide to the future.
Current Ratio 
One of the best-known and most widely used ratios is the current ratio. 
As you might guess, the current ratio is defined as:
Current ratio =
Current assets
 Current liabilities	
[3.1]
For Prufrock, the 2016 current ratio is:
Current ratio =  $708
 $540 = 1.31 times
Because current assets and liabilities are, in principle, converted to cash over the 
­following 12 months, the current ratio is a measure of short-term liquidity. The unit of 
measurement is either dollars or times. So, we could say Prufrock has $1.31 in current 
­assets for every $1 in current liabilities, or we could say Prufrock has its current liabilities 
covered 1.31 times over.
To a creditor, particularly a short-term creditor such as a supplier, the higher the cur-
rent ratio, the better. To the firm, a high current ratio indicates liquidity, but it also may 
indicate an inefficient use of cash and other short-term assets. Absent some extraordinary 
circumstances, we would expect to see a current ratio of at least 1, because a current ratio 
of less than 1 would mean that net working capital (current assets less current liabilities) 
is negative. This would be unusual in a healthy firm, at least for most types of 
businesses.
The current ratio, like any ratio, is affected by various types of transactions. For 
­example, suppose the firm borrows over the long term to raise money. The short-run effect 
income statement
Financial statement 
summarizing a firm’s 
performance over a period 
of time.
balance sheet
Financial statement 
showing a firm’s 
accounting value on a 
particular date.

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
57
would be an increase in cash from the issue proceeds and an increase in long-term debt. 
Current liabilities would not be affected, so the current ratio would rise.
Finally, note that an apparently low current ratio may not be a bad sign for a company 
with a large reserve of untapped borrowing power.
EXAMPLE
3.1
 Current Events
Suppose a firm were to pay off some of its suppliers and short-term creditors. What would happen 
to the current ratio? Suppose a firm buys some inventory. What happens in this case? What happens 
if a firm sells some merchandise?
	
The first case is a trick question. What happens is that the current ratio moves away from 1. If it 
is greater than 1 (the usual case), it will get bigger, but if it is less than 1, it will get smaller. To see this, 
suppose the firm has $4 in current assets and $2 in current liabilities for a current ratio of 2. If we 
use $1 in cash to reduce current liabilities, then the new current ratio is ($4 – 1)/($2 – 1) = 3. If we 
reverse the original situation to $2 in current assets and $4 in current liabilities, then the change will 
cause the current ratio to fall to 1/3 from 1/2.
	
The second case is not quite as tricky. Nothing happens to the current ratio because cash 
goes down while inventory goes up—total current assets are unaffected.
	
In the third case, the current ratio would usually rise because inventory is normally shown at 
cost, and the sale would normally be at something greater than cost (the difference is the markup). 
The increase in either cash or receivables is therefore greater than the decrease in inventory. This 
increases current assets, and the current ratio rises.
Quick (or Acid-Test) Ratio 
Inventory is often the least liquid current asset. It’s also 
the one for which the book values are least reliable as measures of market value because 
the quality of the inventory isn’t considered. Some of the inventory may later turn out to be 
damaged, obsolete, or lost.
More to the point, relatively large inventories are often a sign of short-term trouble. 
The firm may have overestimated sales and overbought or overproduced as a result. In this 
case, the firm may have a substantial portion of its liquidity tied up in slow-moving 
inventory.
To further evaluate liquidity, the quick, or acid-test, ratio is computed just like the cur-
rent ratio, except inventory is omitted:
Quick ratio =  Current assets −Inventory
Current liabilities
 	
[3.2]
Notice that using cash to buy inventory does not affect the current ratio, but it reduces the 
quick ratio. Again, the idea is that inventory is relatively illiquid compared to cash. For 
Prufrock, this ratio in 2016 was:
Quick ratio =  $708 −422
 $540
= .53 times
The quick ratio here tells a somewhat different story than the current ratio, because inven-
tory accounts for more than half of Prufrock’s current assets. To exaggerate the point, if 
this inventory consisted of, say, unsold nuclear power plants, then this would be a cause for 
concern.
To give an example of current versus quick ratios, based on recent financial state-
ments, Walmart and ManpowerGroup, Inc., had current ratios of .88 and 1.49, respectively. 
However, Manpower carries no inventory to speak of, whereas Walmart’s current assets are 
virtually all inventory. As a result, Walmart’s quick ratio was only .24, whereas Manpow-
er’s was 1.49, the same as its current ratio.

58	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
Cash Ratio 
A very short-term creditor might be interested in the cash ratio.
Cash ratio =
Cash
Current liabilities	
[3.3]
You can verify that this works out to be .18 times for Prufrock.
Long-Term Solvency Measures
Long-term solvency ratios are intended to address the firm’s long-run ability to meet its 
obligations, or, more generally, its financial leverage. These ratios are sometimes called 
financial leverage ratios or just leverage ratios. We consider three commonly used mea-
sures and some variations.
Total Debt Ratio 
The total debt ratio takes into account all debts of all maturities to 
all creditors. It can be defined in several ways, the easiest of which is:
 Total debt ratio = Total assets −Total equity
Total assets
	
[3.4]
 = $3,588 −2,591
$3,588
= .28 times
In this case, an analyst might say that Prufrock uses 28 percent debt.1 Whether this is high 
or low or whether it even makes any difference depends on whether or not capital structure 
matters, a subject we discuss in a later chapter.
Prufrock has $.28 in debt for every $1 in total assets. Therefore, there is $.72 in equity 
(=$1 − .28) for every $.28 in debt. With this in mind, we can define two useful variations 
on the total debt ratio, the debt–equity ratio and the equity multiplier:
Debt–equity ratio = Total debt/Total equity	
[3.5]
	
=	 $.28/$.72 = .38 times	
  Equity multiplier = Total assets/Total equity	
[3.6]
	
= 	 $1/$.72 = 1.38 times	
The fact that the equity multiplier is 1 plus the debt–equity ratio is not a coincidence:
  Equity multiplier = Total assets/Total equity = $1/$.72 = 1.38 times 
	
= (Total equity + Total debt)/Total equity
	
= 1 + Debt–equity ratio = 1.38 times
The thing to notice here is that given any one of these three ratios, you can immediately 
calculate the other two, so they all say exactly the same thing.
Times Interest Earned 
Another common measure of long-term solvency is the 
times interest earned (TIE) ratio. Once again, there are several possible (and common) 
definitions, but we’ll stick with the most traditional:
 Times interest earned ratio =
EBIT
Interest
	
[3.7]
 = $691
$141 = 4.9 times
1 Total equity here includes preferred stock (discussed in Chapter 7), if there is any. An equivalent numerator in 
this ratio would be (Current liabilities + Long-term debt).

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
59
As the name suggests, this ratio measures how well a company has its interest obligations 
covered, and it is often called the interest coverage ratio. For Prufrock, the interest bill is 
covered 4.9 times over.
Cash Coverage 
A problem with the TIE ratio is that it is based on EBIT, which is not 
really a measure of cash available to pay interest. The reason is that depreciation, a noncash 
expense, has been deducted out. Because interest is most definitely a cash outflow (to 
creditors), one way to define the cash coverage ratio is:
 Cash coverage ratio = EBIT + Depreciation
Interest
	
[3.8]
 = $691 + 276
$141
= $967
$141 = 6.9 times
The numerator here, EBIT plus depreciation, is often abbreviated EBITD (earnings before 
interest, taxes, and depreciation—say “ebbit-dee”). It is a basic measure of the firm’s abil-
ity to generate cash from operations, and it is frequently used as a measure of cash flow 
available to meet financial obligations.
A common variation on EBITD is earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and 
amortization (EBITDA—say “ebbit-dah”). Here amortization refers to a noncash de-
duction similar conceptually to depreciation, except it applies to an intangible asset 
(such as a patent) rather than a tangible asset (such as a machine). Note that the word 
amortization here does not refer to the repayment of debt, a subject we discuss in a later 
chapter.
Asset Management, or Turnover, Measures
We next turn our attention to the efficiency with which Prufrock uses its assets. The mea-
sures in this section are sometimes called asset utilization ratios. The specific ratios we 
discuss can all be interpreted as measures of turnover. What they are intended to describe 
is how efficiently, or intensively, a firm uses its assets to generate sales. We first look at 
two important current assets: inventory and receivables.
Inventory Turnover and Days’ Sales in Inventory 
During the year, Prufrock 
had a cost of goods sold of $1,344. Inventory at the end of the year was $422. With these 
numbers, inventory turnover can be calculated as:
 Inventory turnover = Cost of goods sold
Inventory
	
[3.9]
 = $1,344
$422 = 3.2 times	
In a sense, we sold off, or turned over, the entire inventory 3.2 times. As long as we are not 
running out of stock and thereby forgoing sales, the higher this ratio is, the more efficiently 
we are managing inventory.
If we know that we turned our inventory over 3.2 times during the year, then we can 
immediately figure out how long it took us to turn it over on average. The result is the aver-
age days’ sales in inventory:
 Days’ sales in inventory =
365 days
Inventory turnover 	
[3.10]
 = 365
3.2 = 115 days

60	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
This tells us that, roughly speaking, inventory sits 115 days on average before it is sold. 
Alternatively, assuming we used the most recent inventory and cost figures, it will take 
about 115 days to work off our current inventory.
For example, in late 2014, the auto industry had a 71-day supply of cars and trucks. Of 
course, not all manufacturers had the same inventory level. At that same time, General Mo-
tors had a 94-day supply. This inventory level means that at the then-current rate of sales, 
it would have taken General Motors 94 days to deplete the available supply, or, equiva-
lently, that General Motors had 94 days of vehicle sales in inventory. At the same time, 
Mitsubishi had a 75-day supply of cars, while Ford had a mere 25-day supply. This type of 
information is useful to auto manufacturers in planning future marketing and production 
decisions. Historically, a 60-day supply of inventory has been considered normal in the 
automobile industry, so these figures pointed to manufacturing continuing at the same 
level, or decreasing slightly, in 2015.
It might make more sense to use the average inventory in calculating turnover. 
Inventory turnover would then be $l,344/[($393 + 422)/2] = 3.3 times.2 It depends on 
the purpose of the calculation. If we are interested in how long it will take us to sell 
our current inventory, then using the ending figure (as we did initially) is probably 
better.
In many of the ratios we discuss in the following pages, average figures could just as 
well be used. Again, it depends on whether we are worried about the past, in which case 
averages are appropriate, or the future, in which case ending figures might be better. Also, 
using ending figures is common in reporting industry averages; so, for comparison pur-
poses, ending figures should be used in such cases. In any event, using ending figures is 
definitely less work, so we’ll continue to use them.
Receivables Turnover and Days’ Sales in Receivables 
Our inventory mea-
sures give some indication of how fast we can sell products. We now look at how fast we 
collect on those sales. The receivables turnover is defined in the same way as inventory 
turnover:
 Receivables turnover =
Sales
Accounts receivable	
[3.11]
 = $2,311
$188 = 12.3 times
Loosely speaking, we collected our outstanding credit accounts and reloaned the money 
12.3 times during the year.3
This ratio makes more sense if we convert it to days, so the days’ sales in receiv-
ables is:
 Days’ sales in receivables =
365 days
Receivables turnovers	
[3.12]
 = 365
12.3 = 30 days
	
Therefore, on average, we collect on our credit sales in 30 days. For obvious reasons, this 
ratio is very frequently called the average collection period (ACP).
2 Notice that we calculated the average as (Beginning value + Ending value)/2.
3 Here we have implicitly assumed that all sales are credit sales. If they were not, then we would simply use total 
credit sales in these calculations, not total sales.

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
61
Total Asset Turnover 
Moving away from specific accounts like inventory or receiv-
ables, we can consider an important “big picture” ratio, the total asset turnover ratio. As 
the name suggests, total asset turnover is:
 Total asset turnover =
Sales
Total assets
	
[3.13]
 = $2,311
$3,588 = .64 times
In other words, for every dollar in assets, we generated $.64 in sales.
A closely related ratio, the capital intensity ratio, is simply the reciprocal of (that is, 
1 divided by) total asset turnover. It can be interpreted as the dollar investment in assets 
needed to generate $1 in sales. High values correspond to capital-intensive industries (such 
as public utilities). For Prufrock, total asset turnover is .64, so, if we flip this over, we get 
that capital intensity is $l/.64 = $1.56. That is, it takes Prufrock $1.56 in assets to create 
$1 in sales.
It might seem that a high total asset turnover ratio is always a good sign for a company, 
but it isn’t necessarily. Consider a company with old assets. The assets would be almost 
fully depreciated and might be very outdated. In this case, the book value of assets is low, 
contributing to a higher asset turnover. Plus, the high turnover might mean that the com-
pany will need to make major capital outlays in the near future. A low asset turnover might 
seem bad, but it could indicate the opposite: The company could have just purchased a lot 
of new equipment, which implies that the book value of assets is relatively high. These new 
assets could be more productive and efficient than those used by the company’s 
competitors.
The eXtensible Business 
Reporting Language 
(XBRL) is designed to 
make extracting EDGAR 
data easier. You can 
learn more about it 
at www.xbrl.org.
EXAMPLE
3.2  Payables Turnover
Here is a variation on the receivables collection period. How long, on average, does it take for Pru-
frock Corporation to pay its bills? To answer, we need to calculate the accounts payable turnover 
rate using cost of goods sold. We will assume that Prufrock purchases everything on credit.
	
The cost of goods sold is $1,344, and accounts payable are $344. The turnover is therefore 
$1,344/$344 = 3.9 times. So, days’ costs in payables was about 365/3.9 = 94 days. On average, 
then, Prufrock takes 94 days to pay. As a potential creditor, we might take note of this fact.
EXAMPLE
3.3  More Turnover
Suppose you find that a particular company generates $.40 in sales for every dollar in total assets. 
How often does this company turn over its total assets?
	
The total asset turnover here is .40 times per year. It takes 1/.40 = 2.5 years to turn assets over 
completely.
Profitability Measures
The three measures we discuss in this section are probably the best known and most widely 
used of all financial ratios. In one form or another, they are intended to measure how 
Also note that if we are using the most recent figures, we can also say that we have 
30 days’ worth of sales currently uncollected. We will learn more about this subject when 
we study credit policy in a later chapter.

62	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
efficiently the firm uses its assets and how efficiently the firm manages its operations. The 
focus in this group is on the bottom line—net income.
Profit Margin 
Companies pay a great deal of attention to their profit margin:
 Profit margin = Net income
Sales
	
[3.14]
 = $363
$2,311 = 15.7%
This tells us that Prufrock, in an accounting sense, generates a little less than 16 cents in 
profit for every dollar in sales.
All other things being equal, a relatively high profit margin is obviously desirable. 
This situation corresponds to low expense ratios relative to sales. However, we hasten to 
add that other things are often not equal.
For example, lowering our sales price will usually increase unit volume, but will nor-
mally cause profit margins to shrink. Total profit (or, more importantly, operating cash 
flow) may go up or down, so the fact that margins are smaller isn’t necessarily bad. After 
all, isn’t it possible that, as the saying goes, “Our prices are so low that we lose money on 
everything we sell, but we make it up in volume!”?4
Return on Assets 
Return on assets (ROA) is a measure of profit per dollar of assets. 
It can be defined several ways, but the most common is:
 Return on assets = Net income
Total assets	
[3.15]
 = $363
$3,588 = 10.1%
Return on Equity 
Return on equity (ROE) is a measure of how the stockholders fared 
during the year. Because benefiting shareholders is our goal, ROE is, in an accounting 
sense, the true bottom-line measure of performance. ROE is usually measured as:
 Return on assets = Net income
Total equity
	
[3.16]
 = $363
$2,591 = 14.0%
Therefore, for every dollar in equity, Prufrock generated 14 cents in profit, but, again, this 
is only correct in accounting terms.
Because ROA and ROE are such commonly cited numbers, we stress that it is impor-
tant to remember they are accounting rates of return. For this reason, these measures 
should properly be called return on book assets and return on book equity. In addition, 
ROE is sometimes called return on net worth. Whatever it’s called, it would be inappropri-
ate to compare the result to, for example, an interest rate observed in the financial 
markets.
The fact that ROE exceeds ROA reflects Prufrock’s use of financial leverage. We will 
examine the relationship between these two measures in more detail later.
4 No, it’s not; margins can be small, but they do need to be positive!

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
63
Market Value Measures
Our final group of measures is based, in part, on information not necessarily contained in 
financial statements—the market price per share of the stock. Obviously, these measures 
can be calculated directly only for publicly traded companies.
We assume that Prufrock has 33 million shares outstanding and the stock sold for $88 
per share at the end of the year. If we recall that Prufrock’s net income was $363 million, 
then we can calculate that its earnings per share were:
 EPS =
Net income
Shares outstanding = $363
33
= $11	
[3.17]
Price–Earnings Ratio 
The first of our market value measures, the price–earnings, 
or PE, ratio (or multiple), is defined as:
 PE ratio =
Price per share
Earnings per share	
[3.18]
 = $88
$11 = 8 times
In the vernacular, we would say that Prufrock shares sell for eight times earnings, or we 
might say that Prufrock shares have, or “carry,” a PE multiple of 8.
Because the PE ratio measures how much investors are willing to pay per dollar of 
current earnings, higher PEs are often taken to mean that the firm has significant prospects 
for future growth. Of course, if a firm had no or almost no earnings, its PE would probably 
be quite large; so, as always, care is needed in interpreting this ratio.
Price–Sales Ratio  In some cases, companies will have negative earnings for extended 
periods, so their PE ratios are not very meaningful. A good example is a recent start-up. Such 
companies usually do have some revenues, so analysts will often look at the price–sales ratio:
Price–sales ratio = Price per share/Sales per share	
[3.19]
In Prufrock’s case, sales were $2,311, so here is the price–sales ratio:
Price–sales ratio = $88/($2,311/33) = $88/$70 = 1.26 times
As with PE ratios, whether a particular price–sales ratio is high or low depends on the in-
dustry involved.
Market-to-Book Ratio  A second commonly quoted measure is the market-to-book ratio:
 Market-to-book ratio = Market value per share
Book value per share
	
[3.20]
 =
$88
$2,591/33 = $88
$78.5 = 1.12 times
Notice that book value per share is total equity (not just common stock) divided by the 
number of shares outstanding.
Because book value per share is an accounting number, it reflects historical costs. 
Therefore, in a loose sense, the market-to-book ratio compares the market value of the 
firm’s investments to their cost. A value less than 1 could mean that the firm has not been 
successful overall in creating value for its stockholders.
Enterprise Value–EBITDA Ratio 
A company’s enterprise value is an estimate of 
the market value of the company’s operating assets. By operating assets, we mean all the 

64	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
assets of the firm except cash. Of course, it’s not practical to work with the individual as-
sets of a firm because market values would usually not be available. Instead, we can use the 
right-hand side of the balance sheet and calculate the enterprise value as:
Enterprise value = Total market value of the stock 	
[3.21] 
	
+ Book value of all liabilities − Cash
We use the book value for liabilities because we typically can’t get the market values, at 
least not for all of them. However, book value is usually a reasonable approximation for 
market value when it comes to liabilities, particularly short-term debts. Notice that the sum 
of the value of the market values of the stock and all liabilities equals the value of the 
firm’s assets from the balance sheet identity. Once we have this number, we subtract the 
cash to get the enterprise value.
Enterprise value is frequently used to calculate the EBITDA ratio (or multiple):
EBITDA ratio = Enterprise value/EBITDA	
[3.22]
This ratio is similar in spirit to the PE ratio, but it relates the value of all the operating assets (the 
enterprise value) to a measure of the operating cash flow generated by those assets (EBITDA).
This completes our definition of some common ratios. We could tell you about more of 
them, but these are enough for now. We’ll leave it here and go on to discuss some ways of 
using these ratios instead of just how to calculate them. Table 3.5 summarizes the ratios 
ta b l e  3.5
Common financial ratios
	
I.	 Short-term solvency, or liquidity, ratios
	
	 Current ratio =
Current assets
Current liabilities
	
	 Quick ratio = Current assets −Inventory
Current liabilities
	
	 Cash ratio =
Cash
Current liabilities
	
II.	 Long-term solvency, or financial leverage, ratios
	
	 Total debt ratio = Total assets −Total equity
Total assets
	
	 Debt–equity ratio = Total debt/Total equity
	
	 Equity multiplier = Total assests/Total equity
	
	 Times interest earned ratio =
EBIT
Interest
	
	 Cash coverage ratio = EBIT + Depreciation
Interest
	 III.	 Asset utilization, or turnover, ratios
	
	 Inventory turnover = Cost of goods sold
Inventory
	
	 Daysʼ sales in inventory =
365 days
Inventory turnover
	
	 Receivables turnover =
Sales
Accounts receivable
	
	 Payables turnover = Cost of goods sold
Accounts payable
	
	 Daysʼ sales in receivables =
365 days
Receivables turnover
	
	 Daysʼ costs in payables =
365 days
Payables turnover
	
	 Total asset turnover =
Sales
Total assets
	
	 Capital intensity = Total assets
Sales
	 IV.	 Profitability ratios
	
	 Profit margin = Net income
Sales
	
	 Return on assets 1ROA2 = Net income
Total assets
	
	 Return on equity 1ROE2 = Net income
Total equity
	
	 ROE = Net income
Sales
× Sales
Assets × Assets
Equity
	
V.	 Market value ratios
	
	 Price–earnings ratio =
Price per share
Earnings per share
	
	 Price–sales ratio = Price per share
Sales per share
	
	 Market-to-book ratio = Market value per share
Book value per share
	
	 EBITDA ratio = Enterprise value
EBITDA

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
65
we’ve discussed. Table 3.6 provides some information for the well-known home supply 
stores Lowe’s and Home Depot for their fiscal years ending in 2014. As you can see, Home 
Depot has a slightly higher current ratio, debt–equity ratio, and total asset turnover. Home 
Depot also has higher profitability ratios. Because of its increased use of leverage and better 
profitability, Home Depot has a higher ROE, something we will discuss in the next section.
The price–earnings ratio is similar for Lowe’s and Home Depot, although Home De-
pot’s market-to-book ratio is almost twice as large as Lowe’s. Overall, Home Depot ap-
pears to be performing better than Lowe’s based on this abbreviated financial analysis. Of 
course, if we really want to examine these two companies, we would want to look at more 
ratios than the ones presented here. 
ta b l e  3.6
Financial information 
from 2014 for Lowe’s 
and Home Depot 
(numbers in millions 
except for per-share 
data)
Lowe’s
Home Depot
Sales
$56,226
$83,176
Net income
2,698
6,345
Current assets
10,080
15,302
Current liabilities
9,348
7,488
Total assets
31,287
39,946
Total debt
21,589
30,624
Total equity
9,968
9,322
Price per share
67.76
104.43
Book value per share
10.78
7.28
Earnings per share
2.92
4.96
Current ratio
1.08
2.04
Debt–equity ratio
2.19
3.29
Total asset turnover
1.80
2.08
Profit margin
4.80%
7.63%
ROE
27.07%
68.06%
ROA
8.48%
15.88%
Market-to-book ratio
6.29
14.34
Price–earnings ratio
23.23
21.07
concept questions
3.2a	
What are the five groups of ratios? Give two or three examples of each kind.
3.2b	
Turnover ratios all have one of two figures as numerators. What are these two 
figures? What do these ratios measure? How do you interpret the results?
3.2c	
Profitability ratios all have the same figure in the numerator. What is it? What do 
these ratios measure? How do you interpret the results?
3.2d	
Given the total debt ratio, what other two ratios can be computed? Explain how.
THE DUPONT IDENTITY
As we mentioned in discussing ROA and ROE, the difference between these two profit-
ability measures is a reflection of the use of debt financing, or financial leverage. We 
illustrate the relationship between these measures in this section by investigating a famous 
way of decomposing ROE into its component parts.
3.3
coverage online
Excel 
Master

66	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
To begin, let’s recall the definition of ROE:
Return on equity = Net income
Total equity
If we were so inclined, we could multiply this ratio by Assets/Assets without changing 
anything:
 Return on equity = Net income
Total equity = Net income
Total equity × Assets
Assets
 = Net income
Assets
×
Assets
Total equity
Notice that we have expressed the ROE as the product of two other ratios—ROA and the 
equity multiplier:
ROE = ROA × Equity multiplier = ROA × (1 + Debt–equity ratio)
Looking back at Prufrock, for example, we see that the debt–equity ratio was .38 and ROA 
was 10.1 percent. Our work here implies that Prufrock’s ROE, as we previously calculated, is:
ROE = 10.1% × 1.38 = 14%
We can further decompose ROE by multiplying the top and bottom by total sales:
ROE = Sales
Sales × Net income
Assets
×
Assets
Total equity
If we rearrange things a bit, ROE is:
 ROE = Net income
Sales
× Sales
Assets ×
Assets
Total equity
	
[3.23]
 = Profit margin × Total asset turnover × Equity multiplier
What we have now done is to partition ROA into its two component parts, profit margin 
and total asset turnover. This last expression is called the DuPont identity, after the DuPont 
Corporation, which popularized its use.
We can check this relationship for Prufrock by noting that the profit margin was 
15.7 percent and the total asset turnover was .64. ROE should thus be:
ROE = Profit margin × Total asset turnover × Equity multiplier
	
= 	
.157 	
×	
.64	
×	
1.38
	
= .14,    or   14% 
This 14 percent ROE is exactly what we had before.
The DuPont identity tells us that ROE is affected by three things:
  1.	 Operating efficiency (as measured by profit margin).
  2.	 Asset use efficiency (as measured by total asset turnover).
  3.	 Financial leverage (as measured by the equity multiplier).
Weakness in either operating or asset use efficiency (or both) will show up in a diminished 
return on assets, which will translate into a lower ROE.
Considering the DuPont identity, it appears that a firm could leverage up its ROE by 
increasing its amount of debt. It turns out this will only happen if the ratio of EBIT to total 
assets is greater than the interest rate. More importantly, the use of debt financing has a 
DuPont identity
Popular expression 
breaking ROE into three 
parts: operating efficiency, 
asset use efficiency, and 
financial leverage.
Return on assets
w

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
67
number of other effects, and, as we discuss at some length in later chapters, the amount of 
leverage a firm uses is governed by its capital structure policy.
The decomposition of ROE we’ve discussed in this section is a convenient way of 
systematically approaching financial statement analysis. If ROE is unsatisfactory by some 
measure, then the DuPont identity tells you where to start looking for the reasons. To give 
an example, take a look at the information about Internet companies Yahoo! and Google in 
Table 3.7. As you can see, in 2014, Yahoo! had an ROE of .4 percent, down from its ROE 
in 2012 of 3.9 percent. In contrast, also in 2014, Google had an ROE of 13.8 percent, down 
from its ROE in 2012 of 16.1 percent. Given this information, why is Google’s ROE so 
much higher than Yahoo!’s over this period of time?
Looking at the DuPont breakdown, we see that Yahoo!’s profit margin decreased dra-
matically, from 11.4 percent to 3.1 percent. Google’s profit margin was 21.9 percent in 
2014, also a decrease from the level two years before. Google’s total asset turnover re-
mained constant, while Yahoo!’s fell dramatically. Finally, Google’s leverage was almost 
constant, while Yahoo!’s increased.
Yahoo!’s ROE fell because of the sharp decline in profit margin and total asset 
turnover. Even though the equity multiplier increased, the increase was not enough to 
offset the effect of the profit margin and total asset turnover declines. The most no-
ticeable differences between the companies are Google’s much higher profit margin 
and total asset turnover, suggesting that Google is able to generate revenues at a far 
lower cost than Yahoo! and use its assets more efficiently, which results in a much 
higher ROE. 
An Expanded DuPont Analysis
So far, we’ve seen how the DuPont equation lets us break down ROE into its basic three 
components: profit margin, total asset turnover, and financial leverage. We now extend this 
analysis to take a closer look at how key parts of a firm’s operations feed into ROE. To get 
going, we went to the SEC website (www.sec.gov) and found the 10-K for chemical prod-
ucts giant DuPont. In the 10-K, we located the financial statements for 2014. What we 
found is summarized in Table 3.8.
Using the information in Table 3.8, Figure 3.1 shows how we can construct an ex-
panded DuPont analysis for DuPont and present that analysis in chart form. The advantage 
of the extended DuPont chart is that it lets us examine several ratios at once, thereby get-
ting a better overall picture of a company’s performance and also allowing us to determine 
possible items to improve.
The regulatory filings of 
publicly traded 
corporations may be found 
at www.sec.gov.
ta b l e  3.7
DuPont analysis for 
Yahoo! and Google
Yahoo!
Year
ROE
=
Profit margin
× 
Total asset turnover
× 
Equity multiplier
2014
  .4%
=
  3.1%
×
.075
×
1.60
2013
4.5%
=
12.6%
×
.279
×
1.29
2012
3.9%
=
11.4%
×
.292
×
1.17
Google
Year
ROE
=
Profit margin
× 
Total asset turnover
× 
Equity multiplier
2014
13.8%
=
21.9%
×
.503
×
1.25
2013
15.3%
=
24.0%
×
.501
×
1.27
2012
16.1%
=
25.1%
×
.491
×
1.31

68	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
ta b l e  3.8
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR DUPONT  
12 months ending December 31, 2014  
(All numbers are in millions)
Income Statement
Balance Sheet
Sales
$35,553
Current assets
Current liabilities
CoGS
  21,703
  Cash
$  7,034
  Accounts payable
$11,217
Gross profit
$13,850
  Accounts receivable
    6,594
  Notes payable
    1,423
SG&A expense
    6,411
  Inventory
    8,120
    Total
$12,640
R&D expense
     2,067
    Total
$21,748
Total long-term debt
$23,916
EBIT
$   5,372
Fixed assets
$28,128
Total equity
$13,320
Interest
       377
Total assets
$49,876
Total liabilities and equity
$49,876
EBT
$  4,995
Taxes
    1,370
Net income
$  3,625
f i g u r e  3.1
Extended DuPont chart for DuPont
Divided by
Subtracted
from
Selling, gen. &
admin. expense
$6,411
Total costs
$31,928
Net income
$3,625
Proﬁt margin
10.20%
Sales
$35,553
Sales
$35,553
Cost of goods
sold
$21,703
Plus
Interest
$377
R&D
$2,067
Taxes
$1,370 
Divided by
Fixed assets
$28,128
Sales
$35,553
Total asset
turnover
.71
Current assets
$21,748
Cash
$7,034 
Accounts
receivable
$6,594
Inventory
$8,120
Total assets
$49,876
Multiplied
by
Multiplied by
Return on
assets
7.27%
Return on
equity
27.21%
Equity
multiplier
3.74

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
69
Looking at the left-hand side of our DuPont chart in Figure 3.1, we see items related 
to profitability. As always, profit margin is calculated as net income divided by sales. But, 
as our chart emphasizes, net income depends on sales and a variety of costs, such as cost of 
goods sold (CoGS) and selling, general, and administrative expenses (SG&A expense). 
DuPont can increase its ROE by increasing sales and also by reducing one or more of these 
costs. In other words, if we want to improve profitability, our chart clearly shows us the 
areas on which we should focus.
Turning to the right-hand side of Figure 3.1, we have an analysis of the key factors 
underlying total asset turnover. Thus, for example, we see that reducing inventory holdings 
through more efficient management reduces current assets, which reduces total assets, 
which then improves total asset turnover.
concept questions
3.3a	
Return on assets, or ROA, can be expressed as the product of two ratios. Which two?
3.3b	
Return on equity, or ROE, can be expressed as the product of three ratios. Which three?
INTERNAL AND SUSTAINABLE GROWTH
A firm’s return on assets and return on equity are frequently used to calculate two addi-
tional numbers, both of which have to do with the firm’s ability to grow. We examine these 
next, but first we introduce two basic ratios.
Dividend Payout and Earnings Retention
As we have seen in various places, a firm’s net income gets divided into two pieces. The 
first piece is cash dividends paid to stockholders. Whatever is left over is the addition to 
retained earnings. For example, from Table 3.3, Prufrock’s net income was $363, of which 
$121 was paid out in dividends. If we express dividends paid as a percentage of net in-
come, the result is the dividend payout ratio:
Dividend payout ratio = Cash dividends/Net income	
[3.24]
	
= $121/$363
	
= 33⅓%
What this tells us is that Prufrock pays out one-third of its net income in dividends.
Anything Prufrock does not pay out in the form of dividends must be retained in the 
firm, so we can define the retention ratio as:
Retention ratio = Addition to retained earnings/Net income       	
[3.25]
	
= $242/$363
	
= 66⅔%	
So, Prufrock retains two-thirds of its net income. The retention ratio is also known as the 
plowback ratio because it is, in effect, the portion of net income that is plowed back into 
the business.
Notice that net income must be either paid out or plowed back, so the dividend payout 
and plowback ratios have to add up to 1. Put differently, if you know one of these figures, 
you can figure the other one out immediately.
3.4
You can find growth rates 
under the “Key Statistics” 
link at finance.yahoo.com.

70	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
ROA, ROE, and Growth
Investors and others are frequently interested in knowing how rapidly a firm’s sales can 
grow. The important thing to recognize is that if sales are to grow, assets have to grow as 
well, at least over the long run. Further, if assets are to grow, then the firm must somehow 
obtain the money to pay for the needed acquisitions. In other words, growth has to be fi-
nanced, and as a direct corollary, a firm’s ability to grow depends on its financing policies.
A firm has two broad sources of financing: internal and external. Internal financ-
ing simply refers to what the firm earns and subsequently plows back into the business. 
External financing refers to funds raised by either borrowing money or selling stock.
The Internal Growth Rate 
Suppose a firm has a policy of financing growth using 
only internal financing. This means that the firm won’t borrow any funds and won’t sell any 
new stock. How rapidly can the firm grow? The answer is given by the internal growth rate:
Internal growth rate =
ROA × b
1 −ROA × b	
[3.26]
where ROA is, as usual, return on assets, and b is the retention, or plowback, ratio we just 
discussed.
For example, for the Prufrock Corporation, we earlier calculated ROA as 10.12 percent. 
We also saw that the retention ratio is 662⁄3 percent, or 2⁄3, so the internal growth rate is:
 Internal growth rate =
ROA × b
1 −ROA × b
 =
.1012 × ⅔
1 −.1012 × ⅔ 
 = 7.23%
Thus, if Prufrock relies solely on internally generated financing, it can grow at a maximum 
rate of 7.23 percent per year.
The Sustainable Growth Rate 
If a firm only relies on internal financing, then, 
through time, its total debt ratio will decline. The reason is that assets will grow, but total 
debt will remain the same (or even fall if some is paid off). Frequently, firms have a par-
ticular total debt ratio or equity multiplier that they view as optimal (why this is so is the 
subject of Chapter 13).
With this in mind, we now consider how rapidly a firm can grow if (1) it wishes to 
maintain a particular total debt ratio and (2) it is unwilling to sell new stock. There are vari-
ous reasons a firm might wish to avoid selling stock, and equity sales by established firms 
are actually a relatively rare occurrence. Given these two assumptions, the maximum 
growth rate that can be achieved, called the sustainable growth rate, is:
Sustainable growth rate =
ROE × b
1 −ROE × b	
[3.27]
Notice that this is the same as the internal growth rate, except that ROE is used instead of ROA.
internal growth rate
The maximum possible 
growth rate a firm can 
achieve without external 
financing of any kind.
sustainable growth 
rate
The maximum possible 
growth rate a firm can 
achieve without external 
equity financing while 
maintaining a constant 
debt–equity ratio.
EXAMPLE
3.4  Payout and Retention
The Manson-Marilyn Corporation routinely pays out 40 percent of net income in the form of 
dividends. What is its plowback ratio? If net income was $800, how much did stockholders actu-
ally receive?
	
If the payout ratio is 40 percent, then the retention, or plowback, ratio must be 60 percent 
because the two have to add up to 100 percent. Dividends were 40 percent of $800, or $320.

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
71
Looking at Prufrock, we earlier calculated ROE as 14 percent, and we know that the 
retention ratio is ⅔, so we can easily calculate sustainable growth as:
 Sustainable growth rate =
ROE × b
1 −ROE × b
 =
.14 × ⅔
1 −.14 × ⅔
 = 10.29%
If you compare this sustainable growth rate of 10.29 percent to the internal growth rate of 
7.23 percent, you might wonder why it is larger. The reason is that, as the firm grows, it 
will have to borrow additional funds if it is to maintain a constant debt ratio. This new bor-
rowing is an extra source of financing in addition to internally generated funds, so Prufrock 
can expand more rapidly.
Determinants of Growth 
In our previous section, we saw that the return on equity, 
or ROE, could be decomposed into its various components using the DuPont identity. Be-
cause ROE appears so prominently in the determination of the sustainable growth rate, the 
factors important in determining ROE are also important determinants of growth.
As we saw, ROE can be written as the product of three factors:
ROE = Profit margin × Total asset turnover × Equity multiplier
If we examine our expression for the sustainable growth rate, we see that anything that in-
creases ROE will increase the sustainable growth rate by making the top bigger and the 
bottom smaller. Increasing the plowback ratio will have the same effect.
Putting it all together, what we have is that a firm’s ability to sustain growth depends 
explicitly on the following four factors:
  1.	 Profit margin. An increase in profit margin will increase the firm’s ability to generate 
funds internally and thereby increase its sustainable growth.
  2.	 Total asset turnover. An increase in the firm’s total asset turnover increases the 
sales generated for each dollar in assets. This decreases the firm’s need for new 
assets as sales grow and thereby increases the sustainable growth rate. Notice 
that increasing total asset turnover is the same thing as decreasing capital 
intensity.
  3.	 Financial policy. An increase in the debt–equity ratio increases the firm’s financial 
leverage. Because this makes additional debt financing available, it increases the 
sustainable growth rate.
  4.	 Dividend policy. A decrease in the percentage of net income paid out as dividends 
will increase the retention ratio. This increases internally generated equity and thus 
increases internal and sustainable growth.
The sustainable growth rate is a very useful number. What it illustrates is the explicit 
relationship between the firm’s four major areas of concern: its operating efficiency as 
measured by profit margin, its asset use efficiency as measured by total asset turnover, its 
financial policy as measured by the debt–equity ratio, and its dividend policy as measured 
by the retention ratio. If sales are to grow at a rate higher than the sustainable growth rate, 
the firm must increase profit margins, increase total asset turnover, increase financial 
­leverage, increase earnings retention, or sell new shares.
The two growth rates, internal and sustainable, are summarized in Table 3.9. The 
nearby Finance Matters box discusses some issues related to growth rates.

How Fast Is Too Fast?
G
rowth rates are an important tool for evaluating a com-
pany, and, as we will see later, an important tool for 
valuing a company’s stock. When thinking about (and calcu-
lating) growth rates, a little common sense goes a long way. 
For example, in 2014, retailing giant Walmart had about 
1.1 billion square feet of stores, distribution centers, and so 
forth. The company expected to expand its square footage 
by a little less than 4 percent over the next year. This in-
crease doesn’t sound too outrageous, but can Walmart grow 
its square footage at 4 percent indefinitely?
	
We’ll get into the calculation in our next chapter, but if 
you assume that Walmart grows at 4 percent per year over 
the next 292 years, the company will have about 100 trillion 
square feet of property, which is about the total land mass of 
the entire United States! In other words, if Walmart keeps 
growing at 4 percent, the entire country will eventually be 
one big Walmart. Scary.
	
Facebook is another example. The company had total 
revenues of about $1.97 billion in 2010 and $12.47 billion in 
2014. This represents an annual rate of increase of 59 per-
cent! How likely do you think it is that the company can con-
tinue this growth rate? If this growth continued, the company 
would have revenues of about $19.83 trillion in just 16 years, 
which exceeds the gross domestic product (GDP) of the 
United States. Obviously, Facebook’s growth rate will slow 
substantially in the next several years.
	
What about growth in cash flow? As of the beginning  
of 2015, cash flow for Internet travel booking website 
Priceline.com grew at an annual rate of about 40 percent 
for the past five years. The company generated about 
$2.95 billion in cash flow for 2014. If Priceline.com’s cash 
flow grew at the same rate for the next 18 years, the com-
pany would generate about $1.26 trillion dollars per year, or 
just slightly less than the $1.34 trillion of U.S. currency circu-
lating in the world.
	
As these examples show, growth rates can be deceiv-
ing. It is fairly easy for a small company to grow very fast. If a 
company has $100 dollars in sales, it only has to increase 
sales by another $100 to have a 100 percent increase in 
sales. If the company’s sales are $10 billion, it has to increase 
sales by another $10 billion to achieve the same 100 percent 
increase. So, long-term growth rate estimates must be cho-
sen very carefully. As a rule of thumb, for really long-term 
growth estimates, you should probably assume that a com-
pany will not grow much faster than the economy as a 
whole, which is about 1 to 3 percent (inflation-adjusted).
FINANCE MATTERS
72
 I.	
Internal growth rate
	
Internal growth rate =
ROA × b
1 −ROA × b
where
    ROA = Return on assets = Net income/Total assets
        b = Plowback (retention) ratio
	
= Addition to retained earnings/Net income
	
= 1 – Dividend payout ratio
The internal growth rate is the maximum growth rate that can be achieved with no external 
financing of any kind.
II.	
Sustainable growth rate
Sustainable growth rate =
ROE × b
1 −ROE × b
where
    ROE = Return on equity = Net income/Total equity
        b = Plowback (retention) ratio
	
= Addition to retained earnings/Net income
	
= 1 – Dividend payout ratio
The sustainable growth rate is the maximum growth rate that can be achieved with no 
external equity financing while maintaining a constant debt–equity ratio.
ta b l e  3.9
Summary of internal 
and sustainable 
growth rates

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
73
A Note on Sustainable Growth Rate Calculations 
Very commonly, the sus-
tainable growth rate is calculated using just the numerator in our expression, ROE × b. 
This causes some confusion, which we can clear up here. The issue has to do with how 
ROE is computed. Recall that ROE is calculated as net income divided by total equity. If 
total equity is taken from an ending balance sheet (as we have done consistently, and is 
commonly done in practice), then our formula is the right one. However, if total equity is 
from the beginning of the period, then the simpler formula is the correct one.
In principle, you’ll get exactly the same sustainable growth rate regardless of which way 
you calculate it (as long as you match up the ROE calculation with the right formula). In real-
ity, you may see some differences because of accounting-related complications. By the way, 
if you use the average of beginning and ending equity (as some advocate), yet another for-
mula is needed. Also, all of our comments here apply to the internal growth rate as well.
A simple example is useful to illustrate these points. Suppose a firm has a net income 
of $20 and a retention ratio of .60. Beginning assets are $100. The debt–equity ratio is .25, 
so beginning equity is $80.
If we use beginning numbers, we get the following:
ROE = $20/80 = .25 = 25%
Sustainable growth = .25 × .60 = .15 = 15%
For the same firm, ending equity is $80 + .60 × $20 = $92. So, we can calculate this:
ROE = $20/92 = .2174 = 21.74%
Sustainable growth = .2174 × .60/(1 − .2174 × .60) = .15 = 15%
These growth rates are exactly the same (after accounting for a small rounding error in the 
second calculation). See if you don’t agree that the internal growth rate is 12%.
concept questions
3.4a 	 What does a firm’s internal growth rate tell us?
3.4b 	 What does a firm’s sustainable growth rate tell us?
3.4c 	
Why is the sustainable growth rate likely to be larger than the internal growth rate?
USING FINANCIAL STATEMENT INFORMATION
Our last task in this chapter is to discuss in more detail some practical aspects of financial 
statement analysis. In particular, we will look at reasons for doing financial statement anal-
ysis, how to go about getting benchmark information, and some of the problems that come 
up in the process.
Why Evaluate Financial Statements?
As we have discussed, the primary reason for looking at accounting information is that we 
don’t have, and can’t reasonably expect to get, market value information. It is important to 
emphasize that, whenever we have market information, we will use it instead of account-
ing data. Also, if there is a conflict between accounting and market data, market data 
should be given precedence.
Financial statement analysis is essentially an application of “management by excep-
tion.” In many cases, such analysis will boil down to comparing ratios for one business 
3.5
coverage online
Excel 
Master

74	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
with some kind of average or representative ratios. Those ratios that seem to differ the most 
from the averages are tagged for further study.
Internal Uses 
Financial statement information has a variety of uses within a firm. 
Among the most important of these is performance evaluation. For example, managers are 
frequently evaluated and compensated on the basis of accounting measures of performance 
such as profit margin and return on equity. Also, firms with multiple divisions frequently 
compare the performance of those divisions using financial statement information.
Another important internal use of financial statement information involves planning for 
the future. Historical financial statement information is very useful for generating projections 
about the future and for checking the realism of assumptions made in those projections.
External Uses 
Financial statements are useful to parties outside the firm, including 
short-term and long-term creditors and potential investors. For example, we would find such 
information quite useful in deciding whether or not to grant credit to a new customer.
We would also use this information to evaluate suppliers, and suppliers would use our 
statements before deciding to extend credit to us. Large customers use this information to 
decide if we are likely to be around in the future. Credit-rating agencies rely on financial 
statements in assessing a firm’s overall creditworthiness. The common theme here is that 
financial statements are a prime source of information about a firm’s financial health.
We would also find such information useful in evaluating our main competitors. We 
might be thinking of launching a new product. A prime concern would be whether the 
competition would jump in shortly thereafter. In this case, we would be interested in our 
competitors’ financial strength to see if they could afford the necessary development.
Finally, we might be thinking of acquiring another firm. Financial statement informa-
tion would be essential in identifying potential targets and deciding what to offer.
Choosing a Benchmark
Given that we want to evaluate a division or a firm based on its financial statements, a ba-
sic problem immediately comes up. How do we choose a benchmark, or a standard of 
comparison? We describe some ways of getting started in this section.
Time-Trend Analysis 
One standard we could use is history. Suppose we found that 
the current ratio for a particular firm is 2.4 based on the most recent financial statement 
information. Looking back over the last 10 years, we might find that this ratio has declined 
fairly steadily over that period.
Based on this, we might wonder if the liquidity position of the firm has deteriorated. It 
could be, of course, that the firm has made changes that allow it to use its current assets 
more efficiently, that the nature of the firm’s business has changed, or that business prac-
tices have changed. If we investigate, we might find any of these possible explanations. 
This is an example of what we mean by management by exception—a deteriorating time 
trend may not be bad, but it does merit investigation.
Peer Group Analysis 
The second means of establishing a benchmark is to identify 
firms similar in the sense that they compete in the same markets, have similar assets, and 
operate in similar ways. In other words, we need to identify a peer group. There are obvi-
ous problems with doing this since no two companies are identical. Ultimately, the choice 
of which companies to use as a basis for comparison is subjective.
One common way of identifying potential peers is based on Standard Industrial ­Classification 
(SIC) codes. These are four-digit codes established by the U.S. government for statistical reporting 
purposes. Firms with the same SIC code are frequently assumed to be similar.
Standard Industrial 
Classification (SIC) 
codes
U.S. government code 
used to classify a firm by 
its type of business 
operations.

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
75
The first digit in an SIC code establishes the general type of business. For example, 
firms engaged in finance, insurance, and real estate have SIC codes beginning with 6. Each 
additional digit narrows down the industry. So, companies with SIC codes beginning with 
60 are mostly banks and banklike businesses; those with codes beginning with 602 are 
mostly commercial banks; and SIC code 6025 is assigned to national banks that are mem-
bers of the Federal Reserve system. Table 3.10 is a list of selected two-digit codes (the first 
two digits of the four-digit SIC codes) and the industries they represent.
Beginning in 1997, a new industry classification system was instituted. Specifically, 
the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS, pronounced “nakes”) is in-
tended to replace the older SIC codes, and it probably will eventually. Currently, however, 
SIC codes are widely used.
SIC codes are far from perfect. For example, suppose you were examining financial 
statements for Walmart, the largest retailer in the United States. In a quick scan of the near-
est financial database, you might find about 20 large, publicly owned corporations with 
this same SIC code, but you might not be too comfortable with some of them. Target would 
seem to be a reasonable peer, but Neiman-Marcus also carries the same industry code. Are 
Walmart and Neiman-Marcus really comparable?
As this example illustrates, it is probably not appropriate to blindly use SIC code-
based averages. Instead, analysts often identify a set of primary competitors and then com-
pute a set of averages based on just this group. Also, we may be more concerned with a 
group of the top firms in an industry, not the average firm. Such a group is called an aspi-
rant group, because we aspire to be like them. In this case, a financial statement analysis 
reveals how far we have to go.
We can now take a look at a specific industry. Suppose we are in the retail hardware 
business. Table 3.11 contains some condensed common-size financial statements for this 
industry from RMA, one of many sources of such information. Table 3.12 contains se-
lected ratios from the same source.
There is a large amount of information here, most of which is self-explanatory. On 
the right in Table 3.11, we have current information reported for different groups 
based on sales. Within each sales group, common-size information is reported. For 
example, firms with sales in the $10 million to $25 million range have cash and equiv-
alents equal to 6.5 percent of total assets. There are 36 companies in this group, out of 
369 in all.
Learn more about NAICS 
at www.naics.com.
ta b l e  3.10
Selected two-digit 
SIC codes
Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing
  01 Agriculture production—crops
  02 Forestry
Mining
  10 Metal mining
  13 Oil and gas extraction
Construction
  15 Building construction
  16 Construction other than building
Manufacturing
  28 Chemicals and allied products
  29 Petroleum refining
  35 Machinery, except electrical
  37 Transportation equipment
Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas, 
and Sanitary Service
  45 Transportation by air
  49 Electric, gas, and sanitary services
Retail Trade
  54 Food stores
  55 Auto dealers and gas stations
  58 Eating and drinking places
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate
  60 Banking
  63 Insurance
  65 Real Estate
Services
  78 Motion pictures
  80 Health services
  82 Educational services

76	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
ta b l e  3.11
Selected financial statement information
M = $ thousand; MM = $ million.
Interpretation of Statement Studies Figures: RMA cautions that the studies be regarded only as a general guideline and not as an absolute industry 
norm. This is due to limited samples within categories, the categorization of companies by their primary NAICS code only, and different methods of 
operations by companies within the same industry. For these reasons, RMA recommends that the figures be used only as general guidelines in 
addition to other methods of financial analysis.
© 2012 by RMA. All rights reserved. No part of this table may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from RMA—Risk Management 
Association.
RETAIL—Hardware Stores NAICS 444130
Comparative Historical Data
Current Data Sorted by Sales
12   
33   
83   
106   
103   
6   
48   
64   
121   
98   
10   
33   
88   
134   
104   
Type of Statement
Unqualified
Reviewed
Compiled
Tax Returns
Other
6   
29   
14   
4   
37   
63   
39   
3   
14   
15   
22   
1   
5   
20   
25   
12   
2   
16   
7   
2   
9   
7   
5   
4   
8   
43 (4/1–9/30/10)
326 (10/1/10–3/31/11)
4/1/08–
3/31/09
ALL
337
4/1/09–
3/31/10
ALL
337
4/1/10–
3/31/11
ALL
369
 
 
NUMBER OF
STATEMENTS
 
0-1
MM
49
 
 
1-3MM
143
 
 
3-5MM
54
 
 
5-10MM
63
 
 
10-25MM
36
 
25MM
& OVER
24
6.4%
10.3   
53.7   
2.6   
73.0   
14.4   
2.3   
10.2   
100.0   
7.2%
10.0   
51.0   
1.7   
69.9   
15.3   
3.9   
10.9   
100.0   
6.8%
8.5   
53.1   
2.1   
70.4   
15.0   
2.7   
11.8   
100.0   
Assets
Cash & Equivalents
Trade Receivables (net)
Inventory
All Other Current
Total Current
Fixed Assets (net)
Intangibles (net)
All Other Non-Current
Total
7.0%
7.3   
55.7   
1.2   
71.1   
12.9   
1.6   
14.3   
100.0   
7.1%
6.6   
55.3   
2.1   
71.1   
13.7   
3.0   
12.2   
100.0   
6.7%
9.6   
47.6   
3.0   
67.0   
17.4   
2.4   
13.2   
100.0   
7.3%
10.1   
52.8   
1.6   
71.8   
15.1   
2.9   
10.3   
100.0   
6.5%
11.8   
48.2   
2.5   
69.0   
15.9   
3.1   
12.0   
100.0   
3.4%
11.1   
54.7   
2.2   
71.3   
20.0   
3.5   
5.2   
100.0   
12.1   
3.0   
13.2   
.1   
7.0   
35.4   
19.8   
.1   
7.8   
36.9   
100.0   
8.9   
3.5   
12.0   
.2   
6.5   
30.9   
22.7   
.1   
9.5   
36.7   
100.0   
8.4   
2.8   
12.9   
.1   
6.9   
31.2   
21.0   
.1   
11.5   
36.1   
100.0   
Liabilities
Notes Payable-Short Term
Cur. Mat.-L.T.D.
Trade Payables
Income Taxes Payable
All Other Current
Total Current
Long-Term Debt
Deferred Taxes
All Other Non-Current
Net Worth
Total Liabilities & Net Worth
6.4   
3.0   
13.4   
.2   
6.5   
29.5   
33.8   
.0   
27.4   
9.2   
100.0   
8.6   
2.8   
11.2   
.1   
7.2   
29.9   
23.1   
.0   
12.5   
34.5   
100.0   
8.5   
3.1   
13.2   
.1   
7.1   
31.9   
20.3   
.1   
4.0   
43.6   
100.0   
6.4   
2.4   
14.8   
.1   
7.2   
31.0   
15.3   
.1   
7.5   
46.2   
100.0   
9.9   
2.6   
11.9   
.3   
5.3   
30.0   
13.2   
.3   
8.1   
48.4   
100.0   
14.7   
2.9   
18.6   
.0   
7.6   
43.8   
11.4   
.3   
5.3   
39.2   
100.0   
100.0   
36.4   
34.7   
1.7   
.0   
1.7   
100.0   
38.9   
37.2   
1.7   
.0   
1.8   
100.0   
38.0   
36.4   
1.6   
−.2   
1.8   
Income Data
Net Sales
Gross Profit
Operating Expenses
Operating Profit
All Other Expenses (net)
Profit Before Taxes
100.0   
41.4   
42.8   
−1.4   
−.7   
−.7   
100.0   
38.7   
37.0   
1.7   
−.1   
1.8   
100.0   
39.7   
37.2   
2.6   
−.2   
2.7   
100.0   
34.7   
32.4   
2.3   
−.3   
2.7   
100.0   
36.3   
34.5   
1.8   
−.2   
2.1   
100.0   
34.2   
32.2   
2.0   
.6   
1.4   

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
77
ta b l e  3.12
Selected ratios
(continued )
Retail—Hardware Stores NAICS 444130
Comparative Historical Data
Current Data Sorted by Sales
  12    
33    
83    
106    
103    
   6   
 48   
 64   
121   
 98   
  10      
 33      
88      
134      
104      
Type of  
Statement
Unqualified
Reviewed
Compiled
Tax Returns
Other
 
6
29
14
 
4
37
63
39
 
  3  
14  
15  
22  
 
1
5
20  
25  
12  
 
2
16  
7
2
9
 
7
5
4
8
43 (4/1–9/30/10)
326 (10/1/10–3/31/11)
4/1/08– 
3/31/09  
ALL 
337
4/1/09–
3/31/10  
ALL 
337
4/1/10– 
3/31/11  
ALL 
369
 
NUMBER OF 
STATEMENTS
 
0–1 MM  
49
 
1–3 MM  
143
 
3–5 MM  
54
 
5–10 MM  
63
 
10–25 MM  
36
25 MM & 
OVER  
24
  4.2
  2.6
  1.6
  4.9
  2.8
  1.6
4.5
2.8
1.6
Ratios
Current
    5.4
    2.4
    1.6
    5.0
    3.5
    1.8
  4.5
  2.7
  1.6
  4.3
  2.6
  1.8
  4.4
  2.9
  1.5
  2.5
  1.6
  1.4
  1.0
    .5
    .2
  1.1
    .5
    .2
1.0
  .5
  .2
 
Quick
    1.2
      .5
      .1
    1.0
      .5
      .2
  1.0
    .4
    .3
  1.2
    .6
    .2
  1.2
    .6
    .3
    .5
    .2
    .1
    4
    9   
22
81.5
39.4
16.4
5
10
20
78.7
36.7
18.0
    4
8
18
98.1  
45.6  
19.9  
Sales/ 
Receivables
   2
10
17
146.6
  35.8
  21.8
    3
 7
13
114.4
  50.4
  28.3
    5
 8 
23
80.2
43.7
15.7
   4 
9 
27
99.2
41.8
13.5
   5
9  
24
79.6
39.3
15.5
  4  
13  
20
85.4
27.8
18.7
  94 
138
185
  3.9
  2.7
  2.0
  95
141 
200
  3.8
  2.6
  1.8
100
141
187
3.6
2.6
1.9
Cost of Sales/  
Inventory
116
191 
297
    3.2
    1.9
    1.2
110 
160 
207
    3.3
    2.3
    1.8
  94
121 
169
  3.9
  3.0
  2.2
 87 
123 
153
  4.2
  3.0
  2.4
66 
118 
172
  5.5
  3.1
  2.1
90 
134 
168
  4.1
  2.7
  2.2
  14 
24 
38
26.4
15.0
  9.5
  14
24
37
26.6
15.4
  9.8
  15
26
43
24.2  
13.9  
8.4
Cost of Sales/  
Payables
 10  
33  
88
  35.4
  11.1
    4.2
  12 
22 
37
  30.5
  16.4
    9.8
  16
26 
45
23.1
13.8
  8.1
 16  
26  
44
23.3
14.3
  8.3
 15  
23  
36
24.0
15.9
10.1
 26  
37  
47
13.8
  9.9
  7.7
  3.8
  5.6
10.5
  3.7
  5.5
  9.2
3.7
5.4
10.1  
Sales/Working  
Capital
    3.1
    4.2
    9.4
    3.5
    4.5
    8.6
  4.0
  6.2
10.0
  4.4
  6.1
11.6
  4.1
  6.0
12.5
  6.7
  8.5
17.4
(306)
  6.5
  2.4
    .9
(295)
  6.7
  2.6
    .5
(336)
6.6
3.0
1.0
 
EBIT/Interest
 (44)
    5.1
    1.6
 −1.4
(127)
    6.0
    3.0
      .7
 (49)
10.2
  3.8
  1.2
 (58)
  7.2
  3.3
  1.7
(34)
  7.1
  3.2
  1.9
  7.8
  2.2
    .7
(54)
  4.1
  1.7
    .4
  (50)
  4.2
  1.6
    .5
  (44)
5.5
1.6
  .4
Net Profit + Depr.,  
Dep., Amort./ 
Cur. Mat. L/T/D
  (11)
    4.7
    1.4
      .9
    .1
    .3
  1.1
    .1
    .3
  1.6
  .1
  .3
1.1
Fixed/Worth
      .1
      .6
   −.8
      .1
      .3
    3.3
    .1
    .3
    .7
    .1
    .2
    .6
    .1
    .2
    .7
    .2
    .4
  1.0
    .6
  1.6
  4.6
    .6
  1.7
  7.3
  .6
1.5
5.6
Debt/Worth
      .9
    5.9
−14.5
      .5
    1.5
  32.4
    .4
  1.3
  3.0
    .6
  1.0
  3.2
    .6
  1.2
  2.4
  1.0
  1.8
  3.5
(289)
25.4
12.2
  1.5
(280)
26.9
11.0
  1.9
(311)
23.9  
11.2  
2.1
% Profit Before  
Taxes/Tangible  
Net Worth 
(30)
  20.9
    9.4
      .4
(112)
  21.1
  11.2
      .8
 (50)
42.3
13.2
  2.2
 (61)
34.7
12.5
  3.5
(35)
16.1
  8.4
  3.1
 (23)
15.6
12.6
 −.1

78	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
On the left, we have three years’ worth of summary historical information for the en-
tire group. For example, operating expenses rose from 34.7 percent of sales to 36.4 percent 
over that time.
Table 3.12 contains some selected ratios, again reported by sales groups on the right 
and time period on the left. To see how we might use this information, suppose our firm 
has a current ratio of 2. Based on the ratios, is this value unusual?
Looking at the current ratio for the overall group for the most recent year (third column 
from the left in Table 3.12), we see that three numbers are reported. The one in the middle, 2.8, 
is the median, meaning that half of the 369 firms had current ratios that were lower and half had 
bigger current ratios. The other two numbers are the upper and lower quartiles. So, 25 percent 
of the firms had a current ratio larger than 4.5 and 25 percent had a current ratio smaller than 
1.6. Our value of 2 falls comfortably within these bounds, so it doesn’t appear too unusual. This 
comparison illustrates how knowledge of the range of ratios is important in addition to knowl-
edge of the average. Notice how stable the current ratio has been for the last three years.
ta b l e  3.12
Selected ratios (continued )
43 (4/1–9/30/10)
326 (10/1/10–3/31/11)
4/1/08– 
3/31/09  
ALL 
337
4/1/09–
3/31/10  
ALL 
337
4/1/10– 
3/31/11  
ALL 
369
 
NUMBER OF 
STATEMENTS
 
0–1 MM  
49
 
1–3 MM  
143
 
3–5 MM  
54
 
5–10 MM  
63
 
10–25 MM  
36
25 MM & 
OVER  
24
  9.8
  4.2
 −.2
  9.9
  4.1
 −.5
9.9
4.1
  .0
% Profit  
Before Taxes/ 
Total Assets
    9.5
    2.8
 −3.9
    9.0
    4.4
 −1.1
13.3
  6.1
    .3
12.2
  4.8
  1.3
  6.8
  3.5
  1.1
  8.1
  2.4
 −.9
73.0
26.0
10.2
56.5
24.4
  9.7
64.1  
25.3  
9.8
Sales/Net  
Fixed Assets
  79.7
  31.4
    9.8
  68.6
  26.1
    9.5
61.1
17.7
  8.7
49.3
25.3
12.4
33.5
23.1
10.2
37.2
21.6
  9.2
  3.0
  2.4
  1.8
  2.9
  2.2
  1.7
2.8
2.3
1.7
Sales/Total  
Assets
    2.4
    1.9
    1.3
    2.8
    2.3
    1.7
  3.0
  2.3
  1.7
  3.0
  2.5
  2.0
  3.0
  2.3
  1.9
  2.8
  2.6
  1.7
(269)
    .6
  1.2
  2.0
(270)
    .6
  1.3
  2.2
(283)
  .7
1.2
2.1
% Depr.,  
Dep., Amort./ 
Sales
(32)
      .8
    1.9
    3.7
(103)
      .7
    1.2
    2.4
 (40)
    .7
  1.2
  2.0
 (57)
    .5
  1.0
  1.5
 (29)
    .8
  1.0
  1.4
 (22)
    .7
  1.4
  1.9
(197)
  1.7
  3.1
  5.4
(201)
  1.9
  3.5
  5.6
(220)
1.6
3.4
5.6
% Officers’,
Directors’, Owners’
Comp/Sales
(26)
    4.0
    6.8
    9.7
  (90)
    1.8
    3.9
    5.7
 (36)
  1.7
  3.3
  4.3
 (46)
  1.5
  2.3
  5.0
 (15)
  1.2
  2.0
  3.2
5286386M
2072674M
3234499M
1496318M
3274629M
1464549M
Net Sales ($)
Total Assets ($)
31281M
18939M
275677M
134776M
205299M
101186M
428265M
176737M
553714M
257734M
1780393M
775177M
M = $ thousand; MM = $ million.
© 2012 by RMA. All rights reserved. No part of this table may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from RMA—Risk Management Association.
EXAMPLE
3.5  More Ratios
Take a look at the most recent numbers reported for Sales/Receivables and EBIT/lnterest in  
Table 3.12. What are the overall median values? What are these ratios?
	
If you look back at our discussion, you will see that these are the receivables turnover and the 
times interest earned, or TIE, ratios. The median value for receivables turnover for the entire group 
is 45.6 times. So, the days in receivables would be 365/45.6 = 8, which is the bold-faced number 
reported. The median for the TIE is 3.0 times. The number in parentheses indicates that the calcula-
tion is meaningful for, and therefore based on, only 336 of the 369 companies. In this case, the 
reason is that only 336 companies paid any significant amount of interest.

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
79
There are many sources of ratio information in addition to the one we examine here. 
The nearby Work the Web box shows how to get this information for just about any com-
pany, along with some very useful benchmarking information. Be sure to look it over and 
then benchmark your favorite company.
Problems with Financial Statement Analysis
We close out our chapter on working with financial statements by discussing some addi-
tional problems that can arise in using financial statements. In one way or another, the ba-
sic problem with financial statement analysis is that there is no underlying theory to help 
us identify which items or ratios to look at and to guide us in establishing benchmarks.
As we discuss in other chapters, there are many cases in which financial theory and 
economic logic provide guidance in making judgments about value and risk. Very little 
such help exists with financial statements. This is why we can’t say which ratios matter the 
most and what a high or low value might be.
One particularly severe problem is that many firms, such as General Electric (GE), are 
conglomerates owning more or less unrelated lines of business. The consolidated financial 
A
s we discussed in this chapter, ratios are an important tool for examining a company’s perfor-
mance, but gathering the necessary information can be tedious and time-consuming. Fortu-
nately, many sites on the web provide this information for free. We went to www.reuters.com, 
entered the ticker symbol “GPS” (for The Gap), and then went to the financials page. Here is an 
abbreviated look at the results:
W
RK TH E W E B
QUESTIONS
	
1.	 Go to www.reuters.com and find the major ratio categories listed on this website. How 
do the categories differ from the categories listed in the textbook?
	
2.	 Go to www.reuters.com and find all the ratios for The Gap. How is the company per-
forming in each ratio category presented on this website?
	
In looking at the Management Effectiveness ratios (or what we call Profitability ratios), The 
Gap has outperformed the company and sector for both the 1-year and 5-year periods reported.

80
statements for such firms don’t really fit any neat industry category. More generally, the kind of 
peer group analysis we have been describing is going to work best when the firms are strictly in 
the same line of business, the industry is competitive, and there is only one way of operating.
Another problem that is becoming increasingly common is that major competitors and 
natural peer group members in an industry may be scattered around the globe. The automo-
bile industry is an obvious example. The problem here is that financial statements from 
outside the United States do not necessarily conform at all to GAAP (more precisely, differ-
ent countries can have different GAAPs). The existence of different standards and proce-
dures makes it very difficult to compare financial statements across national borders.
Even companies that are clearly in the same line of business may not be comparable. For 
example, electric utilities engaged primarily in power generation are all classified in the same 
group (SIC 4911). This group is often thought to be relatively homogeneous. However, utilities 
generally operate as regulated monopolies, so they don’t compete with each other. Many have 
stockholders, and many are organized as cooperatives with no stockholders. There are several 
different ways of generating power, ranging from hydroelectric to nuclear, so the operating ac-
tivities can differ quite a bit. Finally, profitability is strongly affected by regulatory environ-
ment, so utilities in different locations can be very similar but show very different profits.
Several other general problems frequently crop up. First, different firms use different 
accounting procedures—for inventory, for example. This makes it difficult to compare state-
ments. Second, different firms end their fiscal years at different times. For firms in seasonal 
businesses (such as a retailer with a large Christmas season), this can lead to difficulties in 
What’s in a Ratio?
A
braham Briloff, a well-known financial commentator, 
­famously remarked that “financial statements are like fine 
perfume; to be sniffed but not swallowed.” As you have proba-
bly figured out by now, his point is that information gleaned from 
financial statements—and ratios and growth rates computed 
from that information—should be taken with a grain of salt.
	
For example, looking back at our chapter opener re-
garding PE ratios, investors must really think that 3D Sys-
tems will have extraordinary growth. After all, they are willing 
to pay about $252 for every dollar the company currently 
earns, which definitely makes it look like a growth company. 
Looking back, from 2009 to 2014, 3D Systems’ revenue in-
creased by 12 percent per year. More important, looking 
ahead, the well-known independent investment research 
company Value Line projected revenue growth of 23 per-
cent per year and earnings growth of 17 percent per year 
over the next five years for 3D Systems. 
	
Another problem that can occur with ratio analysis is 
negative equity. Let’s look at clothing company American 
Apparel, for example. The company reported a loss of about 
$68.82 million dollars during 2014, and its book value of eq-
uity was negative $115.52 million. If you calculate the ROE 
for the company, you will find that it is about 60 percent, 
which is outstanding. Unfortunately, if you examine the ROE 
a little closer you will find something unusual: The more the 
company loses, the higher the ROE becomes. Also, in this 
case, both the market-to-book and PE ratios are negative. 
How do you interpret a negative PE? We’re not really sure 
either. Whenever a company has a negative book value of 
equity, it means the losses for the company have been so 
large that they have erased all the book equity. In this case, 
ROE, PE ratios, and market-to-book ratios are usually not re-
ported because they lack meaning.
	
Even if a company’s book equity is positive, you still 
have to be careful. For example, consider B/E Aerospace, 
which had a market-to-book ratio of about 650 at the end of 
the company’s 2014 fiscal year. Because this ratio measures 
the value created by the company for shareholders, things 
look pretty good for the company. But a closer look shows 
that B/E Aerospace’s book value of equity per share was 
$24.69 in 2013, but it dropped to $.10 in 2014 even though 
the company posted a positive net income for the year. As it 
happens, the drop was due to accounting charges related to 
the split of the company into two companies, not economic 
gains or losses, but it nonetheless dramatically increased 
the market-to-book ratio during this period.
	
Financial ratios are important tools used in evaluating 
companies of all types, but you cannot simply take a number 
as given. Instead, before doing any analysis, the first step is 
to ask whether the number actually makes sense.
FINANCE MATTERS

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
81
comparing balance sheets because of fluctuations in accounts during the year. Finally, for 
any particular firm, unusual or transient events, such as a one-time profit from an asset sale, 
may affect financial performance. In comparing firms, such events can give misleading 
signals. Our nearby Finance Matters box discusses some additional issues.
concept questions
3.5a 	 What are some uses for financial statement analysis?
3.5b 	 What are SIC codes and how might they be useful?
3.5c 	 Why do we say that financial statement analysis is management by exception?
3.5d 	 What are some of the problems that can come up with financial statement analysis?
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has discussed aspects of financial statement analysis, including:
 1.	
Standardized financial statements. We explained that differences in firm size make it 
difficult to compare financial statements, and we discussed how to form common-
size statements to make comparisons easier.
 2.	 Ratio analysis. Evaluating ratios of accounting numbers is another way of comparing 
financial statement information. We therefore defined and discussed a number of the 
most commonly reported and used financial ratios. We also discussed the famous 
DuPont identity as a way of analyzing financial performance, and we examined the 
connection between profitability, financial policy, and growth.
 3.	 Using financial statements. We described how to establish benchmarks for 
comparison purposes and discussed some of the types of information that are 
available. We then examined some of the potential problems that can arise.
	
After you have studied this chapter, we hope that you will have some perspective on 
the uses and abuses of financial statements. You should also find that your vocabulary of 
business and financial terms has grown substantially.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 3.1 A common-size balance sheet expresses all accounts as a percentage 
of what?
Section 3.2 What are the categories of traditional financial ratios?
Section 3.3 According to the DuPont identity, what factors affect ROE?
Section 3.4 Bubbles, Inc., has a return on equity of 12 percent and its retention ratio 
is 60 percent. What is its sustainable growth rate?
Section 3.5 When should market information be used when analyzing financial 
transactions?

82	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
3.1 	
Common-Size Statements.  Here are the most recent financial statements for 
Wildhack. Prepare a common-size income statement based on this information. 
How do you interpret the standardized net income? What percentage of sales goes 
to cost of goods sold? (See Problem 15.)
WILDHACK CORPORATION
2016 Income Statement
($ in millions)
Sales	
	
$3,756
Cost of goods sold	
	
2,453
Depreciation	
	
    490
Earnings before interest and taxes	
	
$   813
Interest paid	
	
      613
Taxable income	
	
$    200
Taxes (34%)	
	
       68
Net income	
	
$    132
  Dividends	
$46
  Addition to retained earnings	
86
WILDHACK CORPORATION
Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2015 and 2016
($ in millions)
	
2015	
2016	
	
2015	
2016
	
Assets	
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Current assets	
	
	
Current liabilities
  Cash	
$   120	
$     88	
  Accounts payable	
$  124	
$   144
  Accounts receivable	
     224	
     192	
  Notes payable	
  1,412	
  1,039
  Inventory	
      424	
     368	
    Total	
$1,536	
$1,183
    Total	
$   768	
$   648	
Long-term debt	
$1,804	
$2,077
Fixed assets	
	
	
Owners’ equity
  Net plant and equipment	
$5,228	
$5,354	
  Common stock and  
  paid-in surplus	
$   300	
$    300
	
	
	
  Retained earnings	
  2,356	
  2,442
    Total assets	
$5,996	
$6,002	
    Total	
$2,656	
$2,742
	
	
	
Total liabilities and 
  owners’ equity	
$5,996	
$6,002

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
83
3.2	
Financial Ratios.  Based on the balance sheets and income statement in the 
previous problem, calculate the following ratios for 2016: (See Problem 35.)
Current ratio	
Quick ratio	
Cash ratio	
Inventory turnover	
Receivables turnover	
Days’ sales in inventory	
Days’ sales in receivables	
Total debt ratio	
Times interest earned ratio	
Cash coverage ratio	
3.3	
ROE and the DuPont Identity.  Calculate the 2016 ROE for the Wildhack 
Corporation and then break down your answer into its component parts using the 
DuPont identity. (See Problem 36.)
3.4	
Sustainable Growth.  Based on the following information, what growth rate can 
Corwin maintain if no external financing is used? What is the sustainable growth 
rate? (See Problems 20, 21.)
CORWIN COMPANY
Financial Statements
Income Statement
	
Balance Sheet
Sales
$2,750
Current assets
$   600
Long-term debt
$   200
Cost of sales
2,400
Net fixed assets
     800
Equity
   1,200
Tax (34%)
      119
  Total
$1,400
  Total
$1,400
Net income
$   231
Dividends
$      77
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
3.1	
We’ve calculated the common-size income statement below. Remember that we 
simply divide each item by total sales.
WILDHACK CORPORATION
2016 Common-Size Income Statement
Sales
100.0%
Cost of goods sold
65.3   
Depreciation 
  13.0   
Earnings before interest and taxes 
21.6   
Interest paid
  16.3   
Taxable income
5.3   
Taxes (34%)
    1.8   
Net income 
    3.5%
  Dividends 
1.2%
  Addition to retained earnings 
2.3

84	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
Net income is 3.5 percent of sales. Because this is the percentage of each sales dollar 
that makes its way to the bottom line, the standardized net income is the firm’s profit 
margin. Cost of goods sold is 65.3 percent of sales.
3.2	
We’ve calculated the ratios below based on the ending figures. If you don’t 
remember a definition, refer back to Table 3.5.
Current ratio	
$648/$1,183	
= .55 times
Quick ratio	
$280/$1,183	
= .24 times
Cash ratio	
$88/$1,183	
= .07 times
Inventory turnover	
$2,453/$368	
= 6.7 times
Receivables turnover	
$3,756/$192	
= 19.6 times
Days’ sales in inventory	
365/6.7	
= 54.5 days
Days’ sales in receivables	
365/19.6	
= 18.6 days
Total debt ratio	
$3,260/$6,002	
= 54.3%
Times interest earned ratio	
$813/$613	
= 1.33 times
Cash coverage ratio	
$1,303/$613	
= 2.13 times
3.3	
The return on equity is the ratio of net income to total equity. For Wildhack, this is 
$132/$2,742 = 4.8%, which is not outstanding. Given the DuPont identity, ROE can 
be written as:
ROE =	Profit margin 	× 	Total asset turnover 	× 	Equity multiplier
	
=	 $132/$3,756	 ×	
$3,756/$6,002	
×	 $6,002/$2,742
	
=	
3.5%	
×	
.626	
×	
2.19
	
=	
4.8%
Notice that return on assets, ROA, is 3.5% × .626 = 2.2%.
3.4	
Corwin retains b = (1 − .33) = 2∕3 ≈ .67 of net income. Return on assets is 
$231/$1,400 = 16.5%. The internal growth rate is:
ROA × b
1 −ROA × b =
.165 × 2∕3
1 −.165 × 2∕3
= 12.36%
Return on equity for Corwin is $231/$1,200 = 19.25%, so we can calculate the 
sustainable growth rate as:
ROE × b
1 −ROE × b =
.1925 × 2∕3
1 −.1925 × 2∕3
= 14.72%
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 2 	 3.1	
Current Ratio.  What effect would the following actions have on a firm’s 
current ratio? Assume that net working capital is positive.
a.	
Inventory is purchased.
b.	 A supplier is paid.
c.	
A short-term bank loan is repaid.
d.	 A long-term debt is paid off early.
e.	
A customer pays off a credit account.

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
85
f.	
Inventory is sold at cost.
g.	
Inventory is sold for a profit.
LO 2 	 3.2	 Current Ratio and Quick Ratio.  In recent years, Dixie Co. has greatly 
increased its current ratio. At the same time, the quick ratio has fallen. 
What has happened? Has the liquidity of the company improved?
LO 2 	 3.3	 Current Ratio.  Explain what it means for a firm to have a current ratio 
equal to .50. Would the firm be better off if the current ratio were 1.50? 
What if it were 15.0? Explain your answers.
LO 2 	 3.4 	 Financial Ratios.  Fully explain the kind of information the following 
financial ratios provide about a firm:
a.	
Quick ratio
b.	 Cash ratio
c.	
Capital intensity ratio
d.	 Total asset turnover
e.	
Equity multiplier
f.	
Times interest earned ratio
g.	
Profit margin
h.	 Return on assets
i.	
Return on equity
j.	
Price–earnings ratio
LO 1 	 3.5	 Standardized Financial Statements.  What types of information do 
common-size financial statements reveal about the firm? What is the best 
use for these common-size statements?
LO 2 	 3.6	 Peer Group Analysis.  Explain what peer group analysis means. As a 
financial manager, how could you use the results of peer group analysis to 
evaluate the performance of your firm? How is a peer group different from 
an aspirant group?
LO 3 	 3.7	 DuPont Identity.  Why is the DuPont identity a valuable tool for analyzing 
the performance of a firm? Discuss the types of information it reveals as 
compared to ROE considered by itself.
LO 2 	 3.8	 Industry-Specific Ratios.  Specialized ratios are sometimes used in 
specific industries. For example, the so-called book-to-bill ratio is closely 
watched for semiconductor manufacturers. A ratio of .93 indicates that for 
every $100 worth of chips shipped over some period, only $93 worth of 
new orders were received. In January 2015 the North American 
semiconductor equipment industry’s book-to-bill ratio was 1.03, with 
orders of $1.314 billion and billings of $1.276 billion. The most recent 
peak in the book-to-bill ratio was in February 2010 when it reached 1.23. 
The most recent low occurred in January 2009 when it reached .47. What 
is this ratio intended to measure? Why do you think it is so closely 
followed?
LO 2 	 3.9	 Industry-Specific Ratios.  So-called same-store sales are a very 
important measure for companies as diverse as McDonald’s and Sears. 
As the name suggests, examining same-store sales means comparing 
revenues from the same stores or restaurants at two different points in 
time. Why might companies focus on same-store sales rather than total 
sales?

86	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
LO 2 	 3.10	 Industry-Specific Ratios.  There are many ways of using standardized 
financial information beyond those discussed in this chapter. The usual 
goal is to put firms on an equal footing for comparison purposes. For 
example, for auto manufacturers, it is common to express sales, costs, and 
profits on a per-car basis. For each of the following industries, give an 
example of an actual company and discuss one or more potentially useful 
means of standardizing financial information:
a.	
Public utilities
b.	 Large retailers
c.	
Airlines
d.	 Online services
e.	
Hospitals
f.	
College textbook publishers
LO 2 	 3.11	 Financial Statement Analysis.  You are examining the common-size 
income statements for a company for the past five years and have noticed 
that the cost of goods as a percentage of sales has been increasing steadily. 
At the same time, EBIT as a percentage of sales has been decreasing. 
What might account for the trends in these ratios?
LO 2 	 3.12	 Financial Statement Analysis.  In the previous question, what actions 
might managers take to improve these ratios?
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–26)
LO 2 	 1.	 Calculating Liquidity Ratios.  SDJ, Inc., has net working capital of $1,965, 
current liabilities of $5,460, and inventory of $2,170. What is the current 
ratio? What is the quick ratio?
LO 2 	 2.	 Calculating Profitability Ratios.  Aguilera, Inc., has sales of $13.5 
million, total assets of $8.7 million, and total debt of $4.1 million. If 
the profit margin is 7 percent, what is net income? What is ROA? What 
is ROE?
LO 2 	 3. 	 Calculating the Average Collection Period.  Ordonez Lumber Yard has a 
current accounts receivable balance of $583,174. Credit sales for the year 
just ended were $6,787,626. What is the receivables turnover? The days’ 
sales in receivables? How long did it take on average for credit customers to 
pay off their accounts during the past year?
LO 2 	 4.	 Calculating Inventory Turnover.  Bobaflex Corporation has ending 
inventory of $527,156 and cost of goods sold for the year just ended was 
$8,543,132. What is the inventory turnover? The days’ sales in inventory? 
How long on average did a unit of inventory sit on the shelf before it was 
sold?

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
87
LO 2 	 5.	 Calculating Leverage Ratios.  Fincher, Inc., has a total debt ratio of .19. 
What is its debt–equity ratio? What is its equity multiplier?
LO 2 	 6.	 Calculating Market Value Ratios.  Rossdale, Inc., had additions to retained 
earnings for the year just ended of $534,000. The firm paid out $185,000 
in cash dividends, and it has ending total equity of $7.45 million. If the 
company currently has 365,000 shares of common stock outstanding, what 
are earnings per share? Dividends per share? What is book value per share? 
If the stock currently sells for $49 per share, what is the market-to-book 
ratio? The price–earnings ratio? If total sales were $15.4 million, what is the 
price–sales ratio?
LO 3 	 7.	 DuPont Identity.  If jPhone, Inc., has an equity multiplier of 1.83, total 
asset turnover of 1.65, and a profit margin of 5.2 percent, what is its 
ROE?
LO 3 	 8.	 DuPont Identity.  Jiminy Cricket Removal has a profit margin of 7.6 
percent, total asset turnover of 1.73, and ROE of 17.2 percent. What is this 
firm’s debt–equity ratio?
LO 2 	 9.	 Calculating Average Payables Period.  For the past year, Coach, Inc., had 
a cost of goods sold of $87,386. At the end of the year, the accounts payable 
balance was $19,472. How long on average did it take the company to pay 
off its suppliers during the year? What might a large value for this ratio 
imply?
LO 2 	 10.	Equity Multiplier and Return on Equity.  Shelton Company has a  
debt–equity ratio of .75. Return on assets is 6.9 percent, and total  
equity is $815,000. What is the equity multiplier? Return on equity?  
Net income?
LO 3 	 11.	 Internal Growth.  If Williams, Inc., has an ROA of 7.2 percent and a payout 
ratio of 25 percent, what is its internal growth rate?
LO 3 	 12.	Sustainable Growth.  If the Crash Davis Driving School has an ROE of 
16.8 percent and a payout ratio of 20 percent, what is its sustainable growth 
rate?
LO 3 	 13.	 Sustainable Growth.  Based on the following information, calculate the 
sustainable growth rate for Southern Lights Co.:
	
Profit margin	= 8.1%
	
Capital intensity ratio	= .45
	
Debt–equity ratio	= .55
	
Net income	= $120,000
	
Dividends	= $65,000
LO 3 	 14.	Sustainable Growth.  Assuming the following ratios are constant, what is 
the sustainable growth rate?
	
Total asset turnover	= 2.80
	
Profit margin	= 5.7%
	
Equity multiplier	= 1.47
	
Payout ratio	= 55%
Bethesda Mining Company reports the following balance sheet information 
for 2015 and 2016. Use this information to work Problems 15 through 17.

88	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
LO 1 	 15.	Preparing Standardized Financial Statements.  Prepare the 2015 and 2016 
common-size balance sheets for Bethesda Mining.
LO 2 	 16.	Calculating Financial Ratios.  Based on the balance sheets given for 
Bethesda Mining, calculate the following financial ratios for each year:
a.	
Current ratio
b.	 Quick ratio
c.	
Cash ratio
d.	 Debt–equity ratio and equity multiplier
e.	
Total debt ratio
LO 3 	 17.	 DuPont Identity.  Suppose that the Bethesda Mining Company had sales of 
$2,945,376 and net income of $89,351 for the year ending December 31, 
2016. Calculate the DuPont identity.
LO 3 	 18.	DuPont Identity.  The Cavo Company has an ROA of 8.1 percent, a profit 
margin of 5.8 percent, and an ROE of 16 percent. What is the company’s 
total asset turnover? What is the equity multiplier?
LO 2 	 19.	 Return on Assets.  Beckinsale, Inc., has a profit margin of 5.8 percent on 
sales of $14,500,000. If the firm has debt of $7,300,000 and total assets of 
$11,200,000, what is the firm’s ROA?
LO 3 	 20.	Calculating Internal Growth.  The most recent financial statements for 
Shinoda Manufacturing Co. are shown here:
Income Statement
Balance Sheet
Sales
$87,600
Current assets
$  29,000
Debt
$  38,400
Costs
  64,350
Fixed assets
    91,400
Equity
    82,000
Taxable income
$23,250
  Total
$120,400
    Total
$120,400
Tax (35%)
     8,138
Net Income
$15,112
BETHESDA MINING COMPANY
Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2015 and 2016
2015
2016
2015
2016
Assets
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Current assets
Current liabilities
  Cash
$   19,256
$  21,946
  Accounts payable
  $171,531
$153,984
  Accounts receivable
    46,396
    54,486
  Notes payable
     79,218
  107,606
  Inventory
   109,626
  129,253
    Total
$250,749
$261,590
    Total
$175,278
$205,685
Long-term debt
$255,000
$278,500
Owners’ equity
  Common stock and paid-in surplus
$160,000
$170,000
Fixed assets
  Accumulated retained earnings
   214,915
  280,800
  Net plant and equipment
$705,386
$785,205
    Total
$374,915
$450,800
Total assets
$880,664
$990,890
Total liabilities and owners’ equity
$880,664
$990,890

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
89
	
Assets and costs are proportional to sales. Debt and equity are not. The com-
pany maintains a constant 40 percent dividend payout ratio. No external fi-
nancing is possible. What is the internal growth rate?
LO 3 	 21.	Calculating Sustainable Growth.  For Shinoda Manufacturing in Problem 
20, what is the sustainable growth rate?
LO 2 	 22.	Total Asset Turnover.  Kaleb’s Karate Supply had a profit margin of  
7.9 percent, sales of $13.8 million, and total assets of $7.1 million. What 
was total asset turnover? If management set a goal of increasing total asset 
turnover to 2.75 times, what would the new sales figure need to be, 
assuming no increase in total assets?
LO 2 	 23.	Return on Equity.  Carroll, Inc., has a total debt ratio of .75, total debt of 
$353,000, and net income of $18,750. What is the company’s return on 
equity?
LO 2 	 24.	Market Value Ratios.  Ames, Inc., has a current stock price of $58. For  
the past year, the company had net income of $8,400,000, total equity of 
$25,300,000, sales of $52,800,000, and 4.6 million shares of stock 
outstanding. What are earnings per share (EPS)? Price–earnings ratio? 
Price–sales ratio? Book value per share? Market-to-book ratio?
LO 3 	 25.	Profit Margin.  Dimeback Co. has total assets of $7,450,000 and a total 
asset turnover of 1.8 times. If the return on assets is 8.25 percent, what is its 
profit margin?
LO 2 	 26.	Enterprise Value–EBITDA Multiple.  The market value of the equity of 
Ginger, Inc., is $635,000. The balance sheet shows $39,000 in cash and 
$215,000 in debt, while the income statement has EBIT of $96,400 and a 
total of $168,000 in depreciation and amortization. What is the enterprise 
value–EBITDA multiple for this company?
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 27–46)
LO 3 	 27.	Using the DuPont Identity.  Y3K, Inc., has sales of $10,570, total assets of 
$4,670, and a debt–equity ratio of .25. If its return on equity is 15 percent, 
what is its net income?
LO 2 	 28.	Ratios and Fixed Assets.  The Smathers Company has a long-term debt 
ratio (i.e., the ratio of long-term debt to long-term debt plus equity) of .45 
and a current ratio of 1.30. Current liabilities are $2,435, sales are $11,610, 
profit margin is 9 percent, and ROE is 12.8 percent. What is the amount of 
the firm’s net fixed assets?
LO 2 	 29.	Profit Margin.  In response to complaints about high prices, a grocery chain 
runs the following advertising campaign: “If you pay your child $2 to go 
buy $50 worth of groceries, then your child makes twice as much on the 
trip as we do.” You’ve collected the following information from the grocery 
chain’s financial statements:
(in millions)
Sales
$790.00
Net income
15.80
Total assets
365.00
Total debt
229.80

90	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
	
Evaluate the grocery chain’s claim. What is the basis for the statement? Is 
this claim misleading? Why or why not?
LO 3 	 30.	Using the DuPont Identity.  The Dahlia Company has net income of 
$162,840. There are currently 29.38 days’ sales in receivables. Total assets 
are $794,350, total receivables are $145,350, and the debt–equity ratio is 
.25. What is the company’s profit margin? Its total asset turnover? Its ROE?
LO 2 	 31.	 Calculating the Cash Coverage Ratio.  Delectable Parsnip, Inc.’s, net 
income for the most recent year was $8,417. The tax rate was 34 percent. 
The firm paid $4,632 in total interest expense and deducted $5,105 in 
depreciation expense. What was the company’s cash coverage ratio for  
the year?
LO 2 	 32.	Calculating the Times Interest Earned Ratio.  For the most recent year, 
Seether, Inc., had sales of $534,000, cost of goods sold of $241,680, 
depreciation expense of $60,400, and additions to retained earnings of 
$72,800. The firm currently has 20,000 shares of common stock outstanding, 
and the previous year’s dividends per share were $1.35. Assuming a 34 
percent income tax rate, what was the times interest earned ratio?
LO 2 	 33.	Return on Assets.  A fire has destroyed a large percentage of the financial 
records of the Excandesco Company. You have the task of piecing together 
information in order to release a financial report. You have found the return 
on equity to be 12.9 percent. Sales were $1,840,000, the total debt ratio was 
.37, and total debt was $673,000. What is the return on assets (ROA)?
LO 2 	 34.	Ratios and Foreign Companies.  Prince Albert Canning PLC had a net loss 
of £27,860 on sales of £512,621. What was the company’s profit margin? 
Does the fact that these figures are quoted in a foreign currency make any 
difference? Why? In dollars, sales were $765,828. What was the net loss in 
dollars?
Some recent financial statements for Smolira Golf, Inc., follow. Use this infor-
mation to work Problems 35 through 38.
SMOLIRA GOLF, INC.  
Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2015 and 2016
2015
2016
2015
2016
Assets
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Current assets
Current liabilities
  Cash
$  4,607
$    4,910
  Accounts payable
$  3,413
$     3,846
  Accounts receivable
6,702
8,149
  Notes payable
2,768
3,416
  Inventory
  17,357
    19,350
  Other
        138
          165
    Total
$28,666
$  32,409
    Total
$  6,319
$     7,427
Long-term debt
$22,500
$  19,000
Owners’ equity
  Common stock and paid-in surplus
$38,000
$  38,000
Fixed assets
  Accumulated retained earnings
  20,535
     44,792
  Net plant and equipment
  58,688
     76,810
    Total
$58,535
$  82,792
Total assets
$87,354
$109,219
Total liabilities and owners’ equity
$87,354
$109,219
	
	

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
91
SMOLIRA GOLF, INC.  
2016 Income Statement
Sales
$205,227
Cost of goods sold
138,383
Depreciation
      5,910
EBIT
$  60,934
Interest paid
       1,617
Taxable income
$  59,317
Taxes
     20,760
Net income
$  38,557
  Dividends
$14,300
  Additions to retained earnings
24,257
LO 2 	 35.	Calculating Financial Ratios.  Find the following financial ratios for Smolira 
Golf (use year-end figures rather than average values where appropriate):
Short-term solvency ratios	
	a.	 Current ratio	
________________
	b.	 Quick ratio	
________________
	c.	 Cash ratio	
________________
Asset utilization ratios
	d. 	 Total asset turnover	
________________
	e. 	 Inventory turnover	
________________
	 f. 	 Receivables turnover	
________________
Long-term solvency ratios
	g. 	 Total debt ratio	
________________
	h. 	 Debt–equity ratio	
________________
	 i. 	 Equity multiplier	
________________
	 j. 	 Times interest earned ratio	
________________
	k. 	 Cash coverage ratio	
________________
Profitability ratios
	 l. 	 Profit margin	
________________
	m. 	 Return on assets	
________________
	n. 	 Return on equity	
________________
LO 3 	 36.	DuPont Identity.  Construct the DuPont identity for Smolira Golf.
LO 2 	 37. 	Market Value Ratios.  Smolira Golf has 10,000 shares of common stock 
outstanding, and the market price for a share of stock at the end of 2016 was 
$73. What is the price–earnings ratio? What is the price–sales ratio? What are 
the dividends per share? What is the market-to-book ratio at the end of 2016?

92	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
LO 2 	 38.	Interpreting Financial Ratios.  After calculating the ratios for Smolira Golf, 
you have uncovered the following industry ratios for 2016:
	
Lower Quartile	
Median	
Upper Quartile
Current ratio	
    1.3	
2.6 	
5.3
Total asset turnover	
    2.1	
2.7 	
4.1
Debt–equity ratio	
       .25	
  .50	
   .60
Profit margin	
      8.4%	
11.9% 	
16.3%
	
	
How is Smolira Golf performing based on these ratios?
LO 3 	 39.	Growth and Profit Margin.  Fulkerson Manufacturing wishes to maintain a 
sustainable growth rate of 8 percent a year, a debt–equity ratio of .85, and 
a dividend payout ratio of 30 percent. The ratio of total assets to sales is 
constant at 1.35. What profit margin must the firm achieve?
LO 2 	 40.	Market Value Ratios.  Abercrombie & Fitch and American Eagle Outfitters 
(AEO), reported the following numbers (in millions) for fiscal year 2014. 
Calculate the earnings per share, market-to-book ratio, and price–earnings 
ratio for each company.
	
Abercrombie	
AEO
Net income	
$     51.821	
$     80.322
Shares outstanding	
      68.98	
   195.43
Stock price	
$      24.81  	
$     13.84  
Total equity	
$1,389.701	
$1,139.746
LO 3 	 41.	Growth and Assets.  A firm wishes to maintain an internal growth rate of 
6.8 percent and a dividend payout ratio of 25 percent. The current profit 
margin is 7.3 percent and the firm uses no external financing sources. What 
must total asset turnover be?
LO 3 	 42.	Sustainable Growth.  Based on the following information, calculate the 
sustainable growth rate for Sully, Inc.:
	     Profit margin	= 5.2%
	Total asset turnover	= 1.90
	   Total debt ratio	= .30
	
    Payout ratio	= 15%
What is the ROA here?
LO 3 	 43.	Sustainable Growth and Outside Financing.  You’ve collected the 
following information about Erna, Inc.:
	
Sales	= $275,000
	Net income	= $19,000
	 Dividends	= $8,100
	 Total debt	= $67,000
Total equity = $91,000

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
93
What is the sustainable growth rate for the company? If it does grow at this 
rate, how much new borrowing will take place in the coming year, assuming 
a constant debt–equity ratio? What growth rate could be supported with no 
outside financing at all?
LO 4 	 44.	Constraints on Growth.  High Flyer, Inc., wishes to maintain a growth rate 
of 13 percent per year and a debt–equity ratio of .35. The profit margin is 
6 percent, and total asset turnover is constant at 1.10. Is this growth rate 
possible? To answer, determine what the dividend payout ratio must be. 
How do you interpret the result?
LO 3 	 45.	Internal and Sustainable Growth Rates.  Best Buy reported the following 
numbers (in millions) for the years ending February 1, 2014, and January 31, 
2015. What are the internal and sustainable growth rates? What are the 
internal and sustainable growth rates using ROE × b and (ROA × b) and 
the end of period equity (assets)? What are the growth rates if you use the 
beginning of period equity in this equation? Why aren’t the growth rates 
the same? What is your best estimate of the internal and sustainable  
growth rates?
	
2014	
2015
Net income	
	
$  1,233
Dividends	
	
       251
Total assets	
$14,013	
  15,256
Total equity	
    3,986	
    4,995
LO 3 	 46.	Expanded DuPont Identity.  Hershey Co. reported the following income 
statement and balance sheet (in millions) for 2014. Construct the expanded 
DuPont identity similar to Figure 3.1. What is the company’s return on 
equity?
Income Statement
Sales	
$7,421.768
CoGS	
4,085.602
Other costs	
1,770.279
Depreciation	
     176.312
EBIT	
$1,389.575
Interest	
        83.532
EBT	
$1,306.043
Taxes	
     459.131
Net income	
$   846.912
Balance Sheet
	
Assets	
Liabilities & Equity
Current assets	
	
Current liabilities	
$1,935.647
  Cash	
$   471.985
  Accounts receivable	
697.455	
Long-term debt	
$2,238.807
  Inventory	
  1,077.607
    Total	
$2,247.047	
Shareholders’ equity	
$1,455.062
Fixed assets	
$3,382.469
Total assets	
$5,629.516	
Total liabilities and 	
$5,629.516 
  shareholders’ equity

94	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
The exTensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) is likely the future of financial re-
porting. XBRL is a computer language that “tags” each item and specifies what that item 
is. XBRL reporting has already been adopted for use in Australia, Japan, and the United 
Kingdom. As of early 2009, a Securities and Exchange Commission advisory committee 
has recommended that U.S. companies be required to submit financial reports to the SEC 
in XBRL format. It has been suggested to require that XBRL be gradually implemented, so 
it could be several years before we see all companies file XBRL financial reports. All listed 
U.S. companies file electronic reports with the SEC, but the reports are only available in 
html or text format. XBRL reporting will allow investors to quickly download financial 
statements for analysis.
	
Currently, several companies voluntarily submit financial statements in XBRL format. 
For this assignment, go to the SEC website at www.sec.gov. Once there, find the link that 
says “Interactive Data (XBRL),” and follow the link. Now follow the “Interactive Data 
Viewers” link, then “Interactive Financial Reports.” Download the income statement and 
balance sheet from the annual report for the company you chose. Using these reports, cal-
culate the financial ratios for the company from the data available, typically two or three 
years. Do you notice any changes in these ratios that might indicate further investigation?
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
3.1 DuPont Identity.  You can find financial statements for Walt Disney Company at 
Disney’s home page, thewaltdisneycompany.com. For the three most recent years, 
calculate the DuPont identity for Disney. How has ROE changed over this period? How 
have changes in each component of the DuPont identity affected ROE over this period?
3.2 Ratio Analysis.  You want to examine the financial ratios for Johnson & Johnson. 
Go to www.reuters.com and type in the ticker symbol for the company (JNJ). Next, go 
to the financials link. 
a.	
What do TTM and MRQ mean?
b.  	 How do JNJ’s recent profitability ratios compare to their values over the past 
five years? To the industry averages? To the sector averages? To the S&P 500 
averages? Which is the better comparison group for JNJ: the industry, sector, or 
S&P 500 averages? Why?
c.  	 In what areas does JNJ seem to outperform its competitors based on the financial 
ratios? Where does JNJ seem to lag behind its competitors?
3.3 Standardized Financial Statements.  Go to www.att.com and find the income 
statements and balance sheets for the two most recent years at this link. Using this 
information, prepare the common-size income statements and balance sheets for the 
two years.
3.4 Asset Utilization Ratios.  Find the most recent financial statements for Walmart at 
www.walmart.com and Boeing at www.boeing.com. Calculate the asset utilization ratio 
for these two companies. What does this ratio measure? Is the ratio similar for both 
companies? Why or why not?

	
c h a p t e r  3
Working with Financial Statements	
95
partial payment before the order is complete. In con-
trast, a commercial airplane may take one and one-half 
to two years to manufacture once the order is placed.
	
Mark and Todd have provided the following finan-
cial statements. Chris has gathered the industry ratios 
for the light airplane manufacturing industry.
C
hris Guthrie was recently hired by S&S Air, Inc., to 
assist the company with its financial planning and to 
evaluate the company’s performance. Chris graduated 
from college five years ago with a finance degree. He 
has been employed in the finance department of a  
Fortune 500 company since then.
	
S&S Air was founded 10 years ago by friends Mark 
Sexton and Todd Story. The company has manufactured 
and sold light airplanes over this period, and the com-
pany’s products have received high reviews for safety 
and reliability. The company has a niche market in that it 
sells primarily to individuals who own and fly their own 
airplanes. The company has two models, the Birdie, 
which sells for $53,000, and the Eagle, which sells for 
$78,000.
	
While the company manufactures aircraft, its opera-
tions are different from commercial aircraft companies. 
S&S Air builds aircraft to order. By using prefabricated 
parts, the company is able to complete the manufacture 
of an airplane in only five weeks. The company also re-
ceives a deposit on each order, as well as another 
CHAPTER CASE
Ratios and Financial Planning at S&S Air, Inc.
S&S AIR, INC. 
2016 Income Statement
Sales	
	
$24,092,400
Cost of goods sold	
	
17,982,000
Other expenses	
	
2,878,800
Depreciation	
	
        786,000
EBIT	
	
$   2,445,600
Interest	
	
        434,400
Taxable income	
	
$   2,011,200
Taxes (40%)	
	
        804,480
Net income	
	
$   1,206,720
  Dividends	
$246,000
  Additions to retained 	
960,720 
  earnings	
S&S AIR, INC.  
2016 Balance Sheet
	
Assets	
Liabilities and Equity
Current assets	
	
Current liabilities
  Cash	
$     438,048	
  Accounts payable	
$     858,816
  Accounts receivable	
1,841,616	
  Notes payable	
     1,735,680
  Inventory	
      1,486,200	
    Total current liabilities	
$  2,594,496
    Total current assets	 $  3,765,864
Fixed assets	
	
Long-term debt	
$  4,590,000
  Net plant and	
$14,778,816	
Shareholder equity 
  equipment	
	
  Common stock	
$     180,000
	
	
  Retained earnings	
$11,180,184
	
	
    Total equity	
$11,360,184
Total assets	
$18,544,680	
Total liabilities and equity	
$18,544,680

96	
p a r t  2
Understanding Financial Statements and Cash Flow
Light Airplane Industry Ratios
	
Lower Quartile	
Median	
Upper Quartile
Current ratio	
  .50  	
1.43	
  1.89  
Quick ratio	
  .64  	
  .84 	
  1.05  
Cash ratio	
  .08  	
   .21  	
    .39  
Total asset turnover	
  .68  	
   .85  	
  1.28  
Inventory turnover	
4.89 	
6.15 	
10.89
Receivables turnover	
6.27  	
 9.82  	
11.51  
Total debt ratio	
  .31  	
   .52  	
    .61  
Debt–equity ratio	
  .58  	
 1.08  	
  1.56  
Equity multiplier	
1.58  	
 2.08  	
  2.56  
Times interest earned	
5.18  	
 8.06 	
  9.83  
Cash coverage ratio	
5.84  	
 8.43  	
10.27  
Profit margin	
 4.05%	
  5.15%	
   6.47%
Return on assets	
 6.05%	
10.53%	
 13.21%
Return on equity	
 9.93%	
16.54%	
 26.15%
1.	
Calculate the ratios for S&S Air that are shown for 
the industry.
2.	
Mark and Todd agree that a ratio analysis can pro-
vide a measure of the company’s performance. 
They have chosen Boeing as an aspirant com-
pany. Would you choose Boeing as an aspirant 
company? Why or why not?
3.	
Compare the performance of S&S Air to the indus-
try. For each ratio, comment on why it might be 
viewed as positive or negative relative to the in-
dustry. Suppose you create an inventory ratio cal-
culated by inventory divided by current liabilities. 
How do you think S&S Air’s ratio would compare 
to the industry average?
4.	
Calculate the internal growth rate and sustainable 
growth rate for S&S Air. What do these numbers 
mean?
Q U E ST I ONS

97
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
A
s you are probably aware, the U.S. government has a signifi-
cant amount of debt. That debt, which is widely owned by in-
vestors, comes in different varieties, including Series EE U.S. 
Treasury savings bonds. With a Series EE bond, you pay a particular 
amount today of, say, $25, and the bond accrues interest over the 
time you hold it. In early 2015, the U.S. Treasury promised to pay 
.10 percent per year on EE savings bonds. In an interesting (and im-
portant) wrinkle, if you hold the bond for 20 years, the Treasury 
promises to “step up” the value to double your cost. That is, if the 
$25 bond you purchased and all the accumulated interest earned is 
worth less than $50, the Treasury will automatically increase the 
value of the bond to $50.
Is giving up $25 in exchange for $50 in 20 years a good 
deal? On the plus side, you get back $2 for every $1 you put up. 
That probably sounds good, but, on the downside, you have to wait 20 years to get it. 
What you need to know is how to analyze this trade-off. This chapter gives you the tools 
you need.
Specifically, our goal here is to introduce you to one of the most important principles 
in finance, the time value of money. What you will learn is how to determine the value 
today of some cash flow to be received later. This is a very basic business skill, and it 
underlies the analysis of many different types of investments and financing arrange-
ments. In fact, almost all business activities, whether they originate in marketing, man-
agement, operations, or strategy, involve comparing outlays made today to benefits 
projected for the future. How to do this comparison is something everyone needs to un-
derstand; this chapter gets you started.
Introduction to Valuation:  
The Time Value of Money
4
PART THREE 
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Determine the future value of an 
investment made today.
LO 2 	 Determine the present value of 
cash to be received at a future 
date.
LO 3 	 Calculate the return on an 
investment.
LO 4 	 Predict how long it takes for an 
investment to reach a desired 
value.

98	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
O
ne of the basic problems faced by the financial manager is how to determine the value 
today of cash flows expected in the future. For example, the jackpot in a PowerBallTM 
lottery drawing was $110 million. Does this mean the winning ticket was worth $110 mil-
lion? The answer is no because the jackpot was actually going to pay out over a 20-year 
period at a rate of $5.5 million per year. How much was the ticket worth then? The answer 
depends on the time value of money, the subject of this chapter.
In the most general sense, the phrase time value of money refers to the fact that a dollar 
in hand today is worth more than a dollar promised at some time in the future. On a practi-
cal level, one reason for this is that you could earn interest while you waited; so, a dollar 
today would grow to more than a dollar later. The trade-off between money now and money 
later thus depends on, among other things, the rate you can earn by investing. Our goal in 
this chapter is to explicitly evaluate this trade-off between dollars today and dollars at some 
future time.
A thorough understanding of the material in this chapter is critical to understanding 
material in subsequent chapters, so you should study it with particular care. We present a 
number of examples in this chapter. In many problems, your answer may differ from ours 
slightly. This can happen because of rounding and is not a cause for concern.
FUTURE VALUE AND COMPOUNDING
The first thing we will study is future value. Future value (FV) refers to the amount of 
money an investment will grow to over some period of time at some given interest rate. Put 
another way, future value is the cash value of an investment at some time in the future. We 
start out by considering the simplest case, a single-period investment.
Investing for a Single Period
Suppose you were to invest $100 in a savings account that pays 10 percent interest per year. 
How much would you have in one year? You would have $110. This $110 is equal to your 
original principal of $100 plus $10 in interest that you earn. We say that $110 is the future 
value of $100 invested for one year at 10 percent, and we simply mean that $100 today is 
worth $110 in one year, given that 10 percent is the interest rate.
In general, if you invest for one period at an interest rate of r, your investment will 
grow to (1 + r) per dollar invested. In our example, r is 10 percent, so your investment 
grows to 1 + .10 = 1.1 dollars per dollar invested. You invested $100 in this case, so you 
ended up with $100 × 1.10 = $110.
Investing for More than One Period
Going back to our $100 investment, what will you have after two years, assuming the inter-
est rate doesn’t change? If you leave the entire $110 in the bank, you will earn $110 × .10 = 
$11 in interest during the second year, so you will have a total of $110 + 11 = $121. This 
$121 is the future value of $100 in two years at 10 percent. Another way of looking at it is 
that one year from now you are effectively investing $110 at 10 percent for a year. This is a 
single-period problem, so you’ll end up with $1.1 for every dollar invested, or $110 × 1.1 = 
$121 total.
This $121 has four parts. The first part is the $100 original principal. The second part 
is the $10 in interest you earn in the first year, and the third part is another $10 you earn in 
the second year, for a total of $120. The last $1 you end up with (the fourth part) is interest 
you earn in the second year on the interest paid in the first year: $10 × .10 = $1.
To find out more about 
U.S. savings bonds and 
other government 
securities, go to  
www.treasurydirect.gov.
4.1
future value (FV)
The amount an investment 
is worth after one or more 
periods. Also compound 
value.
coverage online
Excel 
Master

	
c h a p t e r  4
Introduction to Valuation: The Time Value of Money	
99
This process of leaving your money and any accumulated interest in an investment for 
more than one period, thereby reinvesting the interest, is called compounding. Compound-
ing the interest means earning interest on interest, so we call the result compound interest. 
With simple interest, the interest is not reinvested, so interest is earned each period only on 
the original principal.
compounding
The process of 
accumulating interest in 
an investment over time to 
earn more interest.
EXAMPLE
4.1
 Interest on Interest
Suppose you locate a two-year investment that pays 14 percent per year. If you invest $325, how 
much will you have at the end of the two years? How much of this is simple interest? How much is 
compound interest?
	
At the end of the first year, you will have $325 × (1 + .14) = $370.50. If you reinvest this entire 
amount, and thereby compound the interest, you will have $370.50 × 1.14 = $422.37 at the end of 
the second year. The total interest you earn is thus $422.37 − 325 = $97.37. Your $325 original 
principal earns $325 × .14 = $45.50 in interest each year, for a two-year total of $91 in simple inter-
est. The remaining $97.37 − 91 = $6.37 results from compounding. You can check this by noting that 
the interest earned in the first year is $45.50. The interest on interest earned in the second year thus 
amounts to $45.50 × .14 = $6.37, as we calculated.
We now take a closer look at how we calculated the $121 future value. We multiplied 
$110 by 1.1 to get $121. The $110, however, was $100 also multiplied by 1.1. In other 
words:
$121 = $110 × 1.1
	
= ($100 × 1.1) × 1.1 
	
= $100 × (1.1 × 1.1)
	
= $100 × 1.12
	
= $100 × 1.21
At the risk of belaboring the obvious, let’s ask: How much would our $100 grow to 
after three years? Once again, in two years, we’ll be investing $121 for one period at 10 percent. 
We’ll end up with $1.1 for every dollar we invest, or $121 × 1.1 = $133.1 total. This 
$133.1 is thus:
$133.1 = $121 × 1.1 
	
= ($110 × 1.1) × 1.1
	
= ($100 × 1.1) × 1.1 × 1.1
	
= $100 × (1.1 × 1.1 × 1.1)
	
= $100 × 1.13
	
= $100 × 1.331
You’re probably noticing a pattern to these calculations, so we can now go ahead and 
state the general result. As our examples suggest, the future value of $1 invested for t peri-
ods at a rate of r per period is:
Future value = $1 × (1 + r)t	
[4.1]
The expression (1 + r)t is sometimes called the future value interest factor (or just future 
value factor) for $1 invested at r percent for t periods. It can be abbreviated as FVIF(r, t).
In our example, what would your $100 be worth after five years? We can first compute 
the relevant future value factor as:
(1 + r)t = (1 + .10)5 = 1.15 = 1.6105
interest on interest
Interest earned on the 
reinvestment of previous 
interest payments.
compound interest
Interest earned on both 
the initial principal and the 
interest reinvested from 
prior periods.
simple interest
Interest earned only on 
the original principal 
amount invested.

100	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
Your $100 will thus grow to:
$100 × 1.6105 = $161.05
The growth of your $100 each year is illustrated in Table 4.1. As shown, the interest earned 
in each year is equal to the beginning amount multiplied by the interest rate of 10 percent.
In Table 4.1, notice that the total interest you earn is $61.05. Over the five-year span 
of this investment, the simple interest is $100 × .10 = $10 per year, so you accumulate $50 
this way. The other $11.05 is from compounding.
Figure 4.1 illustrates the growth of the compound interest in Table 4.1. Notice how the 
simple interest is constant each year, but the compound interest you earn gets bigger every 
year. The size of the compound interest keeps increasing because more and more interest 
builds up and there is thus more to compound.
Future values depend critically on the assumed interest rate, particularly for long-lived 
investments. Figure 4.2 illustrates this relationship by plotting the growth of $1 for differ-
ent rates and lengths of time. Notice that the future value of $1 after 10 years is about $6.20 
at a 20 percent rate, but it is only about $2.60 at 10 percent. In this case, doubling the inter-
est rate more than doubles the future value.
A brief introduction to 
key financial concepts is 
available at www.
teachmefinance.com.
Year
Beginning Amount
Interest Earned
Ending Amount
1
$100.00
$10.00
$110.00
2
  110.00
  11.00
  121.00
3
  121.00
  12.10
  133.10
4
  133.10
  13.31
  146.41
5
  146.41
  14.64
  161.05
	
Total interest $61.05
ta b le  4.1
Future value of $100 
at 10 percent
f i g u r e  4.1
Future value, simple 
interest, and 
compound interest
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
$110
$121
$133.10
$146.41
$161.05
Future
value ($)
1
2
3
4
5
$0
Growth of $100 original amount at 10% per year. Blue
shaded area represents the portion of the total that results
from compounding of interest.
Time
(years)

	
c h a p t e r  4
Introduction to Valuation: The Time Value of Money	
101
To solve future value problems, we need to come up with the relevant future value fac-
tors. There are several different ways of doing this. In our example, we could have multi-
plied 1.1 by itself five times. This would work just fine, but it would get to be very tedious 
for, say, a 30-year investment.
Fortunately, there are several easier ways to get future value factors. Most calculators 
have a key labeled “yx”. You can usually just enter 1.1, press this key, enter 5, and press the 
“=” key to get the answer. This is an easy way to calculate future value factors because it’s 
quick and accurate.
Alternatively, you can use a table that contains future value factors for some common 
interest rates and time periods. Table 4.2 contains some of these factors. Table A.1 in 
Appendix A at the end of the book contains a much larger set. To use the table, find the 
column that corresponds to 10 percent. Then look down the rows until you come to five 
periods. You should find the factor that we calculated, 1.6105.
Tables such as Table 4.2 are not as common as they once were because they predate 
inexpensive calculators and are only available for a relatively small number of rates. Inter-
est rates are often quoted to three or four decimal places, so the tables needed to deal with 
these accurately would be quite large. As a result, the “real world” has moved away from 
using them. We will emphasize the use of a calculator in this chapter.
These tables still serve a useful purpose. To make sure you are doing the calculations 
correctly, pick a factor from the table and then calculate it yourself to see that you get the 
same answer. There are plenty of numbers to choose from.
f i g u r e  4.2
Future value of $1 for 
different periods and 
rates
Future
value
of $1 ($)
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
10
9
8
7
6
Time
(years)
ta b l e  4.2
Future value interest 
factors
Number of 
Periods
Interest Rates
    5%
10%
15%
20%
1
1.0500
1.1000
1.1500
1.2000
2
1.1025
1.2100
1.3225
1.4400
3
1.1576
1.3310
1.5209
1.7280
4
1.2155
1.4641
1.7490
2.0736
5
1.2763
1.6105
2.0114
2.4883

102	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
The effect of compounding is not great over short time periods, but it really starts 
to add up as the time horizon grows. To take an extreme case, suppose one of your more 
frugal ancestors had invested $5 for you at a 6 percent interest rate 200 years ago. How 
much would you have today? The future value factor is a substantial 1.06200 = 
115,125.90 (you won’t find this one in a table), so you would have $5 × 115,125.90 = 
$575,629.50 today. Notice that the simple interest is just $5 × .06 = $.30 per year. After 
200 years, this amounts to $60. The rest is from reinvesting. Such is the power of com-
pound interest!
How much do you need 
at retirement? Locate the 
“Retirement Planning” 
link at www.about.com.
EXAMPLE
4.2  Compound Interest
You’ve located an investment that pays 12 percent. That rate sounds good to you, so you invest 
$400. How much will you have in three years? How much will you have in seven years? At the end 
of seven years, how much interest have you earned? How much of that interest results from 
compounding?
	
Based on our discussion, we can calculate the future value factor for 12 percent and three 
years as:
(1 + r)t = 1.123 = 1.4049
Your $400 thus grows to:
$400 × 1.4049 = $561.97
After seven years, you will have:
$400 × 1.127 = $400 × 2.2107 = $884.27
Thus, you will more than double your money over seven years.
	
Because you invested $400, the interest in the $884.27 future value is $884.27 − 400 = 
$484.27. At 12 percent, your $400 investment earns $400 × .12 = $48 in simple interest every year. 
Over seven years, the simple interest thus totals 7 × $48 = $336. The other $484.27 − 336 = 
$148.27 is from compounding.
EXAMPLE
4.3  How Much for That Island?
To further illustrate the effect of compounding for long horizons, consider the case of Peter Minuit 
and the Indians. In 1626, Minuit bought all of Manhattan Island for about $24 in goods and trinkets. 
This sounds cheap, but the Indians may have gotten the better end of the deal. To see why, suppose 
the Indians had sold the goods and invested the $24 at 10 percent. How much would it be worth 
today?
	
Roughly 390 years have passed since the transaction. At 10 percent, $24 will grow by quite a 
bit over that time. How much? The future value factor is approximately:
(1 + r)t = 1.1390 ≃ 14,000,000,000,000,000
That is, 14 followed by 15 zeroes. The future value is thus on the order of $24 × 14 quadrillion, or about 
$334 quadrillion (give or take a few hundreds of trillions).
	
Well, $334 quadrillion is a lot of money. How much? If you had it, you could buy the United 
States. All of it. Cash. With money left over to buy Canada, Mexico, and the rest of the world, for that 
matter.
	
This example is something of an exaggeration, of course. In 1626, it would not have been 
easy to locate an investment that would pay 10 percent every year without fail for the next 
390 years.

	
c h a p t e r  4
Introduction to Valuation: The Time Value of Money	
103
USING A FINANCIAL CALCULATOR
Although there are the various ways of calculating future values we have described so far, many of you 
will decide that a financial calculator is the way to go. If you are planning on using one, you should read 
this extended hint; otherwise, skip it.
	
A financial calculator is simply an ordinary calculator with a few extra features. In particular, it knows 
some of the most commonly used financial formulas, so it can directly compute things like future 
values.
	
Financial calculators have the advantage that they handle a lot of the computation, but that is really 
all. In other words, you still have to understand the problem; the calculator just does some of the arith-
metic. In fact, there is an old joke (somewhat modified) that goes like this: Anyone can make a mistake 
on a time value of money problem, but to really screw one up takes a financial calculator! We therefore 
have two goals for this section. First, we’ll discuss how to compute future values. After that, we’ll show 
you how to avoid the most common mistakes people make when they start using financial calculators.
How to Calculate Future Values with a Financial Calculator  Examining a typical financial cal-
culator, you will find five keys of particular interest. They usually look like this:
	
	
For now, we need to focus on four of these. The keys labeled  PV   and  FV   are just what you 
would guess: present value and future value. The key labeled  N   refers to the number of periods, 
which is what we have been calling t. Finally,  I/Y   stands for the interest rate, which we have called r.1
	
If we have the financial calculator set up right (see our next section), then calculating a future value 
is very simple. Take a look back at our question involving the future value of $100 at 10 percent for five 
years. We have seen that the answer is $161.05. The exact keystrokes will differ depending on what type 
of calculator you use, but here is basically all you do:
	 1.	
Enter −100. Press the  PV   key. (The negative sign is explained below.)
	2.	
Enter 10. Press the  I/Y   key. (Notice that we entered 10, not .10; see below.)
	3.	
Enter 5. Press the  N   key.
Now we have entered all of the relevant information. To solve for the future value, we need to ask the 
calculator what the  FV   is. Depending on your calculator, you either press the button labeled “CPT” 
(for compute) and then press  FV  , or else you just press  FV  . Either way, you should get 161.05. If 
you don’t (and you probably won’t if this is the first time you have used a financial calculator!), we offer 
some help in our next section.
	
Before we explain the kinds of problems that you are likely to run into, we want to establish a stan-
dard format for showing you how to use a financial calculator. Using the example we just looked at, in 
the future, we will illustrate such problems like this:
Enter	
5	
10	
−100
	
FV
FV
Solve for	
	
	
	
	
161.05
CALCULATOR 
HINTS
1 The reason financial calculators use N and I/Y is that the most common use for these calculators is determining 
loan payments. In this context, N is the number of payments and I/Y is the interest rate on the loan. But, as we will 
see, there are many other uses of financial calculators that don’t involve loan payments and interest rates.
(continued)

104	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
	
Here is an important tip: Appendix D in the back of the book contains some more detailed instruc-
tions for the most common types of financial calculators. See if yours is included, and, if it is, follow the 
instructions there if you need help. Of course, if all else fails, you can read the manual that came with the 
calculator.
How to Get the Wrong Answer Using a Financial Calculator  There are a couple of common 
(and frustrating) problems that cause a lot of trouble with financial calculators. In this section, we provide 
some important dos and don’ts. If you just can’t seem to get a problem to work out, you should refer 
back to this section.
	
There are two categories we examine: three things you need to do only once and three things you 
need to do every time you work a problem. The things you need to do just once deal with the following 
calculator settings:
	 1.	
Make sure your calculator is set to display a large number of decimal places. Most financial 
calculators only display two decimal places; this causes problems because we frequently work 
with numbers—like interest rates—that are very small.
	2.	
Make sure your calculator is set to assume only one payment per period or per year. Some 
financial calculators assume monthly payments (12 per year) unless you say otherwise.
	3.	
Make sure your calculator is in “end” mode. This is usually the default, but you can accidentally 
change to “begin” mode.
If you don’t know how to set these three things, see Appendix D or your calculator’s operating manual.
There are also three things you need to do every time you work a problem:
	 1.	
Before you start, completely clear out the calculator. This is very important. Failure to do this 
is the number one reason for wrong answers; you simply must get in the habit of clearing 
the calculator every time you start a problem. How you do this depends on the calculator 
(see Appendix D), but you must do more than just clear the display. For example, on a Texas 
Instruments BA II Plus, you must press  2nd   then  CLR TVM   for clear time value of money. 
There is a similar command on your calculator. Learn it! 
	
	
	
Note that turning the calculator off and back on won’t do it. Most financial calculators 
remember everything you enter, even after you turn them off. In other words, they remember all 
your mistakes unless you explicitly clear them out. Also, if you are in the middle of a problem and 
make a mistake, clear it out and start over. Better to be safe than sorry.
	2.	
Put a negative sign on cash outflows. Most financial calculators require you to put a negative 
sign on cash outflows and a positive sign on cash inflows. As a practical matter, this usually just 
means that you should enter the present value amount with a negative sign (because normally 
the present value represents the amount you give up today in exchange for cash inflows later). 
You enter a negative value on the BA II Plus by first entering a number and then pressing the 
+/–   key. By the same token, when you solve for a present value, you shouldn’t be surprised to 
see a negative sign.
	3.	
Enter the rate correctly. Financial calculators assume that rates are quoted in percent, so if the 
rate is .08 (or 8 percent), you should enter 8, not .08.
	
If you follow these guidelines (especially the one about clearing out the calculator), you should 
have no problem using a financial calculator to work almost all of the problems in this and the next few 
chapters. We’ll provide some additional examples and guidance where appropriate.

	
c h a p t e r  4
Introduction to Valuation: The Time Value of Money	
105
PRESENT VALUE AND DISCOUNTING
When we discuss future value, we are thinking of questions such as the following: What 
will my $2,000 investment grow to if it earns a 6.5 percent return every year for the next 
six years? The answer to this question is what we call the future value of $2,000 invested 
at 6.5 percent for six years (verify that the answer is about $2,918).
There is another type of question that comes up even more often in financial manage-
ment that is obviously related to future value. Suppose you need to have $10,000 in 
10 years, and you can earn 6.5 percent on your money. How much do you have to invest 
today to reach your goal? You can verify that the answer is $5,327.26. How do we know 
this? Read on.
The Single-Period Case
We’ve seen that the future value of $1 invested for one year at 10 percent is $1.10. We 
now ask a slightly different question: How much do we have to invest today at 10 percent 
to get $1 in one year? In other words, we know the future value here is $1, but what is the 
present value (PV)? The answer isn’t too hard to figure out. Whatever we invest today 
will be 1.1 times bigger at the end of the year. Because we need $1 at the end of the year: 
Present value × 1.1 = $1
Or, solving for the present value:
Present value = $1/1.1 = $.909
In this case, the present value is the answer to the following question: What amount, 
invested today, will grow to $1 in one year if the interest rate is 10 percent? Present value 
is thus just the reverse of future value. Instead of compounding the money forward into the 
future, we discount it back to the present.
4.2
present value (PV)
The current value of future 
cash flows discounted at 
the appropriate discount 
rate.
discount
Calculation of the present 
value of some future 
amount.
concept questions
4.1a	
What do we mean by the future value of an investment?
4.1b	
What does it mean to compound interest? How does compound interest differ from 
simple interest?
4.1c	
In general, what is the future value of $1 invested at r per period for t periods?
coverage online
Excel 
Master
EXAMPLE
4.4  Single-Period PV
Suppose you need $800 to buy textbooks next year. You can earn 7 percent on your money. How 
much do you have to put up today?
	
We need to know the PV of $800 in one year at 7 percent. Proceeding as earlier:
Present value × 1.07 = $800
We can now solve for the present value:
Present value = $800 × (1/1.07) = $747.66
Thus, $747.66 is the present value. Again, this just means that investing this amount for one year at 
7 percent will result in a future value of $800.

106	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
From our examples, the present value of $1 to be received in one period is generally 
given as:
PV = $1 × [1/(1 + r)] = $1/(1 + r)
We next examine how to get the present value of an amount to be paid in two or more pe-
riods into the future.
Present Values for Multiple Periods
Suppose you need to have $1,000 in two years. If you can earn 7 percent, how much do you 
have to invest to make sure that you have the $1,000 when you need it? In other words, 
what is the present value of $1,000 in two years if the relevant rate is 7 percent?
Based on your knowledge of future values, you know that the amount invested must 
grow to $1,000 over the two years. In other words, it must be the case that:
$1,000 = PV × 1.07 × 1.07
	
= PV × 1.072
	
= PV × 1.1449
Given this, we can solve for the present value:
Present value = $1,000/1.1449 = $873.44
Therefore, $873.44 is the amount you must invest in order to achieve your goal.
EXAMPLE
4.5  Saving Up
You would like to buy a new automobile. You have $50,000, but the car costs $68,500. If you can 
earn 9 percent, how much do you have to invest today to buy the car in two years? Do you have 
enough? Assume the price will stay the same.
	
What we need to know is the present value of $68,500 to be paid in two years, assuming a 
9 percent rate. Based on our discussion, this is:
PV = $68,500/1.092 = $68,500/1.1881 = $57,655.08
You’re still about $7,655 short, even if you’re willing to wait two years.
As you have probably recognized by now, calculating present values is quite similar to 
calculating future values, and the general result looks much the same. The present value of 
$1 to be received t periods into the future at a discount rate of r is:
PV = $1 × [1/(1 + r)t] = $1/(1 + r)t            	
[4.2]
The quantity in brackets, 1/(1 + r)t, goes by several different names. Because it’s used to 
discount a future cash flow, it is often called a discount factor. With this name, it is not sur-
prising that the rate used in the calculation is often called the discount rate. We tend to call it 
this in talking about present values. The quantity in brackets is also called the present value 
interest factor (or just present value factor) for $1 at r percent for t periods and is sometimes 
abbreviated as PVIF(r, t). Finally, calculating the present value of a future cash flow to deter-
mine its worth today is commonly called discounted cash flow (DCF) valuation.
To illustrate, suppose you need $1,000 in three years. You can earn 15 percent on your 
money. How much do you have to invest today? To find out, we have to determine the pres-
ent value of $1,000 in three years at 15 percent. We do this by discounting $1,000 back 
three periods at 15 percent. With these numbers, the discount factor is:
1/(1 + .15)3 = 1/1.5209 = .6575
discount rate
The rate used to calculate 
the present value of future 
cash flows.
discounted cash 
flow (DCF) valuation
(a) Calculating the present 
value of a future cash flow 
to determine its value 
today. (b) The process of 
valuing an investment by 
discounting its future cash 
flows.

	
c h a p t e r  4
Introduction to Valuation: The Time Value of Money	
107
The amount you must invest is thus:
$1,000 × .6575 = $657.50
We say that $657.50 is the present, or discounted, value of $1,000 to be received in three 
years at 15 percent.
There are tables for present value factors just as there are tables for future value fac-
tors, and you use them in the same way (if you use them at all). Table 4.3 contains a small 
set of these factors. A much larger set can be found in Table A.2 in Appendix A.
In Table 4.3, the discount factor we just calculated, .6575, can be found by looking 
down the column labeled “15%” until you come to the third row. Of course, you could use 
a financial calculator, as we illustrate nearby.
As the length of time until payment grows, present values decline. As Example 4.6 il-
lustrates, present values tend to become small as the time horizon grows. If you look out far 
enough, they will always get close to zero. Also, for a given length of time, the higher the 
discount rate is, the lower is the present value. Put another way, present values and discount 
rates are inversely related. Increasing the discount rate decreases the PV and vice versa.
ta b l e  4.3
Present value 
interest factors
Number of 
Periods
Interest Rates
5%
10%
15%
20%
1
.9524
.9091
.8696
.8333
2
.9070
.8264
.7561
.6944
3
.8638
.7513
.6575
.5787
4
.8227
.6830
.5718
.4823
5
.7835
.6209
.4972
.4019
You solve present value problems on a financial calculator just like you do future value problems. For the 
example we just examined (the present value of $1,000 to be received in three years at 15 percent), you 
would do the following:
Enter	
3	
15	
1,000
	
FV
FV
Solve for	
	
	
	
−657.52
Notice that the answer has a negative sign; as we discussed earlier, that’s because it represents an out-
flow today in exchange for the $1,000 inflow later.
CALCULATOR 
HINTS
EXAMPLE
4.6  Deceptive Advertising
Recently, some businesses have been saying things like “Come try our product. If you do, we’ll give 
you $100 just for coming by!” If you read the fine print, what you find out is that they will give you a 
savings certificate that will pay you $100 in 25 years or so. If the going interest rate on such certifi-
cates is 10 percent per year, how much are they really giving you today?
	
What you’re actually getting is the present value of $100 to be paid in 25 years. If the discount 
rate is 10 percent per year, then the discount factor is:
1/1.125 = 1/10.8347 = .0923
This tells you that a dollar in 25 years is worth a little more than nine cents today, assuming a 10 percent 
discount rate. Given this, the promotion is actually paying you about .0923 × $100 = $9.23. Maybe this 
is enough to draw customers, but it’s not $100.

108	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
The relationship between time, discount rates, and present values is illustrated in 
Figure 4.3. Notice that by the time we get to 10 years, the present values are all substan-
tially smaller than the future amounts.
f i g u r e  4.3
Present value of $1 
for different periods 
and rates
Present
value
of $1 ($)
1.00
.90
.80
.70
.60
.50
.40
.30
.20
.10
r = 0%
r = 5%
r = 10%
r = 15%
r = 20%
5
4
3
2
1
10
9
8
7
6
Time
(years)
concept questions
4.2a	
What do we mean by the present value of an investment?
4.2b	
The process of discounting a future amount back to the present is the opposite of 
doing what?
4.2c	
What do we mean by discounted cash flow, or DCF, valuation?
4.2d	
In general, what is the present value of $1 to be received in t periods, assuming a 
discount rate of r per period?
MORE ON PRESENT AND FUTURE VALUES
If you look back at the expressions we came up with for present and future values, you will 
see there is a very simple relationship between the two. We explore this relationship and 
some related issues in this section.
Present versus Future Value
What we called the present value factor is just the reciprocal of (that is, 1 divided by) the 
future value factor:
Future value factor = (1 + r)t
Present value factor = 1/(1 + r)t
In fact, the easy way to calculate a present value factor on many calculators is to first cal-
culate the future value factor and then press the 1/X  key to flip it over.
4.3
For a downloadable, 
Windows-based financial 
calculator, go to  
www.calculator.org.
coverage online
Excel 
Master

	
c h a p t e r  4
Introduction to Valuation: The Time Value of Money	
109
If we let FVt stand for the future value after t periods, then the relationship between 
future value and present value can be written very simply as one of the following:
PV × (1 + r)t = FVt
	
PV = FVt/(1 + r)t = FVt × [1/(1 + r)t]                 	
[4.3]
We will call this last result the basic present value equation, and we use it throughout 
the text. There are a number of variations that come up, but this simple equation underlies 
many of the most important ideas in finance.
EXAMPLE
4.7  Evaluating Investments
To give you an idea of how we will be using present and future values, consider the following simple 
investment. Your company proposes to buy an asset for $335. This investment is very safe. You will 
sell off the asset in three years for $400. You know you could invest the $335 elsewhere at 10 per-
cent with very little risk. What do you think of the proposed investment?
	
This is not a good investment. Why not? Because you can invest the $335 elsewhere at  
10 percent. If you do, after three years it will grow to:
$335 × (1 + r)t = $335 × 1.13
	
= $335 × 1.331     
	
= $445.89
Because the proposed investment only pays out $400, it is not as good as other alternatives we 
have. Another way of saying the same thing is to notice that the present value of $400 in three years 
at 10 percent is:
$400 × [1/(1 + r)t] = $400/1.13 = $400/1.331 = $300.53
This tells us that we only have to invest about $300 to get $400 in three years, not $335. We will 
return to this type of analysis later on.
EXAMPLE
4.8  Finding r for a Single-Period Investment
You are considering a one-year investment. If you put up $1,250, you will get back $1,350. What rate 
is this investment paying?
	
First, in this single-period case, the answer is fairly obvious. You are getting a total of $100 in 
addition to your $1,250. The implicit rate on this investment is thus $100/1,250 = 8 percent.
	
More formally, from the basic present value equation, the present value (the amount you must 
put up today) is $1,250. The future value (what the present value grows to) is $1,350. The time in-
volved is one period, so we have:
	
$1,250 = $1,350/(1 + r)t
1 + r = $1,350/1,250 = 1.08
	
r = 8%
In this simple case, of course, there was no need to go through this calculation, but, as we describe 
later, it gets a little harder when there is more than one period.
Determining the Discount Rate
It will turn out that we frequently need to determine what discount rate is implicit in an 
investment. We can do this by looking at the basic present value equation:
PV = FVt  /(1 + r)t
There are only four parts to this equation: the present value (PV), the future value (FVt  ), 
the discount rate (r), and the life of the investment (t). Given any three of these, we can 
always find the fourth.

110	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
To illustrate what happens with multiple periods, let’s say that we are offered an in-
vestment that costs us $100 and will double our money in eight years. To compare this to 
other investments, we would like to know what discount rate is implicit in these num-
bers. This discount rate is called the rate of return, or sometimes just return, on the in-
vestment. In this case, we have a present value of $100, a future value of $200 (double 
our money), and an eight-year life. To calculate the return, we can write the basic present 
value equation as:
    PV = FVt/(1 + r)t
$100 = $200/(1 + r)8
It could also be written as:
(1 + r)8 = $200/100 = 2
We now need to solve for r. There are three ways we could do it:
  1.	 Use a financial calculator. (See below.)
  2.	 Solve the equation for 1 + r by taking the eighth root of both sides. Because this is 
the same thing as raising both sides to the power of 1∕8, or .125, this is actually easy 
to do with the 
yx
  key on a calculator. Just enter 2, then press 
yx , enter .125, 
and press the  =   key. The eighth root should be about 1.09, which implies that r is 
9 percent.
  3.	 Use a future value table. The future value factor for eight years is equal to 2. If you 
look across the row corresponding to eight periods in Table A.1, you will see that a 
future value factor of 2 corresponds to the 9 percent column, again implying that the 
return here is 9 percent.
Actually, in this particular example, there is a useful “back of the envelope” means of 
solving for r—the Rule of 72. For reasonable rates of return, the time it takes to double your 
money is given approximately by 72/r%. In our example, this means that 72/r% = 8 years, 
implying that r is 9 percent as we calculated. This rule is fairly accurate for discount rates in 
the 5 percent to 20 percent range.
The nearby Finance Matters box provides some examples of rates of return on col-
lectibles. See if you can verify the numbers reported there.
Why does the Rule  
of 72 work? See  
www.moneychimp.com.
EXAMPLE
4.9  Double Your Fun
You have been offered an investment that promises to double your money every 10 years. What is 
the approximate rate of return on the investment?
	
From the Rule of 72, the rate of return is given approximately by 72/r% = 10, so the rate is ap-
proximately 72/10 = 7.2%. Verify that the exact answer is 7.177 percent.
A slightly more extreme example involves money bequeathed by Benjamin Franklin, 
who died on April 17, 1790. In his will, he gave 1,000 pounds sterling to Massachusetts 
and the city of Boston. He gave a like amount to Pennsylvania and the city of Philadelphia. 
The money was paid to Franklin when he held political office, but he believed that politi-
cians should not be paid for their service (it appears that this view is not widely shared by 
modern-day politicians).
Franklin originally specified that the money should be paid out 100 years after his 
death and used to train young people. Later, however, after some legal wrangling, it was 
agreed that the money would be paid out in 1990, 200 years after Franklin’s death. By that 

111
time, the Pennsylvania bequest had grown to about $2 million; the Massachusetts bequest 
had grown to $4.5 million. The money was used to fund the Franklin Institutes in Boston 
and Philadelphia. Assuming that 1,000 pounds sterling was equivalent to 1,000 dollars, 
what rate of return did the two states earn (the dollar did not become the official U.S. cur-
rency until 1792)?
For Pennsylvania, the future value is $2 million and the present value is $1,000. There 
are 200 years involved, so we need to solve for r in the following:
	 $1,000 = $2 million/(1 + r)200
(1 + r)200 = 2,000
Solving for r, we see that the Pennsylvania money grew at about 3.87 percent per year. The 
Massachusetts money did better; verify that the rate of return in this case was 4.3 percent. 
Small differences can add up!
Collectibles as Investments?
I
t used to be that trading in collectibles such as baseball 
cards, art, and old toys occurred mostly at auctions, swap 
meets, and collectible shops, all of which were limited to re-
gional traffic. However, with the growing popularity of online 
auctions such as eBay, trading in collectibles has expanded 
to an international arena. The most visible form of collectible 
is probably the baseball card, but Furbies, Beanie Babies, 
and Pokémon cards have been extremely hot collectibles in 
the recent past. However, it’s not just fad items that spark 
interest from collectors; virtually anything of sentimental 
value from days gone by is considered collectible, and, more 
and more, collectibles are being viewed as investments.
	
Collectibles typically provide no cash flows until they 
are sold, and condition and buyer sentiment are the major 
determinants of value. The rates of return have been amaz-
ing at times, but care is needed in interpreting them. For 
example, in 2015, a 1793 “chain cent,” America’s first large 
cent, sold for a record $2,350,000. While that looks like a 
whopping price increase to the untrained eye, check for 
yourself that the actual return on the investment was only 
about 9.07 percent per year. Not too bad, but nowhere 
near the return most people expect from looking at the 
sales price.
	
Comic books have recently grown in popularity among 
collectors. Batman, who first appeared in Detective Comics No. 
27, is a popular superhero. The comic book sold in May 1939 at 
a cover price of 10 cents. In 2015, the value of this comic book 
had grown to $1,380,000. This gain seems like a very high re-
turn to the untrained eye, and indeed it is! See if you don’t 
agree that the return was about 24.15 percent per year.
	
Stamp collecting (or philately) is another popular activity. 
Possibly the most famous stamp in the world is the British Gui-
ana One-Cent Black on Magenta stamp, issued in 1856. There 
is only one known example of this stamp left in existence and 
it has been out of public view since 1986. In June 2014, the 
stamp sold at auction for $9,480,000. Although this is almost 
1 billion times the original price of the stamp, verify for yourself 
that the annual return is about 13.98 percent.
FINANCE MATTERS
We can illustrate how to calculate unknown rates using a financial calculator with these numbers. For 
Pennsylvania, you would do the following:
Enter	
200	
	
−1,000	
2,000,000
	
I/ Y
I/ Y
Solve for	
	
3.87	
	
As in our previous examples, notice the minus sign on the present value, representing Franklin’s outlay 
made many years ago. What do you change to work the problem for Massachusetts?
CALCULATOR 
HINTS

112	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
Finding the Number of Periods
Suppose we were interested in purchasing an asset that costs $50,000. We currently have 
$25,000. If we can earn 12 percent on this $25,000, how long until we have the $50,000? 
Finding the answer involves solving for the last variable in the basic present value equa-
tion, the number of periods. You already know how to get an approximate answer to this 
particular problem. Notice that we need to double our money. From the Rule of 72, this 
will take about 72/12 = 6 years at 12 percent.
To come up with the exact answer, we can again manipulate the basic present value 
equation. The present value is $25,000, and the future value is $50,000. With a 12 percent 
discount rate, the basic equation takes one of the following forms:
	
$25,000 = $50,000/1.12t
$50,000/25,000 = 1.12t = 2
We thus have a future value factor of 2 for a 12 percent rate. We now need to solve for t. If 
you look down the column in Table A.1 that corresponds to 12 percent, you will see that a 
future value factor of 1.9738 occurs at six periods. It will thus take about six years, as we 
EXAMPLE
4.10  Saving for College
You estimate that you will need about $80,000 to send your child to college in eight years. You have 
about $35,000 now. If you can earn 20 percent per year, will you make it? At what rate will you just 
reach your goal?
	
If you can earn 20 percent, the future value of your $35,000 in eight years will be:
FV = $35,000 × 1.208 = $35,000 × 4.2998 = $150,493.59
So, you will make it easily. The minimum rate is the unknown r in the following:
	
FV = $35,000 × (1 + r)8 = $80,000
(1 + r)8 = $80,000/35,000 = 2.2857
Therefore, the future value factor is 2.2857. Looking at the row in Table A.1 that corresponds to 
eight periods, we see that our future value factor is roughly halfway between the ones shown 
for 10 percent (2.1436) and 12 percent (2.4760), so you will just reach your goal if you earn ap-
proximately 11 percent. To get the exact answer, we could use a financial calculator or we could 
solve for r:
(1 + r)8 = $80,000/35,000 = 2.2857
	 1 + r = 2.2857(1/8) = 2.2857.125 = 1.1089
	
r = 10.89%
EXAMPLE
4.11  Only 18,262.5 Days to Retirement
You would like to retire in 50 years as a millionaire. If you have $10,000 today, what rate of return do 
you need to earn to achieve your goal?
	
The future value is $1,000,000. The present value is $10,000, and there are 50 years until re-
tirement. We need to calculate the unknown discount rate in the following:
$10,000 = $1,000,000/(1 + r)50
  (1 + r)50 = 100
The future value factor is thus 100. You can verify that the implicit rate is about 9.65 percent.

	
c h a p t e r  4
Introduction to Valuation: The Time Value of Money	
113
This example finishes our introduction to basic time value of money concepts. Table 4.4 
summarizes present value and future value calculations for future reference. As the Work the 
Web box in this section shows, online calculators are widely available to handle these calcula-
tions, but it is still important to know what is going on.
If you do use a financial calculator, here are the relevant entries:
Enter	
	
12	
−25,000	
50,000
	
	
N
Solve for	
6.1163	
	
CALCULATOR 
HINTS
EXAMPLE
4.12  Waiting for Godot
You’ve been saving up to buy the Godot Company. The total cost will be $10 million. You currently 
have about $2.3 million. If you can earn 5 percent on your money, how long will you have to wait? At 
16 percent, how long must you wait?
	
At 5 percent, you’ll have to wait a long time. From the basic present value equation:
$2.3 = $10/1.05t
1.05t = 4.35
	
t = 30.12 years
At 16 percent, things are a little better. Verify for yourself that it will take about 10 years.
   I.	 Symbols
	
 PV = Present value, what future cash flows are worth today
	
FVt = Future value, what cash flows are worth in the future
	
r = Interest rate, rate of return, or discount rate per period—typically, but not always, 
one year
	
t = Number of periods—typically, but not always, the number of years
	
C = Cash amount
 II.	 Future value of C invested at r percent per period for t periods
	
FVt = C × (1 + r)t
	
The term (1 + r)t is called the future value factor.
III.	 Present value of C to be received in t periods at r percent per period
	
PV = C/(1 + r)t
	
The term 1/(1 + r)t is called the present value factor.
	
IV.	 The basic present value equation giving the relationship between present and future 
value is
	
PV = FVt/(1 + r)t
ta b l e  4.4
Summary of time 
value of money 
calculations
calculated. To get the exact answer, we have to explicitly solve for t (or use a financial cal-
culator). If you do this, you will find that the answer is 6.1163 years, so our approximation 
was quite close in this case.

114	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
USING A SPREADSHEET FOR TIME VALUE OF MONEY CALCULATIONS
More and more, businesspeople from many different areas (and not just finance and accounting) rely 
on spreadsheets to do all the different types of calculations that come up in the real world. As a result, 
in this section, we show you how to use a spreadsheet to handle the various time value of money 
problems we presented in this chapter. We will use Microsoft ExcelTM, but the commands are similar 
for other types of software. We assume you are already familiar with basic spreadsheet operations.
	
As we have seen, you can solve for any one of the following four potential unknowns: future value, 
present value, the discount rate, or the number of periods. With a spreadsheet, there is a separate for-
mula for each. In Excel, these are as follows:
To Find
Enter This Formula
Future value
= FV(rate,nper,pmt,pv)
Present value
= PV(rate,nper,pmt,fv)
Discount rate
= RATE(nper,pmt,pv,fv)
Number of periods
= NPER(rate,pmt,pv,fv)
In these formulas, pv and fv are present and future value; nper is the number of periods; and rate is the 
discount, or interest, rate.
SPREADSHEET 
STRATEGIES
Learn more about using 
Excel for time value of 
money and other 
calculations at www.
studyfinance.com.
H
ow important is the time value of money? A recent search on one web engine returned more 
than 791 million hits! It is important to understand the calculations behind the time value of 
money, but the advent of financial calculators and spreadsheets has eliminated the need for te-
dious calculations. In fact, many websites offer time value of money calculators. The following is an 
example from Moneychimp’s website, www.moneychimp.com. You need $150,000 in 25 years and 
will invest your money at 9.2 percent. How much do you need to deposit today? To use the calcu-
lator, you simply enter the values and hit “Calculate.” The results look like this:
Who said time value of money calculations are hard?
W
RK THE  WE B
QUESTIONS
	
1.	 Use the present value calculator on this website to answer the following: Suppose you 
want to have $140,000 in 25 years. If you can earn a 10 percent return, how much do 
you have to invest today?
	
2.	 Use the future value calculator on this website to answer the following question: Sup-
pose you have $8,000 today that you plan to save for your retirement in 40 years. If you 
earn a return of 10.8 percent per year, how much will this account be worth when you 
are ready to retire?

	
c h a p t e r  4
Introduction to Valuation: The Time Value of Money	
115
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1
2
Using a spreadsheet for time value of money calculations
3
4
If we invest $25,000 at 12 percent, how long until we have $50,000? We need to solve for the
5
unknown number of periods, so we use the formula NPER (rate, pmt, pv, fv).
6
7
Present value (pv):
$25,000
8
Future value (fv):
$50,000
9
Rate:
.12
10
 
11
Periods:
6.116255
12
13
The formula entered in cell B11 is =NPER(B9,0,-B7,B8); notice that pmt is zero and that pv has a
14
negative sign on it. Also notice that the rate is entered as a decimal, not a percentage.
	
There are two things that are a little tricky here. First, unlike a financial calculator, the spread-
sheet requires that the rate be entered as a decimal. Second, as with most financial calculators, you 
have to put a negative sign on either the present value or the future value to solve for the rate or the 
number of periods. For the same reason, if you solve for a present value, the answer will have a nega-
tive sign unless you input a negative future value. The same is true when you compute a future value.
	
To illustrate how you might use these formulas, we will go back to an example in the chapter. If you 
invest $25,000 at 12 percent per year, how long until you have $50,000? You might set up a spread-
sheet like this:
concept questions
4.3a	
What is the basic present value equation?
4.3b	
What is the Rule of 72?
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has introduced you to the basic principles of present value and discounted 
cash flow valuation. In it, we explained a number of things about the time value of money, 
including:
  1.	 For a given rate of return, the value at some point in the future of an investment made 
today can be determined by calculating the future value of that investment.
  2.	 The current worth of a future cash flow can be determined for a given rate of return 
by calculating the present value of the cash flow involved.
  3.	 The relationship between present value and future value for a given rate, r, and time, 
t, is given by the basic present value equation: 
	
PV = FVt /(1 + r)t 
	
As we have shown, it is possible to find any one of the four components (PV, FVt, r, 
or t) given the other three.
The principles developed in this chapter will figure prominently in the chapters to 
come. The reason for this is that most investments, whether they involve real assets or 

116	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
4.1	
Calculating Future Values.  Assume you deposit $1,000 today in an account that 
pays 8 percent interest. How much will you have in four years? (See Problem 2.)
4.2	
Calculating Present Values.  Suppose you have just celebrated your 19th birthday. 
A rich uncle set up a trust fund for you that will pay you $100,000 when you turn 
25. If the relevant discount rate is 11 percent, how much is this fund worth today? 
(See Problem 3.)
4.3	
Calculating Rates of Return.  You’ve been offered an investment that will double 
your money in 12 years. What rate of return are you being offered? Check your 
answer using the Rule of 72. (See Problem 4.)
4.4	
Calculating the Number of Periods.  You’ve been offered an investment that will 
pay you 7 percent per year. If you invest $10,000, how long until you have $20,000? 
How long until you have $30,000? (See Problem 5.)
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
4.1	
We need to calculate the future value of $1,000 at 8 percent for four years. The 
future value factor is:
1.084 = 1.3605   
	
The future value is thus $1,000 × 1.3605 = $1,360.50.
4.2	
We need the present value of $100,000 to be paid in six years at 11 percent. The 
discount factor is:
1/1.116 = 1/1.8704 = .5346   
	
The present value is thus about $53,460.
4.3	
Suppose you invest, say, $100. You will have $200 in 12 years with this investment. 
So, $100 is the amount you have today, the present value, and $200 is the amount 
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 4.1 If you invest $500 for one year at a rate of 8 percent per year, how 
much interest will you earn?
Section 4.2 What is the formula used to calculate the present value of a future 
amount?
Section 4.3 Suppose you invest $100 now and receive $259.37 in 10 years. What 
rate of interest did you earn?
financial assets, can be analyzed using the discounted cash flow, or DCF, approach. As a 
result, the DCF approach is broadly applicable and widely used in practice. Before going 
on, therefore, you might want to do some of the problems below.

	
c h a p t e r  4
Introduction to Valuation: The Time Value of Money	
117
you will have in 12 years, or the future value. From the basic present value 
equation, we have:
$200 = $100 × (1 × r)12
    2 = (1 × r)12
	
From here, we need to solve for r, the unknown rate. As shown in the chapter, there 
are several different ways to do this. We will take the 12th root of 2 (by raising 2 to 
the power of 1/12):
  2(1/12) = 1 + r 
1.0595 = 1 + r
     r = 5.95%
	
Using the Rule of 72, we have 72/t = r%, or 72/12 = 6%, so our answer looks good 
(remember that the Rule of 72 is only an approximation).
4.4	
The basic equation is:
$20,000 = $10,000 × (1 + .07)t
       2 = (1 + .07)t
	
If we solve for t, we get that t = 10.24 years. Using the Rule of 72, we get 72/7 = 
10.29 years, so, once again, our answer looks good. To get $30,000, verify for 
yourself that you will have to wait 16.24 years.
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 1 	 4.1	
Compounding.  What is compounding? What is discounting?
LO 1 	 4.2	 Compounding and Periods.  As you increase the length of time involved, 
what happens to future values? What happens to present values?
LO 1 	 4.3	 Compounding and Interest Rates.  What happens to a future value if you 
increase the rate, r? What happens to a present value?
LO 1 	 4.4	 Future Values.  Suppose you deposit a large sum in an account that earns 
a low interest rate and simultaneously deposit a small sum in an account 
with a high interest rate. Which account will have the larger future value?
LO 3 	 4.5	 Ethical Considerations.  Take a look back at Example 4.6. Is it deceptive 
advertising? Is it unethical to advertise a future value like this without a 
disclaimer?
Use the following information for the next five questions: 
On March 28, 2008, Toyota Motor Credit Corporation (TMCC), a subsidiary of 
­Toyota Motor, offered some securities for sale to the public. Under the terms of the 
deal, TMCC promised to repay the owner of one of these securities $100,000 on 
March 28, 2038, but investors would receive nothing until then. Investors paid TMCC 
$24,099 for each of these securities; so they gave up $24,099 on March 28, 2008, for 
the promise of a $100,000 payment 30 years later.
LO 2 	 4.6	 Time Value of Money.  Why would TMCC be willing to accept such a 
small amount today ($24,099) in exchange for a promise to repay about 
four times that amount ($100,000) in the future?
LO 3 	 4.7	 Call Provisions.  TMCC has the right to buy back the securities on the 
anniversary date at a price established when the securities were issued 

118	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
(this feature is a term of this particular deal). What impact does this 
feature have on the desirability of this security as an investment?
LO 3 	 4.8	 Time Value of Money.  Would you be willing to pay $24,099 today in exchange 
for $100,000 in 30 years? What would be the key considerations in answering 
yes or no? Would your answer depend on who is making the promise to repay?
LO 3 	 4.9	 Investment Comparison.  Suppose that when TMCC offered the security 
for $24,099, the U.S. Treasury had offered an essentially identical security. 
Do you think it would have had a higher or lower price? Why?
LO 3 	 4.10	 Length of Investment.  The TMCC security is bought and sold on the New 
York Stock Exchange. If you looked at the price today, do you think the 
price would exceed the $24,099 original price? Why? If you looked in 2018, 
do you think the price would be higher or lower than today’s price? Why?
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the Preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–15)
LO 1 	 1.	 Simple Interest versus Compound Interest.  First City Bank pays 6 percent 
simple interest on its savings account balances, whereas Second City Bank 
pays 6 percent interest compounded annually. If you made a deposit of 
$8,100 in each bank, how much more money would you earn from your 
Second City Bank account at the end of 10 years?
LO 1 	 2.	 Calculating Future Values.  For each of the following, compute the future value:
Present Value
Years
Interest Rate
Future Value
$    3,150
  7
13%
      8,453
16
7
    89,305
19
 9   
  227,382
26
 5   
LO 2 	 3.	 Calculating Present Values.  For each of the following, compute the 
present value:
Present Value
Years
Interest Rate
Future Value
15
     7%
$   17,328
  8
11 
     41,517
13
10 
   790,382
25
13 
   647,816
LO 3 	 4.	 Calculating Interest Rates.  Solve for the unknown interest rate in each of 
the following:
Present Value
Years
Interest Rate
Future Value
$      715
11
$    1,381
       905
  8
     1,718
  15,000
23
   141,832
  70,300
16
   312,815

	
c h a p t e r  4
Introduction to Valuation: The Time Value of Money	
119
LO 4 	 5. Calculating the Number of Periods.  Solve for the unknown number of years 
in each of the following:
Present Value
Years
Interest Rate
Future Value
$     195
   9%
$        873  
    2,105
  7  
   3,500
 47,800
12  
326,500
  38,650
19  
213,380
LO 3 	 6.	 Calculating Rates of Return.  Assume the total cost of a college education 
will be $295,000 when your child enters college in 18 years. You presently 
have $53,000 to invest. What annual rate of interest must you earn on your 
investment to cover the cost of your child’s college education?
LO 4 	 7.	 Calculating the Number of Periods.  At 4.7 percent interest, how long does 
it take to double your money? To quadruple it?
LO 3 	 8.	 Calculating Rates of Return.  In 2014, an 1874 $20 double eagle sold for 
$15,000. What was the rate of return on this investment?
LO 4 	 9.	 Calculating the Number of Periods.  You’re trying to save to buy a new 
$150,000 Ferrari. You have $35,000 today that can be invested at your bank. 
The bank pays 2.1 percent annual interest on its accounts. How long will it 
be before you have enough to buy the car?
LO 2 	 10.	 Calculating Present Values.  Imprudential, Inc., has an unfunded pension 
liability of $730 million that must be paid in 25 years. To assess the value of the 
firm’s stock, financial analysts want to discount this liability back to the present. If 
the relevant discount rate is 5.5 percent, what is the present value of this liability?
LO 2 	 11.	 Calculating Present Values.  You have just received notification that you 
have won the $1 million first prize in the Centennial Lottery. However, the 
prize will be awarded on your 100th birthday (assuming you’re around to 
collect), 80 years from now. What is the present value of your windfall if the 
appropriate discount rate is 7.25 percent?
LO 1 	 12.	Calculating Future Values.  Your coin collection contains fifty 1952 silver 
dollars. If your grandparents purchased them for their face value when they 
were new, how much will your collection be worth when you retire in 2063, 
assuming they appreciate at an annual rate of 4.3 percent?
LO 1 	 13.	 Calculating Growth Rates and Future Values.  In 1895, the first U.S. Open 
Golf Championship was held. The winner’s prize money was $150. In 2014, 
the winner’s check was $1,620,000. What was the annual percentage 
increase in the winner’s check over this period? If the winner’s prize 
increases at the same rate, what will it be in 2045?
LO 3 	 14.	Calculating Rates of Return.  In 2014, an Action Comics No. 1, featuring 
the first appearance of Superman, was sold at auction for $3,207,852. The 
comic book was originally sold in 1938 for $.10. What was the annual 
increase in the value of this comic book?
LO 3 	 15.	Calculating Rates of Return.  Although appealing to more refined tastes, 
art as a collectible has not always performed so profitably. During 2003, 
Sotheby’s sold the Edgar Degas bronze sculpture Petite Danseuse de 
Quatorze Ans at auction for a price of $10,311,500. Unfortunately for the 
previous owner, he had purchased it in 1999 at a price of $12,377,500. What 
was his annual rate of return on this sculpture?
LO 3

120	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 16–25)
LO 3 	 16.	Calculating Rates of Return.  Refer back to the Series EE savings bonds we 
discussed at the very beginning of the chapter.
a.	
Assuming you purchased a $50 face value bond, what rate of return 
would you earn if you held the bond for 20 years until it doubled in 
value?
b.	 If you purchased a $50 face value bond in early 2015 at the then current 
interest rate of .10 percent per year, how much would the bond be worth 
in 2025?
c.	
In 2025, instead of cashing the bond in for its then current value, you 
decide to hold the bond until it doubles in face value in 2035. What rate 
of return will you earn over the last 10 years?
LO 2 	 17.	 Calculating Present Values.  Suppose you are still committed to 
owning a $150,000 Ferrari (see Question 9). If you believe your mutual 
fund can achieve a 10.6 percent annual rate of return, and you want to 
buy the car in 10 years on the day you turn 30, how much must you 
invest today?
LO 1 	 18.	Calculating Future Values.  You have just made your first $5,000 
contribution to your individual retirement account. Assuming you earn an 
annual rate of return of 9.75 percent and make no additional contributions, 
what will your account be worth when you retire in 45 years? What if 
you wait 10 years before contributing? (Does this suggest an investment 
strategy?)
LO 1 	 19.	 Calculating Future Values.  You are scheduled to receive $13,000 in  
two years. When you receive it, you will invest it for six more years at  
7.5 percent per year. How much will you have in eight years?
LO 4 	 20.	Calculating the Number of Periods.  You expect to receive $30,000 at 
graduation in two years. You plan on investing it at 9 percent until you have 
$150,000. How long will you wait from now? (Better than the situation in 
Question 9, but still no Ferrari.)
LO 1 	 21.	Calculating Future Values.  You have $6,150 to deposit. Regency Bank 
offers 12 percent per year compounded monthly (1 percent per month), 
while King Bank offers 12 percent but will only compound annually. How 
much will your investment be worth in 20 years at each bank?
LO 3 	 22.	Calculating Rates of Return.  An investment offers to triple your money 
in 24 months (don’t believe it). What rate per three months are you being 
offered?
LO 4 	 23.	Calculating the Number of Periods.  You can earn .27 percent per month 
at your bank. If you deposit $1,800, how long must you wait until your 
account has grown to $3,100?
LO 2 	 24.	Calculating Present Values.  You need $85,000 in 10 years. If you can earn 
.65 percent per month, how much will you have to deposit today?
LO 2 	 25.	Calculating Present Values.  You have decided that you want to be a 
millionaire when you retire in 45 years. If you can earn an annual return of 
11 percent, how much do you have to invest today? What if you can earn  
5.5 percent?

	
c h a p t e r  4
Introduction to Valuation: The Time Value of Money	
121
CHALLENGE (Question 26)
LO 1 	 26. Calculating Future Values.  You have $20,000 you want to invest for the 
next 40 years. You are offered an investment plan that will pay you  
7 percent per year for the next 20 years and 11 percent per year for the last 
20 years. How much will you have at the end of the 40 years? Does it matter 
if the investment plan pays you 11 percent per year for the first 20 years and 
7 percent per year for the next 20 years? Why or why not?
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
4.1 Calculating Future Values.  Go to www.dinkytown.net and find the “Savings 
Calculator” link. If you currently have $10,000 and invest this money at 9 percent, how 
much will you have in 30 years? Assume you will not make any additional 
contributions. How much will you have if you can earn 11 percent?
4.2 Calculating the Number of Periods.  Go to www.dinkytown.net and find the “Cool 
Million” calculator. You want to be a millionaire. You can earn 11.5 percent per year. 
Using your current age, at what age will you become a millionaire if you have $25,000 
to invest, assuming you make no other deposits (ignore inflation)?
4.3 Calculating the Number of Periods.  Go to www.moneychimp.com and find the 
“Compound Interest” calculator. You want to buy a Lamborghini Murciélago. Assume 
the price of the car is $330,000 and you have $35,000. If you can earn an 11 percent 
return, how long must you wait to buy this car (assuming the price stays the same)?
4.4 Calculating Rates of Return.  Use the “Return Rate” calculator at www.
moneychimp.com to solve the following problem. You still want to buy the 
Lamborghini Murciélago, but you have $60,000 to invest and want to buy the car 
in 15 years. What interest rate do you have to earn to accomplish this (assuming 
the price stays the same)?
4.5 Future Values and Taxes.  Taxes can greatly affect the future value of your 
investment. The website at www.fincalc.com has a financial calculator that adjusts your 
return for taxes. Go to this web page and find this calculator. Suppose you have $50,000 
to invest today. If you can earn a 12 percent return, and you have no additional savings, 
how much will you have in 20 years? (Enter 0 percent as the tax rate.) Now, assume that 
your marginal tax rate is 27.5 percent. How much will you have at this tax rate?
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
Before the advent of financial calculators (and Excel), tables were often used in the calcu-
lation of present values and future values. Using a two-way data table, create a future value 
table and a present value table. To make the table a little more interesting, make sure that 
it will calculate the future values and present values for different dollar amounts. One thing 
we should note here is that you will not be able to simply copy and paste the tables pre-
sented earlier in this workbook. When a data table is created, you cannot insert or delete 
rows or columns at a later point in time.

122
5
W
hat do professional athletes Russell Martin, Ndamukong 
Suh, and Colin Kaepernick have in common? All three 
signed big contracts in late 2014 or early 2015. The contract values 
were reported as $82 million, $114 million, and $121 million, respec-
tively. That’s definitely major league money, but, even so, reported 
numbers like these can be misleading. For example, in November 
2014, Martin signed with the Toronto Blue Jays. His contract called 
for a salary of $7 million in 2015, $15 million in 2016, and $20 mil-
lion per year for 2017 to 2019. Not bad, especially for someone who 
makes a living using the “tools of ignorance” (jock jargon for a 
catcher’s equipment).
A closer look at the numbers shows that Russell, Ndamukong, 
and Colin did pretty well, but nothing like the quoted figures. Using 
Colin’s contract as an example, although the value was reported to 
be $121 million, it was actually payable over several years. The contract consisted of a 
$13 million signing bonus, plus $108 million to be paid over the years 2015 to 2019. Be-
cause the payments were spread out over time, we must consider the time value of money, 
which means his contract was worth less than reported. How much did he really get? This 
chapter gives you the “tools of knowledge” to answer this question.
In our previous chapter, we learned how to examine single, lump-sum future payments 
to determine their current, or present, value. This is a useful skill, but we need to go further 
and figure out how to handle multiple future payments because that is the much more com-
mon situation. For example, most loans (including student loans) involve receiving a lump 
sum today and making future payments.
More generally, most types of business decisions, including decisions concerning mar-
keting, operations, and strategy, involve the comparison of costs incurred today with cash 
Discounted Cash  
Flow Valuation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Determine the future and present 
value of investments with multiple 
cash flows.
LO 2 	 Calculate loan payments, and find 
the interest rate on a loan.
LO 3 	 Describe how loans are amortized 
or paid off.
LO 4 	 Explain how interest rates are 
quoted (and misquoted).
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.

123
I
n our previous chapter, we covered the basics of discounted cash flow valuation. How-
ever, so far, we have only dealt with single cash flows. In reality, most investments have 
multiple cash flows. For example, if Target is thinking of opening a new department store, 
there will be a large cash outlay in the beginning and then cash inflows for many years. In 
this chapter, we begin to explore how to value such investments.
When you finish this chapter, you should have some very practical skills. For example, 
you will know how to calculate your own car payments or student loan payments. You will 
also be able to determine how long it will take to pay off a credit card if you make the mini-
mum payment each month (a practice we do not recommend). We will show you how to 
compare interest rates to determine which are the highest and which are the lowest, and we 
will also show you how interest rates can be quoted in different, and at times deceptive, ways.
FUTURE AND PRESENT VALUES OF 
MULTIPLE CASH FLOWS
Thus far, we have restricted our attention to either the future value of a lump-sum present 
amount or the present value of some single future cash flow. In this section, we begin to 
study ways to value multiple cash flows. We start with future value.
Future Value with Multiple Cash Flows
Suppose you deposit $100 today in an account paying 8 percent. In one year, you will de-
posit another $100. How much will you have in two years? This particular problem is rela-
tively easy. At the end of the first year, you will have $108 plus the second $100 you 
deposit, for a total of $208. You leave this $208 on deposit at 8 percent for another year. At 
the end of this second year, the account is worth:
$208 × 1.08 = $224.64
Figure 5.1 is a time line that illustrates the process of calculating the future value of these 
two $100 deposits. Figures such as this one are very useful for solving complicated prob-
lems. Any time you are having trouble with a present or future value problem, drawing a 
time line will usually help you to see what is happening.
In the first part of Figure 5.1, we show the cash flows on the time line. The most im-
portant thing is that we write them down where they actually occur. Here, the first cash 
flow occurs today, which we label as Time 0. We therefore put $100 at Time 0 on the time 
line. The second $100 cash flow occurs one year from today, so we write it down at the 
point labeled as Time 1. In the second part of Figure 5.1, we calculate the future values one 
period at a time to come up with the final $224.64.
5.1
coverage online
Excel 
Master
inflows hoped for later. Evaluating the cost-benefit trade-off requires the tools that we develop 
in this chapter.
Because discounted cash flow valuation is so important, students who learn this mate-
rial well will find that life is much easier down the road. Getting it straight now will save you a 
lot of headaches later.

124	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
f i g u r e  5.1
Drawing and using a time line
A. The time line:
0
$100
1
2
Cash flows
B. Calculating the future value:
0
1
2
Cash flows
+108
$208
31.08
$224.64
Future values
31.08
$100
$100
$100
Time
(years)
Time
(years)
EXAMPLE
5.1
 Saving Up Revisited
You think you will be able to deposit $4,000 at the end of each of the next three years in a bank 
account paying 8 percent interest. You currently have $7,000 in the account. How much will you 
have in three years? In four years?
	
At the end of the first year, you will have:
$7,000 × 1.08 + 4,000 = $11,560
At the end of the second year, you will have:
$11,560 × 1.08 + 4,000 = $16,484.80
Repeating this for the third year gives:
$16,484.80 × 1.08 + 4,000 = $21,803.58
Therefore, you will have $21,803.58 in three years. If you leave this on deposit for one more year 
(and don’t add to it), at the end of the fourth year, you’ll have:
$21,803.58 × 1.08 = $23,547.87
When we calculated the future value of the two $100 deposits, we simply calculated 
the balance as of the beginning of each year and then rolled that amount forward to the next 
year. We could have done it another, quicker way. The first $100 is on deposit for two years 
at 8 percent, so its future value is:
$100 × 1.082 = $100 × 1.1664 = $116.64
The second $100 is on deposit for one year at 8 percent, and its future value is thus:
$100 × 1.08 = $108.00
The total future value, as we previously calculated, is equal to the sum of these two future 
values:
$116.64 + 108 = $224.64

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
125
Based on this example, there are two ways to calculate future values for multiple cash 
flows: (1) compound the accumulated balance forward one year at a time or (2) calculate 
the future value of each cash flow first and then add these up. Both give the same answer, 
so you can do it either way.
To illustrate the two different ways of calculating future values, consider the future 
value of $2,000 invested at the end of each of the next five years. The current balance is 
zero, and the rate is 10 percent. We first draw a time line as shown in Figure 5.2.
On the time line, notice that nothing happens until the end of the first year when we 
make the first $2,000 investment. This first $2,000 earns interest for the next four (not five) 
years. Also notice that the last $2,000 is invested at the end of the fifth year, so it earns no 
interest at all.
Figure 5.3 illustrates the calculations involved if we compound the investment one 
period at a time. As illustrated, the future value is $12,210.20.
Figure 5.4 goes through the same calculations, but it uses the second technique. Natu-
rally, the answer is the same.
f i g u r e  5.4
Future value calculated by compounding each cash flow separately
0
1
2
3
4
5
$2,000
$2,000
$2,000
$2,000
$  2,000
2,200.00
2,420.00
2,662.00
2,928.20
$12,210.20
31.1
Time
(years)
31.12
31.13
31.14
0
1
2
3
4
5
$2,000
$2,000
$2,000
$2,000
$2,000
Time
(years)
f ig u r e  5.2
Time line for $2,000 per year for five years
f ig u r e  5.3
Future value calculated by compounding forward one period at a time
0
1
2
3
4
5
$
0
2,000
$2,000
Beginning amount
Additions
Ending amount
$0
0
$031.1
1
$2,200
2,000
$4,200
31.1
$4,620
2,000
$6,620
31.1
$7,282
2,000
$9,282
31.1
$10,210.20
2,000.00
$12,210.20
31.1
Time
(years)

126	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
Present Value with Multiple Cash Flows
It will turn out that we will very often need to determine the present value of a series of 
future cash flows. As with future values, there are two ways we can do it. We can either 
discount back one period at a time, or we can just calculate the present values individually 
and add them up.
Suppose you need $1,000 in one year and $2,000 more in two years. If you can earn 
9 percent on your money, how much do you have to put up today to exactly cover these 
amounts in the future? In other words, what is the present value of the two cash flows at 
9 percent?
The present value of $2,000 in two years at 9 percent is:
$2,000/1.092 = $1,683.36
The present value of $1,000 in one year is:
$1,000/1.09 = $917.43
Therefore, the total present value is:
$1,683.36 + 917.43 = $2,600.79
To see why $2,600.79 is the right answer, we can check to see that after the $2,000 is 
paid out in two years, there is no money left. If we invest $2,600.79 for one year at 9 per-
cent, we will have:
$2,600.79 × 1.09 = $2,834.86
EXAMPLE
5.2  Saving Up Once Again
If you deposit $100 in one year, $200 in two years, and $300 in three years, how much will you 
have in three years? How much of this is interest? How much will you have in five years if you don’t 
add additional amounts? Assume a 7 percent interest rate throughout.
	
We will calculate the future value of each amount in three years. Notice that the $100 earns 
interest for two years, and the $200 earns interest for one year. The final $300 earns no interest. 
The future values are thus:
	 $100 × 1.072	 = $114.49
	 $200 × 1.07	
=	 214.00
+$300	
	
=	  300.00
Total future value = $628.49
The future value is thus $628.49. The total interest is:
 $628.49 − (100 + 200 + 300) = $28.49
How much will you have in five years? We know that you will have $628.49 in three years. If you 
leave that in for two more years, it will grow to:
$628.49 × 1.072 = $628.49 × 1.1449 = $719.56
Notice that we could have calculated the future value of each amount separately. Once again, be 
careful about the lengths of time. As we previously calculated, the first $100 earns interest for only 
four years, the second deposit earns three years’ interest, and the last earns two years’ interest:
	 $100 × 1.074 = $100 × 1.3108 =	$131.08
	 $200 × 1.073 = $200 × 1.2250 =	 245.01
+$300 × 1.072 = $300 × 1.1449 =	   343.47
	
Total future value = $719.56

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
127
We take out $1,000, leaving $1,834.86. This amount earns 9 percent for another year, leav-
ing us with:
$1,834.86 × 1.09 = $2,000
This is just as we planned. As this example illustrates, the present value of a series of future 
cash flows is simply the amount that you would need today in order to exactly duplicate 
those future cash flows (for a given discount rate).
An alternative way of calculating present values for multiple future cash flows is to 
discount back to the present one period at a time. To illustrate, suppose we had an invest-
ment that was going to pay $1,000 at the end of every year for the next five years. To find 
the present value, we could discount each $1,000 back to the present separately and then 
add the results up. Figure 5.5 illustrates this approach for a 6 percent discount rate. As 
shown, the answer is $4,212.37 (ignoring a small rounding error).
Alternatively, we could discount the last cash flow back one period and add it to the 
next-to-the-last cash flow:
$1,000/1.06 + 1,000 = $943.40 + 1,000 = $1,943.40
We could then discount this amount back one period and add it to the Year 3 cash flow:
$1,943.40/1.06 + 1,000 = $1,833.40 + 1,000 = $2,833.40
This process could be repeated as necessary. Figure 5.6 illustrates this approach and the 
remaining calculations.
As the accompanying Finance Matters box shows, calculating present values is a vital 
step in comparing alternative cash flows. We will have much more to say on this subject in 
subsequent chapters.
f i g u r e  5.5
Present value 
calculated by 
discounting each 
cash flow separately
0
1
2
3
4
5
$1,000
$1,000
$1,000
$1,000
$   943.40
890.00
839.62
792.09
747.26
$4,212.37
31/1.06
Time
(years)
$1,000
31/1.06 2
31/1.06 3
31/1.06 4
31/1.06 5
Total present value
r = 6%
f i g u r e  5.6
Present value 
calculated by 
discounting back one 
period at a time
0
1
2
3
4
5
$4,212.37
0.00
$4,212.37
$4,212.37
0.00
$4,212.37
$3,465.11
1,000.00
$4,465.11
$2,673.01
1,000.00
$3,673.01
$1,833.40
1,000.00
$2,833.40
$   943.40
1,000.00
$1,943.40
$       0.00
1,000.00
$1,000.00
Time
(years)
Total present value = $4,212.37
r = 6%

128
Jackpot!
I
f you, or someone you know, is a regular lottery player, you 
probably already understand that you are 20 times more 
likely to be killed by a lightning bolt than to win a big lottery 
jackpot. How bad are the odds? Below you will find a table 
comparing your chances of winning the Mega Millions Lot-
tery to other events.
Big Game: Is It Worth the Gamble?
Odds of winning Mega Millions jackpot
1:135,145,920*
Odds of being killed by a venomous spider
1:57,018,763  
Odds of being killed by a dog bite
1:11,403,753  
Odds of being killed by lightning
1:6,479,405  
Odds of being killed by drowning
1:690,300  
Odds of being killed by falling from a bed  
  or other furniture
1:388,411  
Odds of being killed in a car crash
1:6,029
*Source: Virginia Lottery website. All other odds from the National Safety 
Council.
	
Sweepstakes may have different odds than lotteries, 
but the odds may not be much better. Probably the largest 
advertised grand prize ever was Pepsi’s “Play for a Billion,” 
which, you guessed it, had a $1 billion (billion!) prize. Not bad 
for a day’s work, but you still have to read the fine print. It 
turns out that the winner would be paid $5 million per year 
for the next 20 years, $10 million per year for years 21 to 39, 
and a lump sum of $710 million in 40 years. From what you 
have learned, you know the value of the sweepstakes wasn’t 
even close to $1 billion. In fact, at an interest rate of 10 per-
cent, the present value was about $70.7 million.
	
Lottery jackpots are often paid out over 20 or more 
years, but the winner can usually choose to take a lump sum 
cash payment instead. For example, in June 2014, a Knoxville, 
Tennessee, man won the $259.8 million Powerball lottery. The 
man had the option of a single cash payment of $153.5 mil-
lion or payments over the next 30 years. In this case, the 
man chose the cash option.
	
Some lotteries make your decision a little tougher. The 
Ontario Lottery will pay you either $2,000 a week for the 
rest of your life or $1.3 million now. (That’s in Canadian dol-
lars, by the way.) Of course, there is the chance you might 
die in the near future, so the lottery guarantees that your 
heirs will collect the $2,000 weekly payments until the 20th 
anniversary of the first payment, or until you would have 
turned 91, whichever comes first. This payout scheme com-
plicates your decision quite a bit. If you live for only the 20-
year minimum, the break-even interest rate between the two 
options is about 5.13 percent per year, compounded weekly. 
If you expect to live longer than the 20-year minimum, you 
might be better off accepting $2,000 per week for life. Of 
course, if you manage to invest the $1.3 million lump sum at 
a rate of return of about 8 percent per year (compounded 
weekly), you can have your cake and eat it, too, because the 
investment will return $2,000 at the end of each week for-
ever! Taxes complicate the decision in this case because the 
lottery payments are all on an aftertax basis. Thus, the rates 
of return in this example would have to be aftertax as well.
FINANCE MATTERS
EXAMPLE
5.3  How Much Is It Worth?
You are offered an investment that will pay you $200 in one year, $400 the next year, $600 the next 
year, and $800 at the end of the next year. You can earn 12 percent on very similar investments. 
What is the most you should pay for this one?
	
We need to calculate the present value of these cash flows at 12 percent. Taking them one at a 
time gives:
	 $200 × 1/1.121 = $200/1.1200 = $	 178.57
	 $400 × 1/1.122 = $400/1.2544 =	
318.88
	 $600 × 1/1.123 = $600/1.4049 =	
427.07
+$800 × 1/1.124 = $800/1.5735 =	     508.41
	
Total present value = $1,432.93
If you can earn 12 percent on your money, then you can duplicate this investment’s cash flows for 
$1,432.93, so this is the most you should be willing to pay.

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
129
EXAMPLE
5.4  How Much Is It Worth? Part 2
You are offered an investment that will make three $5,000 payments. The first payment will occur 
four years from today. The second will occur in five years, and the third will follow in six years. If you 
can earn 11 percent, what is the most this investment is worth today? What is the future value of the 
cash flows?
	
We answer the questions in reverse order to illustrate a point. The future value of the cash 
flows in six years is:
$5,000 × 1.112 + 5,000 × 1.11 + 5,000 = $6,160.50 + 5,550 + 5,000    
	
= $16,710.50
The present value must be:
$16,710.50/1.116 = $8,934.12
Let’s check this. Taking them one at a time, the PVs of the cash flows are:
	 $5,000 × 1/1.116 = $5,000/1.8704 = $2,673.20
	 $5,000 × 1/1.115 = $5,000/1.6851 =	     2,967.26
+$5,000 × 1/1.114 = $5,000/1.5181 =	  3,293.65
	
Total present value = $8,934.12
This is as we previously calculated. The point we want to make is that we can calculate present and 
future values in any order and convert between them using whatever way seems most convenient. 
The answers will always be the same as long as we stick with the same discount rate and are careful 
to keep track of the right number of periods.
HOW TO CALCULATE PRESENT VALUES WITH MULTIPLE FUTURE 
CASH FLOWS USING A FINANCIAL CALCULATOR
To calculate the present value of multiple cash flows with a financial calculator, we will simply discount the 
individual cash flows one at a time using the same technique we used in our previous chapter, so this is not 
really new. There is a shortcut, however, that we can show you. We will use the numbers in Example 5.3 to 
illustrate.
	
To begin, of course, we first remember to clear out the calculator! Next, from Example 5.3, the 
first cash flow is $200 to be received in one year and the discount rate is 12 percent, so we do the 
following:
Enter	
1	
12	
	
200
	
PV
PV
Solve for	
	
	
	
−178.57
Now, you can write down this answer to save it, but that’s inefficient. All calculators have a memory 
where you can store numbers. Why not just save it there? Doing so cuts way down on mistakes because 
you don’t have to write down and/or rekey numbers, and it’s much faster.
	
Next, we value the second cash flow. We need to change N to 2 and FV to 400. As long as we 
haven’t changed anything else, we don’t have to reenter I/Y or clear out the calculator, so we have:
Enter	
2	
	
	
400
	
PV
PV
Solve for	
	
	
	
−318.88
CALCULATOR 
HINTS

130	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
A Note on Cash Flow Timing
In working present and future value problems, cash flow timing is critically important. In 
almost all such calculations, it is implicitly assumed that the cash flows occur at the end of 
each period. In fact, all the formulas we have discussed, all the numbers in a standard pres-
ent value or future value table, and, very importantly, all the preset (or default) settings on 
a financial calculator or spreadsheet assume that cash flows occur at the end of each pe-
riod. Unless you are very explicitly told otherwise, you should always assume that this is 
what is meant.
As a quick illustration of this point, suppose you are told that a three-year investment 
has a first-year cash flow of $100, a second-year cash flow of $200, and a third-year cash 
flow of $300. You are asked to draw a time line. Without further information, you should 
always assume that the time line looks like this:
0
1
$100
$200
$300
2
3
On our time line, notice how the first cash flow occurs at the end of the first 
period, the second at the end of the second period, and the third at the end of the third 
period.
We will close this section by answering the question we posed at the beginning of the 
chapter concerning football player Colin Kaepernick’s contract. Recall that the contract 
called for a $13 million signing bonus. The remaining $108 million was to be paid as $12.4 
million in 2015, $14.3 million in 2016, $18.5 million in 2017, $19 million in 2018, $20.8 
million in 2019, and $23 million in 2020. If 12 percent is the appropriate discount rate, 
what kind of deal did the 49ers’ quarterback get thrown?
To answer, we can calculate the present value by discounting each year’s salary 
back to the present as follows (notice we assume that all the payments are made at 
year-end):
Year 0 (2014): $13,000,000	
= $13,000,000.00
Year 1 (2015): $12,400,000 × 1/1.121 = $11,071,428.57
Year 2 (2016): $14,300,000 × 1/1.122 = $11,399,872.45
	 .	
.	
.
	 .	
.	
.
	 .	
.	
.
Year 6 (2020): $23,000,000 × 1/1.126 = $11,652,515.79
If you fill in the missing rows and then add (do it for practice), you will see that Colin’s 
contract had a present value of about $84.2 million, or only about 70 percent of the stated 
$121 million value (but still pretty good).
You save this number by adding it to the one you saved in our first calculation, and so on, for the remain-
ing two calculations.
	
As we will see in a later chapter, some financial calculators will let you enter all of the future cash 
flows at once, but we’ll discuss that subject when we get to it.

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
131
VALUING LEVEL CASH FLOWS:  
ANNUITIES AND PERPETUITIES
We frequently encounter situations in which we have multiple cash flows that are all the 
same amount. For example, a very common type of loan repayment plan calls for the bor-
rower to repay the loan by making a series of equal payments for some length of time. Al-
most all consumer loans (such as car loans) and home mortgages feature equal payments, 
usually made each month.
5.2
HOW TO CALCULATE PRESENT VALUES WITH MULTIPLE FUTURE 
CASH FLOWS USING A SPREADSHEET
Just as we did in our previous chapter, we can set up a basic spreadsheet to calculate the present val-
ues of the individual cash flows as follows. Notice that we have simply calculated the present values one 
at a time and added them up.
SPREADSHEET 
STRATEGIES
A
B
C
D
E
F
1
2
Using a spreadsheet to value multiple cash flows
3
4
What is the present value of $200 in one year, $400 the next year, $600 the next year, and
5
$800 the last year if the discount rate is 12 percent?
6
7
Rate:
.12
8
9
Year
Cash flows
Present values
Formula used
10
1
$200
$178.57
=PV($B$7, A10,0,-B10)
11
2
$400
$318.88
=PV($B$7, A11,0,-B11)
12
3
$600
$427.07
=PV($B$7, A12,0,-B12)
13
4
$800
$508.41
=PV($B$7, A13,0,-B13)
14
15
Total PV:
$1,432.93
=SUM(C10:C13)
16
17
Notice the negative signs inserted in the PV formulas. These just make the present values have 
18
positive signs. Also, the discount rate in cell B7 is entered as $B$7 (an “absolute” reference) 
19
because it is used over and over. We could have just entered “.12” instead, but our approach is
20
more flexible.
21
22
concept questions
5.1a	
Describe how to calculate the future value of a series of cash flows.
5.1b	
Describe how to calculate the present value of a series of cash flows.
5.1c	
Unless we are explicitly told otherwise, what do we always assume about the timing of 
cash flows in present and future value problems?
coverage online
Excel 
Master

132	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
More generally, a series of constant, or level, cash flows that occur at the end of each 
period for some fixed number of periods is called an ordinary annuity; or, more correctly, 
the cash flows are said to be in ordinary annuity form. Annuities appear very frequently in 
financial arrangements, and there are some useful shortcuts for determining their values. 
We consider these next.
Present Value for Annuity Cash Flows
Suppose we were examining an asset that promised to pay $500 at the end of each of the 
next three years. The cash flows from this asset are in the form of a three-year, $500 ordi-
nary annuity. If we wanted to earn 10 percent on our money, how much would we offer for 
this annuity?
From the previous section, we know that we can discount each of these $500 payments 
back to the present at 10 percent to determine the total present value:
Present value = $500/1.11 + 500/1.12 + 500/1.13
	
= $500/1.10 + 500/1.21 + 500/1.331
	
= $454.55 + 413.22 + 375.66    
	
= $1,243.43
This approach works just fine. However, we will often encounter situations where 
the number of cash flows is quite large. For example, a typical home mortgage calls 
for monthly payments over 30 years, for a total of 360 payments. If we were trying to 
determine the present value of those payments, it would be useful to have a 
shortcut.
Because the cash flows on an annuity are all the same, we can come up with a very 
useful variation on the basic present value equation. It turns out that the present value of an 
annuity of C dollars per period for t periods when the rate of return, or interest rate, is r is 
given by:
 Annuity present value = C × a1 −Present value factor
r
b	
[5.1]
 = C × e
1 −31/11 + r2t4
r
f
The term in parentheses on the first line is sometimes called the present value interest fac-
tor for annuities and abbreviated PVIFA(r, t).
The expression for the annuity present value may look a little complicated, but it 
isn’t difficult to use. Notice that the term in square brackets on the second line, 1/(1 + r)t, 
is the same present value factor we’ve been calculating. In the preceding example, 
the interest rate is 10 percent and there are three years involved. The usual present 
value factor is thus:
Present value factor = 1/1.13 = 1/1.331 = .751315
To calculate the annuity present value factor, we just plug this in:
Annuity present value factor = (1 − Present value factor)/r
	
= (1 − .751315 )/.10    
	
= .248685/.10 = 2.48685
Just as we calculated before, the present value of our $500 annuity is then:
Annuity present value = $500 × 2.48685 = $1,243.43
annuity
A level stream of cash 
flows for a fixed period of 
time.

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
133
Annuity Tables 
Just as there are tables for ordinary present value factors, there are 
tables for annuity factors as well. Table 5.1 contains a few such factors; Table A.3 in Ap-
pendix A contains a larger set. To find the annuity present value factor we just calculated, 
look for the row corresponding to three periods and then find the column for 10 percent. 
The number you see at that intersection should be 2.4869 (rounded to four decimal places), 
as we calculated. Once again, try calculating a few of these factors yourself and compare 
your answers to the ones in the table to make sure you know how to do it. If you are using 
a financial calculator, just enter $1 as the payment and calculate the present value; the re-
sult should be the annuity present value factor.
EXAMPLE
5.5  How Much Can You Afford?
After carefully going over your budget, you have determined you can afford to pay $632 per month 
toward a new sports car. You call up your local bank and find out that the going rate is 1 percent per 
month for 48 months. How much can you borrow?
	
To determine how much you can borrow, we need to calculate the present value of $632 per 
month for 48 months at 1 percent per month. The loan payments are in ordinary annuity form, so the 
annuity present value factor is:
Annuity PV factor = (1 − Present value factor)/r
	
= [1 − (1/1.0148)]/.01
	
= (1 − .62026)/.01
	
= 37.9740
With this factor, we can calculate the present value of the 48 payments of $632 each as:
Present value = $632 × 37.9740 = $24,000
Therefore, $24,000 is what you can afford to borrow and repay.
ta b l e  5.1
Annuity present 
value interest factors
Number of 
Periods
Interest Rates
5%
10%
15%
20%
1
.9524
.9091
.8696
.8333
2
1.8594
1.7355
1.6257
1.5278
3
2.7232
2.4869
2.2832
2.1065
4
3.5460
3.1699
2.8550
2.5887
5
4.3295
3.7908
3.3522
2.9906
ANNUITY PRESENT VALUES
To find annuity present values with a financial calculator, we need to use the  PMT  key (you were probably 
wondering what it was for). Compared to finding the present value of a single amount, there are two impor-
tant differences. First, we enter the annuity cash flow using the  PMT  key, and, second, we don’t enter any-
thing for the future value,  FV. So, for example, the problem we have been examining is a three-year, $500 
annuity. If the discount rate is 10 percent, we need to do the following (after clearing out the calculator!):
Enter	
3	
10	
500
	
PV
PV
Solve for	
	
	
	
−1,243.43
As usual, we get a negative sign on the PV.
CALCULATOR 
HINTS

134	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
Finding the Payment 
Suppose you wish to start up a new business that specializes 
in the latest health food trend, frozen yak milk. To produce and market your product, the 
Yakee Doodle Dandy, you need to borrow $100,000. Because it strikes you as unlikely that 
this particular fad will be long-lived, you propose to pay off the loan quickly by making 
five equal annual payments. If the interest rate is 18 percent, what will the payments be?
In this case, we know that the present value is $100,000. The interest rate is 18 per-
cent, and there are five years to make payments. The payments are all equal, so we need to 
find the relevant annuity factor and solve for the unknown cash flow:
Annuity present value = $100,000 = C × (1 − Present value factor)/r
	
$100,000 = C × (1 − 1/1.185)/.18    
	
= C × (1 − .4371)/.18    
	
= C × 3.1272 
	
C = $100,000/3.1272 = $31,977.78
Therefore, you’ll make five payments of just under $32,000 each.
ANNUITY PRESENT VALUES
Using a spreadsheet to work the same problem goes like this:
SPREADSHEET 
STRATEGIES
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
2
Using a spreadsheet to find annuity present values
3
4
What is the present value of $500 per year for 3 years if the discount rate is 10 percent?
5
We need to solve for the unknown present value, so we use the formula PV(rate, nper, pmt, fv).
6
7
Payment amount per period:
$500
8
Number of payments:
3
9
Discount rate:
.1
10
11
Annuity present value:
$1,243.43
12
13
The formula entered in cell B11 is =PV(B9, B8, −B7, 0); notice that fv is zero and that pmt has a
14
negative sign on it. Also notice that the discount rate is entered as a decimal, not a percentage.
15
ANNUITY PAYMENTS
Finding annuity payments is easy with a financial calculator. In our example just above, the PV is 
$100,000, the interest rate is 18 percent, and there are five years. We find the payment as follows:
Enter	
5	
18	
100,000
	
PMT
PMT
Solve for	
	
	
−31,978
Here we get a negative sign on the payment because the payment is an outflow for us.
CALCULATOR 
HINTS

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
135
ANNUITY PAYMENTS
Using a spreadsheet to work the same problem goes like this:
SPREADSHEET 
STRATEGIES
A
B
C
D
E
F
1
2
Using a spreadsheet to find annuity payments
3
4
What is the annuity payment if the present value is $100,000, the interest rate is 18 percent, and
5
there are 5 periods? We need to solve for the unknown payment in an annuity, so we use the
6
formula PMT(rate, nper, pv, fv)
7
8
Annuity present value:
$100,000
9
Number of payments:
5
10
Discount rate:
.18
11
12
Annuity payment:
($31,977.78)
13
14
The formula entered in cell B12 is =PMT(B10, B9, B8); notice that the 
15
payment has a negative sign because it is an outflow to us.
EXAMPLE
5.6  Finding the Number of Payments
You ran a little short on your spring break vacation, so you put $1,000 on your credit card. You can 
only afford to make the minimum payment of $20 per month. The interest rate on the credit card is 
1.5 percent per month. How long will you need to pay off the $1,000?
	
What we have here is an annuity of $20 per month at 1.5 percent per month for some unknown 
length of time. The present value is $1,000 (the amount you owe today). We need to do a little alge-
bra (or else use a financial calculator):
	
$1,000 = $20 × (1 − Present value factor)/.015
	 ($1,000/20) × .015 = 1 − Present value factor   
Present value factor = .25 = 1/(1 + r)t
	
1.015t = 1/.25 = 4
At this point, the problem boils down to asking the following question: How long does it take for your 
money to quadruple at 1.5 percent per month? Based on our previous chapter, the answer is about 
93 months:
1.01593 = 3.99 ≈ 4
It will take you about 93/12 = 7.75 years at this rate.
FINDING THE NUMBER OF PAYMENTS
To solve this one on a financial calculator, do the following:
Enter	
	
1.5	
−20	
1,000
	
N
Solve for	
93.11	
	
	
Notice that we put a negative sign on the payment you must make, and we have solved for the number of 
months. You still have to divide by 12 to get our answer. Also, some financial calculators won’t report a frac-
tional value for N; they automatically (without telling you) round up to the next whole period (not to the near-
est value). With a spreadsheet, use the function =NPER(rate,pmt,pv,fv); be sure to put in a zero for fv and to 
enter −20 as the payment.
CALCULATOR 
HINTS

136	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
Finding the Rate 
The last question we might want to ask concerns the interest rate 
implicit in an annuity. For example, an insurance company offers to pay you $1,000 
per year for 10 years if you pay $6,710 up front. What rate is implicit in this 10-year 
annuity?
In this case, we know the present value ($6,710), we know the cash flows ($1,000 per 
year), and we know the life of the investment (10 years). What we don’t know is the dis-
count rate:
	
$6,710 = $1,000 × (1 − Present value factor)/r    
$6,710/1,000 = 6.71 = {1 − [1/(1 + r)10]}/r
So, the annuity factor for 10 periods is equal to 6.71, and we need to solve this equation for 
the unknown value of r. Unfortunately, this is mathematically impossible to do directly. 
The only way to do it is to use a table or trial and error to find a value for r.
If you look across the row corresponding to 10 periods in Table A.3, you will see a 
factor of 6.7101 for 8 percent, so we see right away that the insurance company is offering 
just about 8 percent. Alternatively, we could just start trying different values until we got 
very close to the answer. Using this trial-and-error approach can be a little tedious, but, 
fortunately, machines are good at that sort of thing.1
To illustrate how to find the answer by trial and error, suppose a relative of yours 
wants to borrow $3,000. She offers to repay you $1,000 every year for four years. What 
interest rate are you being offered?
The cash flows here have the form of a four-year, $1,000 annuity. The present value is 
$3,000. We need to find the discount rate, r. Our goal in doing so is primarily to give you a 
feel for the relationship between annuity values and discount rates.
We need to start somewhere, and 10 percent is probably as good a place as any to be-
gin. At 10 percent, the annuity factor is:
Annuity present value factor = (1 − 1/1.104)/.10 = 3.1699
The present value of the cash flows at 10 percent is thus:
Present value = $1,000 × 3.1699 = $3,169.90
You can see that we’re already in the right ballpark.
Is 10 percent too high or too low? Recall that present values and discount rates move 
in opposite directions: Increasing the discount rate lowers the PV and vice versa. Our pres-
ent value here is too high, so the discount rate is too low. If we try 12 percent:
Present value = $1,000 × (1 − 1/1.124)/.12 = $3,037.35
Now we’re almost there. We are still a little low on the discount rate (because the PV is a 
little high), so we’ll try 13 percent:
Present value = $1,000 × (1 − 1/1.134)/.13 = $2,974.47
This is less than $3,000, so we now know that the answer is between 12 percent and 13 
percent, and it looks to be about 12.5 percent. For practice, work at it for a while longer and 
see if you find that the answer is about 12.59 percent.
1 Financial calculators rely on trial and error to find the answer. That’s why they sometimes appear to be 
“thinking” before coming up with the answer. Actually, it is possible to directly solve for r if there are fewer 
than five periods, but it’s usually not worth the trouble.

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
137
Future Value for Annuities
On occasion, it’s also handy to know a shortcut for calculating the future value of an annu-
ity. As you might guess, there are future value factors for annuities as well as present value 
factors. In general, the future value factor for an annuity is given by:
Annuity FV factor = (Future value factor − 1)/r
	
= [(1 + r)t − 1]/r 	
[5.2]
To see how we use annuity future value factors, suppose you plan to contribute $2,000 
every year into a retirement account paying 8 percent. If you retire in 30 years, how much 
will you have?
The number of years here, t, is 30, and the interest rate, r, is 8 percent, so we can cal-
culate the annuity future value factor as:
Annuity FV factor	= (Future value factor  − 1)/r
	
= (1.0830 − 1)/.08     
	
= (10.0627 − 1 )/.08     
	
= 113.2832
The future value of this 30-year, $2,000 annuity is thus:
Annuity future value	 = $2,000 × 113.2832
	
= $226,566.42
FINDING THE RATE
Alternatively, you could use a financial calculator to do the following:
Enter	
4	
	
1,000	
−3,000
	
I/ Y
I/ Y
Solve for	
	
12.59
Notice that we put a negative sign on the present value (why?). With a spreadsheet, use the function 
=RATE(nper,pmt,pv,fv); be sure to put in a zero for fv and to enter 1,000 as the payment and −3,000 as 
the present value.
CALCULATOR 
HINTS
ANNUITY FUTURE VALUES
Of course, you could solve this problem using a financial calculator by doing the following:
Enter	
30	
8	
−2,000
	
FV
FV
Solve for	
	
	
	
	
226,566.42
Notice that we put a negative sign on the payment (why?). With a spreadsheet, use the function 
=FV(rate,nper,pmt,pv); be sure to put in a zero for pv and to enter −2,000 as the payment.
CALCULATOR 
HINTS
A Note on Annuities Due
So far, we have only discussed ordinary annuities. These are the most important, but there 
is a variation that is fairly common. Remember that with an ordinary annuity, the cash 
flows occur at the end of each period. When you take out a loan with monthly payments, 

138	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
for example, the first loan payment normally occurs one month after you get the loan. 
However, when you lease an apartment, the first lease payment is usually due immediately. 
The second payment is due at the beginning of the second month, and so on. A lease is an 
example of an annuity due. An annuity due is an annuity for which the cash flows occur at 
the beginning of each period. Almost any type of arrangement in which we have to prepay 
the same amount each period is an annuity due.
There are several different ways to calculate the value of an annuity due. With a financial 
calculator, you simply switch it into “due” or “beginning” mode. It is very important to re-
member to switch it back when you are finished! Another way to calculate the present value 
of an annuity due can be illustrated with a time line. Suppose an annuity due has five pay-
ments of $400 each, and the relevant discount rate is 10 percent. The time line looks like this:
0
1
$400
$400
$400
2
$400
3
$400
4
5
Notice how the cash flows here are the same as those for a four-year ordinary annuity, ex-
cept that there is an extra $400 at Time 0. For practice, verify that the present value of a 
four-year $400 ordinary annuity at 10 percent is $1,267.95. If we add on the extra $400, we 
get $1,667.95, which is the present value of this annuity due.
There is an even easier way to calculate the present or future value of an annuity due. If we 
assume that cash flows occur at the end of each period when they really occur at the beginning, 
then we discount each one by one period too many. We could fix this by simply multiplying our 
answer by (1 + r), where r is the discount rate. In fact, the relationship between the value of an 
annuity due and an ordinary annuity with the same number of payments is just:
Annuity due value = Ordinary annuity value × (1 + r)	
[5.3]
This works for both present and future values, so calculating the value of an annuity due 
involves two steps: (1) calculate the present or future value as though it were an ordinary 
annuity and (2) multiply your answer by (1 + r).
Perpetuities
We’ve seen that a series of level cash flows can be valued by treating those cash flows as 
an annuity. An important special case of an annuity arises when the level stream of cash 
flows continues forever. Such an asset is called a perpetuity because the cash flows are 
perpetual. Perpetuities are also called consols, particularly in Canada and the United King-
dom. See Example 5.7 for an important example of a perpetuity.
Because a perpetuity has an infinite number of cash flows, we obviously can’t com-
pute its value by discounting each one. Fortunately, valuing a perpetuity turns out to be the 
easiest possible case. The present value of a perpetuity is simply:
Perpetuity PV = C/r	
[5.4]
For example, an investment offers a perpetual cash flow of $500 every year. The return you 
require on such an investment is 8 percent. What is the value of this investment? The value 
of this perpetuity is:
Perpetuity PV  = C/r = $500/.08 = $6,250
This concludes our discussion of valuing investments with multiple cash flows. For future 
reference, Table 5.2 contains a summary of the annuity and perpetuity basic calculations 
we described. By now, you probably think that you’ll just use online calculators to handle 
annuity problems. Before you do, see our nearby Work the Web box.
annuity due
An annuity for which the 
cash flows occur at the 
beginning of the period.
Time value applications 
abound on the web.  
See, for example,  
www.collegeboard.org  
and  
personal.fidelity.com.
perpetuity
An annuity in which the 
cash flows continue 
forever.
consol
A type of perpetuity.

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
139
ta b l e  5.2
Summary of annuity 
and perpetuity 
calculations
I.	
Symbols
	
PV = Present value, what future cash flows are worth today
	
FVt = Future value, what cash flows are worth in the future at Time t
	
 
r = Interest rate, rate of return, or discount rate per period—typically, but not always,  
one year
	
 
t = Number of periods—typically, but not always, the number of years
	
  C = Cash amount
II.	 Future value of C invested per period for t periods at r percent per period
	
FVt = C × [(1 + r)t − 1]/r
	
A series of identical cash flows paid for a set number of periods is called an annuity, and the 
term [(1 + r)t − 1]/r is called the annuity future value factor.
III.	 Present value of C per period for t periods at r percent per period
	
PV = C × {1 − [1/(1 + r)t]}/r
	
The term {1 − [1/(1 + r)t]}/r is called the annuity present value factor.
IV.	 Present value of a perpetuity of C per period
	
PV = C/r
	
A perpetuity has the same cash flow every period forever.
A
s we discussed in our previous chapter, many websites have financial calculators. One of 
these sites is Calculatoredge, which is located at www.calculatoredge.com. Suppose you re-
tire with $1,500,000 and want to withdraw an equal amount each year for the next 30 years. If you 
can earn a 9.5 percent return, how much can you withdraw each year? Here is what Calcula-
toredge says:
According to the Calculatoredge calculator, the answer is $139,288.47. How important is it to un-
derstand what you are doing? Calculate this one for yourself, and you should get $152,520.88. 
Which one is right? You are, of course! What’s going on is that Calculatoredge assumes (but tells 
you on a different page) that the annuity is in the form of an annuity due, not an ordinary annuity. 
Recall that with an annuity due the payments occur at the beginning of the period rather than at 
the end of the period. The moral of the story is clear: Caveat calculator.
W
RK TH E W E B
QUESTIONS
	
1.	 Go to the calculator at www.calculatoredge.com and find out how much the website 
says you could withdraw each year if you have $2,500,000, earn an 8 percent interest 
rate, and make annual withdrawals for 35 years. How much more are the withdrawals 
if they are in the form of an ordinary annuity?
	
2.	 Suppose you have $500,000 and want to make withdrawals each month for the next 
10 years. The first withdrawal is today and the appropriate interest rate is 9 percent 
compounded monthly. Using this website, how much are your withdrawals?

140	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
concept questions
5.2a	
In general, what is the present value of an annuity of C dollars per period at a 
discount rate of r per period? The future value?
5.2b	
In general, what is the present value of a perpetuity?
COMPARING RATES: THE EFFECT  
OF COMPOUNDING PERIODS
An important issue we need to discuss has to do with the way interest rates are quoted. This 
subject causes a fair amount of confusion because rates are quoted in many different ways. 
Sometimes the way a rate is quoted is the result of tradition, and sometimes it’s the result 
of legislation. Unfortunately, at times, rates are quoted in deliberately deceptive ways to 
mislead borrowers and investors. We discuss these topics in this section.
Effective Annual Rates and Compounding
If a rate is quoted as 10 percent compounded semiannually, then what this means is that the in-
vestment actually pays 5 percent every six months. A natural question then arises: Is 5 percent 
every six months the same thing as 10 percent per year? It’s easy to see that it is not. If you in-
vest $1 at 10 percent per year, you will have $1.10 at the end of the year. If you invest at 5 per-
cent every six months, then you’ll have the future value of $1 at 5 percent for two periods, or:
$1 × 1.052 = $1.1025
This is $.0025 more. The reason is very simple. What has occurred is that your account 
was credited with $1 × .05 = 5 cents in interest after six months. In the following six 
months, you earned 5 percent on that nickel, for an extra .05 × .05 = .0025 = .25 cents.
As our example illustrates, 10 percent compounded semiannually is actually equiva-
lent to 10.25 percent per year. Put another way, we would be indifferent between 10 percent 
compounded semiannually and 10.25 percent compounded annually. Any time we have 
compounding during the year, we need to be concerned about what the rate really is.
5.3
coverage online
Excel 
Master
EXAMPLE
5.7  Preferred Stock
Preferred stock (or preference stock) is an important example of a perpetuity. When a corporation 
sells preferred stock, the buyer is promised a fixed cash dividend every period (usually every quar-
ter) forever. This dividend must be paid before any dividend can be paid to regular stockholders, 
hence the term preferred.
	
Suppose the Fellini Co. wants to sell preferred stock at $100 per share. A very similar issue of 
preferred stock already outstanding has a price of $40 per share and offers a dividend of $1 every 
quarter. What dividend will Fellini have to offer if the preferred stock is going to sell?
	
The issue that is already out has a present value of $40 and a cash flow of $1 every quarter 
forever. Because this is a perpetuity:
Present value = $40 = $1 × (1/r) 
	
r = 2.5%
To be competitive, the new Fellini issue will also have to offer 2.5 percent per quarter; so, if the pres-
ent value is to be $100, the dividend must be such that:
Present value = $100 = C × (1/.025) 
	
C = $2.5 (per quarter)

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
141
In our example, the 10 percent is called a stated, or quoted, interest rate. Other names 
are used as well. The 10.25 percent, which is actually the rate that you will earn, is called 
the effective annual rate (EAR). To compare different investments or interest rates, we will 
always need to convert to effective rates. Some general procedures for doing this are dis-
cussed next.
Calculating and Comparing Effective Annual Rates
To see why it is important to work only with effective rates, suppose you’ve shopped 
around and come up with the following three rates:
Bank A: 15 percent, compounded daily
Bank B: 15.5 percent, compounded quarterly
Bank C: 16 percent, compounded annually
Which of these is the best if you are thinking of opening a savings account? Which of these 
is best if they represent loan rates?
To begin, Bank C is offering 16 percent per year. Because there is no compounding dur-
ing the year, this is the effective rate. Bank B is actually paying .155/4 = .03875, or 3.875 
percent, per quarter. At this rate, an investment of $1 for four quarters would grow to:
$1 × 1.038754 = $1.1642
The EAR, therefore, is 16.42 percent. For a saver, this is much better than the 16 percent 
rate Bank C is offering; for a borrower, it’s worse.
Bank A is compounding every day. This may seem a little extreme, but it is very com-
mon to calculate interest daily. In this case, the daily interest rate is actually:
.15/365 = .000411
This is .0411 percent per day. At this rate, an investment of $1 for 365 periods would grow to:
$1 × 1.000411365 = $1.1618
The EAR is 16.18 percent. This is not as good as Bank B’s 16.42 percent for a saver and 
not as good as Bank C’s 16 percent for a borrower.
This example illustrates two things. First, the highest quoted rate is not necessarily the 
best. Second, compounding during the year can lead to a significant difference between the 
quoted rate and the effective rate. Remember that the effective rate is what you get or what 
you pay.
If you look at our examples, you see that we computed the EARs in three steps. We 
first divided the quoted rate by the number of times that the interest is compounded. We 
then added 1 to the result and raised it to the power of the number of times the interest is 
compounded. Finally, we subtracted the 1. If we let m be the number of times the interest 
is compounded during the year, these steps can be summarized simply as:
EAR = (1 + Quoted rate/m)m − 1	
[5.5]
For example, suppose you were offered 12 percent compounded monthly. In this case, the 
interest is compounded 12 times a year, so m is 12. You can calculate the effective rate as:
EAR 	= (1 + Quoted rate/m)m − 1
	
= (1 + .12/12)12 − 1
	
= 1.0112 − 1
	
= 1.126825 − 1
	
= 12.6825%
stated interest rate
The interest rate 
expressed in terms of the 
interest payment made 
each period. Also quoted 
interest rate.
quoted interest rate
The interest rate 
expressed in terms of the 
interest payment made 
each period. Also stated 
interest rate.
effective annual rate 
(EAR)
The interest rate 
expressed as if it were 
compounded once per 
year.

142	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
EARs and APRs
Sometimes it’s not altogether clear whether a rate is an effective annual rate or not. A case 
in point concerns what is called the annual percentage rate (APR) on a loan. Truth-in-
lending laws in the United States require that lenders disclose an APR on virtually all 
annual percentage 
rate (APR)
The interest rate charged 
per period multiplied by the 
number of periods per year.
EXAMPLE
5.8  What’s the EAR?
A bank is offering 12 percent compounded quarterly. If you put $100 in an account, how much will 
you have at the end of one year? What’s the EAR? How much will you have at the end of two years?
	
The bank is effectively offering 12%/4 = 3% every quarter. If you invest $100 for four periods at 
3 percent per period, the future value is:
Future value 	= $100 × 1.034
	
= $100 × 1.1255
	
= $112.55
The EAR is 12.55 percent, so at the end of one year you will have: $100 × (1 + .1255) = $112.55.
	
We can determine what you would have at the end of two years in two different ways. One way 
is to recognize that two years is the same as eight quarters. At 3 percent per quarter, after eight 
quarters, you would have:
$100 × 1.038 = $100 × 1.2668 = $126.68
Alternatively, we could determine the value after two years by using an EAR of 12.55 percent; so 
after two years you would have:
$100 × 1.12552 = $100 × 1.2668 = $126.68
Thus, the two calculations produce the same answer. This illustrates an important point. Any time we 
do a present or future value calculation, the rate we use must be an actual or effective rate. In this 
case, the actual rate is 3 percent per quarter. The effective annual rate is 12.55 percent. It doesn’t 
matter which one we use once we know the EAR.
EXAMPLE
5.9  Quoting a Rate
Now that you know how to convert a quoted rate to an EAR, consider going the other way. As a 
lender, you know you want to actually earn 18 percent on a particular loan. You want to quote a rate 
that features monthly compounding. What rate do you quote?
	
In this case, we know that the EAR is 18 percent, and we know that this is the result of monthly 
compounding. Let q stand for the quoted rate. We thus have:
EAR 	= (1 + Quoted rate/m)m − 1
	 .18 = (1 + q/12)12 − 1
	 1.18 = (1 + q/12)12
We need to solve this equation for the quoted rate. This calculation is the same as the ones we did 
to find an unknown interest rate in Chapter 4:
1.18(1/12) 	 = 1 + q/12
	1.18.08333 = 1 + q/12
	 1.0139 = 1 + q/12   
	
q = .0139 × 12
	
= 16.68%
Therefore, the rate you would quote is 16.68 percent, compounded monthly.

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
143
consumer loans. This rate must be displayed on a loan document in a prominent and unam-
biguous way.2
Given that an APR must be calculated and displayed, an obvious question arises: Is an 
APR an effective annual rate? Put another way: If a bank quotes a car loan at 12 percent 
APR, is the consumer actually paying 12 percent interest? Surprisingly, the answer is no. 
There is some confusion over this point, which we discuss next.
The confusion over APRs arises because lenders are required by law to compute the 
APR in a particular way. By law, the APR is simply equal to the interest rate per period 
multiplied by the number of periods in a year. For example, if a bank is charging 1.2 per-
cent per month on car loans, then the APR that must be reported is 1.2% × 12 = 14.4%. So, 
an APR is in fact a quoted, or stated, rate in the sense we’ve been discussing. For example, 
an APR of 12 percent on a loan calling for monthly payments is really 1 percent per month. 
The EAR on such a loan is thus:
EAR 	= (1 + APR/12)12 − 1
	
= 1.0112 − 1 = 12.6825%
2 By law, lenders are required to report the APR on all consumer loans. We normally compute the APR as the 
interest rate per period multiplied by the number of periods in a year. According to federal law, the APR is a 
measure of the cost of consumer credit expressed as a yearly rate, and it includes interest and certain noninterest 
charges and fees. In practice, the APR can be much higher than the interest rate on the loan if the lender charges 
substantial fees that must be included in the federally mandated APR calculation.
EXAMPLE
5.10  What Rate Are You Paying?
A typical credit card agreement quotes an interest rate of 18 percent APR. Monthly payments are 
required. What is the actual interest rate you pay on such a credit card?
	
Based on our discussion, an APR of 18 percent with monthly payments is really .18/12 = .015, or 
1.5 percent, per month. The EAR is thus:
EAR	= (1 + .18/12)12 − 1
	
= 1.01512 − 1
	
= 1.1956 − 1
	
= 19.56%
This is the rate you actually pay.
The difference between an APR and an EAR probably won’t be all that great (as long 
as the rates are relatively low), but it is somewhat ironic that truth-in-lending laws some-
times require lenders to be untruthful about the actual rate on a loan.
There can be a huge difference between the APR and EAR when interest rates are 
large. For example, consider “payday loans.” Payday loans are short-term loans made 
to consumers, often for less than two weeks, and are offered by companies such as 
Check Into Cash and National Payday. The loans work like this: You write a check to-
day that is postdated (i.e., the date on the check is in the future) and give it to the com-
pany. They give you some cash. When the check date arrives, you either go to the store 
and pay the cash amount of the check, or the company cashes it (or else automatically 
renews the loan).

144	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
For example, as of 2015 in one particular state, Check Into Cash allows you to write a 
check for $352.94 dated 14 days in the future, for which they give you $300 today. So what 
are the APR and EAR of this arrangement? First, we need to find the interest rate, which 
we can find by the FV equation as follows:
	
FV = PV × (1 + r)1
	$352.94 = $300 × (1 + r)1
	
1.1765 = (1 + r)
	
r = .1765, or 17.65%
That doesn’t seem too bad until you remember this is the interest rate for 14 days! The 
APR of the loan is:
APR = .1765 × 365/14
APR = 4.6007, or 460.07%
And the EAR for this loan is:
EAR = (1 + Quoted rate/m)m − 1
EAR = (1 + .1765)365/14 − 1
EAR = 68.13889, or 6,813.89
Now that’s an interest rate! Just to see what a difference a small difference in fees can 
make, in another state, Check Into Cash will make you write a check for $335 for the same 
amount. Check for yourself that the APR of this arrangement is 304.17 percent and the 
EAR is 1,675.22 percent.
EARs, APRs, Financial Calculators, and Spreadsheets
A financial calculator will convert a quoted rate (or an APR) to an EAR and back. Unfor-
tunately, the specific procedures are too different from calculator to calculator for us to il-
lustrate in general terms; you’ll have to consult Appendix D or your calculator’s operating 
manual. Typically, however, what we have called EAR is labeled “EFF ”(for effective) on a 
calculator. More troublesome is the fact that what we have called a quoted rate (or an APR) 
is labeled “NOM” (for nominal). Unfortunately, the term nominal rate has come to have a 
different meaning that we will see in our next chapter. So, just remember that nominal in 
this context means quoted or APR.
With a spreadsheet, we can easily do these conversions. To convert a quoted rate (or an 
APR) to an effective rate in Excel, for example, use the formula EFFECT(nominal_ 
rate,npery), where nominal_rate is the quoted rate or APR and npery is the number of com-
pounding periods per year. Similarly, to convert an EAR to a quoted rate, use 
NOMINAL(effect_rate,npery), where effect_rate is the EAR.
concept questions
5.3a	
If an interest rate is given as 12 percent, compounded daily, what do we call this 
rate?
5.3b	
What is an APR? What is an EAR? Are they the same thing?
5.3c	
In general, what is the relationship between a stated interest rate and an effective 
interest rate? Which is more relevant for financial decisions?

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
145
LOAN TYPES AND LOAN AMORTIZATION
Whenever a lender extends a loan, some provision will be made for repayment of the prin-
cipal (the original loan amount). A loan might be repaid in equal installments, for example, 
or it might be repaid in a single lump sum. Because the way that the principal and interest 
are paid is up to the parties involved, there are actually an unlimited number of 
possibilities.
In this section, we describe a few forms of repayment that come up quite often; more 
complicated forms can usually be built up from these. The three basic types of loans are 
pure discount loans, interest-only loans, and amortized loans. Working with these loans 
is a very straightforward application of the present value principles that we have already 
developed.
Pure Discount Loans
The pure discount loan is the simplest form of loan. With such a loan, the borrower re-
ceives money today and repays a single lump sum at some time in the future. A one-year, 
10 percent pure discount loan, for example, would require the borrower to repay $1.1 in 
one year for every dollar borrowed today.
Because a pure discount loan is so simple, we already know how to value one. Sup-
pose a borrower was able to repay $25,000 in five years. If we, acting as the lender, wanted 
a 12 percent interest rate on the loan, how much would we be willing to lend? Put another 
way, what value would we assign today to that $25,000 to be repaid in five years? Based on 
our work in Chapter 4, we know that the answer is just the present value of $25,000 at 
12 percent for five years:
	Present value = $25,000/1.125
	
= $25,000/1.7623
	
= $14,186
Pure discount loans are very common when the loan term is short, say, a year or less. In 
recent years, they have become increasingly common for much longer periods.
5.4
coverage online
Excel 
Master
EXAMPLE
5.11  Treasury Bills
When the U.S. government borrows money on a short-term basis (a year or less), it does so by sell-
ing what are called Treasury bills, or T-bills for short. A T-bill is a promise by the government to repay 
a fixed amount at some time in the future, for example, 3 months or 12 months.
	
Treasury bills are pure discount loans. If a T-bill promises to repay $10,000 in 12 months, and 
the market interest rate is 7 percent, how much will the bill sell for in the market?
	
The going rate is 7 percent, so the T-bill will sell for the present value of $10,000 to be paid in 
one year at 7 percent, or:
Present value = $10,000/1.07 = $9,345.79
Interest-Only Loans
A second type of loan has a repayment plan that calls for the borrower to pay interest each 
period and to repay the entire principal (the original loan amount) at some point in the fu-
ture. Such loans are called interest-only loans. Notice that if there is just one period, a pure 
discount loan and an interest-only loan are the same thing.

146	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
For example, with a three-year, 10 percent, interest-only loan of $1,000, the bor-
rower would pay $1,000 × .10 = $100 in interest at the end of the first and second 
years. At the end of the third year, the borrower would return the $1,000 along with 
another $100 in interest for that year. Similarly, a 50-year interest-only loan would 
call for the borrower to pay interest every year for the next 50 years and then repay 
the principal. In the extreme, the borrower pays the interest every period forever and 
never repays any principal. As we discussed earlier in the chapter, the result is a 
perpetuity.
Most corporate bonds have the general form of an interest-only loan. Because we will 
be considering bonds in some detail in the next chapter, we defer a further discussion of 
them for now.
Amortized Loans
With a pure discount or interest-only loan, the principal is repaid all at once. An alternative 
is an amortized loan, with which the lender may require the borrower to repay parts of the 
loan amount over time. The process of paying off a loan by making regular principal reduc-
tions is called amortizing the loan.
A simple way of amortizing a loan is to have the borrower pay the interest each period 
plus some fixed amount. This approach is common with medium-term business loans. For 
example, suppose a business takes out a $5,000, five-year loan at 9 percent. The loan 
agreement calls for the borrower to pay the interest on the loan balance each year and to 
reduce the loan balance each year by $1,000. Since the loan amount declines by $1,000 
each year, it is fully paid in five years.
In the case we are considering, notice that the total payment will decline each year. 
The reason is that the loan balance goes down, resulting in a lower interest charge each 
year, while the $1,000 principal reduction is constant. For example, the interest in the first 
year will be $5,000 × .09 = $450. The total payment will be $1,000 + 450 = $1,450. In the 
second year, the loan balance is $4,000, so the interest is $4,000 × .09 = $360, and the total 
payment is $1,360. We can calculate the total payment in each of the remaining years by 
preparing a simple amortization schedule as follows:
	
Beginning	
Total	
Interest	
Principal	
Ending
   Year	
Balance	
Payment	
Paid	
Paid	
Balance
	
1	
 $5,000	
$1,450	
$    450	
$1,000	
$4,000
	
2	
  4,000	
  1,360	
     360	
  1,000	
  3,000
	
3	
  3,000	
  1,270	
    270	
  1,000	
  2,000
	
4	
  2,000	
  1,180	
    180	
  1,000	
  1,000
	
5	
  1,000	
   1,090	
        90	
   1,000	
         0
	
Totals	
	
 $6,350	
$1,350	
$5,000	
Notice that, in each year, the interest paid is just given by the beginning balance multiplied 
by the interest rate. Also, notice that the beginning balance is given by the ending balance 
from the previous year.
Probably the most common way of amortizing a loan is to have the borrower make a 
single, fixed payment every period. Almost all consumer loans (such as car loans) and 
mortgages work this way. For example, suppose our five-year, 9 percent, $5,000 loan was 
amortized this way. How would the amortization schedule look?

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
147
We first need to determine the payment. From our discussion earlier in the chapter, we 
know that this loan’s cash flows are in the form of an ordinary annuity. In this case, we can 
solve for the payment as follows:
	$5,000 = C × (1 − 1/1.095)/.09
	
= C × (1 − .6499)/.09
This gives us:
C = $5,000/3.8897
  = $1,285.46
The borrower will, therefore, make five equal payments of $1,285.46. Will this pay off the 
loan? We check by filling in an amortization schedule.
In our previous example, we knew the principal reduction each year. We then calcu-
lated the interest owed to get the total payment. In this example, we know the total pay-
ment. We thus calculate the interest and then subtract it from the total payment to get the 
principal portion in each payment.
In the first year, the interest is $450, as we calculated before. Because the total pay-
ment is $1,285.46, the principal paid in the first year must be:
Principal paid = $1,285.46 − 450 = $835.46
The ending loan balance is thus:
Ending balance = $5,000 − 835.46 = $4,164.54
The interest in the second year is $4,164.54 × .09 = $374.81, and the loan balance declines 
by $1,285.46 − 374.81 = $910.65. We can summarize all of the relevant calculations in the 
following schedule:
	
Beginning	
Total	
Interest	
Principal	
Ending
   Year	
Balance	
Payment	
Paid	
Paid	
Balance
	
1	
$5,000.00	
$1,285.46	
$      450.00	
$    835.46	
$ 4,164.54
	
2	
  4,164.54	
  1,285.46	
     374.81	
     910.65	
  3,253.88
	
3	
  3,253.88	
  1,285.46	
     292.85	
     992.61	
  2,261.27
	
4	
  2,261.27	
  1,285.46	
     203.51	
  1,081.95	
  1,179.32
	
5	
  1,179.32	
  1,285.46	
       106.14	
   1,179.32	
           .00
	
Totals	
	
$6,427.31	
$1,427.31	
$5,000.00	
Because the loan balance declines to zero, the five equal payments do pay off the loan. 
Notice that the interest paid declines each period. This isn’t surprising because the loan 
balance is going down. Given that the total payment is fixed, the principal paid must be 
rising each period.
If you compare the two loan amortizations in this section, you see that the total in-
terest is greater for the equal total payment case, $1,427.31 versus $1,350. The reason for 
this is that the loan is repaid more slowly early on, so the interest is somewhat higher. 
This doesn’t mean that one loan is better than the other; it simply means that one is ef-
fectively paid off faster than the other. For example, the principal reduction in the first 
year is $835.46 in the equal total payment case compared to $1,000 in the first case. 
Many websites offer loan amortization schedules. See our nearby Work the Web box for 
an example.
You can find a good loan 
amortization schedule 
online at www. 
myamortizationchart.com.

148	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
P
reparing an amortization table is one of the more tedious time value of money applications. 
Using a spreadsheet makes it relatively easy, but there are also websites available that will 
prepare an amortization table very quickly. One such site is www.bankrate.com. The website has 
a mortgage calculator for home loans, but the same calculations apply to most other types of loans 
such as car loans and student loans. College graduates in 2013 left school with an average of 
$28,400 in student loans. Suppose you graduate with the average student loan and decide to pay 
the loan off over the next 15 years at 6.8 percent, the maximum interest rate for unsubsidized 
Stafford loans. What are your monthly payments? Using the calculator, for the first year, we get:
	
As you can see, the monthly payment will be $252.10. The first payment will consist of $91.17 
in principal and $160.93 in interest. Over the life of the loan you will pay a total of $16,978.40 in 
interest.
W
RK THE  WE B
QUESTIONS
	
1.	 Suppose you take out a 30-year mortgage for $250,000 at an interest rate of 6.8 per-
cent. Use this website to construct an amortization table for the loan. What are the in-
terest payment and principal amounts in the 110th payment? How much in total interest 
will you pay over the life of the loan?
	
2.	 You take out a 30-year mortgage for $275,000 at an interest rate of 7.3 percent. How 
much will you pay in interest over the life of this loan? Now assume you pay an extra 
$100 per month on this loan. How much is your total interest now? How much sooner 
will the mortgage be paid off?

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
149
We close out this discussion by noting that one type of loan may be particularly impor-
tant to you. Student loans are an important source of financing for many college students, 
helping to cover the cost of tuition, books, new cars, condominiums, and many other 
things. Sometimes students do not seem to fully realize that such loans have a serious 
drawback: They must be repaid. See our nearby Finance Matters box for a discussion.
concept questions
5.4a	
What is a pure discount loan?
5.4b	
What does it mean to amortize a loan?
LOAN AMORTIZATION USING A SPREADSHEET
Loan amortization is a very common spreadsheet application. To illustrate, we will set up the problem 
that we have just examined, a five-year, $5,000, 9 percent loan with constant payments. Our spread-
sheet looks like this:
SPREADSHEET 
STRATEGIES
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1
2
Using a spreadsheet to amortize a loan
3
4
Loan amount:
$5,000
5
Interest rate:
.09
6
Loan term:
5
7
Loan payment:
$1,285.46
8
Note: payment is calculated using PMT(rate,nper,-pv,fv).
9
Amortization table:
10
11
Year
Beginning
Total
Interest
Principal
Ending
12
Balance
Payment
Paid
Paid
Balance
13
1
$5,000.00
$1,285.46
$450.00
$835.46
$4,164.54
14
2
4,164.54
1,285.46
374.81
910.65
3,253.88
15
3
3,253.88
1,285.46
292.85
992.61
2,261.27
16
4
2,261.27
1,285.46
203.51
1,081.95
1,179.32
17
5
1,179.32
1,285.46
106.14
1,179.32
.00
18
Totals
$6,427.31
$1,427.31
$5,000.00
19
20
Formulas in the amortization table:
21
22
Year
Beginning
Total
Interest
Principal
Ending
23
Balance
Payment
Paid
Paid
Balance
24
1
=+D4
=$D$7
=+$D$5*C13
=+D13-E13
=+C13-F13
25
2
=+G13
=$D$7
=+$D$5*C14
=+D14-E14
=+C14-F14
26
3
=+G14
=$D$7
=+$D$5*C15
=+D15-E15
=+C15-F15
27
4
=+G15
=$D$7
=+$D$5*C16
=+D16-E16
=+C16-F16
28
5
=+G16
=$D$7
=+$D$5*C17
=+D17-E17
=+C17-F17
29
30
Note: totals in the amortization table are calculated using the SUM formula.
31

An Unwelcome Christmas Present
I
f you are reading this, we can assume that you are a col-
lege student. While you will receive an education in col-
lege, and studies show that college graduates earn higher 
salaries on average than nongraduates, you might receive 
an unwelcome Christmas present if you graduate in May: 
student loan payments. About one-half of all college stu-
dents graduate with student loans, and more than 90 per-
cent of the loans are Stafford loans. For example, the son of 
former Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke was re-
ported to be on track to graduate medical school with more 
than $400,000 in student loans! Stafford loans are available 
through lenders such as Sallie Mae, online lenders, or, in 
some cases, your college. Stafford loans must be paid off in 
10 years, but there is a six-month grace period from the time 
you graduate until the first payment must be made. The in-
terest rate on unsubsidized Stafford loans made after July 1, 
2006, is 6.8 percent.
	
If you have student loans, you went through an introduc-
tory program. Just in case you forgot, here are several of the 
repayment options. First, you can make equal monthly pay-
ments like most other loans. A second option is to pay only 
the interest on the loan for up to four years, and then begin 
making principal and interest payments. This means your pay-
ments at the end of the loan are higher than the equal pay-
ment option. A third option is to make payments based on a 
percentage of your salary. A fourth option is a graduated pay-
ment option that increases your monthly payments on a pre-
determined schedule. Finally, you can consolidate your loans 
one time. If the loan balance is high enough, you may be able 
to extend your payment for up to 30 years.
	
So how do student loans work in practice? A recent 
graduate from the University of Maryland with a master’s 
degree in creative writing graduated with $40,000 in stu-
dent loans. Her loan payments were $442 a month, a pay-
ment that was difficult to make on her salary as a fundraiser. 
She considered the percentage of salary option, which 
would have lowered her monthly payments to about $200 
per month. However, she realized that this was just putting 
off the inevitable, so she took a second job to make up the 
difference.
	
A recent master’s graduate from law school took a dif-
ferent route. His student loans totaled $109,000 and re-
quired monthly payments of $1,200 per month for 10 years. 
The option chosen by this lawyer was to consolidate his 
loans and extend his payments to 30 years. This reduced his 
monthly payments to about $640 per month.
	
A Chicago couple is using a third solution. Both the 
husband and wife are doctors. The wife is out of her resi-
dency and employed full time, while the husband is finish-
ing his last year of residency. What is most unusual about 
this couple is the amount of student loan debt. The wife’s 
student loan balance is $234,000, the husband’s student 
loan balance is $310,000, and the couple has a $156,000 
mortgage! The wife’s student loan repayments have al-
ready started and amount to $1,750 per month. So how is 
the couple handling this? They are paying a total of $2,250 
per month toward the wife’s student loans. This will reduce 
the repayment period from 22 years to 13 years. The cou-
ple is also paying an additional $100 per month on their 
$1,500 mortgage payment. Fortunately, when the hus-
band’s residency ends, he expects his salary to triple. The 
couple will need it. His loan payments will be $2,349 per 
month. And you thought your student loan was high! Maybe 
MD stands for “mucho debt”!
FINANCE MATTERS
150
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter rounds out your understanding of fundamental concepts related to the time 
value of money and discounted cash flow valuation. Several important topics were cov-
ered, including:
  1.	 There are two ways of calculating present and future values when there are multiple 
cash flows. Both approaches are straightforward extensions of our earlier analysis of 
single cash flows.
  2.	 A series of constant cash flows that arrive or are paid at the end of each period is 
called an ordinary annuity, and we described some useful shortcuts for determining 
the present and future values of annuities.
  3.	 Interest rates can be quoted in a variety of ways. For financial decisions, it is 
important that any rates being compared be first converted to effective rates. The 

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
151
relationship between a quoted rate, such as an annual percentage rate, or APR, and an 
effective annual rate, or EAR, is given by:  
	
EAR = (1 + Quoted rate/m)m − 1 
	
where m is the number of times during the year the money is compounded, or, equiva-
lently, the number of payments during the year.
  4.	 Many loans are annuities. The process of paying off a loan gradually is called amortizing 
the loan, and we discussed how amortization schedules are prepared and interpreted.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 5.1 In multiple cash flow calculations, when is it assumed that cash flows 
occur?
Section 5.2 What is the present value of an ordinary annuity that pays $100 per 
year for three years if the interest rate is 6 percent per year?
Section 5.3 You agree to repay $1,200 in two weeks for a $1,000 payday loan. 
What is your EAR assuming that there are 52 weeks in a year?
Section 5.4 What is the simplest form of loan?
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
5.1 	
Present Values with Multiple Cash Flows.  A first-round-draft choice quarterback 
has been signed to a three-year, $10 million contract. The details provide for an 
immediate cash bonus of $1 million. The player is to receive $2 million in salary at 
the end of the first year, $3 million the next, and $4 million at the end of the last 
year. Assuming a 10 percent discount rate, is this package worth $10 million? How 
much is it worth? (See Problem 1.)
5.2	
Future Value with Multiple Cash Flows.  You plan to make a series of deposits in 
an interest-bearing account. You will deposit $1,000 today, $2,000 in two years, and 
$8,000 in five years. If you withdraw $3,000 in three years and $5,000 in seven 
years, how much will you have after eight years if the interest rate is 9 percent? 
What is the present value of these cash flows? (See Problem 3.)
5.3	
Annuity Present Value.  You are looking into an investment that will pay you 
$12,000 per year for the next 10 years. If you require a 15 percent return, what is 
the most you would pay for this investment? (See Problem 2.)
5.4	
APR versus EAR.  The going rate on student loans is quoted as 9 percent APR. The 
terms of the loan call for monthly payments. What is the effective annual rate, or 
EAR, on such a student loan? (See Problem 14.)
5.5	
It’s the Principal That Matters.  Suppose you borrow $10,000. You are going to 
repay the loan by making equal annual payments for five years. The interest rate on 
the loan is 14 percent per year. Prepare an amortization schedule for the loan. How 
much interest will you pay over the life of the loan? (See Problem 55.)

152	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
5.6 	 Just a Little Bit Each Month.  You’ve recently finished your MBA at the Darnit 
School. Naturally, you must purchase a new BMW immediately. The car costs 
about $42,000. The bank quotes an interest rate of 15 percent APR for a 72-month 
loan with a 10 percent down payment. What will your monthly payment be? What 
is the effective interest rate on the loan? (See Problem 20.)
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
5.1  	 Obviously, the package is not worth $10 million because the payments are spread 
out over three years. The bonus is paid today, so it’s worth $1 million. The present 
values for the three subsequent salary payments are:
$2/1.1 + $3/1.12 + $4/1.13 = $2/1.1 + $3/1.21 + $4/1.331
	
= $7.3028
The package is worth a total of $8.3028 million.
5.2  	We will calculate the future value for each of the cash flows separately and then add 
the results up. Notice that we treat the withdrawals as negative cash flows:
   $1,000 × 1.098 =    $1,000 × 1.9926  =  $ 1,992.56   
   $2,000 × 1.096 =    $2,000 × 1.6771  =     3,354.20   
−$3,000 × 1.095 = −$3,000 × 1.5386  =  −4,615.87   
   $8,000 × 1.093 =    $8,000 × 1.2950  =   10,360.23   
−$5,000 × 1.091 = −$5,000 × 1.0900  =  −5,450.00
                 Total future value =  $ 5,641.12
This value includes a small rounding error.
To calculate the present value, we could discount each cash flow back to the 
present or we could discount back a single year at a time. However, since we 
already know that the future value in eight years is $5,641.12, the easy way to get 
the PV is just to discount this amount back eight years:
	Present value = $5,641.12/1.098
	
= $5,641.12/1.9926     
	
= $2,831.03
We again ignore a small rounding error. For practice, you can verify that this is 
what you get if you discount each cash flow back separately.
5.3  	The most you would be willing to pay is the present value of $12,000 per year for 
10 years at a 15 percent discount rate. The cash flows here are in ordinary annuity 
form, so the relevant present value factor is:
	Annuity present value factor = [1 − (1/1.1510)]/.15
	
= (1 − .2472)/.15
	
= 5.0188
The present value of the 10 cash flows is thus:
	Present value = $12,000 × 5.0188 
	
= $60,225
This is the most you would pay.

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
153
5.4  	A rate of 9 percent with monthly payments is actually 9%/12 = .75% per month. 
The EAR is thus:
EAR = (1 + .09/12)12 − 1 = 9.38%
5.5  	We first need to calculate the annual payment. With a present value of $10,000, an interest 
rate of 14 percent, and a term of five years, the payment can be determined from:
	$10,000 = Payment × (1 − 1/1.145)/.14     
	
= Payment × 3.4331
Therefore, the payment is $10,000/3.4331 = $2,912.84 (actually, it’s $2,912.8355; 
this will create some small rounding errors in the accompanying schedule). We can 
now prepare the amortization schedule as follows:
	
Beginning	
Total	
Interest	
Principal	
Ending
    Year	
Balance	
Payment	
Paid	
Paid	
Balance
	
1	
$10,000.00	
$  2,912.84	
$1,400.00	
$  1,512.84	
$8,487.16 
	
2	
    8,487.16	
    2,912.84	
  1,188.20	
    1,724.63	
 6,762.53
	
3	
    6,762.53	
    2,912.84	
     946.75	
    1,966.08	
 4,796.45
	
4	
    4,796.45	
    2,912.84	
     671.50	
    2,241.33	
 2,555.12
	
5	
    2,555.12	
      2,912.84	
     357.72	
     2,555.12	
          .00
	
Totals	
	
$14,564.17	
$4,564.17	
$10,000.00	
5.6  	The cash flows on the car loan are in annuity form, so we only need to find the 
payment. The interest rate is 15%/12 = 1.25% per month, and there are 72 months. 
The first thing we need is the annuity factor for 72 periods at 1.25 percent per period:
	Annuity present value factor  = (1 − Present value factor)/r
	
= [1 − (1/1.012572)]/.0125
	
= [1 − (1/2.4459)]/.0125     
	
= (1 − .4088)/.0125
	
= 47.2925
The present value is the amount we finance. With a 10 percent down payment, we 
will be borrowing 90 percent of $42,000, or $37,800.
So, to find the payment, we need to solve for C in the following:
$37,800 = C × Annuity present value factor     
	
= C × 47.2925
Rearranging things a bit, we have:
	C = $37,800 × (1/47.2925)
	 = $37,800 × .02115 
	 = $799.28
Your payment is just under $800 per month.
The actual interest rate on this loan is 1.25 percent per month. Based on our 
work in the chapter, we can calculate the effective annual rate as:
EAR = 1.012512 − 1 = 16.08%
The effective rate is about one point higher than the quoted rate.

154	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 1 	 5.1	
Annuity Period.  As you increase the length of time involved, what 
happens to the present value of an annuity? What happens to the future 
value?
LO 1  	 5.2	 Interest Rates.  What happens to the future value of an annuity if you 
increase the rate, r? What happens to the present value?
LO 1  	 5.3	 Annuity Present Values.  Tri-State Megabucks Lottery advertises a 
LO 2  	      $10 million grand prize. The winner receives $500,000 today and 
19 annual payments of $500,000. A lump sum option of $5 million 
payable immediately is also available. Is this deceptive advertising?
LO 1  	 5.4	 Annuity Present Values.  Suppose you won the Tri-State Megabucks 
Lottery in the previous question. What factors should you take into 
account in deciding whether you should take the annuity option or the 
lump sum option?
LO 1  	 5.5	 Present Value.  If you were an athlete negotiating a contract, would you 
want a big signing bonus payable immediately and smaller payments in 
the future, or vice versa? How about looking at it from the team’s 
perspective?
LO 1  	 5.6	 Present Value.  Suppose two athletes sign 10-year contracts for $80 
million. In one case, we’re told that the $80 million will be paid in 10 
equal installments. In the other case, we’re told that the $80 million will be 
paid in 10 installments, but the installments will increase by 5 percent per 
year. Who got the better deal?
LO 4  	 5.7	 APR and EAR.  Should lending laws be changed to require lenders to 
report EARs instead of APRs? Why or why not?
LO 3  	 5.8	 Time Value.  On subsidized Stafford loans, a common source of 
financial aid for college students, interest does not begin to accrue until 
repayment begins. Who receives a bigger subsidy, a freshman or a 
senior? Explain.
LO 3  	 5.9	 Time Value.  In words, how would you go about valuing the subsidy on a 
subsidized Stafford loan?
LO 3  	 5.10	 Time Value.  Eligibility for a subsidized Stafford loan is based on current 
financial need. However, both subsidized and unsubsidized Stafford loans 
are repaid out of future income. Given this, do you see a possible objection 
to having two types?
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–28)
LO 1 	 1.	 Present Value and Multiple Cash Flows.  Eulis Co. has identified an 
investment project with the following cash flows. If the discount rate is 10 
percent, what is the present value of these cash flows? What is the present 
value at 18 percent? At 24 percent?

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
155
	 Year	
Cash Flow
	
1	
$   680
	
2	
    490
	
3	
    975
	
4	
 1,160
LO 1 	 2.	 Present Value and Multiple Cash Flows.  Investment X offers to pay you 
$3,400 per year for nine years, whereas Investment Y offers to pay you 
$5,200 per year for five years. Which of these cash flow streams has the 
higher present value if the discount rate is 6 percent? If the discount rate is 
22 percent?
LO 1 	 3.	 Future Value and Multiple Cash Flows.  Booker, Inc., has identified an 
investment project with the following cash flows. If the discount rate is 
8 percent, what is the future value of these cash flows in Year 4? What is 
the future value at an interest rate of 11 percent? At 24 percent?
	 Year	
Cash Flow
	
1	
$   985
	
2	
 1,160
	
3	
 1,325
	
4	
 1,495
LO 1 	 4.	 Calculating Annuity Present Values.  An investment offers $5,450 per year 
for 15 years, with the first payment occurring one year from now. If the 
required return is 8 percent, what is the value of the investment? What 
would the value be if the payments occurred for 40 years? For 75 years? 
Forever?
LO 1 	 5.	 Calculating Annuity Cash Flows.  For each of the following annuities, 
calculate the annual cash flow.
	 Present Value	
Years	
Interest Rate
	
$  24,500	
  6	
 11%
	
   19,700	
  8	
7  
	
 136,400	
15	
8  
	
 285,650	
20	
6 
LO 1 	 6.	 Calculating Annuity Values.  For each of the following annuities, calculate 
the present value.
	 Annuity Payment	
Years	
Interest Rate
	
$  2,100	
  7	
5%
	
   1,095	
  9	
10     
	
 11,000	
18	
  8   
	
 30,000	
28	
14    

156	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
LO 1 	 7.	 Calculating Annuity Cash Flows.  For each of the following annuities, 
calculate the annual cash flow.
	
Future Value	
Years	
Interest Rate
	
$    30,000	
  8	
   5%
	
1,200,000	
40	
7   
	
   625,000	
25	
8   
	
   125,000	
13	
4  
LO 1 	 8.	 Calculating Annuity Values.  For each of the following annuities, calculate 
the future value.
	 Annual Payment	
Years	
Interest Rate
	
$1,900	
10	
     8%
	
  6,000	
40	
  9   
	
  2,950	
  9	
  6   
	
  6,400	
30	
10    
LO 1 	 9.	 Calculating Annuity Values.  If you deposit $5,000 at the end of each year 
for the next 20 years into an account paying 9.6 percent interest, how much 
money will you have in the account in 20 years? How much will you have if 
you make deposits for 40 years?
LO 1 	 10.	Calculating Perpetuity Values.  Curly’s Life Insurance Co. is trying to sell 
you an investment policy that will pay you and your heirs $30,000 per year 
forever. If the required return on this investment is 6 percent, how much will 
you pay for the policy?
LO 1 	 11.	 Calculating Perpetuity Values.  In the previous problem, suppose Curly’s 
told you the policy costs $645,000. At what interest rate would this be a fair 
deal?
LO 4 	 12.	Calculating EAR.  Find the EAR in each of the following cases:
	 Stated Rate (APR)	
Number of Times Compounded	
Effective Rate (EAR)
	
 10%	
Quarterly	
	
 17   	
Monthly	
	
 13   	
Daily	
	
  9  	
Semiannually	
LO 4 	 13.	 Calculating APR.  Find the APR, or stated rate, in each of the following 
cases:
	 Stated Rate (APR)	
Number of Times Compounded	
Effective Rate (EAR)
	
Semiannually	
 14%
	
Monthly	
   9   
	
Weekly	
    8   
	
Daily	
 13  

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
157
LO 4 	 14.	Calculating EAR.  First National Bank charges 10.1 percent compounded 
monthly on its business loans. First United Bank charges 10.3 percent 
compounded semiannually. As a potential borrower, which bank would you 
go to for a new loan?
LO 4 	 15.	Calculating APR.  Vandermark Credit Corp. wants to earn an effective 
annual return on its consumer loans of 14.2 percent per year. The bank uses 
daily compounding on its loans. What interest rate is the bank required by 
law to report to potential borrowers? Explain why this rate is misleading to 
an uninformed borrower.
LO 4 	 16.	Calculating Future Values.  What is the future value of $1,345 in 16 years 
assuming an interest rate of 8.4 percent compounded semiannually?
LO 4 	 17.	 Calculating Future Values.  Bucher Credit Bank is offering 4.7 percent 
compounded daily on its savings accounts. If you deposit $3,650 today, how 
much will you have in the account in five years? In 10 years? In 20 years?
LO 4 	 18.	Calculating Present Values.  An investment will pay you $65,000 in  
nine years. If the appropriate discount rate is 5.5 percent compounded daily, 
what is the present value?
LO 4 	 19.	 EAR versus APR.  Ricky Ripov’s Pawn Shop charges an interest rate of 
13.7 percent per month on loans to its customers. Like all lenders, Ricky 
must report an APR to consumers. What rate should the shop report? What 
is the effective annual rate?
LO 2 	 20.	Calculating Loan Payments.  You want to buy a new sports coupe for 
$73,400, and the finance office at the dealership has quoted you a loan with 
an APR of 5.1 percent for 60 months to buy the car. What will your monthly 
payments be? What is the effective annual rate on this loan?
LO 2 	 21.	Calculating Number of Periods.  One of your customers is delinquent on 
his accounts payable balance. You’ve mutually agreed to a repayment 
schedule of $400 per month. You will charge 1.4 percent per month interest 
on the overdue balance. If the current balance is $14,480, how long will it 
take for the account to be paid off?
LO 4 	 22.	Calculating EAR.  Friendly’s Quick Loans, Inc., offers you “Five for four, 
or I knock on your door.” This means you get $4 today and repay $5 when 
you get your paycheck in one week (or else). What’s the effective annual 
return Friendly’s earns on this lending business? If you were brave enough 
to ask, what APR would Friendly’s say you were paying?
LO 1 	 23.	Valuing Perpetuities.  Maybepay Life Insurance Co. is selling a perpetual 
annuity contract that pays $3,300 monthly. The contract currently sells for 
$425,000. What is the monthly return on this investment vehicle? What is 
the APR? The effective annual return?
LO 1 	 24.	Calculating Annuity Future Values.  You are to make monthly deposits of 
$500 into a retirement account that pays an APR of 9.8 percent compounded 
monthly. If your first deposit will be made one month from now, how large 
will your retirement account be in 35 years?
LO 1 	 25.	Calculating Annuity Future Values.  In the previous problem, suppose you 
make $6,000 annual deposits into the same retirement account. How large 
will your account balance be in 35 years?

158	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
LO 1 	 26.	Calculating Annuity Present Values.  Beginning three months from now, 
you want to be able to withdraw $2,500 each quarter from your bank 
account to cover college expenses over the next four years. If the account 
pays .38 percent interest per quarter, how much do you need to have in your 
bank account today to meet your expense needs over the next four years?
LO 1 	 27.	Discounted Cash Flow Analysis.  If the appropriate discount rate for the 
following cash flows is 6.75 percent, what is the present value of the cash 
flows?
	 Year	
Cash Flow
	
1	
$1,200
	
2	
  1,100
	
3	
     800
	
4	
     600
LO 1 	 28.	Discounted Cash Flow Analysis.  If the appropriate discount rate for the 
following cash flows is 7.13 percent per year, what is the present value of 
the cash flows?
	 Year	
Cash Flow
	
1	
$1,400
	
2	
  1,900
	
3	
  3,400
	
4	
  4,300
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 29–56)
LO 4 	 29.	Simple Interest versus Compound Interest.  First Simple Bank pays  
5.8 percent simple interest on its investment accounts. If First Complex 
Bank pays interest on its accounts compounded annually, what rate should 
the bank set if it wants to match First Simple Bank over an investment 
horizon of 10 years?
LO 2 	 30.	Calculating Annuities Due.  You want to buy a new sports car from Muscle 
Motors for $58,600. The contract is in the form of a 60-month annuity due 
at an APR of 5.2 percent. What will your monthly payment be?
LO 4 	 31.	 Calculating Interest Expense.  You receive a credit card application from 
Shady Banks Savings and Loan offering an introductory rate of 1.6 percent 
per year, compounded monthly for the first six months, increasing thereafter 
to 17.9 percent compounded monthly. Assuming you transfer the $10,000 
balance from your existing credit card and make no subsequent payments, 
how much interest will you owe at the end of the first year?
LO 4 	 32.	Calculating the Number of Periods.  You are saving to buy a $235,000 
house. There are two competing banks in your area, both offering 
certificates of deposit yielding 4.8 percent. How long will it take your initial 
$85,000 investment to reach the desired level at First Bank, which pays 
simple interest? How long at Second Bank, which compounds interest 
monthly?

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
159
LO 4 	 33.	Calculating Future Values.  You have an investment that will pay you  
1.29 percent per month. How much will you have per dollar invested in one 
year? In two years?
LO 4 	 34.	Calculating Annuity Interest Rates.  Although you may know William 
Shakespeare from his classic literature, what is not well-known is that he 
was an astute investor. In 1604, when he was 40 and writing King Lear, 
Shakespeare grew worried about his eventual retirement. Afraid that he 
would become like King Lear in his retirement and beg hospitality from 
his children, he purchased grain “tithes,” or shares in farm output, for  
440 pounds. The tithes paid him 60 pounds per year for 31 years. Even 
though he died at the age of 52, his children received the remaining payments. 
What interest rate did the Bard of Avon receive on this investment?
LO 1 	 35.	Comparing Cash Flow Streams.  You’ve just joined the investment banking 
firm of Dewey, Cheatum, and Howe. They’ve offered you two different 
salary arrangements. You can have $6,700 per month for the next two years, 
or you can have $5,400 per month for the next two years, along with a 
$25,000 signing bonus today. If the interest rate is 7 percent compounded 
monthly, which do you prefer?
LO 1 	 36.	Calculating Present Value of Annuities.  Peter Lynchpin wants to sell you 
an investment contract that pays equal $17,500 amounts at the end of each 
year for the next 20 years. If you require an effective annual return of  
8 percent on this investment, how much will you pay for the contract today?
LO 4 	 37.	Calculating Rates of Return.  You’re trying to choose between two different 
investments, both of which have up-front costs of $39,000. Investment G 
returns $75,000 in six years. Investment H returns $105,000 in 9 years. 
Which of these investments has the higher return?
LO 1 	 38.	Present Value and Interest Rates.  What is the relationship between the 
value of an annuity and the level of interest rates? Suppose you just bought 
a 10-year annuity of $7,300 per year at the current interest rate of 10 percent 
per year. What happens to the value of your investment if interest rates 
suddenly drop to 5 percent? What if interest rates suddenly rise to  
15 percent?
LO 1 	 39.	Calculating the Number of Payments.  You’re prepared to make monthly 
payments of $250, beginning at the end of this month, into an account that 
pays 8 percent interest compounded monthly. How many payments will you 
have made when your account balance reaches $50,000?
LO 2 	 40.	Calculating Annuity Present Values.  You want to borrow $80,000 from 
your local bank to buy a new sailboat. You can afford to make monthly 
payments of $1,650, but no more. Assuming monthly compounding, what is 
the highest rate you can afford on a 60-month APR loan?
LO 1 	 41.	Calculating Present Values.  In March 2015, the Kansas City Chiefs signed 
Jeremy Maclin to a contract reportedly worth $55 million. Maclin’s salary 
(including roster bonus) was to be paid as $3.4 million in 2015, $12.4 million 
in 2016 and 2017, and $13.4 million in 2018 and 2019. If the appropriate 
interest rate is 11 percent, what kind of deal did the wide receiver snag? 
Assume all payments are paid at the end of each year.
LO 1 	 42.	Calculating Present Values.  The contract signed in March 2015 by 
Ndamukong Suh that we discussed at the beginning of the chapter was 

160	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
actually paid as a $5.1 million signing bonus to be paid immediately and 
$985,000 in salary for 2015. The remaining salary was $28,585,000 in 
2016, $15,085,000 in 2017, $22,085,000 in 2018, $24,085,000 in 2019, and 
$18,360,000 in 2020. If the appropriate interest rate is 11 percent, what kind 
of deal did the defensive tackle sack? Assume all payments other than the 
first $5.1 million are paid at the end of each year.
LO 4 	 43.	EAR versus APR.  You have just purchased a new warehouse. To finance 
the purchase, you’ve arranged for a 30-year mortgage loan for 80 percent of 
the $2,950,000 purchase price. The monthly payment on this loan will be 
$14,300. What is the APR on this loan? The EAR?
LO 1 	 44.	Annuity Values.  You are planning your retirement in 10 years. You 
currently have $75,000 in a bond account and $300,000 in a stock account. 
You plan to add $6,000 per year at the end of each of the next 10 years to 
your bond account. The stock account will earn a return of 10.5 percent and 
the bond account will earn a return of 7 percent. When you retire, you plan 
to withdraw an equal amount for each of the next 25 years at the end of each 
year and have nothing left. Additionally, when you retire you will transfer 
your money to an account that earns 6.25 percent. How much can you 
withdraw each year?
LO 4 	 45.	Calculating Annuities Due Interest Rates.  You have arranged for a loan on 
your new car that will require the first payment today. The loan is for 
$24,500, and the monthly payments are $465. If the loan will be paid off 
over the next 60 months, what is the APR of the loan?
LO 1 	 46.	Calculating Annuities Due.  Suppose you are going to receive $13,500 per 
year for five years. The appropriate interest rate is 7.5 percent.
a.  	What is the present value of the payments if they are in the form of an 
ordinary annuity? What is the present value if the payments are an 
annuity due?
b.  	Suppose you plan to invest the payments for five years. What is the 
future value if the payments are an ordinary annuity? What if the 
payments are an annuity due?
c.  	 Which has the higher present value, the ordinary annuity or annuity 
due? Which has the higher future value? Will this always be true?
LO 1 	 47.	Annuity and Perpetuity Values.  Mary is going to receive a 30-year annuity 
of $12,700. Nancy is going to receive a perpetuity of $12,700. If the appropriate 
interest rate is 5.4 percent, how much more is Nancy’s cash flow worth?
LO 1 	 48.	Calculating Present Values.  A 6-year annuity of twelve $7,750 semiannual 
payments will begin 9 years from now, with the first payment coming 9.5 years 
from now. If the discount rate is 9 percent compounded semiannually, what is 
the value of this annuity five years from now? What is the value three years 
from now? What is the current value of the annuity?
LO 1 	 49.	Present Value and Multiple Cash Flows.  What is the present value of $2,150 
per year, at a discount rate of 6.9 percent, if the first payment is received six 
years from now and the last payment is received 20 years from now?
LO 1 	 50.	Variable Interest Rates.  A 10-year annuity pays $1,450 per month, and 
payments are made at the end of each month. If the interest rate is 9 percent 
compounded monthly for the first four years, and 7 percent compounded 
monthly thereafter, what is the present value of the annuity?

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
161
LO 1 	 51.	Comparing Cash Flow Streams.  You have your choice of two investment 
accounts. Investment A is a 10-year annuity that features end-of-month 
$1,145 payments and has an interest rate of 7 percent compounded monthly. 
Investment B is an annually compounded lump-sum investment with an 
interest rate of 9 percent, also good for 10 years. How much money would 
you need to invest in B today for it to be worth as much as Investment A 10 years 
from now?
LO 1 	 52.	Calculating Present Value of a Perpetuity.  Given an interest rate of  
6.35 percent per year, what is the value at Year 7 of a perpetual stream of 
$5,000 payments that begin at Year 20?
LO 4 	 53.	Calculating EAR.  A local finance company quotes an interest rate of  
17.2 percent on one-year loans. So, if you borrow $25,000, the interest for 
the year will be $4,300. Because you must repay a total of $29,300 in one 
year, the finance company requires you to pay $29,300/12, or $2,441.67 per 
month over the next 12 months. Is the interest rate on this loan 17.2 percent? 
What rate would legally have to be quoted? What is the effective annual 
rate?
LO 1 	 54.	Calculating Future Values.  If today is Year 0, what is the future value of 
the following cash flows five years from now? What is the future value  
10 years from now? Assume an interest rate of 5.8 percent per year.
	 Year	
Cash Flow
	
2	
$15,000
	
3	
  24,000
	
5	
  33,000
LO 3 	 55.	Amortization with Equal Payments.  Prepare an amortization schedule for a 
three-year loan of $54,000. The interest rate is 8 percent per year, and the 
loan calls for equal annual payments. How much interest is paid in the third 
year? How much total interest is paid over the life of the loan?
LO 3 	 56.	Amortization with Equal Principal Payments.  Rework Problem 55 
assuming that the loan agreement calls for a principal reduction of $18,000 
every year instead of equal annual payments.
CHALLENGE (Questions 57–60)
LO 4 	 57.	Discount Interest Loans.  This question illustrates what is known as 
discount interest. Imagine you are discussing a loan with a somewhat 
unscrupulous lender. You want to borrow $18,000 for one year. The interest 
rate is 13.5 percent. You and the lender agree that the interest on the loan 
will be .135 × $18,000 = $2,430. So, the lender deducts this interest amount 
from the loan up front and gives you $15,570. In this case, we say that the 
discount is $2,430. What’s wrong here?
LO 1 	 58.	Calculating Annuity Values.  You are serving on a jury. A plaintiff is suing 
the city for injuries sustained after a freak street sweeper accident. In the 
trial, doctors testified that it will be five years before the plaintiff is able to 
return to work. The jury has already decided in favor of the plaintiff. You 
are the foreperson of the jury and propose that the jury give the plaintiff an 

162	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
award to cover the following: (a) The present value of two years’ back pay. 
The plaintiff’s annual salary for the last two years would have been $43,000 
and $46,000, respectively. (b) The present value of five years’ future salary. 
You assume the salary will be $49,000 per year. (c) $200,000 for pain and 
suffering. (d) $25,000 for court costs. Assume that the salary payments are 
equal amounts paid at the end of each month. If the interest rate you choose 
is an EAR of 7 percent, what is the size of the settlement? If you were the 
plaintiff, would you like to see a higher or lower interest rate?
LO 4 	 59.	Calculating EAR with Points.  You are looking at a one-year loan of 
$15,000. The interest rate is quoted as 12 percent plus two points. A point 
on a loan is simply 1 percent (one percentage point) of the loan amount. 
Quotes similar to this one are common with home mortgages. The interest 
rate quotation in this example requires the borrower to pay two points to the 
lender up front and repay the loan later with 10 percent interest. What rate 
would you actually be paying here?
LO 1 	 60.	Future Value and Multiple Cash Flows.  An insurance company is offering 
a new policy to its customers. Typically, the policy is bought by a parent or 
grandparent for a child at the child’s birth. The details of the policy are as 
follows: The purchaser (say, the parent) makes the following six payments 
to the insurance company:
	
    First birthday:	
$   800
	
    Second birthday:	
$   800
	
    Third birthday:	
$   900
	
    Fourth birthday:	
$   900
	
    Fifth birthday:	
$1,000
	
    Sixth birthday:	
$1,000
	
    After the child’s sixth birthday, no more payments are made. When the child 
reaches age 65, he or she receives $150,000. If the relevant interest rate is 
9 percent for the first six years and 5.5 percent for all subsequent years, is 
the policy worth buying?
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
5.1 Annuity Future Value.  The St. Louis Federal Reserve Board has files listing 
historical interest rates on its website www.stlouisfed.org. Find the link for “FRED®” 
(Federal Reserve Economic Data). You will find listings for Moody’s Seasoned Aaa 
Corporate Bond Yield and Moody’s Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond Yield. (These rates 
are discussed in the next chapter.) If you invest $2,000 per year for the next 40 years at 
the most recent Aaa yield, how much will you have? What if you invest the same 
amount at the Baa yield?
5.2 Loan Payments.  Finding the time necessary until you pay off a loan is simple if 
you make equal payments each month. However, when paying off credit cards many 
individuals only make the minimum monthly payment, which is generally $10 or  
2 percent to 3 percent of the balance, whichever is greater. You can find a credit card 
calculator at www.fincalc.com. You currently owe $10,000 on a credit card with a  
17 percent interest rate and a minimum payment of $10 or 2 percent of your balance, 
whichever is greater. How soon will you pay off this debt if you make the minimum 
payment each month? How much total interest will you pay?
(continued)

	
c h a p t e r  5
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation	
163
5.3 Annuity Payments.  Find the retirement calculator at www.moneychimp.com to 
answer the following question: Suppose you have $1,500,000 when you retire and want 
to withdraw an equal amount each year for the next 30 years. How much can you 
withdraw each year if you earn 7 percent? What if you can earn 9 percent?
5.4 Annuity Payments.  The St. Louis Federal Reserve Board has files listing historical 
interest rates on its website www.stlouisfed.org. Find the link for “FRED®” (Federal 
Reserve Economic Data). You will find a listing for the Bank Prime Loan Rate. The file 
lists the monthly prime rates since January 1949 (1949.01). What is the most recent 
prime rate? What is the highest prime rate over this period? If you buy a house for 
$150,000 at the current prime rate on a 30-year mortgage with monthly payments, how 
much are your payments? If you had purchased the house at the same price when the 
prime rate was at its highest, what would your monthly payments have been?
5.5 Loan Amortization.  Bankrate.com, located at www.bankrate.com, has a financial 
calculator that will prepare an amortization table based on your inputs. First, find the 
APR quoted on the website for a 30-year fixed rate mortgage. You want to buy a home 
for $200,000 on a 30-year mortgage with monthly payments at the rate quoted on the 
site. What percentage of your first month’s payment is principal? What percentage of 
your last month’s payment is principal? What is the total interest paid on the loan?
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
This is a classic retirement problem. A friend is celebrating her birthday and wants to start 
saving for her anticipated retirement. She has the following years to retirement and retire-
ment spending goals:
Years until retirement:	
30   
Amount to withdraw each year:	
$90,000   
Years to withdraw in retirement:	
20   
Interest rate:	
8%
Because your friend is planning ahead, the first withdrawal will not take place until 
one year after she retires. She wants to make equal annual deposits into her account for her 
retirement fund.
a.	
If she starts making these deposits in one year and makes her last deposit on the day 
she retires, what amount must she deposit annually to be able to make the desired 
withdrawals at retirement?
b.	 Suppose your friend just inherited a large sum of money. Rather than making equal 
annual payments, she decided to make one lump-sum deposit today to cover her 
retirement needs. What amount does she have to deposit today?
c.	
Suppose your friend’s employer will contribute to the account each year as part of 
the company’s profit-sharing plan. In addition, your friend expects a distribution 
from a family trust several years from now. What amount must she deposit annually 
now to be able to make the desired withdrawals at retirement?
Employer’s annual contribution:	
$  1,500
Years until trust fund distribution:	
20
Amount of trust fund distribution:	
$25,000

164	
p a r t  3
Valuation of Future Cash Flows
CHAPTER CASE
S&S Air’s Mortgage
M
ark Sexton and Todd Story, the owners of S&S Air, Inc., 
were impressed by the work Chris had done on finan-
cial planning. Using Chris’s analysis, and looking at the de-
mand for light aircraft, they have decided that their existing 
fabrication equipment is sufficient, but it is time to acquire a 
bigger manufacturing facility. Mark and Todd have identi-
fied a suitable structure that is currently for sale, and they 
believe they can buy and refurbish it for about $35 million. 
Mark, Todd, and Chris are now ready to meet with 
Christie Vaughan, the loan officer for First United National 
Bank. The meeting is to discuss the mortgage options 
available to the company to finance the new facility.
	
Christie begins the meeting by discussing a 30-year 
mortgage. The loan would be repaid in equal monthly 
installments. Because of the previous relationship be-
tween S&S Air and the bank, there would be no closing 
costs for the loan. Christie states that the APR of the 
loan would be 6.1 percent. Todd asks if a shorter mort-
gage loan is available. Christie says that the bank does 
have a 20-year mortgage available at the same APR.
	
Mark decides to ask Christie about a “smart loan” he 
discussed with a mortgage broker when he was refinanc-
ing his home loan. A smart loan works as follows: Every 
two weeks a mortgage payment is made that is exactly 
one-half of the traditional monthly mortgage payment. 
Christie informs him that the bank does have smart loans. 
The APR of the smart loan would be the same as the APR 
of the traditional loan. Mark nods his head. He then states 
this is the best mortgage option available to the company 
because it saves interest payments.
	
Christie agrees with Mark, but then suggests that a 
bullet loan, or balloon payment, would result in the 
greatest interest savings. At Todd’s prompting, she 
goes on to explain a bullet loan. The monthly payments 
of a bullet loan would be calculated using a 30-year 
traditional mortgage. In this case, there would be a 
5-year bullet. This means that the company would 
make the mortgage payments for the traditional  
30-year mortgage for the first five years, but immedi-
ately after the company makes the 60th payment, the 
bullet payment would be due. The bullet payment is 
the remaining principal of the loan. Chris then asks 
how the bullet payment is calculated. Christie tells him 
that the remaining principal can be calculated using an 
amortization table, but it is also the present value of 
the remaining 25 years of mortgage payments for the 
30-year mortgage.
	
Todd has also heard of an interest-only loan and asks 
if this loan is available and what the terms would be. 
Christie says that the bank offers an interest-only loan with 
a term of 10 years and an APR of 3.5 percent. She goes on 
to further explain the terms. The company would be re-
sponsible for making interest payments each month on the 
amount borrowed. No principal payments are required. At 
the end of the 10-year term, the company would repay the 
$35 million. However, the company can make principal 
payments at any time. The principal payments would work 
just like those on a traditional mortgage. Principal pay-
ments would reduce the principal of the loan and reduce 
the interest due on the next payment.
	
Mark and Todd are satisfied with Christie’s answers, 
but they are still unsure of which loan they should 
choose. They have asked Chris to answer the following 
questions to help them choose the correct mortgage.
Q U E ST I ONS
1.	
What are the monthly payments for a 30-year tra-
ditional mortgage? What are the payments for a 
20-year traditional mortgage?
2.	
Prepare an amortization table for the first six 
months of the traditional 30-year mortgage. How 
much of the first payment goes toward principal?
3.	
How long would it take for S&S Air to pay off the 
smart loan assuming 30-year traditional mortgage 
payments? Why is this shorter than the time 
needed to pay off the traditional mortgage? How 
much interest would the company save?
4.	
Assume S&S Air takes out a bullet loan under the 
terms described. What are the payments on the loan?
5.	
What are the payments for the interest-only loan?
6.	
Which mortgage is the best for the company? Are 
there any potential risks in this action?

165
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
L
ate 2014 and early 2015 proved to be a very unusual period for 
bonds. For example, in the last week of February 2015, the 
German government issued new five-year bonds with a yield to 
maturity of negative .08 percent. In other words, investors were will-
ing to put up money today and receive less money in the future! You 
would actually be better off burying your money in the backyard for 
the next five years. Germany wasn’t alone: Finland, the Netherlands, 
France, Belgium, Austria, and Italy all had government bonds out-
standing with a negative return.
So what happened? Central banks were in a race to the bot-
tom, lowering interest rates in an attempt to improve their domestic 
economies.
This chapter takes what we have learned about the time value 
of money and shows how it can be used to value one of the most 
common of all financial assets, a bond. It then discusses bond features, bond types, and the 
operation of the bond market.
What we will see is that bond prices depend critically on interest rates, so we will go on 
to discuss some very fundamental issues regarding interest rates. Clearly, interest rates are 
important to everybody because they underlie what businesses of all types—small and 
large—must pay to borrow money.
Interest Rates and  
Bond Valuation
6
PART FOUR 
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Identify important bond features 
and types of bonds.
LO 2 	 Describe bond values and why 
they fluctuate.
LO 3 	 Discuss bond ratings and what 
they mean.
LO 4 	 Evaluate the impact of inflation on 
interest rates.
LO 5 	 Explain the term structure of 
interest rates and the determinants 
of bond yields.
O
ur goal in this chapter is to introduce you to bonds. We begin by showing how 
the techniques we developed in Chapters 4 and 5 can be applied to bond valua-
tion. From there, we go on to discuss bond features and how bonds are bought and 
sold. One important thing we learn is that bond values depend, in large part, on inter-
est rates. Thus, we close out the chapter with an examination of interest rates and 
their behavior.

166	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
BONDS AND BOND VALUATION
When a corporation (or government) wishes to borrow money from the public on a long-
term basis, it usually does so by issuing, or selling, debt securities that are generically 
called bonds. In this section, we describe the various features of corporate bonds and some 
of the terminology associated with bonds. We then discuss the cash flows associated with 
a bond and how bonds can be valued using our discounted cash flow procedure.
Bond Features and Prices
As we mentioned in our previous chapter, a bond is normally an interest-only loan, mean-
ing that the borrower will pay the interest every period, but none of the principal will be 
repaid until the end of the loan. For example, suppose the Beck Corporation wants to bor-
row $1,000 for 30 years. The interest rate on similar debt issued by similar corporations is 
12 percent. Beck will thus pay .12 × $1,000 = $120 in interest every year for 30 years. At 
the end of 30 years, Beck will repay the $1,000. As this example suggests, a bond is a fairly 
simple financing arrangement. There is, however, a rich jargon associated with bonds, so 
we will use this example to define some of the more important terms.
In our example, the $120 regular interest payments that Beck promises to make are 
called the bond’s coupons. Because the coupon is constant and paid every year, the type of 
bond we are describing is sometimes called a level coupon bond. The amount that will be 
repaid at the end of the loan is called the bond’s face value or par value. As in our example, 
this par value is usually $1,000 for corporate bonds, and a bond that sells for its par value is 
called a par value bond. Government bonds frequently have much larger face, or par, values. 
Finally, the annual coupon divided by the face value is called the coupon rate on the bond; in 
this case, because $120/1,000 = 12%, the bond has a 12 percent coupon rate.
The number of years until the face value is paid is called the bond’s time to maturity. 
A corporate bond will frequently have a maturity of 30 years when it is originally issued, 
but this varies. Once the bond has been issued, the number of years to maturity declines as 
time goes by.
Bond Values and Yields
As time passes, interest rates change in the marketplace. The cash flows from a bond, how-
ever, stay the same. As a result, the value of the bond will fluctuate. When interest rates 
rise, the present value of the bond’s remaining cash flows declines, and the bond is worth 
less. When interest rates fall, the bond is worth more.
To determine the value of a bond at a particular point in time, we need to know the 
number of periods remaining until maturity, the face value, the coupon, and the market 
interest rate for bonds with similar features. This interest rate required in the market on a 
bond is called the bond’s yield to maturity (YTM). This rate is sometimes called the bond’s 
yield for short. Given all this information, we can calculate the present value of the cash 
flows as an estimate of the bond’s current market value.
For example, suppose the Xanth (pronounced “zanth”) Co. were to issue a bond with 
10 years to maturity. The Xanth bond has an annual coupon of $80. Similar bonds have a yield 
to maturity of 8 percent. Based on our preceding discussion, the Xanth bond will pay $80 per 
year for the next 10 years in coupon interest. In 10 years, Xanth will pay $1,000 to the owner of 
the bond. The cash flows from the bond are shown in Figure 6.1. What would this bond sell for?
As illustrated in Figure 6.1, the Xanth bond’s cash flows have an annuity component 
(the coupons) and a lump sum (the face value paid at maturity). We thus estimate the mar-
ket value of the bond by calculating the present value of these two components separately 
6.1
coverage online
Excel 
Master
coupon
The stated interest 
payment made on a bond.
face value
The principal amount of a 
bond that is repaid at the 
end of the term. Also par 
value.
par value
The principal amount of a 
bond that is repaid at the 
end of the term. Also face 
value.
coupon rate
The annual coupon 
divided by the face value 
of a bond.
maturity
Specified date on which 
the principal amount of a 
bond is paid.
yield to maturity 
(YTM)
The rate required in the 
market on a bond.

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
167
and adding the results together. First, at the going rate of 8 percent, the present value of the 
$1,000 paid in 10 years is:
Present value = $1,000/1.0810 = $1,000/2.1589 = $463.19
Second, the bond offers $80 per year for 10 years; the present value of this annuity stream is:
Annuity present value = $80 × (1 − 1/1.0810)/.08 
	
= $80 × (1 − 1/2.1589 )/.08 
	
= $80 × 6.7101 
	
= $536.81
We can now add the values for the two parts together to get the bond’s value:
Total bond value = $463.19 + 536.81 = $1,000
This bond sells for exactly its face value. This is not a coincidence. The going interest rate in the 
market is 8 percent. Considered as an interest-only loan, what interest rate does this bond have? 
With an $80 coupon, this bond pays exactly 8 percent interest only when it sells for $1,000.
To illustrate what happens as interest rates change, suppose that a year has gone by. 
The Xanth bond now has nine years to maturity. If the interest rate in the market has risen 
to 10 percent, what will the bond be worth? To find out, we repeat the present value calcu-
lations with 9 years instead of 10, and a 10 percent yield instead of an 8 percent yield. First, 
the present value of the $1,000 paid in nine years at 10 percent is:
Present value = $1,000/1.109 = $1,000/2.3579 = $424.10
Second, the bond now offers $80 per year for nine years; the present value of this an-
nuity stream at 10 percent is:
Annuity present value = $80 × (1 − 1/1.109)/.10 
	
= $80 × (1 − 1/2.3579)/.10 
	
= $80 × 5.7590     
	
= $460.72
We can now add the values for the two parts together to get the bond’s value:
Total bond value = $424.10 + 460.72 = $884.82
Therefore, the bond should sell for about $885. In the vernacular, we say that this bond, 
with its 8 percent coupon, is priced to yield 10 percent at $885.
The Xanth Co. bond now sells for less than its $1,000 face value. Why? The market 
interest rate is 10 percent. Considered as an interest-only loan of $1,000, this bond only 
pays 8 percent, its coupon rate. Because this bond pays less than the going rate, investors 
f i g u r e  6.1
$80
Cash flows
Year
Coupon
Face Value
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
$80
$80
$80
$80
$80
$80
$80
$80
$80
$80
$80
$80
$80
$80
$80
$80
$80
$     80
1,000
$1,080
As shown, the Xanth bond has an annual coupon of $80 and a face, or par, value of $1,000 paid at maturity in
10 years.
Cash flows for Xanth Co. bond

168	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
are only willing to lend something less than the $1,000 promised repayment. Because the 
bond sells for less than face value, it is said to be a discount bond.
The only way to get the interest rate up to 10 percent is to lower the price to less than 
$1,000 so that the purchaser, in effect, has a built-in gain. For the Xanth bond, the price of 
$885 is $115 less than the face value, so an investor who purchased and kept the bond 
would get $80 per year and would have a $115 gain at maturity as well. This gain compen-
sates the lender for the below-market coupon rate.
Another way to see why the bond is discounted by $115 is to note that the $80 coupon 
is $20 below the coupon on a newly issued par value bond, based on current market condi-
tions. The bond would be worth $1,000 only if it had a coupon of $100 per year. In a sense, 
an investor who buys and keeps the bond gives up $20 per year for nine years. At 10 per-
cent, this annuity stream is worth:
Annuity present value = $20 × (1 − 1/1.109)/.10 
	
= $20 × 5.7590 
	
= $115.18
This is just the amount of the discount.
What would the Xanth bond sell for if interest rates had dropped by 2 percent instead 
of rising by 2 percent? As you might guess, the bond would sell for more than $1,000. Such 
a bond is said to sell at a premium and is called a premium bond.
This case is just the opposite of that of a discount bond. The Xanth bond now has a cou-
pon rate of 8 percent when the market rate is only 6 percent. Investors are willing to pay a 
premium to get this extra coupon amount. In this case, the relevant discount rate is 6 percent, 
and there are nine years remaining. The present value of the $1,000 face amount is:
Present value = $1,000/1.069 = $1,000/1.6895 = $591.89
The present value of the coupon stream is:
Annuity present value = $80 × (1 − 1/1.069)/.06
	
= $80 × (1 − 1/1.6895)/.06
	
= $80 × 6.8017     
	
= $544.14
We can now add the values for the two parts together to get the bond’s value:
Total bond value = $591.89 + 544.14 = $1,136.03
Total bond value is therefore about $136 in excess of par value. Once again, we can verify 
this amount by noting that the coupon is now $20 too high, based on current market condi-
tions. The present value of $20 per year for nine years at 6 percent is:
Annuity present value = $20 × (1 − 1/1.069)/.06 
	
= $20 × 6.8017     
	
= $136.03
This is just as we calculated.
Based on our examples, we can now write the general expression for the value of a 
bond. If a bond has (1) a face value of F paid at maturity, (2) a coupon of C paid per period, 
(3) t periods to maturity, and (4) a yield of r per period, its value is:
Bond value = C × [1 − 1/(1 + r)t ]/r	 +	
F/( 1 + r)t
Bond value =	
Present value	
+	
Present value	
[6.1]
	
of the coupons	
	 of the face amount
A good bond site to visit 
is finance.yahoo.com/
bonds, which has loads 
of useful information.

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
169
As we have illustrated in this section, bond prices and interest rates always move in 
opposite directions. When interest rates rise, a bond’s value, like any other present value, 
will decline. Similarly, when interest rates fall, bond values rise. Even if we are consider-
ing a bond that is riskless in the sense that the borrower is certain to make all the payments, 
there is still risk in owning a bond. We discuss this next.
Interest Rate Risk
The risk that arises for bond owners from fluctuating interest rates is called interest rate 
risk. How much interest rate risk a bond has depends on how sensitive its price is to inter-
est rate changes. This sensitivity directly depends on two things: the time to maturity and 
the coupon rate. As we will see momentarily, you should keep the following in mind when 
looking at a bond:
  1.	 All other things being equal, the longer the time to maturity, the greater the interest 
rate risk.
  2.	 All other things being equal, the lower the coupon rate, the greater the interest rate 
risk.
Online bond calculators 
and interest rate 
information are available 
at money.cnn.com/data/
bonds and www. 
bankrate.com.
EXAMPLE
6.1
 Semiannual Coupons
In practice, bonds issued in the United States usually make coupon payments twice a year. So, if an 
ordinary bond has a coupon rate of 14 percent, then the owner will get a total of $140 per year, but 
this $140 will come in two payments of $70 each. Suppose we are examining such a bond. The 
yield to maturity is quoted at 16 percent.
	
Bond yields are quoted like APRs; the quoted rate is equal to the actual rate per period multi-
plied by the number of periods. In this case, with a 16 percent quoted yield and semiannual pay-
ments, the true yield is 8 percent per six months. The bond matures in seven years. What is the 
bond’s price? What is the effective annual yield on this bond?
	
Based on our discussion, we know that the bond will sell at a discount because it has a cou-
pon rate of 7 percent every six months when the market requires 8 percent every six months. So, if 
our answer is equal to or exceeds $1,000, we know that we have made a mistake.
	
To get the exact price, we first calculate the present value of the bond’s face value of $1,000 
paid in seven years. This seven-year period has 14 periods of six months each. At 8 percent per 
period, the value is:
Present value = $1,000/1.0814 = $1,000/2.9372 = $340.46
The coupons can be viewed as a 14-period annuity of $70 per period. At an 8 percent discount rate, 
the present value of such an annuity is:
	Annuity present value = $70 × (1 − 1/1.0814)/.08
	
= $70 × (1 − .3405)/.08
	
= $70 × 8.2442
	
= $577.10
The total present value gives us what the bond should sell for:
Total present value = $340.46 + 577.10 = $917.56
To calculate the effective yield on this bond, note that 8 percent every six months is equivalent to:
Effective annual rate = (1 + .08)2 − 1 = 16.64%
The effective yield, therefore, is 16.64 percent.

170	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
We illustrate the first of these two points in Figure 6.2. As shown, we compute and 
plot prices under different interest rate scenarios for 10 percent coupon bonds with maturi-
ties of 1 year and 30 years. Notice how the slope of the line connecting the prices is much 
steeper for the 30-year maturity bond than it is for the 1-year maturity bond. This steepness 
tells us that a relatively small change in interest rates will lead to a substantial change in the 
bond’s value. In comparison, the one-year bond’s price is relatively insensitive to interest 
rate changes.
Intuitively, we can see that the reason that longer-term bonds have greater interest 
rate sensitivity is that a large portion of a bond’s value comes from the $1,000 face 
amount. The present value of this amount isn’t greatly affected by a small change in in-
terest rates if the amount is to be received in one year. Even a small change in the interest 
rate, however, once it is compounded for 30 years, can have a significant effect on the 
present value. As a result, the present value of the face amount will be much more vola-
tile with a longer-term bond.
The other thing to know about interest rate risk is that, like most things in finance and 
economics, it increases at a decreasing rate. In other words, if we compared a 10-year bond 
to a 1-year bond, we would see that the 10-year bond has much greater interest rate risk. 
However, if you were to compare a 20-year bond to a 30-year bond, you would find that the 
30-year bond has somewhat greater interest rate risk because it has a longer maturity, but 
the difference in the risk would be fairly small.
The reason that bonds with lower coupons have greater interest rate risk is easy to 
understand. As we discussed earlier, the value of a bond depends on the present value of its 
coupons and the present value of the face amount. If two bonds with different coupon rates 
have the same maturity, then the value of the one with the lower coupon is proportionately 
Visit www.investorguide.
com to learn more about 
bonds.
f i g u r e  6.2
Interest rate risk and 
time to maturity
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
5
10
15
20
Bond
value ($)
Interest
rate (%)
$1,768.62
30-year bond
$1,047.62
1-year bond
$916.67
$502.11
Value of a Bond with a 10 Percent Coupon Rate for Different Interest Rates and Maturities
Time to Maturity
Interest Rate
1 Year
30 Years
5%
$1,047.62
1,000.00
956.52
916.67
$1,768.62
1,000.00
671.70
502.11
10
15
20

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
171
more dependent on the face amount to be received at maturity. As a result, all other things 
being equal, its value will fluctuate more as interest rates change. Put another way, the 
bond with the higher coupon has a larger cash flow early in its life, so its value is less sen-
sitive to changes in the discount rate.
Bonds are usually not issued with maturities longer than 30 years. However, low 
interest rates have led to the issuance of bonds with much longer maturities. In the 
1990s, Walt Disney issued “Sleeping Beauty” bonds with a 100-year maturity. Simi-
larly, BellSouth (now known as AT&T), Coca-Cola, and Dutch banking giant ABN 
AMRO all issued bonds with 100-year maturities. These companies wanted to lock in 
the historically low interest rates for a long time. The current record holder for corpo-
rations appears to be Republic National Bank, which sold bonds with 1,000 years to 
maturity. Before these fairly recent issues, it appears the last time 100-year bonds were 
issued was in May 1954 by the Chicago and Eastern Railroad. And low interest rates in 
recent years have led to more 100-year bonds. For example, in January 2014, French-
utility company Électricité de France sold $700 million in 100-year bonds in the 
United States at a yield of 6.2 percent.
We can illustrate the effect of interest rate risk using a 100-year BellSouth issue. The 
following table provides some basic information on this issue, along with its prices on 
December 31, 1995, May 6, 2008, and December 9, 2014.
	
	
	
	
	
Percentage	
	
Percentage
	
	
	
	
	
Change	
	
Change in
	
	
Coupon	
Price on	
Price on	
in Price	
Price on	
Price
	 Maturity	
Rate	
12/31/95	
5/6/08	
1995–2008	
12/9/14	
2005–2014
	
2095	
7.00%	
$1,000.00	 $1,008.40	
+.84%	
$1,235.59	
+22.5%
Several things emerge from this table. First, interest rates apparently fell slightly between 
December 31, 1995, and May 6, 2008 (why?). After that, however, they fell even more 
(why?). The bond’s price first gained .84 percent and then gained an additional 22.5 per-
cent. These swings illustrate that longer-term bonds have significant interest rate risk.
Finding the Yield to Maturity: More Trial and Error
Frequently, we will know a bond’s price, coupon rate, and maturity date, but not its yield 
to maturity. For example, suppose we are interested in a six-year, 8 percent coupon bond. 
The coupons are paid annually. A broker quotes a price of $955.14. What is the yield on 
this bond?
We’ve seen that the price of a bond can be written as the sum of its annuity and lump-
sum components. Knowing that there is an $80 coupon for six years and a $1,000 face 
value, we can say that the price is:
$955.14 = $80 × [1 − 1/(1 + r)6]/r + 1,000/( 1 + r)6
where r is the unknown discount rate, or yield to maturity. We have one equation here and 
one unknown, but we cannot solve for r explicitly. The only way to find the answer is to use 
trial and error (or, better yet, a spreadsheet or financial calculator).
This problem is essentially identical to the one we examined in the last chapter when 
we tried to find the unknown interest rate on an annuity. However, finding the rate (or 
yield) on a bond is even more complicated because of the $1,000 face amount.

172	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
We can speed up the trial-and-error process by using what we know about bond prices 
and yields. In this case, the bond has an $80 coupon and is selling at a discount. We thus 
know that the yield is greater than 8 percent. If we compute the price at 10 percent:
	Bond value = $80 × (1 − 1/1.106 )/.10 + 1,000/1.106
	
= $80 × 4.3553 + 1,000/1.7716
	
= $912.89
At 10 percent, the value we calculate is lower than the actual price, so 10 percent is too 
high. The true yield must be somewhere between 8 and 10 percent. At this point, it’s “plug 
and chug” to find the answer. You would probably want to try 9 percent next. If you did, 
you would see that this is in fact the bond’s yield to maturity.
A bond’s yield to maturity should not be confused with its current yield, which is a 
bond’s annual coupon divided by its price. In the example we just worked, the bond’s an-
nual coupon was $80, and its price was $955.14. Given these numbers, we see that the 
current yield is $80/955.14 = 8.38 percent, which is less than the yield to maturity of 
9 percent. The reason the current yield is too low is that it only considers the coupon por-
tion of your return; it doesn’t consider the built-in gain from the price discount. For a pre-
mium bond, the reverse is true, meaning that current yield would be higher because it 
ignores the built-in loss.
Our discussion of bond valuation is summarized in Table 6.1.
Current market rates are 
available at www.
bankrate.com.
current yield
A bond’s coupon payment 
divided by its closing 
price.
 I.	 Finding the value of a bond
Bond value = C × [1 − 1/(1 + r)t]/r + F/(1 + r)t
where
	C = Coupon paid each period
	 r = Rate per period
	 t = Number of periods
	 F = Bond’s face value
II.	 Finding the yield on a bond
Given a bond value, coupon, time to maturity, and face value, it is possible to find the implicit 
discount rate, or yield to maturity, by trial and error only. To do this, try different discount rates 
in the preceding formula until the calculated bond value equals the given bond value. 
Remember that increasing the rate decreases the bond value.
ta b le  6.1
Summary of bond 
valuation
EXAMPLE
6.2  Current Events
A bond has a quoted price of $1,080.42. It has a face value of $1,000, a semiannual coupon of $30, 
and a maturity of five years. What is its current yield? What is its yield to maturity? Which is bigger? 
Why?
	
Notice that this bond makes semiannual payments of $30, so the annual payment is $60. The 
current yield is thus $60/1,080.42 = 5.55 percent. To calculate the yield to maturity, refer back to 
Example 6.1. Now, in this case, the bond pays $30 every six months and it has 10 six-month periods 
until maturity. So, we need to find r as follows:
$1,080.42 = $30 × [1 − 1/(1 + r)10]/r + 1,000/(1 + r)10
After some trial and error, we find that r is equal to 2.1 percent. But, the tricky part is that this 
2.1 percent is the yield per six months. We have to double it to get the yield to maturity, so the yield 
to maturity is 4.2 percent, which is less than the current yield. The reason is that the current yield 
ignores the built-in loss of the premium between now and maturity.

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
173
EXAMPLE
6.3  Bond Yields
You’re looking at two bonds identical in every way except for their coupons and, of course, their 
prices. Both have 12 years to maturity. The first bond has a 10 percent coupon rate and sells for 
$935.08. The second has a 12 percent coupon rate. What do you think it would sell for?
	
Because the two bonds are very similar, they will be priced to yield about the same rate. We 
first need to calculate the yield on the 10 percent coupon bond. Proceeding as before, we know that 
the yield must be greater than 10 percent because the bond is selling at a discount. The bond has 
a fairly long maturity of 12 years. We’ve seen that long-term bond prices are relatively sensitive to 
interest rate changes, so the yield is probably close to 10 percent. A little trial and error reveals that 
the yield is actually 11 percent:
	Bond value = $100 × (1 − 1/1.1112)/.11 + 1,000/1.1112
	
= $100 × 6.4924 + 1,000/3.4985
	
= $649.24 + 285.84
	
= $935.08
With an 11 percent yield, the second bond will sell at a premium because of its $120 coupon. Its 
value is:
	Bond value = $120 × (1 − 1/1.1112)/.11 + 1,000/1.1112
	
= $120 × 6.4924 + 1,000/3.4985
	
= $779.08 + 285.84
	
= $1,064.92
HOW TO CALCULATE BOND PRICES AND YIELDS USING A FINANCIAL 
CALCULATOR
Many financial calculators have fairly sophisticated built-in bond valuation routines. However, these vary 
quite a lot in implementation, and not all financial calculators have them. As a result, we will illustrate a 
simple way to handle bond problems that will work on just about any financial calculator.
	
To begin, of course, we first remember to clear out the calculator! Next, for Example 6.3, we have 
two bonds to consider, both with 12 years to maturity. The first one sells for $935.08 and has a 10 per-
cent coupon rate. To find its yield, we can do the following:
Enter	
12	
	
100	
−935.08	
1,000
	
I/ Y
I/ Y
Solve for	
	
11
Notice that here we have entered both a future value of $1,000, representing the bond’s face value, and 
a payment of 10 percent of $1,000, or $100, per year, representing the bond’s annual coupon. Also no-
tice that we have a negative sign on the bond’s price, which we have entered as the present value.
	
For the second bond, we now know that the relevant yield is 11 percent. It has a 12 percent coupon 
and 12 years to maturity, so what’s the price? To answer, we just enter the relevant values and solve for 
the present value of the bond’s cash flows:
Enter	
12	
11	
120	
	
1,000
	
PV
PV
Solve for	
	
	
	
−1,064.92
CALCULATOR 
HINTS
(continued)

174	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
There is an important detail that comes up here. Suppose we have a bond with a price of $902.29, 
10 years to maturity, and a coupon rate of 6 percent. As we mentioned earlier, most bonds actually make 
semiannual payments. Assuming that this is the case for the bond here, what’s the bond’s yield? To an-
swer, we need to enter the relevant numbers like this:
Enter	
20	
	
30	
−902.29	
1,000
	
I/ Y
I/ Y
Solve for	
	
3.7
Notice that we entered $30 as the payment because the bond actually makes payments of $30 every 
six months. Similarly, we entered 20 for N because there are actually 20 six-month periods. When we 
solve for the yield, we get 3.7 percent, but the tricky thing to remember is that this is the yield per six 
months, so we have to double it to get the right answer: 2 × 3.7 = 7.4 percent, which would be the bond’s 
reported yield.
HOW TO CALCULATE BOND PRICES AND YIELDS  
USING A SPREADSHEET
Like financial calculators, most spreadsheets have fairly elaborate routines available for calculating 
bond values and yields; many of these routines involve details that we have not discussed. However, 
setting up a simple spreadsheet to calculate prices or yields is straightforward, as our next two 
spreadsheets show:
SPREADSHEET 
STRATEGIES
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1
2
Using a spreadsheet to calculate bond yields
3
4
Suppose we have a bond with 22 years to maturity, a coupon rate of 8 percent, and a price of
5
$960.17. If the bond makes semiannual payments, what is its yield to maturity?
6
7
Settlement date:
1/1/00
8
Maturity date:
1/1/22
9
Annual coupon rate:
.08
10
Bond price (% of par):
96.017
11
Face value (% of par):
100
12
Coupons per year:
2
13
Yield to maturity:
.084
14
15
The formula entered in cell B13 is = YIELD(B7,B8,B9,B10,B11,B12); notice that face value and bond
16
price are entered as a percentage of face value.
17
(continued)

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
175
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1
2
Using a spreadsheet to calculate bond values
3
4
Suppose we have a bond with 22 years to maturity, a coupon rate of 8 percent, and a yield to
5
maturity of 9 percent. If the bond makes semiannual payments, what is its price today?
6
7
Settlement date:
1/1/00
8
Maturity date:
1/1/22
9
Annual coupon rate:
.08
10
Yield to maturity:
.09
11
Face value (% of par):
100
12
Coupons per year:
2
13
Bond price (% of par):
90.49
14
15
The formula entered in cell B13 is =PRICE(B7,B8,B9,B10,B11,B12); notice that face value and bond
16
price are entered as a percentage of face value.
17
In our spreadsheets, notice that we had to enter two dates, a settlement date and a maturity date. The 
settlement date is just the date you actually pay for the bond, and the maturity date is the day the bond 
actually matures. In most of our problems, we don’t explicitly have these dates, so we have to make 
them up. For example, because our bond has 22 years to maturity, we just picked 1/1/2000 (January 1, 
2000) as the settlement date and 1/1/2022 (January 1, 2022) as the maturity date. Any two dates would 
do as long as they were exactly 22 years apart, but these are particularly easy to work with. Finally, no-
tice that we had to enter the coupon rate and yield to maturity in annual terms and then explicitly provide 
the number of coupon payments per year.
concept questions
6.1a	
What are the cash flows associated with a bond?
6.1b	
What is the general expression for the value of a bond?
6.1c	
Is it true that the only risk associated with owning a bond is that the issuer will not 
make all the payments? Explain.
MORE ON BOND FEATURES
In this section, we continue our discussion of corporate debt by describing in some detail 
the basic terms and features that make up a typical long-term corporate bond. We discuss 
additional issues associated with long-term debt in subsequent sections.
Securities issued by corporations may be classified roughly as equity securities and 
debt securities. At the crudest level, a debt represents something that must be repaid; it is 
the result of borrowing money. When corporations borrow, they generally promise to make 
regularly scheduled interest payments and to repay the original amount borrowed (i.e., the 
principal). The person or firm making the loan is called the creditor, or lender. The corpo-
ration borrowing the money is called the debtor, or borrower.
6.2
coverage online
Excel 
Master

176	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
From a financial point of view, the main differences between debt and equity are the 
following:
1.	
Debt is not an ownership interest in the firm. Creditors generally do not have voting 
power.
2.	
The corporation’s payment of interest on debt is considered a cost of doing business 
and is fully tax deductible. Dividends paid to stockholders are not tax deductible.
3.	
Unpaid debt is a liability of the firm. If it is not paid, the creditors can legally claim 
the assets of the firm. This action can result in liquidation or reorganization, two of 
the possible consequences of bankruptcy. Thus, one of the costs of issuing debt is the 
possibility of financial failure. This possibility does not arise when equity is issued.
Is It Debt or Equity?
Sometimes it is not clear if a particular security is debt or equity. For example, suppose a 
corporation issues a perpetual bond with interest payable solely from corporate income if 
and only if earned. Whether or not this is really a debt is hard to say and is primarily a legal 
and semantic issue. Courts and taxing authorities would have the final say.
Corporations are very adept at creating exotic, hybrid securities that have many features 
of equity but are treated as debt. Obviously, the distinction between debt and equity is very 
important for tax purposes. So, one reason that corporations try to create a debt security that 
is really equity is to obtain the tax benefits of debt and the bankruptcy benefits of equity.
As a general rule, equity represents an ownership interest, and it is a residual claim. This 
means that equity holders are paid after debt holders. As a result of this, the risks and benefits 
associated with owning debt and equity are different. To give just one example, note that the 
maximum reward for owning a debt security is ultimately fixed by the amount of the loan, 
whereas there is no upper limit to the potential reward from owning an equity interest.
Long-Term Debt: The Basics
Ultimately, all long-term debt securities are promises made by the issuing firm to pay prin-
cipal when due and to make timely interest payments on the unpaid balance. Beyond this, 
there are a number of features that distinguish these securities from one another. We dis-
cuss some of these features next.
The maturity of a long-term debt instrument is the length of time the debt remains 
outstanding with some unpaid balance. Debt securities can be short term (with maturities 
of one year or less) or long term (with maturities of more than one year).1 Short-term debt 
is sometimes referred to as unfunded debt.2
Debt securities are typically called notes, debentures, or bonds. Strictly speaking, a 
bond is a secured debt. However, in common usage, the word bond refers to all kinds of 
secured and unsecured debt. We will, therefore, continue to use the term generically to 
refer to long-term debt.
The two major forms of long-term debt are public issue and private issue. We concen-
trate on public-issue bonds. Most of what we say about them holds true for private-issue, 
long-term debt as well. The main difference between public-issue and private-issue debt is 
Information for bond 
investors can be found at 
www.investinginbonds.
com.
1 There is no universally agreed-upon distinction between short-term and long-term debt. In addition, people 
often refer to intermediate-term debt, which has a maturity of more than 1 year and less than 3 to 5, or even 10, 
years.
2 The word funding is part of the jargon of finance. It generally refers to the long term. Thus, a firm planning to 
“fund” its debt requirements may be replacing short-term debt with long-term debt.

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
177
that the latter is directly placed with a lender and not offered to the public. Because this is 
a private transaction, the specific terms are up to the parties involved.
There are many other dimensions to long-term debt, including such things as security, 
call features, sinking funds, ratings, and protective covenants. The following table illus-
trates these features for a bond issued by ExxonMobil on March 6, 2015. If some of these 
terms are unfamiliar, have no fear. We discuss them all presently.
Information on individual 
bonds can be found at 
www.bondsonline.com.
3 The term loan agreement or loan contract is usually used for privately placed debt and term loans.
Features of an ExxonMobil Bond
Term	
Explanation	
Amount of issue	
$1.75 billion	
The company issued $1.75 billion worth of bonds.
Date of issue	
03/06/2015	
The bonds were sold on 03/06/2015.
Maturity	
03/06/2025	
The bonds mature on 03/06/2025.
Face value	
$2,000	
The denomination of the bonds is $2,000.	
Annual coupon	
2.709	
Each bondholder will receive $54.18 per bond per 
year (2.709% of face value).	
Offer price	
99.550	
The offer price will be 99.550% of the $2,000 face 
value, or $1,991, per bond.
Coupon payment	
03/06, 09/06	
Coupons of $54.18/2 = $27.09 will be paid on  
  dates 	
	
these dates.	
Security	
None	
The bonds are not secured by specific assets.	
Sinking fund	
None	
The bonds have no sinking fund.	
Call provision	
At any time	
The bonds do not have a deferred call.
Call price	
Treasury rate	
The bonds have a “make whole” call price.	 
	
plus .10.
Rating	
Moody’s Aaa; 	
The bonds have the highest credit rating possible.
	
S&P AAA
Many of these features will be detailed in the bond indenture, so we discuss this first.
The Indenture
The indenture is the written agreement between the corporation (the borrower) and its 
creditors. It is sometimes referred to as the deed of trust.3 Usually, a trustee (a bank, per-
haps) is appointed by the corporation to represent the bondholders. The trust company 
must (1) make sure the terms of the indenture are obeyed; (2) manage the sinking fund 
(described in the following pages); and (3) represent the bondholders in default, that is, if 
the company defaults on its payments to them.
The bond indenture is a legal document. It can run several hundred pages and gener-
ally makes for very tedious reading. It is an important document, however, because it gen-
erally includes the following provisions:
  1.	 The basic terms of the bonds.
  2.	 The total amount of bonds issued.
  3.	 A description of property used as security.
  4.	 The repayment arrangements.
  5.	 The call provisions.
  6.	 Details of the protective covenants.
We discuss these features next.
indenture
The written agreement 
between the corporation 
and the lender detailing 
the terms of the debt 
issue.

178	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
Terms of a Bond 
Corporate bonds have historically had a face value (i.e., a denomi-
nation) of $1,000, although par values of $2,000 like the ExxonMobil bond have become 
fairly common. This is called the principal value, and it is stated on the bond certificate. 
So, if a corporation wanted to borrow $1 million, 1,000 bonds with a face value of $1,000 
would have to be sold. The par value (i.e., initial accounting value) of a bond is almost al-
ways the same as the face value, and the terms are used interchangeably in practice.
Corporate bonds are usually in registered form. For example, the indenture might read 
as follows:
Interest is payable semiannually on July 1 and January 1 of each year to the person in 
whose name the bond is registered at the close of business on June 15 or December 15, 
respectively.
This means that the company has a registrar who will record the ownership of each bond 
and record any changes in ownership. The company will pay the interest and principal di-
rectly to the owner of record. Long ago, corporate bonds (and other types) had attached 
“coupons.” To obtain an interest payment, the owner had to separate a coupon from the 
bond certificate and send it to the company registrar (the paying agent).
Alternatively, the bond could be in bearer form. This means that the certificate is 
the basic evidence of ownership, and the corporation will “pay the bearer.” Ownership is 
not otherwise recorded, and, as with a registered bond with attached coupons, the holder 
of the bond certificate detaches the coupons and sends them to the company to receive 
payment.
There are two drawbacks to bearer bonds. First, they are difficult to recover if they are 
lost or stolen. Second, because the company does not know who owns its bonds, it cannot 
notify bondholders of important events. Bearer bonds were once the dominant type, but 
they are now much less common (in the United States) than registered bonds.
Security 
Debt securities are classified according to the collateral and mortgages used 
to protect the bondholder.
Collateral is a general term that frequently means securities (e.g., bonds and stocks) 
that are pledged as security for payment of debt. For example, collateral trust bonds often 
involve a pledge of common stock held by the corporation. However, the term collateral is 
commonly used to refer to any asset pledged on a debt.
Mortgage securities are secured by a mortgage on the real property of the borrower. 
The property involved is usually real estate, for example, land or buildings. The legal docu-
ment that describes the mortgage is called a mortgage trust indenture or trust deed. A 
“blanket” mortgage pledges all the real property owned by the company.4
Bonds frequently represent unsecured obligations of the company. A debenture is an 
unsecured bond, for which no specific pledge of property is made. The term note is gener-
ally used for such instruments if the maturity of the unsecured bond is less than 10 or so 
years when the bond is originally issued. Debenture holders only have a claim on property 
not otherwise pledged, in other words, the property that remains after mortgages and col-
lateral trusts are taken into account.
The terminology that we use here and elsewhere in this chapter is standard in the 
United States. Outside the United States, these same terms can have different meanings. 
registered form
The registrar of a 
company records who 
owns each bond, and 
bond payments are made 
directly to the owner of 
record.
bearer form
A bond issued without 
record of the owner’s 
name; payment is made to 
whomever holds the bond.
debenture
Unsecured debt, usually 
with a maturity of 10 years 
or more.
note
Unsecured debt, usually 
with a maturity of under 
10 years.
4 Real property includes land and things “affixed thereto.” It does not include cash or inventories.

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
179
For example, bonds issued by the British government (“gilts”) are called treasury “stock.” 
Also, in the United Kingdom, a debenture is a secured obligation.
At the current time, almost all public bonds issued in the United States by industrial 
and financial companies are debentures. However, most utility and railroad bonds are se-
cured by a pledge of assets.
Seniority 
In general terms, seniority indicates preference in position over other lend-
ers, and debts are sometimes labeled as senior or junior to indicate seniority. Some debt is 
subordinated, as in, for example, a subordinated debenture.
In the event of default, holders of subordinated debt must give preference to other speci-
fied creditors. Usually, this means that the subordinated lenders will be paid off only after the 
specified creditors have been compensated. However, debt cannot be subordinated to equity.
Repayment 
Bonds can be repaid at maturity, at which time the bondholder will re-
ceive the stated, or face, value of the bond, or they may be repaid in part or in entirety be-
fore maturity. Early repayment in some form is more typical and is often handled through 
a sinking fund.
A sinking fund is an account managed by the bond trustee for the purpose of repaying 
the bonds. The company makes annual payments to the trustee, who then uses the funds to 
retire a portion of the debt. The trustee does this by either buying up some of the bonds in 
the market or calling in a fraction of the outstanding bonds. This second option is dis-
cussed in the next section.
There are many different kinds of sinking fund arrangements, and the details would be 
spelled out in the indenture. For example:
  1.	 Some sinking funds start about 10 years after the initial issuance.
  2.	 Some sinking funds establish equal payments over the life of the bond.
  3.	 Some high-quality bond issues establish payments to the sinking fund that are not 
sufficient to redeem the entire issue. As a consequence, there is the possibility of a 
large “balloon payment” at maturity.
The Call Provision 
A call provision allows the company to repurchase, or “call,” part 
or all of the bond issue at stated prices over a specific period. Corporate bonds are usually 
callable.
Generally, the call price is above the bond’s stated value (that is, the par value). The 
difference between the call price and the stated value is the call premium. The amount of 
the call premium usually becomes smaller over time. One arrangement is to initially set the 
call premium equal to the annual coupon payment and then make it decline to zero as the 
call date moves closer to the time of maturity.
Call provisions are not usually operative during the first part of a bond’s life. This 
makes the call provision less of a worry for bondholders in the bond’s early years. For ex-
ample, a company might be prohibited from calling its bonds for the first 10 years. This is 
a deferred call provision. During this period of prohibition, the bond is said to be call 
protected.
In just the last few years, use of a new type of call provision, a “make-whole” call, has 
become very widespread in the corporate bond market. With such a feature, bondholders 
receive exactly what the bonds are worth if they are called. When bondholders don’t suffer 
a loss in the event of a call, they are made whole.
To determine the make-whole call price, we calculate the present value of the remain-
ing interest and principal payments at a rate specified in the indenture. For example, 
The Securities Industry 
and Financial Markets 
Association (SIFMA) 
website is www.sifma.
org.
sinking fund
An account managed by 
the bond trustee for early 
bond redemption.
call provision
Agreement giving the 
issuer the option to 
repurchase a bond at a 
specific price prior to 
maturity.
call premium
The amount by which the 
call price exceeds the par 
value of the bond.
deferred call 
provision
Bond call provision 
prohibiting the company 
from redeeming the bond 
prior to a certain date.
call protected bond
Bond during period in 
which it cannot be 
redeemed by the issuer.

180	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
­looking at our ExxonMobil issue, we see that the discount rate is “Treasury rate plus .10%.” 
What this means is that we determine the discount rate by first finding a U.S. Treasury is-
sue with the same maturity. We calculate the yield to maturity on the Treasury issue and 
then add on an additional .10 percent to get the discount rate we use.
Notice that, with a make-whole call provision, the call price is higher when interest 
rates are lower and vice versa (why?). Also notice that, as is common with a make-whole 
call, the ExxonMobil issue does not have a deferred call feature. Why might investors not 
be too concerned about the absence of this feature?
Protective Covenants 
A protective covenant is that part of the indenture or loan 
agreement that limits certain actions a company might otherwise wish to take during the 
term of the loan. Protective covenants can be classified into two types: negative covenants 
and positive (or affirmative) covenants.
A negative covenant is a “thou shalt not” type of covenant. It limits or prohibits ac-
tions that the company might take. Here are some typical examples:
  1.	 The firm must limit the amount of dividends it pays according to some formula.
  2.	 The firm cannot pledge any assets to other lenders.
  3.	 The firm cannot merge with another firm.
  4.	 The firm cannot sell or lease any major assets without approval by the lender.
  5.	 The firm cannot issue additional long-term debt.
A positive covenant is a “thou shalt” type of covenant. It specifies an action that the 
company agrees to take or a condition the company must abide by. Here are some examples:
  1.	 The company must maintain its working capital at or above some specified minimum 
level.
  2.	 The company must periodically furnish audited financial statements to the lender.
  3.	 The firm must maintain any collateral or security in good condition.
This is only a partial list of covenants; a particular indenture may feature many differ-
ent ones.
concept questions
6.2a	
What are the distinguishing features of debt as compared to equity?
6.2b	
What is the indenture? What are protective covenants? Give some examples.
6.2c	
What is a sinking fund?
BOND RATINGS
Firms frequently pay to have their debt rated. The two leading bond-rating firms are 
Moody’s and Standard and Poor’s (S&P). The debt ratings are an assessment of the credit-
worthiness of the corporate issuer. The definitions of creditworthiness used by Moody’s 
and S&P are based on how likely the firm is to default and the protection creditors have in 
the event of a default.
It is important to recognize that bond ratings are concerned only with the possibility of 
default. Earlier, we discussed interest rate risk, which we defined as the risk of a change in 
protective covenant
A part of the indenture 
limiting certain actions 
that might be taken during 
the term of the loan, 
usually to protect the 
lender’s interest.
Want detailed 
information on the 
amount and terms of  
the debt issued by a 
particular firm? Check out 
the firm’s latest financial 
statements by searching 
SEC filings at www.sec.
gov.
6.3

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
181
the value of a bond resulting from a change in interest rates. Bond ratings do not address 
this issue. As a result, the price of a highly rated bond can still be quite volatile.
Bond ratings are constructed from information supplied by the corporation. The rating 
classes and some information concerning them are shown in the following table.
	
High Grade	
Medium Grade	
Low Grade	
Very Low Grade
Standard & Poor’s	
AAA	
AA	
A	
BBB	
BB	
B	
CCC	
CC	
C	
D
Moody’s	
Aaa	
Aa	
A	
Baa	
Ba	
B	
Caa	
Ca	
C
Moody’s	 S&P
Aaa	
AAA	
Debt rated Aaa and AAA has the highest rating. Capacity to pay interest and principal is extremely strong.
Aa	
AA	
Debt rated Aa and AA has a very strong capacity to pay interest and repay principal. Together with the 
highest rating, this group constitutes the high-grade bond class.
A	
A	
Debt rated A has a strong capacity to pay interest and repay principal, although it is somewhat more 
susceptible to the adverse effects of changes in circumstances and economic conditions than debt in 
higher-rated categories.
Baa	
BBB	
Debt rated Baa and BBB is regarded as having an adequate capacity to pay interest and repay 
principal. Whereas it normally exhibits adequate protection parameters, adverse economic conditions 
or changing circumstances are more likely to lead to a weakened capacity to pay interest and repay 
principal for debt in this category than in higher-rated categories. These bonds are medium-grade 
obligations.
Ba; B	
BB; B	
Debt rated in these categories is regarded, on balance, as predominantly speculative with respect to  
Caa	
CCC	
capacity to pay interest and repay principal in accordance with the terms of the obligation. BB and Ba  
Ca	
CC	
indicate the lowest degree of speculation, and Ca, CC, and C the highest degree of speculation.  
C	
C	
Although such debt is likely to have some quality and protective characteristics, these are outweighed 
by large uncertainties or major risk exposures to adverse conditions. Issues rated C by Moody’s are 
typically in default.
	
D	
Debt rated D is in default, and payment of interest and/or repayment of principal is in arrears.
Note: At times, both Moody’s and S&P use adjustments (called notches) to these ratings. S&P uses plus and minus signs: A+ is the strongest A rating 
and A− the weakest. Moody’s uses a 1, 2, or 3 designation, with 1 being the highest.
Investment-Quality Bond Ratings
Low-Quality, Speculative,  
and/or “Junk” Bond Ratings
The highest rating a firm’s debt can have is AAA or Aaa, and such debt is judged to be 
the best quality and to have the lowest degree of default risk. For example, the ExxonMobil 
issue we discussed earlier was rated AAA. This rating is not awarded very often: As of 
2015, only three nonfinancial U.S. companies have AAA ratings, ExxonMobil, Johnson & 
Johnson, and Microsoft. AA or Aa ratings indicate very good quality debt and are much 
more common. The lowest rating is D, for debt that is in default.
Beginning in the 1980s, a growing part of corporate borrowing has taken the form of 
low-grade, or “junk,” bonds. If these low-grade corporate bonds are rated at all, they are 
rated below investment grade by the major rating agencies. Investment-grade bonds are 
bonds rated at least BBB by S&P or Baa by Moody’s.
Some bonds are called “crossover” or “5B” bonds. The reason is that they are rated 
triple-B (or Baa) by one rating agency and double-B (or Ba) by another, a “split rating.” 
For example, in February 2015, casino owner Wynn Las Vegas issued $1.8 billion worth of 
bonds that were rated Ba2 by Moody’s and BBB– by S&P.
A bond’s credit rating can change as the issuer’s financial strength improves or dete-
riorates. For example, in February 2015, Moody’s downgraded Petrobras, Brazil’s largest 
Want to know what 
criteria are commonly 
used to rate corporate 
and municipal  
bonds? Go to www.
standardandpoors.com, 
www.moodys.com,  
or  
www.fitchinv.com.

182	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
oil and gas company, from investment grade to junk bond status. Bonds that drop into junk 
territory from above are called “fallen angels.” Why was Petrobras downgraded? The rea-
son given by Moody’s was a corruption investigation. Executives of the company had been 
accused of collaborating with contractors to pay bribes to politicians.
Credit ratings are important because defaults really do occur, and, when they do, in-
vestors can lose heavily. For example, in 2000, AmeriServe Food Distribution, Inc., which 
supplied restaurants such as Burger King with everything from burgers to giveaway toys, 
defaulted on $200 million in junk bonds. After the default, the bonds traded at just 18 cents 
on the dollar, leaving investors with a loss of more than $160 million.
Even worse in AmeriServe’s case, the bonds had been issued only four months earlier, 
thereby making AmeriServe an NCAA champion. While that might be a good thing for a 
college basketball team such as the University of Kentucky Wildcats, in the bond market it 
means “No Coupon At All,” and it’s not a good thing for investors.
concept questions
6.3a 	 What is a junk bond?
6.3b 	 What does a bond rating say about the risk of fluctuations in a bond’s value 
resulting from interest rate changes?
SOME DIFFERENT TYPES OF BONDS
Thus far, we have considered only “plain vanilla” corporate bonds. In this section, we 
briefly look at bonds issued by governments and also at bonds with unusual features.
Government Bonds
The biggest borrower in the world—by a wide margin—is everybody’s favorite family 
member, Uncle Sam. In late 2015, the total debt of the U.S. government was more than 
$18.2 trillion, or about $57,000 per U.S. citizen (and growing rapidly). When the govern-
ment wishes to borrow money for more than one year, it sells what are known as Treasury 
notes and bonds to the public (in fact, it does so every month). Treasury notes have original 
maturities ranging from 2 to 10 years, while Treasury bonds have longer maturities, ex-
tending out as far as 30 years.
Most U.S. Treasury issues are just ordinary coupon bonds. There are two important 
things to keep in mind, however. First, U.S. Treasury issues, unlike essentially all other 
bonds, have no default risk because (we hope) the Treasury can always come up with the 
money to make the payments. Second, Treasury issues are exempt from state income taxes 
(though not federal income taxes). In other words, the coupons you receive on a Treasury 
note or bond are only taxed at the federal level.
State and local governments also borrow money by selling notes and bonds. Such 
issues are called municipal notes and bonds, or just “munis.” Unlike Treasury issues, 
munis have varying degrees of default risk, and, in fact, they are rated much like corpo-
rate issues. Also, they are almost always callable. The most intriguing thing about munis 
is that their coupons are exempt from federal income taxes (and state income taxes in 
6.4
If you’re nervous about 
the level of debt piled up 
by the U.S. government, 
don’t go to www.
publicdebt.treas.gov or 
to www.brillig.com/
debt_clock! Learn all 
about government bonds 
at www.newyorkfed.org.

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
183
some cases), which makes them very attractive to high-income, high-tax bracket 
investors.
Because of the enormous tax break they receive, the yields on municipal bonds are 
much lower than the yields on taxable bonds. For example, in early 2015, long-term, high-
quality corporate bonds were yielding about 3.7 percent. At the same time, long-term, 
high-quality munis were yielding about 2.7 percent. Suppose an investor was in a 30 per-
cent tax bracket. All else being the same, would this investor prefer an Aa corporate bond 
or an Aa municipal bond?
To answer, we need to compare the aftertax yields on the two bonds. Ignoring state 
and local taxes, the muni pays 2.7 percent on both a pretax and an aftertax basis. The 
corporate issue pays 3.7 percent before taxes, but it only pays .037 × (1 − .30) = .026, 
or 2.6 percent, once we account for the 30 percent tax bite. Given this, the yields are 
quite close.
EXAMPLE
6.4  Taxable versus Municipal Bonds
Suppose taxable bonds are currently yielding 8 percent, while at the same time, munis of compa-
rable risk and maturity are yielding 6 percent. Which is more attractive to an investor in a 40 percent 
tax bracket? What is the break-even tax rate? How do you interpret this rate?
	
For an investor in a 40 percent tax bracket, a taxable bond yields 8 × (1 − .40) = 4.8 percent 
after taxes, so the muni is much more attractive. The break-even tax rate is the tax rate at which an 
investor would be indifferent between a taxable and a nontaxable issue. If we let t* stand for the 
break-even tax rate, then we can solve for it as follows:
	.08 × (1 − t*) = .06
	
1 − t* = .06/.08 = .75
	
t* = .25
Thus, an investor in a 25 percent tax bracket would make 6 percent after taxes from either bond.
Zero Coupon Bonds
A bond that pays no coupons at all must be offered at a price that is much lower than its 
stated value. Such bonds are called zero coupon bonds, or just zeroes.5
Suppose the Eight-Inch Nails (EIN) Company issues a $1,000 face value, five-year 
zero coupon bond. The initial price is set at $508.35. Even though no interest payments are 
made on the bond, zero coupon bond calculations use semiannual periods to be consistent 
with coupon bond calculations. Using semiannual periods, it is straightforward to verify 
that, at this price, the bond yields 14 percent to maturity. The total interest paid over the life 
of the bond is $1,000 − 508.35 = $491.65.
For tax purposes, the issuer of a zero coupon bond deducts interest every year even 
though no interest is actually paid. Similarly, the owner must pay taxes on interest accrued 
every year, even though no interest is actually received.
zero coupon bond
A bond that makes no 
coupon payments, and 
thus is initially priced at a 
deep discount.
5 A bond issued with a very low coupon rate (as opposed to a zero coupon rate) is an original-issue discount 
(OID) bond.

184	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
The way in which the yearly interest on a zero coupon bond is calculated is governed 
by tax law. Before 1982, corporations could calculate the interest deduction on a straight-
line basis. For EIN, the annual interest deduction would have been $491.65/5 = $98.33 
per year.
Under current tax law, the implicit interest is determined by amortizing the loan. We 
do this by first calculating the bond’s value at the beginning of each year. For example, 
after one year, the bond will have four years until maturity, so it will be worth $1,000/1.078 = 
$582.01; the value in two years will be $1,000/1.076 = $666.34; and so on. The implicit 
interest each year is simply the change in the bond’s value for the year. The values and in-
terest expenses for the EIN bond are listed in Table 6.2.
Notice that under the old rules, zero coupon bonds were more attractive for corpora-
tions because the deductions for interest expense were larger in the early years (compare 
the implicit interest expense with the straight-line expense).
Under current tax law, EIN could deduct $73.66 in interest paid the first year, and the 
owner of the bond would pay taxes on $73.66 of taxable income (even though no interest 
was actually received). This second tax feature makes taxable zero coupon bonds less at-
tractive to individuals. However, they are still a very attractive investment for tax-exempt 
investors with long-term dollar-denominated liabilities, such as pension funds, because the 
future dollar value is known with relative certainty.
Some bonds are zero coupon bonds for only part of their lives. For example, at one 
time, General Motors had a debenture outstanding that matured on March 15, 2036. 
For the first 20 years, no coupon payments were scheduled, but 20 years into the 
bond’s life, it was to begin paying coupons at a rate of 7.75 percent per year, payable 
semiannually.
Floating-Rate Bonds
The conventional bonds we have talked about in this chapter have fixed-dollar obligations 
because the coupon rate is set as a fixed percentage of the par value. Similarly, the princi-
pal is set equal to the par value. Under these circumstances, the coupon payment and prin-
cipal are completely fixed.
With floating-rate bonds (floaters), the coupon payments are adjustable. The adjust-
ments are tied to an interest rate index such as the Treasury bill interest rate or the 30-year 
Treasury bond rate. The value of a floating-rate bond depends on exactly how the coupon 
payment adjustments are defined. In most cases, the coupon adjusts with a lag to some 
base rate. For example, suppose a coupon rate adjustment is made on June 1. The adjust-
ment might be based on the simple average of Treasury bond yields during the previous 
three months.
Another good bond 
market site is  
money.cnn.com.
ta b l e  6.2
Interest expense for 
EIN’s zeroes
	
Beginning	
Ending	
Implicit	
Straight-Line
Year	
Value	
Value	
Interest Expense	
Interest Expense
1	
$508.35	
$   582.01	
$  73.66	
$  98.33
2	
   582.01	
   666.34	
    84.33	
    98.33
3	
  666.34	
   762.90	
    96.56	
    98.33
4	
  762.90	
   873.44	
  110.54	
    98.33
5	
  873.44	
1,000.00	
  126.56	
    98.33
Total	
	
	
$491.65	
$491.65

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
185
In addition, the majority of floaters have the following features:
  1.	 The holder has the right to redeem the note at par on the coupon payment date after 
some specified amount of time. This is called a put provision, and it is discussed in 
the following section.
  2.	 The coupon rate has a floor and a ceiling, meaning that the coupon is subject to a 
minimum and a maximum. In this case, the coupon rate is said to be “capped,“ and 
the upper and lower rates are sometimes called the collar.
A particularly interesting type of floating-rate bond is an inflation-linked bond. Such bonds 
have coupons that are adjusted according to the rate of inflation (the principal amount may 
be adjusted as well). The U.S. Treasury began issuing such bonds in January of 1997. The 
issues are sometimes called “TIPS,” or Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities. Other 
countries, including Canada, Israel, and Britain, have issued similar securities.
Other Types of Bonds
Many bonds have unusual, or exotic, features. Unfortunately, there are far too many varia-
tions for us to cover in detail here. We therefore focus on only a few of the more common 
types.
Structured notes are bonds that are based on stocks, bonds, commodities, or curren-
cies. One particular type of structured note has a return based on a stock market index. At 
expiration, if the stock index has declined, the bond returns the principal. However, if the 
stock index has increased, the bond will return a portion of the stock index return, say 
80 percent. Another type of structured note will return twice the stock index return, but 
with the potential for loss of principal.
A convertible bond can be swapped for a fixed number of shares of stock anytime be-
fore maturity at the holder’s option. Convertibles are relatively common, but the number 
has been decreasing in recent years.
A put bond allows the holder to force the issuer to buy the bond back at a stated price. 
The put feature is therefore just the reverse of the call provision and is a relatively new 
development.
A given bond may have many unusual features. For example, two recent types of ex-
otic bonds include CoCo bonds, which have a coupon payment, and NoNo bonds, which 
are zero coupon bonds. CoCo and NoNo bonds are contingent convertible, putable, call-
able, subordinated bonds. The contingent convertible clause is similar to the normal con-
version feature, except the contingency feature must be met. For example, a contingency 
feature may require that the company stock trade at 110 percent of the conversion price for 
20 out of 30 days. Valuing a bond of this sort can be quite complex, and the yield to matu-
rity calculation is often meaningless. The nearby Finance Matters box provides some more 
examples of exotic bonds.
concept questions
6.4a	
Why might an income bond be attractive to a corporation with volatile cash flows? 
Can you think of a reason why income bonds are not more popular?
6.4b	
What do you think would be the effect of a put feature on a bond’s coupon? How 
about a convertibility feature? Why?
Official information on 
U.S. inflation-indexed 
bonds is at www.
treasurydirect.gov.

Exotic Bonds
B
onds come in many flavors. The unusual types are called 
“exotics” and can range from the fairly simple to the truly 
esoteric. Take the case of mortgage-backed securities (MBSs). 
MBSs are a type of securitized financial instrument. In securiti-
zation, cash flows from financial assets are pooled together 
into securities, and the securities are sold to investors. With 
an MBS, banks or mortgage brokers who originate mortgages 
sell the mortgages to a trust. The trust pools the mortgages 
and sells bonds to investors. Bondholders receive payments 
based on the mortgage payments made by homeowners. 
During 2008, problems with MBSs skyrocketed due to the 
precipitous drop in real estate values and the sharply in-
creased default rates on the underlying mortgages.
	
The reverse convertible is a relatively new type of 
structured note. One type generally offers a high coupon 
rate, but the redemption at maturity can be paid in cash at 
par value or paid in shares of stock. For example, one recent 
General Motors (GM) reverse convertible had a coupon rate 
of 16 percent, which is a very high coupon rate in today’s in-
terest rate environment. However, at maturity, if GM’s stock 
declined sufficiently, bondholders would receive a fixed 
number of GM shares that were worth less than par value. 
So, while the income portion of the bond return would be 
high, the potential loss in par value could easily erode the 
extra return.
	
CAT bonds are issued to cover insurance companies 
against natural catastrophes. The type of natural catastro-
phe is outlined in the bond. For example, about 30 percent 
of all CAT bonds protect against a North Atlantic hurricane. 
The way these issues are structured is that the borrowers 
can suspend payment temporarily (or even permanently) if 
they have significant hurricane-related losses. These CAT 
bonds may seem like pretty risky investments, but, to date, 
only four have not been paid in full. For example, because of 
Hurricane Katrina, CAT bondholders lost $190 million. CAT 
bondholders also lost $300 million due to the 2011 tsunami 
in Japan. During 2011, two other CAT bond issues, each 
worth $100 million, were triggered due to an unusually ac-
tive tornado season.
	
Perhaps the most unusual bond (and certainly the most 
ghoulish) is the “death bond.” Companies such as Stone 
Street Financial purchase life insurance policies from indi-
viduals who are expected to die within the next 10 years. 
They then sell bonds that are paid off from the life insurance 
proceeds received when the policyholders die. The return 
on the bonds to investors depends on how long the policy-
holders live. A major risk is that if medical treatment ad-
vances quickly, it will raise the life expectancy of the 
policyholders, thereby decreasing the return to the 
bondholder.
FINANCE MATTERS
186
BOND MARKETS
Bonds are bought and sold in enormous quantities every day. You may be surprised to 
learn that the trading volume in bonds on a typical day is many, many times larger than 
the trading volume in stocks (by trading volume, we simply mean the amount of money 
that changes hands). Here is a finance trivia question: What is the largest securities 
market in the world? Most people would guess the New York Stock Exchange. In fact, 
the largest securities market in the world in terms of trading volume is the U.S. Treasury 
market.
How Bonds Are Bought and Sold
As we mentioned all the way back in Chapter 1, most trading in bonds takes place over the 
counter, or OTC. Recall that this means that there is no particular place where buying and 
selling occur. Instead, dealers around the country (and around the world) stand ready to 
buy and sell. The various dealers are connected electronically.
One reason the bond markets are so big is that the number of bond issues far exceeds 
the number of stock issues. There are two reasons for this. First, a corporation would typi-
cally have only one common stock issue outstanding (there are exceptions to this that we 
discuss in our next chapter). However, a single large corporation could easily have a dozen 
6.5
coverage online
Excel 
Master

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
187
or more note and bond issues outstanding. Beyond this, federal, state, and local borrowing 
is enormous. For example, even a small city would usually have a wide variety of notes and 
bonds outstanding, representing money borrowed to pay for things like roads, sewers, and 
schools. When you think about how many small cities there are in the United States, you 
begin to get the picture!
Because the bond market is almost entirely OTC, it has historically had little or no 
transparency. A financial market is transparent if it is possible to easily observe its prices 
and trading volume. On the New York Stock Exchange, for example, it is possible to see 
the price and quantity for every single transaction. In contrast, in the bond market, histori-
cally it was not possible to observe either. Transactions are privately negotiated between 
parties, and there is little or no centralized reporting of transactions.
Although the total volume of trading in bonds far exceeds that in stocks, only a very 
small fraction of the total bond issues that exist actually trade on a given day. This means 
that getting up-to-date prices on individual bonds is often difficult or impossible, particu-
larly for smaller corporate or municipal issues. Instead, a variety of sources of estimated 
prices exist and are very commonly used.
Bond Price Reporting
In 2002, transparency in the corporate bond market began to improve dramatically. Under 
new regulations, corporate bond dealers are now required to report trade information 
through what is known as the Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE). A 
nearby Work the Web box shows how to get TRACE prices.
As we mentioned before, the U.S. Treasury market is the largest securities market in 
the world. As with bond markets in general, it is an OTC market, so there is limited trans-
parency. However, unlike the situation with bond markets in general, trading in Treasury 
issues, particularly recently issued ones, is very heavy. Each day, representative prices for 
outstanding Treasury issues are reported.
Figure 6.3 shows a portion of the daily Treasury note and bond listings from The Wall 
Street Journal online. The only difference between a Treasury note and a Treasury bond is 
that notes have 10 years or less to maturity at the time of issuance. The entry that begins 
“5/15/2030” is highlighted. Reading from left to right, the “5/15/2030” tells us that the 
bond’s maturity is May 15, 2030. The 6.250 is the bond’s coupon rate. Treasury bonds all 
make semiannual payments and have a face value of $1,000, so this bond will pay $31.25 
per six months until it matures.
The next two pieces of information are the bid and asked prices. In general, in any 
OTC or dealer market, the bid price represents what a dealer is willing to pay for a security, 
and the asked price (or just “ask” price) is what a dealer is willing to take for it. The differ-
ence between the two prices is called the bid-ask spread (or just “spread”), and it repre-
sents the dealer’s profit.
Treasury prices are quoted as a percentage of face value. The bid price, or what a 
dealer is willing to pay for the bond, on the 5/15/2030 bond is 149.4063. With a $1,000 
face value, this quote represents $1,494.063. The asked price, or the price at which the 
dealer is willing to sell the bond, is 149.4688, or $1,494.688.
The next number quoted is the change in the asked price from the previous day, mea-
sured as a percentage of face value, so this issue’s asked price fell by .0938 percent, or 
$.938, in value from the previous day. Finally, the last number reported is the yield to ma-
turity, based on the asked price. Notice that this is a premium bond because it sells for 
more than its face value. Not surprisingly, its yield to maturity (2.353 percent) is less than 
its coupon rate (6.25 percent).
To learn more about 
TRACE, visit www.finra.
org.
To purchase newly issued 
corporate bonds, go to 
www.incapital.com.
bid price
The price a dealer is 
willing to pay for a 
security.
asked price
The price a dealer is 
willing to take for a 
security.
bid-ask spread
The difference between 
the bid price and the 
asked price.

188	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
B
ond quotes have become more available with the rise of the web. One site where you can find 
current bond prices (from TRACE) is finra-markets.morningstar.com/BondCenter. We went to 
the site and entered “AZO” for AutoZone, the well-known auto parts company. We found a total of 
eight bond issues outstanding. Here you see the information we pulled up.
Most of the information is self-explanatory. The price and yield columns show the price and yield 
to maturity of the issues based on their most recent sales. If you need more information about a 
particular issue, clicking on it will give you more details such as coupon dates and call dates.
W
RK THE  WE B
QUESTIONS
	
1.	 Go to this website and find the last bond shown in the accompanying table. When was 
this bond issued? What was the size of the bond issue? What were the yield to maturity 
and price when the bond was issued?
	
2.	 When you search for Chevron bonds (CVX), you will find bonds for several companies 
listed. Why do you think Chevron has bonds issued with different corporate names?
The very last ordinary bond listed, in this case the 2/15/2045, is often called the “bell-
wether” bond. This bond’s yield is the one that is usually reported in the evening news. So, 
for example, when you hear that long-term interest rates rose, what is really being said is 
that the yield on this bond went up (and its price went down).
If you examine the yields on the various issues in Figure 6.3, you clearly see that they 
vary by maturity. Why this occurs and what it might mean is one of the things we discuss 
in our next section.
The Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis 
maintains dozens of 
online files containing 
macroeconomic data as 
well as rates on U.S. 
Treasury issues. Go to 
research.stlouisfed.org/
fred2/.
EXAMPLE
6.5  Treasury Quotes
Locate the Treasury issue in Figure 6.3 maturing in August 2022. What is its coupon rate? What is 
its bid price? What was the previous day’s asked price?
	
The bond listed as 8/15/2022 is the one we seek. Its coupon rate is 1.625 percent of face 
value. The bid price is 97.8281, or 97.8281 percent of face value. The ask price is 97.8438, which is 
down by .0781 from the previous day. This means that the ask price on the previous day was equal 
to 97.8438 + .0781 = 97.9219.
A Note on Bond Price Quotes 
If you buy a bond between coupon payment dates, 
the price you pay is usually more than the price you are quoted. The reason is that standard 
convention in the bond market is to quote prices net of “accrued interest,” meaning that 

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
189
f i g u r e  6.3
Sample Wall Street 
Journal U.S. Treasury 
note and bond prices
	
	
	
	
	
Asked 
Maturity	
Coupon	
Bid	
Asked	
Chg	
Yield
1/31/2017	
3.125	
104.6563	
104.6719	
−0.0234	
0.619
3/15/2018	
1.000	
  99.8047	
  99.8203	
−0.0078	
1.061
3/31/2019	
1.625	
100.8047	
100.8203	
−0.0625	
1.415
8/15/2022	
1.625	
  97.8281	
  97.8438	
−0.0781	
1.938
11/15/2024	
7.500	
147.6797	
147.6953	
−0.1797	
2.038
2/15/2025	
2.000	
  99.0078	
  99.0234	
−0.1563	
2.110
2/15/2026	
6.000	
137.3203	
137.3828	
−0.1328	
2.142
11/15/2027	
6.125	
142.3906	
142.4531	
−0.1719	
2.253
8/15/2028	
5.500	
136.7344	
136.7969	
−0.1250	
2.298
8/15/2029	
6.125	
146.1719	
146.2344	
−0.1172	
2.331
5/15/2030	
6.250	
149.4063	
149.4688	
−0.0938	
2.353
2/15/2031	
5.375	
139.3828	
139.4453	
−0.1250	
2.383
2/15/2036	
4.500	
132.8906	
132.9531	
−0.1094	
2.473
2/15/2037	
4.750	
137.3047	
137.3672	
−0.0625	
2.521
2/15/2038	
4.375	
130.9375	
131.0000	
−0.1797	
2.576
11/15/2039	
4.375	
131.6406	
131.6719	
−0.2500	
2.623
2/15/2040	
4.625	
136.4375	
136.4688	
−0.2578	
2.622
5/15/2041	
4.375	
133.1250	
133.1563	
−0.2891	
2.617
8/15/2042	
2.750	
101.1406	
101.1719	
−0.2578	
2.689
11/15/2043	
3.750	
121.5703	
121.6016	
−0.3359	
2.667
11/15/2044	
3.000	
106.3125	
106.3438	
−0.3438	
2.688
2/15/2045	
2.500	
  96.0313	
  96.0625	
   0.4375	
2.693
Source: www.wsj.com, 3/13/2015.
U.S. Treasury Quotes 
Treasury note and bond data are representative over-the-counter quotations as of 3 p.m. Eastern time.
To buy Treasury bonds 
directly from the 
government, go to www.
treasurydirect.gov.
accrued interest is deducted to arrive at the quoted price. This quoted price is called the 
clean price. The price you actually pay, however, includes the accrued interest. This price 
is the dirty price, also known as the “full” or “invoice” price.
An example is the easiest way to understand these issues. Suppose you buy a bond 
with a 12 percent annual coupon, payable semiannually. You actually pay $1,080 for this 
bond, so $1,080 is the dirty, or invoice, price. Further, on the day you buy it, the next cou-
pon is due in four months, so you are between coupon dates. Notice that the next coupon 
will be $60.
The accrued interest on a bond is calculated by taking the fraction of the coupon pe-
riod that has passed, in this case two months out of six, and multiplying this fraction by the 
next coupon, $60. So, the accrued interest in this example is 2/6 × $60 = $20. The bond’s 
quoted price (i.e., its clean price) would be $1,080 − 20 = $1,060.
concept questions
6.5a	
Why do we say bond markets may have little or no transparency?
6.5b	
In general, what are bid and ask prices?
6.5c	
What is the difference between a bond’s clean price and dirty price?
clean price
The price of a bond net of 
accrued interest; this is 
the price that is typically 
quoted.
dirty price
The price of a bond 
including accrued interest, 
also known as the full or 
invoice price. This is the 
price the buyer actually 
pays.

190	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
INFLATION AND INTEREST RATES
So far, we haven’t considered the role of inflation in our various discussions of interest 
rates, yields, and returns. Because this is an important consideration, we consider the im-
pact of inflation next.
Real versus Nominal Rates
In examining interest rates, or any other financial market rates such as discount rates, bond 
yields, rates of return, and required returns, it is often necessary to distinguish between real 
rates and nominal rates. Nominal rates are called “nominal” because they have not been 
adjusted for inflation. Real rates are rates that have been adjusted for inflation.
To see the effect of inflation, suppose prices are currently rising by 5 percent per year. 
In other words, the rate of inflation is 5 percent. An investment is available that will be 
worth $115.50 in one year. It costs $100 today. Notice that with a present value of $100 and 
a future value in one year of $115.50, this investment has a 15.5 percent rate of return. In 
calculating this 15.5 percent return, we did not consider the effect of inflation, however, so 
this is the nominal return.
What is the impact of inflation here? To answer, suppose pizzas cost $5 apiece at the 
beginning of the year. With $100, we can buy 20 pizzas. Because the inflation rate is 
5 percent, pizzas will cost 5 percent more, or $5.25, at the end of the year. If we take the 
investment, how many pizzas can we buy at the end of the year? Measured in pizzas, what 
is the rate of return on this investment?
Our $115.50 from the investment will buy us $115.50/5.25 = 22 pizzas. This is up 
from 20 pizzas, so our pizza rate of return is 10 percent. What this illustrates is that even 
though the nominal return on our investment is 15.5 percent, our buying power goes up by 
only 10 percent because of inflation. Put another way, we are really only 10 percent richer. 
In this case, we say that the real return is 10 percent.
Alternatively, we can say that with 5 percent inflation, each of the 115.50 nominal dol-
lars we get is worth 5 percent less in real terms, so the real dollar value of our investment 
in a year is:
$115.50/1.05 = $110
What we have done is to deflate the $115.50 by 5 percent. Because we give up $100 in cur-
rent buying power to get the equivalent of $110, our real return is again 10 percent. Now 
that we have removed the effect of future inflation, this $110 is said to be measured in cur-
rent dollars.
The difference between nominal and real rates is important and bears repeating:
The nominal rate on an investment is the percentage change in the number of dollars 
you have.
The real rate on an investment is the percentage change in how much you can buy 
with your dollars, in other words, the percentage change in your buying power.
The Fisher Effect
Our discussion of real and nominal returns illustrates a relationship often called the Fisher 
effect (after the great economist Irving Fisher). Because investors are ultimately concerned 
with what they can buy with their money, they require compensation for inflation. Let R 
6.6
real rates
Interest rates or rates of 
return that have been 
adjusted for inflation.
nominal rates
Interest rates or rates of 
return that have not been 
adjusted for inflation.
Fisher effect
The relationship among 
nominal returns, real 
returns, and inflation.

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
191
stand for the nominal rate and r stand for the real rate. The Fisher effect tells us that the 
relationship between nominal rates, real rates, and inflation can be written as:
1 + R = (1 + r) × (1 + h)	
[6.2]
where h is the inflation rate.
In the preceding example, the nominal rate was 15.50 percent, and the inflation 
rate was 5 percent. What was the real rate? We can determine it by plugging in these 
numbers:
	1 + .1550 = (1 + r) × (1 + .05)
	
1 + r = 1.1550/1.05 = 1.10   
	
r = 10%
This real rate is the same as we had before. If we take another look at the Fisher effect, we 
can rearrange things a little as follows:
	1 + R = (1 + r) × (1 + h)
	
R = r + h + r × h	
[6.3]
What this tells us is that the nominal rate has three components. First, there is the real rate 
on the investment, r. Next, there is the compensation for the decrease in the value of the 
money originally invested because of inflation, h. The third component represents compen-
sation for the fact that the dollars earned on the investment are also worth less because of 
the inflation.
This third component is usually small, so it is often dropped. The nominal rate is then 
approximately equal to the real rate plus the inflation rate:
R ≈ r + h	
[6.4]
EXAMPLE
6.6  The Fisher Effect
If investors require a 10 percent real rate of return, and the inflation rate is 8 percent, what must the 
approximate nominal rate be? The exact nominal rate?
	
First of all, the nominal rate is approximately equal to the sum of the real rate and the inflation 
rate: 10% + 8% = 18%. From the Fisher effect, we have:
	1 + R = (1 + r) × (1 + h)
	
= 1.10 × 1.08
	
= 1.1880
Therefore, the nominal rate will actually be closer to 19 percent.
It is important to note that financial rates, such as interest rates, discount rates, 
and rates of return, are almost always quoted in nominal terms. To remind you of this, 
we will henceforth use the symbol R instead of r in most of our discussions about such 
rates.
concept questions
6.6a	
What is the difference between a nominal and a real return? Which is more 
important to a typical investor?
6.6b	
What is the Fisher effect?

192	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
DETERMINANTS OF BOND YIELDS
We are now in a position to discuss the determinants of a bond’s yield. As we will see, the 
yield on any particular bond is a reflection of a variety of factors, some common to all 
bonds and some specific to the issue under consideration.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates
At any point in time, short-term and long-term interest rates will generally be different. 
Sometimes short-term rates are higher, sometimes lower. Figure 6.4 gives us a long-range 
perspective on this by showing over two centuries of short- and long-term interest rates. As 
shown, through time, the difference between short- and long-term rates has ranged from 
essentially zero to up to several percentage points, both positive and negative.
The relationship between short- and long-term interest rates is known as the term 
structure of interest rates. To be a little more precise, the term structure of interest rates 
tells us what nominal interest rates are on default-free, pure discount bonds of all maturi-
ties. These rates are, in essence, “pure” interest rates because they involve no risk of default 
and a single, lump-sum future payment. In other words, the term structure tells us the pure 
time value of money for different lengths of time.
When long-term rates are higher than short-term rates, we say that the term structure 
is upward sloping, and when short-term rates are higher, we say it is downward sloping. 
The term structure can also be “humped.” When this occurs, it is usually because rates in-
crease at first, but then begin to decline as we look at longer- and longer-term rates. The 
6.7
coverage online
Excel 
Master
term structure of 
interest rates
The relationship between 
nominal interest rates on 
default-free, pure discount 
securities and time to 
maturity; that is, the pure 
time value of money.
f i g u r e  6.4
U.S. interest rates: 1800–2014
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
1800
20
40
60
80
1900
20
40
60
80
2000
2014
Year
Interest
rate (%)
Long-term rates
Short-term rates
Source: Adapted from Jeremy J. Siegel, Stocks for the Long Run, 3rd ed., © McGraw-Hill, 2004, as updated by the authors.

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
193
most common shape of the term structure, particularly in modern times, is upward sloping, 
but the degree of steepness has varied quite a bit.
What determines the shape of the term structure? There are three basic components. 
The first two are the ones we discussed in our previous section: the real rate of interest and 
the rate of inflation. The real rate of interest is the compensation investors demand for for-
going the use of their money. You can think of it as the pure time value of money after 
adjusting for the effects of inflation.
The real rate of interest is the basic component underlying every interest rate, regard-
less of the time to maturity. When the real rate is high, all interest rates will tend to be 
higher, and vice versa. Thus, the real rate doesn’t really determine the shape of the term 
structure; instead, it mostly influences the overall level of interest rates.
In contrast, the prospect of future inflation very strongly influences the shape of the 
term structure. Investors thinking about loaning money for various lengths of time recog-
nize that future inflation erodes the value of the dollars that will be returned. As a result, 
investors demand compensation for this loss in the form of higher nominal rates. This extra 
compensation is called the inflation premium.
If investors believe that the rate of inflation will be higher in the future, then long-term 
nominal interest rates will tend to be higher than short-term rates. Thus, an upward-sloping 
term structure may be a reflection of anticipated increases in inflation. Similarly, a downward-
sloping term structure probably reflects the belief that inflation will be falling in the future.
The third, and last, component of the term structure has to do with interest rate risk. 
As we discussed earlier in the chapter, longer-term bonds have much greater risk of loss 
resulting from changes in interest rates than do shorter-term bonds. Investors recognize this 
risk, and they demand extra compensation in the form of higher rates for bearing it. This 
extra compensation is called the interest rate risk premium. The longer the term to matu-
rity, the greater is the interest rate risk, so the interest rate risk premium increases with 
maturity. However, as we discussed earlier, interest rate risk increases at a decreasing rate, 
so the interest rate risk premium does as well.6
Putting the pieces together, we see that the term structure reflects the combined 
effect of the real rate of interest, the inflation premium, and the interest rate risk premium. 
Figure 6.5 shows how these can interact to produce an upward-sloping term structure (in 
the top part of Figure 6.5) or a downward-sloping term structure (in the bottom part).
In the top part of Figure 6.5, notice how the rate of inflation is expected to rise gradually. 
At the same time, the interest rate risk premium increases at a decreasing rate, so the com-
bined effect is to produce a pronounced upward-sloping term structure. In the bottom part of 
Figure 6.5, the rate of inflation is expected to fall in the future, and the expected decline is 
enough to offset the interest rate risk premium and produce a downward-sloping term struc-
ture. Notice that if the rate of inflation was expected to decline by only a small amount, we 
could still get an upward-sloping term structure because of the interest rate risk premium.
We assumed in drawing Figure 6.5 that the real rate would remain the same. Actually, 
expected future real rates could be larger or smaller than the current real rate. Also, for 
simplicity, we used straight lines to show expected future inflation rates as rising or declin-
ing, but they do not necessarily have to look like this. They could, for example, rise and 
then fall, leading to a humped yield curve.
Bond Yields and the Yield Curve: Putting It All Together
Going back to Figure 6.3, recall that we saw that the yields on Treasury notes and bonds of 
different maturities are not the same. Each day, in addition to the Treasury prices and 
inflation premium
The portion of a nominal 
interest rate that 
represents compensation 
for expected future 
inflation.
interest rate risk 
premium
The compensation 
investors demand for 
bearing interest rate risk.
6 In days of old, the interest rate risk premium was called a “liquidity” premium. Today, the term liquidity premium 
has an altogether different meaning, which we explore in our next section. Also, the interest rate risk premium is 
sometimes called a maturity risk premium. Our terminology is consistent with the modern view of the term structure.

194	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
B. Downward-sloping term structure
Interest
rate
Time to
maturity
Nominal
interest
rate
Interest rate
risk premium
Inﬂation
premium
Real rate
Interest
rate
A. Upward-sloping term structure
Time to
maturity
Nominal
interest
rate
Interest rate
risk premium
Inﬂation
premium
Real rate
f i g u r e  6.5
The term structure of 
interest rates
yields shown in Figure 6.3, The Wall Street Journal provides a plot of Treasury yields 
relative to maturity. This plot is called the Treasury yield curve (or just the yield curve). 
Figure 6.6 shows the yield curve drawn from the yields in Figure 6.3.
As you probably now suspect, the shape of the yield curve is a reflection of the term 
structure of interest rates. In fact, the Treasury yield curve and the term structure of interest 
rates are almost the same thing. The only difference is that the term structure is based on 
pure discount bonds, whereas the yield curve is based on coupon bond yields. As a result, 
Treasury yields depend on the three components that underlie the term structure: the real 
rate, expected future inflation, and the interest rate risk premium.
Treasury notes and bonds have three important features that we need to remind you of: 
They are default-free, they are taxable, and they are highly liquid. This is not true of bonds 
in general, so we need to examine what additional factors come into play when we look at 
bonds issued by corporations or municipalities.
The first thing to consider is credit risk—that is, the possibility of default. Investors 
recognize that issuers other than the Treasury may or may not make all the promised pay-
ments on a bond, so they demand a higher yield as compensation for this risk. This extra 
compensation is called the default risk premium. Earlier in the chapter, we saw how bonds 
were rated based on their credit risk. What you will find if you start looking at bonds of 
different ratings is that lower-rated bonds have higher yields.
Treasury yield curve
A plot of the yields on 
Treasury notes and bonds 
relative to maturity.
default risk premium
The portion of a nominal 
interest rate or bond  
yield that represents 
compensation for the 
possibility of default.

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
195
An important thing to recognize about a bond’s yield is that it is calculated assuming that all 
the promised payments will be made. As a result, it is really a promised yield, and it may or may 
not be what you will earn. In particular, if the issuer defaults, your actual yield will be lower, prob-
ably much lower. This fact is particularly important when it comes to junk bonds. Thanks to a 
clever bit of marketing, such bonds are now commonly called high-yield bonds, which has a much 
nicer ring to it; but now you recognize that these are really high-promised yield bonds.
Next, recall that we discussed earlier how municipal bonds are free from most taxes 
and, as a result, have much lower yields than taxable bonds. Investors demand the extra 
yield on a taxable bond as compensation for the unfavorable tax treatment. This extra com-
pensation is the taxability premium.
Finally, bonds have varying degrees of liquidity. As we discussed earlier, there are an 
enormous number of bond issues, most of which do not trade on a regular basis. As a re-
sult, if you wanted to sell quickly, you would probably not get as good a price as you could 
otherwise. Investors prefer liquid assets to illiquid ones, so they demand a liquidity 
premium on top of all the other premiums we have discussed. As a result, all else being the 
same, less liquid bonds will have higher yields than more liquid bonds.
Conclusion
If we combine all of the things we have discussed regarding bond yields, we find that bond 
yields represent the combined effect of no fewer than six things. The first is the real rate of 
interest. On top of the real rate are five premiums representing compensation for (1) ex-
pected future inflation, (2) interest rate risk, (3) default risk, (4) taxability, and (5) lack of 
liquidity. As a result, determining the appropriate yield on a bond requires careful analysis 
of each of these effects.
concept questions
6.7a	
What is the term structure of interest rates? What determines its shape?
6.7b	
What is the Treasury yield curve?
6.7c	
What are the six components that make up a bond’s yield?
Check out the “living 
yield curve” at www.
marketwatch.com.
taxability premium
The portion of a nominal 
interest rate or bond  
yield that represents 
compensation for 
unfavorable tax status.
liquidity premium
The portion of a nominal 
interest rate or bond  
yield that represents 
compensation for lack of 
liquidity.
Treasury Yield Curve
Month(s)
Years
Maturity
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
30
10
7
5
3
2
1
6
3
1
One year ago
Friday
Percent
f i g u r e  6.6
The Treasury yield 
curve 
March 13, 2015
Source: Reprinted by permission of www.wsj.com. March 13, 2015 © 2015 by Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights 
Reserved Worldwide.
Online yield curve 
information is available 
at www.bloomberg.com/
markets.

196	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has explored bonds and bond yields. We saw that:
   1.	 Determining bond prices and yields is an application of basic discounted cash flow 
principles.
   2.	 Bond values move in the direction opposite that of interest rates, leading to potential 
gains or losses for bond investors.
   3.	 Bonds have a variety of features spelled out in a document called the indenture.
   4.	 Bonds are rated based on their default risk. Some bonds, such as Treasury bonds, 
have no risk of default, whereas so-called junk bonds have substantial default risk.
   5.	A wide variety of bonds exist, many of which contain exotic, or unusual, features.
   6.	Almost all bond trading is OTC, with little or no market transparency. As a result, 
bond price and volume information can be difficult to find.
   7.	 Bond yields reflect the effect of six different things: the real rate and five premiums 
that investors demand as compensation for inflation, interest rate risk, default risk, 
taxability, and lack of liquidity.
In closing, we note that bonds are a vital source of financing to governments and corpora-
tions of all types. Bond prices and yields are a rich subject, and our one chapter, necessar-
ily, touches on only the most important concepts and ideas. There is a great deal more we 
could say, but, instead, we move on to stocks in our next chapter.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 6.1 What is the coupon rate on a bond that has a par value of $1,000, a 
market value of $1,100, and a coupon interest rate of $100 per year?
Section 6.2 What is the provision in the bond indenture giving the issuing company 
the option to repurchase bonds prior to maturity?
Section 6.3 Do bond ratings consider default risk?
Section 6.4 What are the features of municipal bonds?
Section 6.5 What does the dirty price of a bond represent?
Section 6.6 What is the difference between a real and a nominal rate of return?
Section 6.7 What does historical data suggest about the nature of short-term and 
long-term interest rates?
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
6.1	
Bond Values.  A Microgates Industries bond has a 10 percent coupon rate and a 
$1,000 face value. Interest is paid semiannually, and the bond has 20 years to 
maturity. If investors require a 12 percent yield, what is the bond’s value? What is 
the effective annual yield on the bond? (See Problem 6.)

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
197
6.2	
Yields.  A Macrohard Corp. bond carries an 8 percent coupon, paid semiannually. 
The par value is $1,000, and the bond matures in six years. If the bond currently 
sells for $911.37, what is its yield to maturity? What is the effective annual yield? 
(See Problem 21.)
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
6.1	
Because the bond has a 10 percent coupon yield and investors require a 12 percent 
return, we know that the bond must sell at a discount. Notice that, because the bond 
pays interest semiannually, the coupons amount to $100/2 = $50 every six months. 
The required yield is 12%/2 = 6% every six months. Finally, the bond matures in 
20 years, so there are a total of 40 six-month periods.
	
	
The bond’s value is thus equal to the present value of $50 every six months for 
the next 40 six-month periods, plus the present value of the $1,000 face amount:
Bond value = $50 × (1 − 1/1.0640)/.06 + 1,000/1.0640
	
= $50 × 15.0463 + 1,000/10.2857    
	
= $849.54
	
Notice that we discounted the $1,000 back 40 periods at 6 percent per period, rather 
than 20 years at 12 percent. The reason is that the effective annual yield on the 
bond is 1.062 − 1 = 12.36%, not 12 percent. We thus could have used 12.36 percent 
per year for 20 years when we calculated the present value of the $1,000 face 
amount, and the answer would have been the same.
6.2	
The present value of the bond’s cash flows is its current price, $911.37. The coupon 
is $40 every six months for 12 periods. The face value is $1,000. So, the bond’s 
yield is the unknown discount rate in the following:
$911.37 = $40 × [1 − 1/(1 + r)12]/r + $1,000/(1 + r)12
	
The bond sells at a discount. Because the coupon rate is 8 percent, the yield must be 
something in excess of that.
	
	
If we were to solve this by trial and error, we might try 12 percent (or 6 percent 
per six months):  
Bond value = $40 × (1 − 1/1.0612)/.06 + $1,000/1.0612
	
= $832.32
	
This is less than the actual value, so our discount rate is too high. We now know 
that the yield is somewhere between 8 and 12 percent. With further trial and error 
(or a little machine assistance), the yield works out to be 10 percent, or 5 percent 
every six months.
	
	
By convention, the bond’s yield to maturity would be quoted as 2 × 5% = 10%. 
The effective yield is thus 1.052 − 1 = 10.25%.
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 1 	 6.1	
Treasury Bonds.  Is it true that a U.S. Treasury security is risk free?
LO 2 	 6.2	 Interest Rate Risk.  Which has greater interest rate risk, a 30-year 
Treasury bond or a 30-year BB corporate bond?

198	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
LO 1 	 6.3	 Treasury Pricing.  With regard to bid and ask prices on a Treasury bond, 
is it possible for the bid price to be higher? Why or why not?
LO 2 	 6.4	 Yield to Maturity.  Treasury bid and ask quotes are sometimes given in 
terms of yields, so there would be a bid yield and an ask yield. Which do 
you think would be larger? Explain.
LO 1 	 6.5	 Call Provisions.  A company is contemplating a long-term bond issue. It 
is debating whether or not to include a call provision. What are the 
benefits to the company from including a call provision? What are the 
costs? How do these answers change for a put provision?
LO 1 	 6.6	 Coupon Rate.  How does a bond issuer decide on the appropriate coupon 
rate to set on its bonds? Explain the difference between the coupon rate 
and the required return on a bond.
LO 4 	 6.7	 Real and Nominal Returns.  Are there any circumstances under which an 
investor might be more concerned about the nominal return on an 
investment than the real return?
LO 3 	 6.8	 Bond Ratings.  Companies pay rating agencies such as Moody’s and S&P 
to rate their bonds, and the costs can be substantial. However, companies 
are not required to have their bonds rated in the first place; doing so is 
strictly voluntary. Why do you think they do it?
LO 3 	 6.9	 Bond Ratings.  Often, junk bonds are not rated. Why?
LO 3 	 6.10	 Crossover Bonds.  Looking back at the crossover bonds we discussed in 
the chapter, why do you think split ratings such as these occur?
LO 1 	 6.11	 Municipal Bonds.  Why is it that municipal bonds are not taxed at the 
federal level, but are taxable across state lines? Why is it that U.S. 
Treasury bonds are not taxable at the state level? (You may need to dust 
off the history books for this one.)
LO 1 	 6.12	 Treasury Market.  All Treasury bonds are relatively liquid, but some are 
more liquid than others. Take a look back at Figure 6.3. Which issues 
appear to be the most liquid? The least liquid?
LO 3 	 6.13	 Rating Agencies.  Several years ago, a controversy erupted regarding 
bond-rating agencies when some agencies began to provide unsolicited 
bond ratings. Why do you think this is controversial?
LO 1 	 6.14	 Bonds as Equity.  The 100-year bonds we discussed in the chapter have 
something in common with junk bonds. Critics charge that, in both cases, 
the issuers are really selling equity in disguise. What are the issues here? 
Why would a company want to sell “equity in disguise”?
LO 2 	 6.15	 Bond Prices versus Yields.
a.	
What is the relationship between the price of a bond and its YTM?
b.	 Explain why some bonds sell at a premium over par value while 
other bonds sell at a discount. What do you know about the 
relationship between the coupon rate and the YTM for premium 
bonds? What about for discount bonds? For bonds selling at par 
value?
c.	
What is the relationship between the current yield and YTM for 
premium bonds? For discount bonds? For bonds selling at par 
value?

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
199
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–17)
LO 2 	 1.	
Interpreting Bond Yields.  Is the yield to maturity on a bond the same thing as 
the required return? Is YTM the same thing as the coupon rate? Suppose today a 
10 percent coupon bond sells at par. Two years from now, the required return on 
the same bond is 8 percent. What is the coupon rate on the bond now? The YTM?
LO 2 	 2.	 Interpreting Bond Yields.  Suppose you buy a 7 percent coupon, 20-year 
bond today when it’s first issued. If interest rates suddenly rise to 15 percent, 
what happens to the value of your bond? Why?
LO 2 	 3.	 Bond Prices.  Lycan, Inc., has 7 percent coupon bonds on the market that 
have 9 years left to maturity. The bonds make annual payments and have a 
par value of $1,000. If the YTM on these bonds is 8.4 percent, what is the 
current bond price?
LO 2 	 4.	 Bond Yields.  The Timberlake-Jackson Wardrobe Co. has 7 percent coupon 
bonds on the market with 9 years left to maturity. The bonds make annual 
payments and have a par value of $1,000. If the bonds currently sell for 
$961.50, what is the YTM?
LO 2 	 5.	 Coupon Rates.  Barnes Enterprises has bonds on the market making annual 
payments, with 12 years to maturity, a par value of $1,000, and a price of 
$963. At this price, the bonds yield 6.14 percent. What must the coupon rate 
be on the bonds?
LO 2 	 6.	 Bond Prices.  Harrison Co. issued 15-year bonds one year ago at a coupon 
rate of 6.1 percent. The bonds make semiannual payments. If the YTM on 
these bonds is 5.3 percent, what is the current dollar price assuming a 
$1,000 par value?
LO 2 	 7.	 Bond Yields.  Stein Co. issued 15-year bonds two years ago at a coupon 
rate of 5.4 percent. The bonds make semiannual payments. If these bonds 
currently sell for 94 percent of par value, what is the YTM?
LO 2 	 8.	 Coupon Rates.  Volbeat Corporation has bonds on the market with  
10.5 years to maturity, a YTM of 6.2 percent, a par value of $1,000, and a 
current price of $945. The bonds make semiannual payments. What must 
the coupon rate be on the bonds?
LO 4 	 9. 	 Calculating Real Rates of Return.  If Treasury bills are currently paying 
4.5 percent and the inflation rate is 1.6 percent, what is the approximate real 
rate of interest? The exact real rate?
LO 4 	 10.	Inflation and Nominal Returns.  Suppose the real rate is 1.9 percent and 
the inflation rate is 3.4 percent. What rate would you expect to see on a 
Treasury bill?
LO 4 	 11.	 Nominal and Real Returns.  An investment offers a total return of  
13 percent over the coming year. Janet Jello thinks the total real return on 
this investment will be only 8 percent. What does Janet believe the inflation 
rate will be over the next year?
LO 4 	 12.	Nominal versus Real Returns.  Say you own an asset that had a total return 
last year of 11.7 percent. If the inflation rate last year was 2.3 percent, what 
was your real return?

200	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
LO 2 	 13.	 Using Treasury Quotes.  Locate the Treasury issue in Figure 6.3 maturing 
in August 2029. What is its coupon rate? What is the dollar bid price for a 
$1,000 par value bond? What was the previous day’s asked price for a 
$1,000 par value bond?
LO 2 	 14.	Using Treasury Quotes.  Locate the Treasury bond in Figure 6.3 maturing 
in February 2037. Is this a premium or a discount bond? What is its current 
yield? What is its yield to maturity? What is the bid-ask spread for a $1,000 
par value bond?
LO 2 	 15.	 Zero Coupon Bonds.  You find a zero coupon bond with a par value of $10,000 
and 17 years to maturity. If the yield to maturity on this bond is 4.9 percent, 
what is the price of the bond? Assume semiannual compounding periods.
LO 2 	 16.	Valuing Bonds.  Yan Yan Corp. has a $2,000 par value bond outstanding 
with a coupon rate of 4.9 percent paid semiannually and 13 years to 
maturity. The yield to maturity of the bond is 3.8 percent. What is the price 
of the bond?
LO 2 	 17.	 Valuing Bonds.  Union Local School District has bonds outstanding with a 
coupon rate of 3.7 percent paid semiannually and 16 years to maturity. The 
yield to maturity on these bonds is 3.9 percent and the bonds have a par 
value of $5,000. What is the price of the bonds?
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 18–33)
LO 2 	 18.	 Bond Price Movements.  Bond X is a premium bond making semiannual 
payments. The bond has a coupon rate of 8.5 percent, a YTM of 7 percent, 
and has 13 years to maturity. Bond Y is a discount bond making semiannual 
payments. This bond has a coupon rate of 7 percent, a YTM of 8.5 percent, 
and also has 13 years to maturity. What are the prices of these bonds today 
assuming both bonds have a $1,000 par value? If interest rates remain 
unchanged, what do you expect the prices of these bonds to be in one year? In 
three years? In eight years? In 12 years? In 13 years? What’s going on here? 
Illustrate your answers by graphing bond prices versus time to maturity.
LO 2 	 19.	Interest Rate Risk.  Both Bond Bill and Bond Ted have 6.2 percent 
coupons, make semiannual payments, and are priced at par value. Bond 
Bill has 5 years to maturity, whereas Bond Ted has 25 years to maturity. 
If interest rates suddenly rise by 2 percent, what is the percentage 
change in the price of Bond Bill? Of Bond Ted? Both bonds have a par 
value of $1,000. If rates were to suddenly fall by 2 percent instead, 
what would the percentage change in the price of Bond Bill be then? Of 
Bond Ted? Illustrate your answers by graphing bond prices versus 
YTM. What does this problem tell you about the interest rate risk of 
longer-term bonds?
LO 2 	 20.	Interest Rate Risk.  Bond J has a coupon rate of 4 percent. Bond S has a 
coupon rate of 14 percent. Both bonds have 13 years to maturity, make 
semiannual payments, a par value of $1,000, and have a YTM of 8 percent. If 
interest rates suddenly rise by 2 percent, what is the percentage price change 
of these bonds? What if rates suddenly fall by 2 percent instead? What does 
this problem tell you about the interest rate risk of lower-coupon bonds?
LO 2 	 21.	Bond Yields.  PK Software has 6.3 percent coupon bonds on the market 
with 22 years to maturity. The bonds make semiannual payments and 

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
201
currently sell for 97 percent of par. What is the current yield on PK’s bonds? 
The YTM? The effective annual yield?
LO 2 	 22.	Bond Yields.  BDJ Co. wants to issue new 25-year bonds for some much-
needed expansion projects. The company currently has 5.6 percent coupon 
bonds on the market that sell for $1,074, make semiannual payments, have a 
$1,000 par value, and mature in 25 years. What coupon rate should the 
company set on its new bonds if it wants them to sell at par?
LO 2 	 23.	Accrued Interest.  You purchase a bond with an invoice price of $1,043. 
The bond has a coupon rate of 5.7 percent, semiannual coupons, a $1,000 
par value, and there are 5 months to the next coupon date. What is the clean 
price of the bond?
LO 2 	 24.	Accrued Interest.  You purchase a bond with a coupon rate of 5.9 percent, 
semiannual coupons, and a clean price of $993. If the next coupon payment 
is due in 2 months, what is the invoice price?
LO 2 	 25.	Using Bond Quotes.  Suppose the following bond quote for IOU 
Corporation appears in the financial page of today’s newspaper. Assume the 
bond has a face value of $1,000, and the current date is April 15, 2016. 
What is the yield to maturity of the bond? What is the current yield?
Company 
(Ticker)
Coupon
Maturity
Last  
Price
Last  
Yield
EST Vol 
(000s)
IOU (IOU)
8.50
Apr 15, 2031
91.645
??
1,827
LO 2 	 26.	Zero Coupon Bonds.  Suppose your company needs to raise $35 million 
and you want to issue 20-year bonds for this purpose. Assume the required 
return on your bond issue will be 6.8 percent, and you’re evaluating two 
issue alternatives: a 6.8 percent semiannual coupon bond and a zero coupon 
bond. Your company’s tax rate is 35 percent.
a.	
How many of the coupon bonds would you need to issue to raise the 
$35 million? How many of the zeroes would you need to issue?
b.	 In 20 years, what will your company’s repayment be if you issue the 
coupon bonds? What if you issue the zeroes?
c.	
Based on your answers in parts (a) and (b), why would you ever want to 
issue the zeroes? To answer, calculate the firm’s aftertax cash outflows 
for the first year under the two different scenarios. Assume that the IRS 
amortization rules apply for the zero coupon bonds.
LO 2 	 27.	Finding the Maturity.  You’ve just found a 10 percent coupon bond on the 
market that sells for par value. What is the maturity on this bond? (Warning: 
possible trick question.)
	
Use the following Treasury bond quotes to answer Questions 28–30. To calculate 
the number of years until maturity, assume that it is currently May 2016. All of 
the bonds have a $1,000 par value.
Rate
Maturity 
Mo/Yr
Bid
Asked
Chg
Ask  
Yld
??
May 20
103.5362
103.8235
+.3204
2.18
5.850
May 27
104.1762
104.3850
+.4513
??
6.125
May 36
??
??
+.6821
3.87

202	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
LO 2 	 28.	Bond Yields.  In the table, find the Treasury bond that matures in May 
2027. What is your yield to maturity if you buy this bond?
LO 2 	 29.	Bond Prices.  In the table, find the Treasury bond that matures in May 
2036. What is the asked price of this bond in dollars? If the bid-ask spread 
for this bond is .0628, what is the bid price in dollars?
LO 2 	 30. Coupon Rates.  Find the Treasury bond that matures in May 2020. What is 
the coupon rate for this bond?
	
Use the following corporate bond quotes to answer Questions 31–33. To calculate 
the number of years until maturity, assume that it is currently January 15, 2016. 
All of the bonds have a $2,000 par value.
Company  
(Ticker)
Coupon
Maturity
Last Price
Last Yield
EST $ Vol  
(000’s)
Xenon, Inc. (XIC)
5.400
Jan 15, 2020
96.153
??
57,362
Kenny Corp. (KCC)
7.125
Jan 15, 2021
??
6.02
48,941
Williams Co. (WICO)
??
Jan 15, 2028
94.735
6.85
43,802
LO 2 	 31. Bond Yields.  What is the yield to maturity for the bond issued by Xenon, Inc.?
LO 2 	 32. Bond Prices.  What price would you expect to pay for the Kenny Corp. 
bond? What is the bond’s current yield?
LO 2 	 33. Coupon Rates.  What is the coupon rate for the Williams Co. bond?
CHALLENGE (Questions 34–35)
LO 2 	 34.	Components of Bond Returns.  Bond P is a premium bond with a coupon 
rate of 8.5 percent. Bond D is a discount bond with a coupon rate of 5.5 percent. 
Both bonds make annual payments, have a YTM of 7 percent, a par value of 
$1,000, and have five years to maturity. What is the current yield for Bond P? 
For Bond D? If interest rates remain unchanged, what is the expected capital 
gains yield over the next year for Bond P? For Bond D? Explain your answers 
and the interrelationships among the various types of yields.
LO 2 	 35.	Holding Period Yield.  The YTM on a bond is the interest rate you earn on your 
investment if interest rates don’t change. If you actually sell the bond before it 
matures, your realized return is known as the holding period yield (HPY).
a.	
Suppose that today you buy an annual coupon bond with a coupon rate of 
7 percent for $875. The bond has 10 years to maturity and a par value of 
$1,000. What rate of return do you expect to earn on your investment?
b.	 Two years from now, the YTM on your bond has declined by 1 percent, 
and you decide to sell. What price will your bond sell for? What is the 
HPY on your investment? Compare this yield to the YTM when you 
first bought the bond. Why are they different?
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
6.1 Bond Quotes.  You can find current bond prices at finra-markets.morningstar.com/
BondCenter. You want to find the bond prices and yields for bonds issued by Pfizer. 
Enter the ticker symbol “PFE” to do a search. What is the shortest maturity bond issued 
by Pfizer that is outstanding? What is the longest maturity bond? What is the credit 
rating for Pfizer’s bonds? Do all of the bonds have the same credit rating? Why do you 
think this is?

	
c h a p t e r  6
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation	
203
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
In an earlier worksheet, we discussed the difference between yield to maturity and yield to 
call. There is another yield that is commonly quoted, the yield to worst. The yield to worst 
is the lowest potential yield that can be received on a bond without the issuer actually de-
faulting. Yield to worst is calculated on all possible call dates. It is assumed that prepayment 
occurs if the bond has a call provision. The yield to worst will be the lowest of yield to ma-
turity or yield to call. The yield to worst may be the same as yield to maturity but never 
higher. Of course, with a traditional callable bond that has a call premium, the call premium 
can decline over time.
A company has the following bond outstanding. The bond is callable every year on 
May 1, the anniversary date of the bond. The bond has a deferred call with three years 
left. The call premium on the first call date is one year’s interest. The call premium will 
decline by 10 percent of the original call premium for 10 years. Eleven years from today, 
the call premium will be zero. Given the following information, what is the yield to worst 
for this bond?
Current date:
	
5/1/2016
Maturity date:
	
5/1/2036
Price (percent of par):
	
104.5%
Coupon rate:
	
10.00%
Par value (percent of par):
	
100%
Coupons per year:
	
2
Call date
Call premium
5/1/2019
$100
5/1/2020
        90
5/1/2021
        80
5/1/2022
        70
5/1/2023
        60
5/1/2024
        50
5/1/2025
        40
5/1/2026
        30
5/1/2027
        20
5/1/2028
     10
6.2 Yield Curves.  You can find information regarding the most current bond yields at 
money.cnn.com. Go there and graph the yield curve for U.S. Treasury bonds. What is 
the general shape of the yield curve? What does this imply about expected future 
inflation? Now graph the yield curve for AAA, AA, and A-rated corporate bonds. Is the 
corporate yield curve the same shape as the Treasury yield curve? Why or why not?
6.3 Default Premiums.  The St. Louis Federal Reserve Board has files listing historical 
interest rates on its website www.stlouisfed.org. Find your way to the “FRED” data, 
then “Interest Rates.” You will find listings for Moody’s Seasoned Aaa Corporate Bond 
Yield and Moody’s Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond Yield. A default premium can be 
calculated as the difference between the Aaa bond yield and the Baa bond yield. 
Calculate the default premium using these two bond indexes for the most recent 36 months. 
Is the default premium the same for every month? Why do you think this is?

204	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
CHAPTER CASE
Financing S&S Air’s Expansion Plans with a Bond Issue
M
ark Sexton and Todd Story, the owners of S&S Air, 
have decided to expand their operations. They in-
structed their newly hired financial analyst, Chris Guthrie, 
to enlist an underwriter to help sell $20 million in new 
10-year bonds to finance construction. Chris has entered 
into discussions with Renata Harper, an underwriter from 
the firm of Crowe & Mallard, about which bond features 
S&S Air should consider and what coupon rate the issue 
will likely have.
	
Although Chris is aware of the bond features, he is 
uncertain as to the costs and benefits of some features, 
so he isn’t clear on how each feature would affect the 
coupon rate of the bond issue. You are Renata’s assis-
tant, and she has asked you to prepare a memo to Chris 
describing the effect of each of the following bond fea-
tures on the coupon rate of the bond. She would also 
like you to list any advantages or disadvantages of each 
feature.
Q U E ST I ONS
1.	
The security of the bond—that is, whether the 
bond has collateral.
2.	
The seniority of the bond.
3.	
The presence of a sinking fund.
4.	
A call provision with specified call dates and call 
prices.
5.	
A deferred call accompanying the preceding call 
provision.
6.	
A make-whole call provision.
  7.	 Any positive covenants. Also, discuss several pos-
sible positive covenants S&S Air might consider.
  8.	 Any negative covenants. Also, discuss several 
possible negative covenants S&S Air might 
consider.
  9.	 A conversion feature (note that S&S Air is not a 
publicly traded company).
10.	 A floating rate coupon.

205
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
W
hen the stock market closed on March 13, 2015, the common 
stock of well-known retailer Target was selling for $79.18 per 
share. On that same day, software company Adobe Systems closed 
at $77.62 per share, while “What’s in your wallet?” bank Capital One 
closed at $80.00. Because the stock prices of these three compa-
nies were so similar, you might expect they would be offering similar 
dividends to their stockholders, but you would be wrong. In fact, 
Target’s annual dividend was $2.08 per share, Capital One’s was 
$1.20 per share, and Adobe was paying no dividend at all!
As we will see in this chapter, the dividends currently being 
paid are one of the primary factors we look at when we attempt to 
value common stocks. However, it is obvious from looking at 
Adobe that current dividends are not the end of the story, so this 
chapter explores dividends, stock values, and the connection be-
tween the two.
Going back to Chapter 1, we see that the goal of financial management is to maximize 
stock prices, so an understanding of what determines share values is obviously a key con-
cern. When a corporation has publicly held stock, its shares will often be bought and sold on 
one or more of the major stock exchanges, so we will examine how stocks are traded. We 
will also see that the shareholders in a corporation have certain rights, and that just how 
these rights are allocated can have a significant impact on corporate control and 
governance.
Equity Markets and  
Stock Valuation
7
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Assess how stock prices depend 
on future dividends and dividend 
growth.
LO 2 	 Identify the different ways 
corporate directors are elected to 
office.
LO 3 	 Explain how the stock markets 
work.

206	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
I
n our previous chapter, we introduced you to bonds and bond valuation. In this chapter, 
we turn to the other major source of financing for corporations, common and preferred 
stock. We first describe the cash flows associated with a share of stock and then go on to 
develop a very famous result, the dividend growth model. From there, we move on to ex-
amine various important features of common and preferred stock, focusing on shareholder 
rights. We close out the chapter with a discussion of how shares of stock are traded and 
how stock prices and other important information are reported in the financial press.
COMMON STOCK VALUATION
A share of common stock is more difficult to value in practice than a bond, for at least 
three reasons. First, with common stock, not even the promised cash flows are known in 
advance. Second, the life of the investment is essentially forever because common stock 
has no maturity. Third, there is no way to easily observe the rate of return that the market 
requires. Nonetheless, as we will see, there are cases in which we can come up with the 
present value of the future cash flows for a share of stock and thus determine its value.
Cash Flows
Imagine that you are considering buying a share of stock today. You plan to sell the stock 
in one year. You somehow know that the stock will be worth $70 at that time. You predict 
that the stock will also pay a $10 per share dividend at the end of the year. If you require a 
25 percent return on your investment, what is the most you would pay for the stock? In 
other words, what is the present value of the $10 dividend along with the $70 ending value 
at 25 percent?
If you buy the stock today and sell it at the end of the year, you will have a total of $80 
in cash. At 25 percent:
Present value = ($10 + 70)/1.25 = $64
Therefore, $64 is the value you would assign to the stock today.
More generally, let P0 be the current price of the stock, and assign P1 to be the price in 
one period. If D1 is the cash dividend paid at the end of the period, then:
P0 = (D1 + P1)/(1 + R)	
[7.1]
where R is the required return in the market on this investment.
Notice that we really haven’t said much so far. If we wanted to determine the value of 
a share of stock today (P0), we would first have to come up with the value in one year (P1). 
This is even harder to do, so we’ve only made the problem more complicated.
What is the price in one period, P1? We don’t know in general. Instead, suppose we 
somehow knew the price in two periods, P2. Given a predicted dividend in two periods, D2, 
the stock price in one period would be:
P1 = (D2 + P2)/(1 + R)
If we were to substitute this expression for P1 into our expression for P0, we would have:
 P0 =
D1 + P1
1 + R =
D1 +
D2 + P2
1 + R
1 + R
 =
D1
(1 + R)1 +
D2
(1 + R)2 +
P2
(1 + R)2
7.1
coverage online
Excel 
Master

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
207
Now we need to get a price in two periods. We don’t know this either, so we can procrasti-
nate again and write:
P2 = (D3 + P3)/(1 + R)
If we substitute this back in for P2, we have:
 P0 =
D1
(1 + R)1 +
D2
(1 + R)2 +
P2
(1 + R)2
 =
D1
(1 + R)1 +
D2
(1 + R)2 +
D3 + P3
1 + R
(1 + R)2
 =
D1
(1 + R)1 +
D2
(1 + R)2 +
D3
(1 + R)3 +  
P3
(1 + R)3
You should start to notice that we can push the problem of coming up with the stock 
price off into the future forever. It is important to note that no matter what the stock 
price is, the present value is essentially zero if we push the sale of the stock far enough 
away. What we are eventually left with is the result that the current price of the stock 
can be written as the present value of the dividends beginning in one period and ex-
tending out forever:
 P0 =
D1
(1 + R)1 +
D2
(1 + R)2 +
D3
(1 + R)3 +
D4
(1 + R)4 +
D5
(1 + R)5 + . . .
We have illustrated here that the price of the stock today is equal to the present value of 
all of the future dividends. How many future dividends are there? In principle, there can 
be an infinite number. This means that we still can’t compute a value for the stock be-
cause we would have to forecast an infinite number of dividends and then discount them 
all. In the next section, we consider some special cases in which we can get around this 
problem.
EXAMPLE
7.1
 Growth Stocks
You might be wondering about shares of stock in companies such as eBay that currently pay no 
dividends. Small, growing companies frequently plow back everything and thus pay no dividends. 
Are such shares worth nothing? It depends. When we say that the value of the stock is equal to the 
present value of the future dividends, we don’t rule out the possibility that some number of those 
dividends are zero. They just can’t all be zero.
	
Imagine a company that has a provision in its corporate charter that prohibits the paying of 
dividends now or ever. The corporation never borrows any money, never pays out any money to 
stockholders in any form whatsoever, and never sells any assets. Such a corporation couldn’t really 
exist because the IRS wouldn’t like it, and the stockholders could always vote to amend the charter 
if they wanted to. If it did exist, however, what would the stock be worth?
	
The stock would be worth absolutely nothing. Such a company is a financial “black hole.” 
Money goes in, but nothing valuable ever comes out. Because nobody would ever get any return 
on this investment, the investment has no value. This example is a little absurd, but it illustrates that 
when we speak of companies that don’t pay dividends, what we really mean is that they are not 
currently paying dividends.
Some Special Cases
There are a few very useful special circumstances under which we can come up with a 
value for the stock. What we have to do is make some simplifying assumptions about the 

208	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
pattern of future dividends. The cases we consider are the following: (1) the dividend has a 
zero growth rate, (2) the dividend grows at a constant rate, and (3) the dividend grows at a 
nonconstant rate. Finally, we examine stock pricing using comparables.
Zero Growth 
The case of zero growth is one we’ve already seen. A share of common 
stock in a company with a constant dividend is much like a share of preferred stock. From 
Chapter 5 (Example 5.7), we know that the dividend on a share of preferred stock has zero 
growth and thus is constant through time. For a zero-growth share of common stock, this 
implies that:
D1 = D2 = D3 = D = constant
So, the value of the stock is:
P0 =
D
(1 + R)1 +
D
(1 + R)2 +
D
(1 + R)3 +
D
(1 + R)4 +
D
(1 + R)5 + p
Because the dividend is always the same, the stock can be viewed as an ordinary perpetuity 
with a cash flow equal to D every period. The per-share value is thus given by:
P0 = D/R	
[7.2]
where R is the required return.
For example, suppose the Paradise Prototyping Company has a policy of paying 
a $10 per-share dividend every year. If this policy is to be continued indefinitely, 
what is the value of a share of stock if the required return is 20 percent? The stock in 
this case amounts to an ordinary perpetuity, so the stock is worth $10/.20 = $50 per 
share.
Constant Growth 
Suppose we know that the dividend for some company always 
grows at a steady rate. Call this growth rate g. If we let D0 be the dividend just paid, then 
the next dividend, D1, is:
D1 = D0 × (1 + g)
The dividend in two periods is:
	D2 = D1 × (1 + g)
	
= [D0 × (1 + g)] × (1 + g) 
	
= D0 × (1 + g)2
We could repeat this process to come up with the dividend at any point in the future. In 
general, from our discussion of compound growth in Chapter 4, we know that the dividend 
t periods into the future, Dt, is given by:
Dt = D0 × (1 + g)t
An asset with cash flows that grow at a constant rate forever is called a growing perpetuity. 
As we will see momentarily, there is a simple expression for determining the value of such 
an asset.
The assumption of steady dividend growth might strike you as peculiar. Why would 
the dividend grow at a constant rate? The reason is that, for many companies, steady 
growth in dividends is an explicit goal. This subject falls under the general heading of divi-
dend policy, so we defer further discussion of it to a later chapter.
Students who are 
interested in equity 
valuation techniques 
should check out the 
Motley Fool at  
www.fool.com/ 
School/Earnings-
BasedValuations.htm.

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
209
If the dividend grows at a steady rate, then we have replaced the problem of fore-
casting an infinite number of future dividends with the problem of coming up with a 
single growth rate, a considerable simplification. In this case, if we take D0 to be the 
dividend just paid and g to be the constant growth rate, the value of a share of stock can 
be written as:
 P0 =
D1
(1 + R)1 +
D2
(1 + R)2 +
D3
(1 + R)3 + p
 =
D0(1 + g)1
(1 + R)1
+
D0(1 + g)2
(1 + R)2
+
D0(1 + g)3
(1 + R)3
+ p
As long as the growth rate, g, is less than the discount rate, R, the present value of this 
series of cash flows can be written very simply as:
P0 =
D0 × (1 + g)
R −g
=
D1
R −g	
 [7.3]
This elegant result goes by a lot of different names. We will call it the dividend growth 
model. By any name, it is very easy to use. To illustrate, suppose D0 is $2.30, R is 13 per-
cent, and g is 5 percent. The price per share in this case is:
	P0 = D0 × (1 + g)/(R − g)
	
= $2.30 × 1.05/(.13 − .05)
	
= $2.415/.08
	
= $30.19
We can actually use the dividend growth model to get the stock price at any point in 
time, not just today. In general, the price of the stock as of Time t is:
Pt =
Dt × (1 + g)
R −g
=
Dt+1
R −g	
 [7.4]
In our example, suppose we are interested in the price of the stock in five years, P5. We 
first need the dividend at Time 5, D5. Because the dividend just paid is $2.30 and the 
growth rate is 5 percent per year, D5 is:
D5 = $2.30 × 1.055 = $2.30 × 1.2763 = $2.935
From the dividend growth model, we get that the price of the stock in five years is:
P5 =
D5 × (1 + g)
R −g
= $2.935 × 1.05
.13 −.05
= $3.0822
.08
= $38.53
dividend growth 
model
A model that determines 
the current price of a 
stock as its dividend next 
period divided by the 
discount rate less the 
dividend growth rate.
EXAMPLE
7.2  Dividend Growth
The Hedless Corporation has just paid a dividend of $3 per share. The dividend of this company 
grows at a steady rate of 8 percent per year. Based on this information, what will the dividend be in 
five years?
	
Here we have a $3 current amount that grows at 8 percent per year for five years. The future 
amount is thus:
$3 × 1.085 = $3 × 1.4693 = $4.41
The dividend will, therefore, increase by $4.41 − 3 = $1.41 over the coming five years.

210	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
You might wonder what would happen with the dividend growth model if the growth 
rate, g, were greater than the discount rate, R. It looks like we would get a negative stock 
price because R − g would be less than zero. This is not what would happen.
Instead, if the constant growth rate exceeds the discount rate, then the stock price is 
infinitely large. Why? If the growth rate is bigger than the discount rate, then the present 
value of the dividends keeps on getting bigger and bigger. Essentially, the same is true if 
the growth rate and the discount rate are equal. In both cases, the simplification that allows 
us to replace the infinite stream of dividends with the dividend growth model is “illegal,” 
so the answers we get from the dividend growth model are nonsense unless the growth rate 
is less than the discount rate.
EXAMPLE
7.3  Gordon Growth Company
The next dividend for the Gordon Growth Company will be $4 per share. Investors require a 16 per-
cent return on companies such as Gordon. Gordon’s dividend increases by 6 percent every year. 
Based on the dividend growth model, what is the value of Gordon’s stock today? What is the value 
in four years?
	
The only tricky thing here is that the next dividend, D1, is given as $4, so we won’t multiply this 
by (1 + g). With this in mind, the price per share is given by:
	P0 = D1/(R − g)
	
= $4/(.16 − .06)
	
= $4/.10
	
= $40
Because we already have the dividend in one year, we know that the dividend in four years is equal 
to D1 × (1 + g)3 = $4 × 1.063 = $4.764. The price in four years is therefore:
	P4 = D4 × (1 + g)/(R − g)
	
= $4.764 × 1.06/(.16 − .06) 
	
= $5.05/.10
	
= $50.50
Notice in this example that P4 is equal to P0 × (1 + g)4:
P4 = $50.50 = $40 × 1.064 = P0 × (1 + g)4
To see why this is so, notice first that:
P4 = D5/(R − g)
However, D5 is just equal to D1 × (1 + g)4, so we can write P4 as:
	P4 = D1 × (1 + g)4/(R − g)
	
= [D1/(R − g)] × (1 + g)4
	
= P0 × (1 + g)4
This last example illustrates that the dividend growth model makes the implicit assumption that the 
stock price will grow at the same constant rate as the dividend. This really isn’t too surprising. What 
it tells us is that if the cash flows on an investment grow at a constant rate through time, so does the 
value of that investment.

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
211
Finally, the expression we came up with for the constant growth case will work for any 
growing perpetuity, not just dividends on common stock. If C1 is the next cash flow on a 
growing perpetuity, then the present value of the cash flows is given by:
Present value = C1/(R − g) = C0(1 + g)/(R − g)
Notice that this expression looks like the result for an ordinary perpetuity except that we 
have R − g on the bottom instead of just R.
Nonconstant Growth 
The last case we consider is nonconstant growth. The main 
reason to consider this case is to allow for “supernormal” growth rates over some finite 
length of time. As we discussed earlier, the growth rate cannot exceed the required return 
indefinitely, but it certainly could do so for some number of years. To avoid the problem of 
having to forecast and discount an infinite number of dividends, we will require that the 
dividends start growing at a constant rate sometime in the future.
For a simple example of nonconstant growth, consider the case of a company that is 
currently not paying dividends. You predict that, in five years, the company will pay a divi-
dend for the first time. The dividend will be $.50 per share. You expect that this dividend 
will then grow at a rate of 10 percent per year indefinitely. The required return on compa-
nies such as this one is 20 percent. What is the price of the stock today?
To see what the stock is worth today, we first find out what it will be worth once divi-
dends are paid. We can then calculate the present value of that future price to get today’s 
price. The first dividend will be paid in five years, and the dividend will grow steadily from 
then on. Using the dividend growth model, we can say that the price in four years will be:
	P4 = D4 × (1 + g)/(R − g)
	
= D5/(R − g) 
	
= $.50/(.20 − .10)
	
= $5
If the stock will be worth $5 in four years, then we can get the current value by discounting 
this price back four years at 20 percent:
P0 = $5/1.204 = $5/2.0736 = $2.41
The stock is therefore worth $2.41 today.
The problem of nonconstant growth is only slightly more complicated if the dividends 
are not zero for the first several years. For example, suppose that you have come up with 
the following dividend forecasts for the next three years:
Year
Expected Dividend
1
$1.00
2
$2.00
3
$2.50
After the third year, the dividend will grow at a constant rate of 5 percent per year. The 
required return is 10 percent. What is the value of the stock today?
In dealing with nonconstant growth, a time line can be very helpful. Figure 7.1 illus-
trates one for this problem. The important thing to notice is when constant growth starts. 
As we’ve shown, for this problem, constant growth starts at Time 3. This means that we 
can use our constant growth model to determine the stock price at Time 3, P3. By far the 

212	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
most common mistake in this situation is to incorrectly identify the start of the constant 
growth phase and, as a result, calculate the future stock price at the wrong time.
As always, the value of the stock is the present value of all the future dividends. To 
calculate this present value, we first have to compute the present value of the stock price 
three years down the road, just as we did before. We then have to add in the present value 
of the dividends that will be paid between now and then. So, the price in three years is:
	P3 = D3 × (1 + g)/(R − g)
	
= $2.50 × 1.05/(.10 − .05)
	
= $52.50
We can now calculate the total value of the stock as the present value of the first three divi-
dends plus the present value of the price at Time 3, P3.
 P0 =
D1
(1 + R)1 +
D2
(1 + R)2 +
D3
(1 + R)3 +
P3
(1 + R)3
 = $1
1.10 +
2
1.102 + 2.50
1.103 + 52.50
1.103
    = $.91 + 1.65 + 1.88 + 39.44 
    = $43.88
The value of the stock today is thus $43.88.
0
1
2
3
4
5
$1
$2
$2.50
$2.50
X 1.05
Time
Dividends
$2.50
X 1.05 2
Nonconstant growth
Constant growth @ 5%
f i g u r e  7.1
Nonconstant growth
EXAMPLE
7.4  Supernormal Growth
Chain Reaction, Inc., has been growing at a phenomenal rate of 30 percent per year because of its 
rapid expansion and explosive sales. You believe that this growth rate will last for three more years 
and that the rate will then drop to 10 percent per year. If the growth rate then remains at 10 percent 
indefinitely, what is the total value of the stock? Total dividends just paid were $5 million, and the 
required return is 20 percent.
	
Chain Reaction’s situation is an example of supernormal growth. It is unlikely that a 30 percent 
growth rate can be sustained for any extended length of time. To value the equity in this company, 
we first need to calculate the total dividends over the supernormal growth period:
Year
Total Dividends (in millions)
1
2
3
   $5.00 × 1.3 = $ 6.500  
     6.50 × 1.3 =    8.450
        8.45 × 1.3 =   10.985
The price at Time 3 can be calculated as:
P3 = D3 × (1 + g)/(R − g)
(continued )

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
213
Components of the Required Return
Thus far, we have taken the required return, or discount rate, R, as given. We will have quite 
a bit to say on this subject in Chapters 10 and 11. For now, we want to examine the implica-
tions of the dividend growth model for this required return. Earlier, we calculated P0 as:
P0 = D1/(R − g)
If we rearrange this to solve for R, we get:
	R − g = D1/P0
	
R = D1/P0 + g	
 [7.5]
This tells us that the total return, R, has two components. The first of these, D1/P0, is called 
the dividend yield. Because this is calculated as the expected cash dividend divided by the 
current price, it is conceptually similar to the current yield on a bond.
The second part of the total return is the growth rate, g. We know that the dividend 
growth rate is also the rate at which the stock price grows (see Example 7.3). Thus, this 
growth rate can be interpreted as the capital gains yield, that is, the rate at which the value 
of the investment grows.1
To illustrate the components of the required return, suppose we observe a stock selling 
for $20 per share. The next dividend will be $1 per share. You think that the dividend will 
grow by 10 percent per year more or less indefinitely. What return does this stock offer you 
if this is correct?
The dividend growth model calculates the total return as:
R = Dividend yield + Capital gains yield
R = D1/P0 + g
In this case, the total return works out to be:
	R = $1/20 + 10%
	 = 5% + 10% 
	 = 15%
This stock, therefore, has a required return of 15 percent.
dividend yield
A stock’s expected cash 
dividend divided by its 
current price.
capital gains yield
The dividend growth rate, 
or the rate at which the 
value of an investment 
grows.
where g is the long-run growth rate. So we have:
P3 = $10.985 × 1.10/(.20 − .10) = $120.835
To determine the value today, we need the present value of this amount plus the present value of 
the total dividends:
 P0 =
D1
(1 + R)1 +
D2
(1 + R)2 +
D3
(1 + R)3 +
P3
(1 + R)3
 = $6.50
1.20 + 8.45
1.202 + 10.985
1.203 + 120.835
1.203
     = $5.42 + 5.87 + 6.36 + 69.93
     = $87.58
The total value of the stock today is thus $87.58 million. If there were, for example, 20 million shares, 
then the stock would be worth $87.58/20 = $4.38 per share.
1 Here and elsewhere, we use the term capital gains a little loosely. For the record, a capital gain (or loss) is, 
strictly speaking, something defined by the IRS. For our purposes, it would be more accurate (but less common) 
to use the term price appreciation instead of capital gain.

214	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
We can verify this answer by calculating the price in one year, P1, using 15 percent as 
the required return. Based on the dividend growth model, this price is:
	P1 = D1 × (1 + g)/(R − g) 
	
= $1 × 1.10/(.15 − .10)     
	
= $1.10/.05
	
= $22
Notice that this $22 is $20 × 1.1, so the stock price has grown by 10 percent, as it should. 
If you pay $20 for the stock today, you will get a $1 dividend at the end of the year, and you 
will have a $22 − 20 = $2 gain. Your dividend yield is thus $1/20 = 5%. Your capital gains 
yield is $2/20 = 10%, so your total return would be 5% + 10% = 15%.
To get a feel for actual numbers in this context, consider that, according to the 2015 
Value Line Investment Survey, The Hershey Company’s dividends were expected to grow by 
12 percent over the next five or so years, compared to an historical growth rate of 9 percent 
over the preceding 10 years. In 2015, the projected dividend for the coming year was given as 
$2.33. The stock price at that time was about $100 per share. What is the return investors re-
quire on Hershey? Here, the dividend yield is about 2.3 percent and the capital gains yield is 
12 percent, giving a total required return of 14.3 percent on Hershey stock.
Stock Valuation Using Comparables, or Comps
An obvious problem with our dividend-based approach to stock valuation is that many 
companies don’t pay dividends. What do we do in such cases? A common approach is to 
make use of the PE ratio, which we defined in Chapter 3 as the ratio of a stock’s price per 
share to its earnings per share (EPS) over the previous year. The idea here is to have some 
sort of benchmark or reference PE ratio, which we then multiply by earnings to come up 
with a price:
Price at Time t = Pt = Benchmark PE ratio × EPSt	
[7.6]
The benchmark PE ratio could come from one of several possible sources. It could be 
based on similar companies (perhaps an industry average or median), or it could be based 
on a company’s own historical values. For example, suppose we are trying to value Inac-
tivision, Inc., a video game developer known for its hit Slack Ops series. Inactivision does 
not pay dividends, but after studying the industry, you feel that a PE ratio of 20 is appropri-
ate for a company like this one. Total earnings over the four most recent quarters combined 
are $2 per share, so you think the stock should sell for 20 × $2 = $40. You might view it as 
an attractive purchase if it is going for less than $40, but not attractive if it sells for more 
than $40.
Security analysts spend a lot of time forecasting future earnings, particularly for the 
coming year. A PE ratio that is based on estimated future earnings is called a forward PE 
ratio. For example, suppose you felt that Inactivision’s earnings for the coming year were 
going to be $2.50, reflecting the growing popularity of the company’s World of Slackcraft 
massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG). In this case, if the current 
stock price is $40, the forward PE ratio is $40/$2.50 = 16.
Finally, notice that your benchmark PE of 20 applies to earnings over the previous 
year. If earnings over the coming year turn out to be $2.50, then the stock price one year 
from today should be 20 × $2.50 = $50. Forecast prices such as this one are often called 
target prices.
Often we will be interested in valuing newer companies that both don’t pay dividends and 
are not yet profitable, meaning that earnings are negative. What do we do then? One answer is 

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
215
to use the price–sales ratio, which we also introduced in Chapter 3. As the name suggests, this 
ratio is the price per share on the stock divided by sales per share. You use this ratio just like 
you use the PE ratio, except you use sales per share instead of earnings per share. As with PE 
ratios, price–sales ratios vary depending on company age and industry. Typical values are in 
the .8–2.0 range, but they can be much higher for younger, faster-growing companies.
For future reference, our discussion of stock valuation techniques is summarized in 
Table 7.1.
concept questions
7.1a	
What are the relevant cash flows for valuing a share of common stock?
7.1b	
Does the value of a share of stock depend on how long you expect to keep it?
7.1c	
What is the value of a share of stock when the dividend grows at a constant rate?
7.1d	
What is a “target price” on a stock? How is it determined?
I.	
The general case
	
In general, the price today of a share of stock, P0, is the present value of all of its future 
dividends, D1, D2, D3, . . . :
	
     P0 =
D1
(1 + R)1 +
D2
(1 + R)2 +
D3
(1 + R)3 + . . .
	
where R is the required return.
II.	
Constant growth case
	
If the dividend is constant and equal to D, then the price can be written as:
	
    P0 = D
R
	
If the dividend grows at a steady rate, g, then the price can be written as:
	
    P0 =
D1
R −g
	
This result is called the dividend growth model.
III.	 Nonconstant Growth
	
If the dividend grows steadily after t periods, then the price can be written as:
	
    P0 =
D1
(1 + R)1 +
D2
(1 + R)2 + . . . +
Dt
(1 + R)t +
Pt
(1 + R)t
	
where
	
    Pt =
Dt × (1 + g)
(R −g)
IV.	 Valuation Using Comparables
	
For stocks that don’t pay dividends (or have erratic dividend growth rates), we can value 
them using the PE ratio and/or the price–sales ratio:
	
Pt = Benchmark PE ratio × EPSt
	
Pt = Benchmark price–sales ratio × Sales per sharet
V.	 The required return, R, can be written as the sum of two things:
	
R = D1/P0 + g
	
where D1/P0 is the dividend yield and g is the capital gains yield (which is the same thing 
as the growth rate in dividends for the steady growth case).
ta b l e  7.1
Summary of stock 
valuation

216	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
SOME FEATURES OF COMMON AND 
PREFERRED STOCK
In discussing common stock features, we focus on shareholder rights and dividend pay-
ments. For preferred stock, we explain what “preferred” means, and we also debate whether 
preferred stock is really debt or equity.
Common Stock Features
The term common stock means different things to different people, but it is usually applied 
to stock that has no special preference either in paying dividends or in bankruptcy.
Shareholder Rights 
The conceptual structure of the corporation assumes that share-
holders elect directors who, in turn, hire management to carry out their directives. Share-
holders, therefore, control the corporation through the right to elect the directors. Generally, 
only shareholders have this right.
Directors are elected each year at an annual meeting. Although there are exceptions 
(discussed in a moment), the general idea is “one share, one vote” (not one shareholder, 
one vote). Corporate democracy is thus very different from our political democracy. With 
corporate democracy, the “golden rule” prevails absolutely.2
Directors are elected at an annual shareholders’ meeting by a vote of the holders of a 
majority of shares who are present and entitled to vote. However, the exact mechanism for 
electing directors differs across companies. The most important difference is whether 
shares must be voted cumulatively or voted straight.
To illustrate the two different voting procedures, imagine that a corporation has two share-
holders: Smith with 20 shares and Jones with 80 shares. Both want to be a director. Jones does 
not want Smith, however. We assume that there are a total of four directors to be elected.
The effect of cumulative voting is to permit minority participation.3 If cumulative vot-
ing is permitted, the total number of votes that each shareholder may cast is determined 
first. This is usually calculated as the number of shares (owned or controlled) multiplied by 
the number of directors to be elected.
With cumulative voting, the directors are elected all at once. In our example, this 
means that the top four vote-getters will be the new directors. Individual shareholders can 
distribute votes however they wish.
Will Smith get a seat on the board? If we ignore the possibility of a five-way tie, then 
the answer is yes. Smith will cast 20 × 4 = 80 votes, and Jones will cast 80 × 4 = 320 
votes. If Smith gives all his votes to himself, he is assured of a directorship. The reason is 
that Jones can’t divide 320 votes among four candidates in such a way as to give all of them 
more than 80 votes, so Smith will finish fourth at worst.
In general, if there are N directors up for election, then 1/(N + 1) percent of the stock 
plus one share will guarantee you a seat. In our current example, this is 1/(4 + 1) = 20% 
(plus one share). So, the more seats that are up for election at one time, the easier (and 
cheaper) it is to win one.
With straight voting the directors are elected one at a time. Each time, Smith can cast 
20 votes and Jones can cast 80. As a consequence, Jones will elect all of the candidates. 
The only way to guarantee a seat is to own 50 percent plus one share. This also guarantees 
that you will win every seat, so it’s really all or nothing.
7.2
common stock
Equity without priority for 
dividends or in 
bankruptcy.
cumulative voting
A procedure in which a 
shareholder may cast all 
votes for one member of 
the board of directors.
straight voting
A procedure in which a 
shareholder may cast all 
votes for each member of 
the board of directors.
2 The golden rule: Whoever has the gold makes the rules.
3 By minority participation, we mean participation by shareholders with relatively small amounts of stock.

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
217
As we’ve illustrated, straight voting can “freeze out” minority shareholders; that is the 
reason many states have mandatory cumulative voting. In states where cumulative voting is 
mandatory, devices have been worked out to minimize its impact.
Many companies have staggered elections for directors. With staggered elections, only 
a fraction of the directorships are up for election at a particular time. Thus, if only two di-
rectors are up for election at any one time, it will take 1/(2 + 1) = 33.33% of the stock plus 
one share to guarantee a seat. Staggered boards are often called “classified” boards because 
directors are placed into different classes with terms that expire at different times. In recent 
years, corporations have come under pressure to “declassify” their boards, meaning that all 
directors would stand for election every year, and many have done so.
Overall, staggering has two basic effects:
  1.	 Staggering makes it more difficult for a minority shareholder to elect a director when 
there is cumulative voting because there are fewer directors to be elected at one time.
  2.	 Staggering makes takeover attempts less likely to be successful because it makes it 
more difficult to vote in a majority of new directors.
We should note that staggering may serve a beneficial purpose. It provides “institu-
tional memory,” that is, continuity on the board of directors. This may be important for 
corporations with significant long-range plans and projects.
Proxy Voting 
A proxy is the grant of authority by a shareholder to someone else to 
vote that shareholder’s shares. For convenience, much of the voting in large public corpora-
tions is actually done by proxy.
As we have seen, with straight voting, each share of stock has one vote. The owner of 
10,000 shares has 10,000 votes. Large companies have hundreds of thousands or even mil-
lions of shareholders. Shareholders can come to the annual meeting and vote in person, or 
they can transfer their right to vote to another party.
Obviously, management always tries to get as many proxies as possible transferred to 
it. However, if shareholders are not satisfied with management, an “outside” group of 
shareholders can try to obtain votes via proxy. They can vote by proxy in an attempt to re-
place management by electing enough directors. The resulting battle is called a proxy fight.
Classes of Stock 
Some firms have more than one class of common stock. Often, the 
classes are created with unequal voting rights. The Ford Motor Company, for example, has 
Class B common stock, which is not publicly traded (it is held by Ford family interests and 
trusts). This class has about 40 percent of the voting power, even though it represents less 
than 10 percent of the total number of shares outstanding.
There are many other cases of corporations with different classes of stock. For exam-
ple, Google, the web search company, has two publicly traded classes of common stock, A 
proxy
A grant of authority by a 
shareholder allowing 
another individual to vote 
his or her shares.
EXAMPLE
7.5  Buying the Election
Stock in JRJ Corporation sells for $20 per share and features cumulative voting. There are 10,000 
shares outstanding. If three directors are up for election, how much does it cost to ensure yourself a 
seat on the board?
	
The question here is how many shares of stock it will take to get a seat. The answer is 2,501, so 
the cost is 2,501 × $20 = $50,020. Why 2,501? Because there is no way the remaining 7,499 votes 
can be divided among three people to give all of them more than 2,501 votes. For example, suppose 
two people receive 2,502 votes and the first two seats. A third person can receive at most 10,000 
− 2,502 − 2,502 − 2,501 = 2,495, so the third seat is yours. Verify that we arrived at 2,501 using the 
formula described earlier.

218	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
and B. The Class A shares are held by the public, and each share has one vote. The Class B 
shares are held by company insiders, and each Class B share has 10 votes. As a result, 
Google’s founders and managers control the company. The CEO of cable TV giant Com-
cast, Brian Roberts, owns about .04 percent of the company’s equity, but he has a third of 
all the votes thanks to the creation of a special class of stock.
In principle, the New York Stock Exchange does not allow companies to create classes of 
publicly traded common stock with unequal voting rights. Exceptions (e.g., Ford) appear to 
have been made. In addition, many non-NYSE companies have dual classes of common stock.
A primary reason for creating dual or multiple classes of stock has to do with control 
of the firm. If such stock exists, management of a firm can raise equity capital by issuing 
nonvoting or limited-voting stock while maintaining control.
The subject of unequal voting rights is controversial in the United States, and the idea of one 
share, one vote has a strong following and a long history. Interestingly, however, shares with un-
equal voting rights are quite common in the United Kingdom and elsewhere around the world.
Other Rights 
The value of a share of common stock in a corporation is directly related 
to the general rights of shareholders. In addition to the right to vote for directors, share-
holders usually have the following rights:
  1.	 The right to share proportionally in dividends paid.
  2.	 The right to share proportionally in assets remaining after liabilities have been paid 
in a liquidation.
  3.	 The right to vote on stockholder matters of great importance, such as a merger. 
Voting is usually done at the annual meeting or a special meeting.
In addition, shareholders sometimes have the right to share proportionally in any new 
stock sold. This is called the preemptive right.
Essentially, a preemptive right means that a company that wishes to sell stock must first 
offer it to the existing stockholders before offering it to the general public. The purpose is to 
give stockholders the opportunity to protect their proportionate ownership in the corporation.
Dividends 
A distinctive feature of corporations is that they have shares of stock on which 
they are authorized by law to pay dividends to their shareholders. Dividends paid to sharehold-
ers represent a return on the capital directly or indirectly contributed to the corporation by the 
shareholders. The payment of dividends is at the discretion of the board of directors.
Some important characteristics of dividends include the following:
  1.	 Unless a dividend is declared by the board of directors of a corporation, it is not a 
liability of the corporation. A corporation cannot default on an undeclared dividend. 
As a consequence, corporations cannot become bankrupt because of nonpayment of 
dividends. The amount of the dividend and even whether it is paid are decisions 
based on the business judgment of the board of directors.
  2.	 The payment of dividends by the corporation is not a business expense. Dividends 
are not deductible for corporate tax purposes. In short, dividends are paid out of the 
corporation’s aftertax profits.
  3.	 Dividends received by individual shareholders are taxable. However, corporations 
that own stock in other corporations are permitted to exclude 70 percent of the 
dividend amounts they receive and are taxed only on the remaining 30 percent.4
dividend
Payments by a corporation 
to shareholders, made in 
either cash or stock.
4 For the record, the 70 percent exclusion applies when the recipient owns less than 20 percent of the 
outstanding stock in a corporation. If a corporation owns more than 20 percent but less than 80 percent, the 
exclusion is 80 percent. If more than 80 percent is owned, the corporation can file a single “consolidated” 
return, and the exclusion is effectively 100 percent.

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
219
Preferred Stock Features
Preferred stock differs from common stock because it has preference over common stock in 
the payment of dividends and in the distribution of corporation assets in the event of liquida-
tion. Preference means only that the holders of the preferred shares must receive a dividend 
(in the case of an ongoing firm) before holders of common shares are entitled to anything.
Preferred stock is a form of equity from a legal and tax standpoint. It is important to 
note, however, that holders of preferred stock sometimes have no voting privileges.
Stated Value 
Preferred shares have a stated liquidating value, usually $100 per share. 
The cash dividend is described in terms of dollars per share. For example, General Motors 
“$5 preferred” easily translates into a dividend yield of 5 percent of stated value.
Cumulative and Noncumulative Dividends 
A preferred dividend is not like in-
terest on a bond. The board of directors may decide not to pay the dividends on preferred shares, 
and their decision may have nothing to do with the current net income of the corporation.
Dividends payable on preferred stock are either cumulative or noncumulative; most are 
cumulative. If preferred dividends are cumulative and are not paid in a particular year, they 
will be carried forward as an arrearage. Usually, both the accumulated (past) preferred 
dividends and the current preferred dividends must be paid before the common sharehold-
ers can receive anything.
Unpaid preferred dividends are not debts of the firm. Directors elected by the common 
shareholders can defer preferred dividends indefinitely. However, in such cases, common 
shareholders must also forgo dividends. In addition, holders of preferred shares are often 
granted voting and other rights if preferred dividends have not been paid for some time. 
For example, at one point, US Airways had failed to pay dividends on one of its preferred 
stock issues for six quarters. As a consequence, the holders of the shares were allowed to 
nominate two people to represent their interests on the airline’s board. Because preferred 
stockholders receive no interest on the accumulated dividends, some have argued that 
firms have an incentive to delay paying preferred dividends, but, as we have seen, this may 
mean sharing control with preferred stockholders.
Is Preferred Stock Really Debt? 
A good case can be made that preferred stock is 
really debt in disguise, a kind of equity bond. Preferred shareholders are only entitled to 
receive a stated dividend, and, if the corporation is liquidated, preferred shareholders are 
only entitled to the stated value of their preferred shares. Often, preferred stocks carry 
credit ratings much like those of bonds. Furthermore, preferred stock is sometimes con-
vertible into common stock, and preferred stocks are often callable.
In addition, in recent years, many new issues of preferred stock have had obligatory 
sinking funds. The existence of such a sinking fund effectively creates a final maturity be-
cause it means that the entire issue will ultimately be retired. For these reasons, preferred 
stock seems to be a lot like debt. However, for tax purposes, preferred dividends are treated 
like common stock dividends.
concept questions
7.2a	
What is a proxy?
7.2b	
What rights do stockholders have?
7.2c	
Why is preferred stock called preferred?
preferred stock
Stock with dividend 
priority over common 
stock, normally with a 
fixed dividend rate, 
sometimes without voting 
rights.

220	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
THE STOCK MARKETS
Back in Chapter 1, we very briefly mentioned that shares of stock are bought and sold on 
various stock exchanges, the two most important of which are the New York Stock 
Exchange and the NASDAQ. From our earlier discussion, recall that the stock market con-
sists of a primary market and a secondary market. In the primary, or new-issue, market, 
shares of stock are first brought to the market and sold to investors. In the secondary mar-
ket, existing shares are traded among investors.
In the primary market, companies sell securities to raise money. We will discuss this 
process in detail in a later chapter. We therefore focus mainly on secondary market activity 
in this section. We conclude with a discussion of how stock prices are quoted in the finan-
cial press.
Dealers and Brokers
Because most securities transactions involve dealers and brokers, it is important to under-
stand exactly what is meant by the terms dealer and broker. A dealer maintains an inven-
tory and stands ready to buy and sell at any time. In contrast, a broker brings buyers and 
sellers together, but does not maintain an inventory. Thus, when we speak of used car deal-
ers and real estate brokers, we recognize that the used car dealer maintains an inventory, 
whereas the real estate broker does not.
In the securities markets, a dealer stands ready to buy securities from investors wish-
ing to sell them and sell securities to investors wishing to buy them. Recall from our previ-
ous chapter that the price the dealer is willing to pay is called the bid price. The price at 
which the dealer will sell is called the ask price (sometimes called the asked, offered, or 
offering price). The difference between the bid and ask prices is called the spread, and it is 
the basic source of dealer profits.
Dealers exist in all areas of the economy, not just the stock markets. For example, your 
local college bookstore is probably both a primary and a secondary market textbook dealer. 
If you buy a new book, this is a primary market transaction. If you buy a used book, this is 
a secondary market transaction, and you pay the store’s ask price. If you sell the book back, 
you receive the store’s bid price, often half of the ask price. The bookstore’s spread is the 
difference between the two prices.
In contrast, a securities broker arranges transactions between investors, matching in-
vestors wishing to buy securities with investors wishing to sell securities. The distinctive 
characteristic of security brokers is that they do not buy or sell securities for their own ac-
counts. Facilitating trades by others is their business.
Organization of the NYSE
The New York Stock Exchange, or NYSE, popularly known as the Big Board, recently 
celebrated its bicentennial. It has occupied its current location on Wall Street since the turn 
of the twentieth century. Measured in terms of dollar volume of activity and the total value 
of shares listed, it is the largest stock market in the world.
Members 
Historically, the NYSE had 1,366 exchange members. Prior to 2006, the 
exchange members were said to own “seats” on the exchange, and, collectively, the 
members of the exchange were also the owners. For this and other reasons, seats were 
valuable and were bought and sold fairly regularly. Seat prices reached a record $4 mil-
lion in 2005.
7.3
coverage online
Excel 
Master
primary market
The market in which new 
securities are originally 
sold to investors.
secondary market
The market in which 
previously issued 
securities are traded 
among investors.
dealer
An agent who buys and 
sells securities from 
inventory.
broker
An agent who arranges 
security transactions 
among investors.
member
As of 2006, a member is 
the owner of a trading 
license on the NYSE.

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
221
In 2006, all of this changed when the NYSE became a publicly owned corporation 
called NYSE Group, Inc. Naturally, its stock is listed on the NYSE. Now, instead of pur-
chasing seats, exchange members must purchase trading licenses, the number of which is 
limited to 1,366. In 2015, a license would set you back a cool $40,000—per year. Having a 
license entitles you to buy and sell securities on the floor of the exchange. Different mem-
bers play different roles in this regard.
On April 4, 2007, the NYSE grew even larger when it merged with Euronext to form 
NYSE Euronext. Euronext was a stock exchange in Amsterdam, with subsidiaries in 
Belgium, France, Portugal, and the United Kingdom. With the merger, NYSE Euronext 
became the world’s “first global exchange.” Further expansion occurred in 2008 when 
NYSE Euronext merged with the American Stock Exchange. Then, in November 2013, the 
acquisition of the NYSE by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) was completed. ICE, 
which was founded in May 2000, was originally a commodities exchange, but its rapid 
growth gave it the necessary $8.2 billion to acquire the NYSE.
With electronic trading, orders to buy and orders to sell are submitted to the ex-
change. Orders are compared by a computer and whenever there is a match, the orders 
are executed with no human intervention. Most trades on the NYSE occur this way. For 
orders that are not handled electronically, the NYSE relies on its license holders. There 
are three different types of license holders, designated market makers (DMMs), floor 
brokers, and supplemental liquidity providers (SLPs), and we now discuss the role 
played by each.
The DMMs, formerly known as “specialists,” act as dealers in particular stocks. Typi-
cally, each stock on the NYSE is assigned to a single DMM. As a dealer, a DMM maintains 
a two-sided market, meaning that the DMM continually posts and updates bid and ask 
prices. By doing so, the DMM ensures that there is always a buyer or seller available, 
thereby promoting market liquidity.
The job of a floor broker is to execute trades for customers, with an emphasis on get-
ting the best price possible. Floor brokers are generally employees of large brokerage firms 
such as Merrill Lynch, the wealth management division of Bank of America. The interac-
tion between floor brokers and DMMs is the key to nonelectronic trading on the NYSE. 
We discuss this interaction in detail in just a moment.
The SLPs are essentially investment firms that agree to be active participants in stocks 
assigned to them. Their job is to regularly make a one-sided market (i.e., offering to either 
buy or sell). They trade purely for their own accounts (using their own money), so they do not 
represent customers. They are given a small rebate on their buys and sells, thereby encourag-
ing them to be more aggressive. The NYSE’s goal is to generate as much liquidity as possi-
ble, which makes it easier for ordinary investors to quickly buy and sell at prevailing prices. 
Unlike DMMs and floor brokers, SLPs do not operate on the floor of the stock exchange.
Operations 
Now that we have a basic idea of how the NYSE is organized and who the 
major players are, we turn to the question of how trading actually takes place. Fundamen-
tally, the business of the NYSE is to attract and process order flow. The term order flow 
means the flow of customer orders to buy and sell stocks. The customers of the NYSE are 
the millions of individual investors and tens of thousands of institutional investors who 
place their orders to buy and sell shares in NYSE-listed companies. The NYSE has been 
quite successful in attracting order flow. Currently, it is common for more than one billion 
shares to change hands in a single day.
Floor Activity 
It is quite likely that you have seen footage of the NYSE trading floor 
on television, or you may have visited the NYSE and viewed exchange floor activity from 
designated market 
makers (DMMs)
NYSE members who act as 
dealers in particular 
stocks. Formerly known as 
“specialists.”
floor brokers
NYSE members who 
execute customer buy and 
sell orders.
supplemental 
liquidity providers 
(SLPs)
Investment firms that are 
active participants in 
stocks assigned to them. 
Their job is to make a one-
sided market (i.e., offering 
to either buy or sell). They 
trade purely for their own 
accounts.
order flow
The flow of customer 
orders to buy and sell 
securities.

222	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
the visitors’ gallery (it’s worth the trip). Either way, you would have seen a big room, about 
the size of a basketball gym. This big room is called, technically, “the Big Room.” There 
are a couple of other, smaller rooms that you normally don’t see, one of which is called 
“the Garage” because that is literally what it was before it was taken over for trading.
On the floor of the exchange are a number of stations. These stations have multiple 
counters with numerous terminal screens above and on the sides. People operate behind 
and in front of the counters in relatively stationary positions.
Other people move around on the exchange floor. In all, you may be reminded of 
worker ants moving around an ant colony. It is natural to wonder: What are all those people 
doing down there (and why are so many wearing funny-looking coats)?
As an overview of exchange floor activity, here is a quick look at what goes on. 
Each of the counters is a DMM’s post. DMMs normally operate in front of their posts 
to monitor and manage trading in the stocks assigned to them. Clerical employees 
working for the DMMs operate behind the counter. Moving from the many worksta-
tions lining the walls of the exchange out to the exchange floor and back again are 
swarms of floor brokers, receiving customer orders, walking out to DMMs’ posts 
where the orders can be executed, and returning to confirm order executions and re-
ceive new customer orders.
To better understand activity on the NYSE trading floor, imagine yourself as a floor 
broker. Your clerk has just handed you an order to sell 2,000 shares of Walmart for a cus-
tomer of the brokerage company that employs you. The customer wants to sell the stock at 
the best possible price as soon as possible. You immediately walk (running violates ex-
change rules) to the DMM’s post where Walmart stock is traded.
As you approach the DMM’s post where Walmart is traded, you check the terminal 
screen for information on the current market price. The screen reveals that the last executed 
trade was at $25.63, and that the DMM is bidding $25.50 per share. You could immedi-
ately sell to the DMM at $25.50, but that would be too easy.
Instead, as the customer’s representative, you are obligated to get the best possible 
price. It is your job to “work” the order, and your job depends on providing satisfactory 
order execution service. So, you look around for another broker who represents a customer 
who wants to buy Walmart stock. Luckily, you quickly find another broker at the DMM’s 
post with an order to buy 2,000 shares. Noticing that the dealer is asking $25.76 per share, 
you both agree to execute your orders with each other at a price of $25.63. This price is 
halfway between the DMM’s bid and ask prices, and it saves each of your customers $.13 
× 2,000 = $260 as compared to dealing at the posted prices.
For a very actively traded stock, there may be many buyers and sellers around the 
DMM’s post, and most of the trading will be done directly between brokers. This is called 
trading in the “crowd.” In such cases, the DMM’s responsibility is to maintain order and to 
make sure that all buyers and sellers receive a fair price. In other words, the DMM essen-
tially functions as a referee.
More often, however, there will be no crowd at the DMM’s post. Going back to our 
Walmart example, suppose you are unable to quickly find another broker with an order to buy 
2,000 shares. Because you have an order to sell immediately, you may have no choice but to sell 
to the DMM at the bid price of $25.50. In this case, the need to execute an order quickly takes 
priority, and the DMM provides the liquidity necessary to allow immediate order execution.
Finally, note that colored coats are worn by many of the people on the floor of the 
exchange. The color of the coat indicates the person’s job or position. Clerks, runners, visi-
tors, exchange officials, and so on wear particular colors to identify themselves. Also, 
things can get a little hectic on a busy day, with the result that good clothing doesn’t last 
long; the cheap coats offer some protection.
DMM’s post
A fixed place on the 
exchange floor where the 
DMM operates.
Take a virtual field trip to 
the New York Stock 
Exchange at  
www.nyse.com.

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
223
NASDAQ Operations
In terms of the number of companies listed and, on many days, the number of shares traded, the 
NASDAQ is even bigger than the NYSE. As we mentioned in Chapter 1, the somewhat odd 
name is derived from the acronym NASDAQ, which stood for National Association of Securities 
Dealers Automated Quotations system; but NASDAQ is now a name in its own right.
Introduced in 1971, the NASDAQ market is a computer network of securities dealers 
who disseminate timely security price quotes to NASDAQ subscribers. These dealers act 
as market makers for securities listed on the NASDAQ. As market makers, NASDAQ deal-
ers post bid and asked prices at which they accept sell and buy orders, respectively. With 
each price quote, they also post the number of stock shares that they obligate themselves to 
trade at their quoted prices.
Not to be outdone by the NYSE, the NASDAQ completed a merger in May 2007 when 
it finalized its deal to buy the OMX, which controlled seven Nordic and Baltic stock ex-
changes. Since the merger, the NASDAQ is officially the NASDAQ OMX Group, although 
it is still often referred to as simply NASDAQ.
Unlike the NYSE DMM system, NASDAQ relies on multiple market makers for ac-
tively traded stocks. Thus, there are two key differences between the NYSE and NASDAQ: 
(1) NASDAQ is a computer network and has no physical location where trading takes 
place, and (2) NASDAQ has a multiple market maker system rather than a DMM system. 
Notice that there is no direct trading in the crowd as there may be on the NYSE.
About 3,100 companies are listed on the NASDAQ system, with an average of about a 
dozen market makers for each security. Traditionally, shares of stock in smaller companies 
were listed on the NASDAQ, and there was a tendency for companies to move from the 
NASDAQ to the NYSE once they became large enough. Today, however, giant companies 
such as Amazon, Microsoft, and Intel have chosen to remain on the NASDAQ.
The NASDAQ network operates with three levels of information access. Level 1 is 
designed to provide a timely, accurate source of price quotations. These prices are freely 
available over the Internet.
Level 2 allows users to view price quotes from all NASDAQ market makers. In par-
ticular, this level allows access to inside quotes. Inside quotes are the highest bid quotes 
and the lowest asked quotes for a NASDAQ-listed security. Level 2 is now available on the 
web, sometimes for a small fee. Level 3 is for the use of market makers only. This access 
level allows NASDAQ dealers to enter or change their price quote information.
The NASDAQ is actually made up of three separate markets: the NASDAQ Global 
Select Market, the NASDAQ Global Market, and the NASDAQ Capital Market. As the 
market for NASDAQ’s larger and more actively traded securities, the Global Select Market 
lists about 1,200 companies (as of early 2015), including some of the best-known compa-
nies in the world, such as Microsoft and Intel. The Global Market companies are somewhat 
smaller in size, and NASDAQ lists about 1,150 of these companies. Finally, the smallest 
companies listed on NASDAQ are in the NASDAQ Capital Market; about 650 are cur-
rently listed. Of course, as Capital Market companies become more established, they may 
move up to the Global Market or Global Select Market.
ECNs 
In a very important development in the late 1990s, the NASDAQ system was 
opened to so-called electronic communications networks (ECNs). ECNs are basically web-
sites that allow investors to trade directly with one another. Investor buy and sell orders 
placed on ECNs are transmitted to the NASDAQ and displayed along with market maker 
bid and ask prices. Thus, the ECNs open up the NASDAQ by essentially allowing indi-
vidual investors, not just market makers, to enter orders. As a result, the ECNs act to in-
crease liquidity and competition. Our nearby Work the Web box describes one ECN, BATS 
How big is the bid-ask 
spread on your favorite 
NASDAQ stock? Check 
out the latest quotes at 
money.cnn.com!
NASDAQ  
(www.nasdaq.com) has a 
great website; check it 
out!
inside quotes
The highest bid quotes 
and the lowest ask quotes 
for a security.
electronic 
communications 
networks (ECNs)
Websites that allow 
investors to trade directly 
with one another.

224	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
Y
ou can actually watch trading taking place on the web by visiting www.batstrading.com. The 
BATS Exchange is somewhat unique in that the “order book,” meaning the list of all buy and 
sell orders, is public in real time. As shown, we have captured a sample of the order book for Intel 
(INTC). On the top in blue are sell orders (asks); buy orders (bids) are in green on the bottom. All 
orders are “limit” orders, which means the customer has specified the most he or she will pay (for 
buy orders) or the least he or she will accept (for sell orders). The inside quotes (the highest bid, or 
buy, and the lowest ask, or sell) in the market are shown in bold face.
If you visit the site, you can see trading take place as orders are entered and executed. Notice that 
on this particular day, about 2 million shares of Intel had traded on BATS. At that time, the inside 
quotes for Intel were 400 shares bid at $30.73 and 400 shares offered at $30.75. This is not the 
entire order book for Intel as there are more buy orders below $30.69 and more sell orders above 
$30.79.
W
RK THE  WE B
QUESTIONS
	
1.	 Go to www.batstrading.com and look up the order book for Microsoft (MSFT). What are 
the inside quotes for Microsoft?
	
2.	 Go to www.batstrading.com. This website shows the 25 most active stocks. Looking 
down through this list, what are the bid-ask spreads for these stocks?

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
225
Global Markets (www.batstrading.com), and contains important information about ECN 
“order books.” Be sure to read it.
Of course, the NYSE and NASDAQ are not the only places stocks are traded. See our 
nearby Finance Matters box for a discussion of somewhat wilder markets.
Stock Market Reporting
Like so many other things, stock price reporting has largely migrated to the web. You can 
get up-to-the-minute prices on stocks from many online servers, along with plenty of infor-
mation about a stock. The following is a stock quote from finance.yahoo.com for famed 
motorcycle manufacturer Harley-Davidson (HOG) from March 16, 2015.
In the upper left, we have a recent trade price of $59.20. Based on that price, the stock 
had increased by $.40 during the day, or .68 percent. In the box below, more information is 
provided. For example, the “Prev Close” is the closing price from the previous trading day, 
and “Open” is the first price of the current day. The high price for this day so far, shown in 
“Day’s Range,” was $59.27, and the low price was $58.75. About 1.3 million shares of 
Harley-Davidson had traded, relative to an average volume over the last three months of 
1.84 million shares. As always, the bid and ask are the highest price someone was willing 
to pay and the lowest price someone was willing to take. For example, 59.20 × 300 tells 
you that someone was willing to pay $59.20 for 300 shares. The “×” is read as “by.” You 
can also see the number of shares at the ask price. The “52wk Range” gives the highest and 
lowest stock prices over the past 52 weeks.
And there is even more information in the quote. “Beta” is an important number. We will 
have lots more to say about it in a later chapter. Harley-Davidson, like most dividend-paying 
companies, actually pays dividends quarterly. However, the dividend shown of $1.24 is the 
expected dividend for the coming year. The dividend yield is the annual dividend divided by 
the stock price. Harley-Davidson’s EPS for the past year was $3.88. The PE ratio shown is 
calculated using the current stock price divided by the last 12 months’ earnings. The “1y 
Target Est” is the projected price next year based on analysts’ estimates. Finally, we are 
shown the “Market Cap” (market capitalization, or total value of Harley-Davidson’s stock).
concept questions
7.3a	
What is the difference between a securities broker and a securities dealer?
7.3b	
Which is bigger, the bid price or the ask price? Why?
7.3c	
What are the three types of license holders of the New York Stock Exchange, or NYSE?
7.3d	
How does NASDAQ differ from the NYSE?
You can get real-time 
stock quotes on the web. 
See finance.yahoo.com 
for details.

The Wild, Wild West of Stock Trading
W
here do companies go when they can’t (or don’t want to) 
meet the listing requirements of the larger stock mar-
kets? Two options are the Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board 
(OTCBB) and the OTC Markets, formerly Pink Sheets. These 
two electronic markets are part of the Wild, Wild West of stock 
trading. The somewhat odd names have simple explanations. 
The OTCBB began as an electronic bulletin board that was 
created to facilitate OTC trading in nonlisted stocks. The 
name “Pink Sheets” just reflects the fact that, at one time, 
prices for such stocks were quoted on pink sheets of paper.
	
The well-known markets such as the NASDAQ and the 
NYSE have relatively strict listing requirements. If a company 
fails to meet these requirements, it can be delisted. The 
OTCBB and the Pink Sheets, on the other hand, have no list-
ing requirements. The OTCBB does require that companies 
file financial statements with the SEC (or other relevant 
agency), but the Pink Sheets does not.
	
Stocks traded on these markets often have very low prices 
and are frequently referred to as “penny stocks,” “microcaps,” or 
even “nanocaps.” Relatively few brokers do any research on 
these companies, so information is often spread through word of 
mouth or the Internet, not the most reliable of sources. In fact, for 
many stocks, these markets often look like big electronic rumor 
mills and gossip factories. To get a feel for what trading looks like, 
we captured a typical screen from the OTCBB website (finra-
markets.morningstar.com/MarketData/EquityOptions/default.jsp).
	
First, let’s look at the returns. WeedHire International, Inc., 
(WDHR) had a return on this day of 100 percent! Of course, the 
gain occurred because the stock price jumped by $.0001. The 
stock price of Telupay International, Inc., (TLPY) fell 57 percent 
FINANCE MATTERS
226
as its price dropped by $.0990. Stocks on the OTCBB tend to 
have large trading volumes when they do trade, but the dollar 
amount is quite a bit lower than seen on the larger exchanges. 
For example, by the end of this same trading day, Bank of 
America (BAC) was the most active stock on the NYSE, with 
about 39 million shares changing hands. Medican Enterprises 
(MDCN) traded about 49 million shares. However, the total dol-
lar volume for the day was a whopping $75,588 or so. In con-
trast, about $630 million worth of BAC stock was traded.
	
The OTC Markets (www.otcmarkets.com) is operated 
by a privately owned company. To be listed on the OTC Mar-
kets, a company just has to find a market maker willing to 
trade in the company’s stock. Companies list on the OTC 
Markets for various reasons. Small companies that do not 
wish to meet listing requirements are one type. Foreign 
companies often list on the OTC Markets because they do 
not prepare their financial statements according to GAAP, a 
requirement for listing on U.S. stock exchanges. There are 
many companies that were formerly listed on bigger stock 
markets that were either delisted involuntarily or chose to 
“go dark” for various reasons, including, as we discussed in 
Chapter 1, the costs associated with Sarbox compliance.
	
All in all, the OTCBB and OTC Markets can be pretty wild 
places to trade. Low stock prices allow huge percentage returns 
on small stock price movements. Be advised, however, that at-
tempts at manipulation and fraud are commonplace. Also, 
stocks on these markets are often very thinly traded, meaning 
there is little volume. It is not unusual for a stock listed on either 
market to have no trades on a given day. Even two or three days 
in a row without a trade in a particular stock is not uncommon.

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
227
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has covered the basics of stocks and stock valuation. The key points include:
  1.	 The cash flows from owning a share of stock come in the form of future dividends. 
We saw that in certain special cases it is possible to calculate the present value of all 
the future dividends and thus come up with a value for the stock.
  2.	 As the owner of shares of common stock in a corporation, you have various rights, 
including the right to vote to elect corporate directors. Voting in corporate elections 
can be either cumulative or straight. Most voting is actually done by proxy, and a 
proxy battle breaks out when competing sides try to gain enough votes to have their 
candidates for the board elected.
  3.	 In addition to common stock, some corporations have issued preferred stock. The 
name stems from the fact that preferred stockholders must be paid first, before 
common stockholders can receive anything. Preferred stock has a fixed dividend.
  4.	 The two biggest stock markets in the United States are the NYSE and the NASDAQ. 
We discussed the organization and operation of these two markets, and we saw how 
stock price information is reported.
This chapter completes Part 4 of our book. By now, you should have a good grasp of 
what we mean by present value. You should also be familiar with how to calculate present 
values, loan payments, and so on. In Part 5, we cover capital budgeting decisions. As you 
will see, the techniques you have learned in Chapters 4–7 form the basis for our approach 
to evaluating business investment decisions.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 7.1 What is the total return for a stock that currently sells for $50, just paid 
a $1.75 dividend, and has a constant growth rate of 8 percent?
Section 7.2 True or false: For tax purposes, preferred stock is considered a form of 
equity.
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
7.1.	
Dividend Growth and Stock Valuation.  The Brigapenski Co. has just paid a cash 
dividend of $2 per share. Investors require a 16 percent return from investments 
such as this. If the dividend is expected to grow at a steady 8 percent per year, what 
is the current value of the stock? What will the stock be worth in five years? (See 
Problem 1.)
7.2.	
Required Returns.  Suppose we observe a stock selling for $40 per share. The next 
dividend will be $1 per share, and you think the dividend will grow at 12 percent 
per year forever. What is the dividend yield in this case? The capital gains yield? 
The total required return? (See Problem 3.)

228	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
7.1	
The last dividend, D0, was $2. The dividend is expected to grow steadily at  
8 percent. The required return is 16 percent. Based on the dividend growth model, 
we can say that the current price is: 
P0 = D1/(R − g)
	
= D0 × (1 + g)/(R − g)
	
= $2 × 1.08/(.16 − .08) 
	
= $2.16/.08 
	
= $27
We could calculate the price in five years by calculating the dividend in five years 
and then using the growth model again. Alternatively, we could recognize that the 
stock price will increase by 8 percent per year and calculate the future price 
directly. We’ll do both. First, the dividend in five years will be: 
D5 = D0 × (1 + g)5
	
= $2 × 1.085
	
= $2.9387
The price in five years would therefore be: 
P5 = D5 × (1 + g)/(R − g)
	
= $2.9387 × 1.08/.08
	
= $3.1738/.08
	
= $39.67
Once we understand the dividend model, however, it’s easier to notice that: 
P5 = P0 × (1 + g)5
	
= $27 × 1.085
	
= $27 × 1.4693
	
= $39.67
Notice that both approaches yield the same price in five years.
7.2	
The dividend yield is the next dividend, D1, divided by the current price, P0, or 
$1/40 = 2.5%. The capital gains yield is the same as the dividend growth rate,  
12 percent. The total required return is the sum of the two, 2.5% + 12% = 14.5%.
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 1 	 7.1.	
Stock Valuation.  Why does the value of a share of stock depend on 
dividends?
LO 1 	 7.2.	 Stock Valuation.  A substantial percentage of the companies listed on the 
NYSE and the NASDAQ don’t pay dividends, but investors are 
nonetheless willing to buy shares in them. How is this possible given your 
answer to the previous question?
LO 1 	 7.3.	 Dividend Policy.  Referring to the previous questions, under what 
circumstances might a company choose not to pay dividends?

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
229
LO 1 	 7.4.	 Dividend Growth Model.  Under what two assumptions can we use the 
dividend growth model presented in the chapter to determine the value of 
a share of stock? Comment on the reasonableness of these assumptions.
LO 1 	 7.5.	 Common versus Preferred Stock.  Suppose a company has a preferred 
stock issue and a common stock issue. Both have just paid a $2 dividend. 
Which do you think will have a higher price, a share of the preferred or a 
share of the common?
LO 1 	 7.6.	 Dividend Growth Model.  Based on the dividend growth model, what are 
the two components of the total return on a share of stock? Which do you 
think is typically larger?
LO 1 	 7.7.	 Growth Rate.  In the context of the dividend growth model, is it true that 
the growth rate in dividends and the growth rate in the price of the stock 
are identical?
LO 1 	 7.8.	 Dividends and Earnings.  Is it possible for a company to pay dividends 
when it has a negative net income for the year? Could this happen for 
longer periods?
LO 2 	 7.9.	 Corporate Ethics.  Is it unfair or unethical for corporations to create 
classes of stock with unequal voting rights?
LO 2 	 7.10.	 Voting Rights.  Some companies, such as Google, have created classes of 
stock with little or no voting rights at all. Why would investors buy such 
stock?
LO 2 	 7.11.	 Stock Valuation.  Evaluate the following statement: Managers should not 
focus on the current stock value because doing so will lead to an 
overemphasis on short-term profits at the expense of long-term profits.
LO 1 	 7.12.	 Constant Dividend Growth Model.  In the constant dividend growth 
model, what is the highest reasonable growth rate for a stock’s dividend?
LO 3 	 7.13.	 Voting Rights.  In the chapter, we mentioned that many companies have 
been under pressure to declassify their boards of directors. Why would 
investors want a board to be declassified? What are the advantages of a 
classified board?
LO 3 	 7.14.	 Price Ratio Valuation.  What are the difficulties in using the PE ratio to 
value stock?
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–14)
LO 1 	 1. 	 Stock Values.  Gilmore, Inc., just paid a dividend of $2.35 per share on its 
stock. The dividends are expected to grow at a constant rate of 4.1 percent 
per year, indefinitely. If investors require a return of 10.4 percent on this 
stock, what is the current price? What will the price be in three years? In 
15 years?
LO 1 	 2.	 Stock Values.  The next dividend payment by Dizzle, Inc., will be $2.48 
per share. The dividends are anticipated to maintain a growth rate of  
4.5 percent forever. If the stock currently sells for $39.85 per share, what is 
the required return?

230	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
LO 1 	 3.	 Stock Values.  For the company in the previous problem, what is the 
dividend yield? What is the expected capital gains yield?
LO 1 	 4.	 Stock Values.  Take Time Corporation will pay a dividend of $3.65 per 
share next year. The company pledges to increase its dividend by 5.1 percent 
per year, indefinitely. If you require a return of 11 percent on your 
investment, how much will you pay for the company’s stock today?
LO 1 	 5.	 Stock Valuation.  Mitchell, Inc., is expected to maintain a constant  
4.6 percent growth rate in its dividends, indefinitely. If the company has a 
dividend yield of 5.8 percent, what is the required return on the company’s 
stock?
LO 1 	 6.	 Stock Valuation.  Suppose you know that a company’s stock currently sells 
for $67 per share and the required return on the stock is 11.5 percent. You 
also know that the total return on the stock is evenly divided between capital 
gains yield and dividend yield. If it’s the company’s policy to always 
maintain a constant growth rate in its dividends, what is the current 
dividend per share?
LO 1 	 7.	 Stock Valuation.  Burkhardt Corp. pays a constant $13.50 dividend on its 
stock. The company will maintain this dividend for the next 9 years and will 
then cease paying dividends forever. If the required return on this stock is 
9.2 percent, what is the current share price?
LO 1 	 8.	 Valuing Preferred Stock.  Smiling Elephant, Inc., has an issue of preferred 
stock outstanding that pays a $3.45 dividend every year, in perpetuity. If this 
issue currently sells for $77.32 per share, what is the required return?
LO 2 	 9.	 Voting Rights.  After successfully completing your corporate finance class, 
you feel the next challenge ahead is to serve on the board of directors of 
Schenkel Enterprises. Unfortunately, you will be the only individual voting 
for you. If the company has 450,000 shares outstanding and the stock 
currently sells for $34, how much will it cost you to buy a seat if the 
company uses straight voting? Assume that the company uses cumulative 
voting and there are 4 seats in the current election; how much will it cost 
you to buy a seat now?
LO 1 	 10.	Growth Rates.  The stock price of Baskett Co. is $73. Investors require a 
return of 10.5 percent on similar stocks. If the company plans to pay a 
dividend of $4.25 next year, what growth rate is expected for the company’s 
stock price?
LO 1 	 11.	 Valuing Preferred Stock.  E-Eyes.com has a new issue of preferred stock it 
calls 20/20 preferred. The stock will pay a $20 dividend per year, but the 
first dividend will not be paid until 20 years from today. If you require a 
return of 7.1 percent on this stock, how much should you pay today?
LO 1 	 12.	Stock Valuation.  Wesen Corp. will pay a dividend of $3.14 next year.  
The company has stated that it will maintain a constant growth rate of  
4.5 percent a year forever. If you want a return of 12 percent, how much will 
you pay for the stock? What if you want a return of 8 percent? What does 
this tell you about the relationship between the required return and the stock 
price?
LO 2 	 13.	 Stock Valuation and PE Ratio.  The Sleeping Flower Co. has earnings of 
$2.65 per share. The benchmark PE for the company is 18. What stock price 
would you consider appropriate? What if the benchmark PE were 21?

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
231
LO 2 	 14.	Stock Valuation and PS Ratio.  TwitterMe, Inc., is a new company and 
currently has negative earnings. The company’s sales are $1.35 million and 
there are 130,000 shares outstanding. If the benchmark price–sales ratio is 
4.8, what is your estimate of an appropriate stock price? What if the  
price–sales ratio were 3.7?
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 15–30)
LO 1 	 15.	Nonconstant Growth.  Metallica Bearings, Inc., is a young start-up 
company. No dividends will be paid on the stock over the next nine years, 
because the firm needs to plow back its earnings to fuel growth. The 
company will then pay a dividend of $19 per share 10 years from today and 
will increase the dividend by 5 percent per year thereafter. If the required 
return on this stock is 13 percent, what is the current share price?
LO 1 	 16.	Nonconstant Dividends.  Hot Wings, Inc., has an odd dividend policy. The 
company has just paid a dividend of $3 per share and has announced that it 
will increase the dividend by $5 per share for each of the next four years, 
and then never pay another dividend. If you require a return of 10.4 percent 
on the company’s stock, how much will you pay for a share today?
LO 1 	 17.	 Nonconstant Dividends.  Apocalyptica Corporation is expected to pay the 
following dividends over the next four years: $6, $12, $17, and $3.25. 
Afterward, the company pledges to maintain a constant 5 percent growth 
rate in dividends, forever. If the required return on the stock is 11 percent, 
what is the current share price?
LO 1 	 18.	Supernormal Growth.  Burton Corp. is growing quickly. Dividends are 
expected to grow at a rate of 25 percent for the next three years, with the 
growth rate falling off to a constant 6 percent thereafter. If the required 
return is 11.5 percent and the company just paid a dividend of $2.50, what 
is the current share price?
LO 1 	 19.	 Negative Growth.  Antiques ‘R’ Us is a mature manufacturing firm. The 
company just paid a dividend of $16.30 but management expects to reduce 
the payout by 4.5 percent per year, indefinitely. If you require a return of 
12 percent on this stock, what will you pay for a share today?
LO 1 	 20.	Finding the Dividend.  Gontier Corporation stock currently sells for $53.95 
per share. The market requires a return of 10.3 percent on the firm’s stock. 
If the company maintains a constant 4.9 percent growth rate in dividends, 
what was the most recent dividend per share paid on the stock?
You’ve collected the following information from your favorite financial website. 
Use it to answer Questions 21–25 (the 52-week Hi and Lo are the highest and 
lowest stock prices over the previous 52 weeks).
52-Week Price
Hi
Lo
Stock (Div)
Div 
Yld %
PE  
Ratio
Close 
Price
Net  
Chg
17.75
  11.72
Alcoa .12
  .9
63.3
  13.30
−.27
63.28
  90.48
Analogic .40
  .5
33.7
  86.39
−.74
149.52
199.21
IBM 4.25
2.7
13.2
156.75
 2.52
55.75
  44.75
Laclede Group 1.84
3.7
20.2
  50.20
   .62
34.26
  25.27
Tootsie Roll .31
  .9
32.8
	
??
   .09

232	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
LO 3 	 21. Dividend Yield.  Find the quote for the Laclede Group. Assume that the 
dividend is constant. What was the highest dividend yield over the past 
year? What was the lowest dividend yield over the past year?
LO 1 	 22.	Stock Valuation.  According to the 2015 Value Line Investment Survey, the 
growth rate in dividends for IBM for the next five years is expected to be 
7.5 percent. Suppose IBM meets this growth rate in dividends for the next 
five years and then the dividend growth rate falls to 5 percent indefinitely. 
Assume investors require a return of 10 percent on IBM stock. Is the stock 
priced correctly? What factors could affect your answer?
LO 1 	 23.	Stock Valuation.  According to the 2015 Value Line Investment Survey, the 
growth rate in dividends for Analogic for the previous 10 years has been  
3 percent. If investors feel this growth rate will continue, what is the 
required return for Analogic stock?
LO 1 	 24.	Negative Growth.  According to the 2015 Value Line Investment Survey, 
the growth rate in dividends for Alcoa for the previous 10 years has been 
negative 15 percent. If investors feel this growth rate will continue, what is 
the required return for Alcoa stock? Does this number make sense? What 
are some of the potential reasons for the negative growth in dividends?
LO 1 	 25.	Stock Quotes.  Using the dividend yield, calculate the closing price for 
Tootsie Roll on this day. The actual closing price for Tootsie Roll was 
$33.30. Why is your closing price different? The Value Line Investment 
Survey projects a 5.5 percent dividend growth rate for Tootsie Roll. What is 
the required return for the stock using the dividend discount model and the 
actual stock price?
LO 2 	 26.	Stock Valuation and PE.  Sully Corp. currently has an EPS of $4.65, and 
the benchmark PE for the company is 19. Earnings are expected to grow at 
7 percent per year.
a.	
What is your estimate of the current stock price?
b.	 What is the target stock price in one year?
c.	
Assuming the company pays no dividends, what is the implied return 
on the company’s stock over the next year? What does this tell you 
about the implied stock return using PE valuation?
LO 2 	 27.	Stock Valuation and PE.  You have found the following historical 
information for the Daniela Company:
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Stock price
$53.18
$62.14
$73.21
$70.21
EPS
3.15
3.35
3.60
3.85
Earnings are expected to grow at 8 percent for the next year. Using the com-
pany’s historical average PE as a benchmark, what is the target stock price in 
one year?
LO 2 	 28.	Stock Valuation and PE.  In the previous problem, we assumed that the 
stock had a single stock price for the year. However, if you look at stock 
prices over any year, you will find a high and low stock price for the year. 
Instead of a single benchmark PE ratio, we now have a high and low PE 
ratio for each year. We can use these ratios to calculate a high and a low 

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
233
stock price for the next year. Suppose we have the following information on 
a particular company:
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
High price
$48.60
$57.34
$69.46
$74.85
Low price
37.25
42.18
55.85
63.18
EPS
2.35
2.48
2.63
2.95
Earnings are projected to grow at 9 percent over the next year. What are your 
high and low target stock prices over the next year?
LO 2 	 29.	Stock Valuation and PE.  Davis, Inc., currently has an EPS of $2.75 and an 
earnings growth rate of 8 percent. If the benchmark PE ratio is 21, what is 
the target share price five years from now?
LO 2 	 30.	PE and Terminal Stock Price.  In practice, a common way to value a share 
of stock when a company pays dividends is to value the dividends over the 
next five years or so, then find the “terminal” stock price using a benchmark 
PE ratio. Suppose a company just paid a dividend of $1.15. The dividends 
are expected to grow at 10 percent over the next five years. The company 
has a payout ratio of 40 percent and a benchmark PE of 21. What is the 
target stock price in five years? What is the stock price today assuming a 
required return of 11 percent on this stock?
CHALLENGE (Questions 31–32)
LO 1 	 31.	 Capital Gains versus Income.  Consider four different stocks, all of which 
have a required return of 17 percent and a most recent dividend of $2.40 per 
share. Stocks W, X, and Y are expected to maintain constant growth rates in 
dividends for the foreseeable future of 8 percent, 0 percent, and −5 percent 
per year, respectively. Stock Z is a growth stock that will increase its 
dividend by 20 percent for the next two years and then maintain a constant 
12 percent growth rate, thereafter. What is the dividend yield for each of 
these four stocks? What is the expected capital gains yield? Discuss the 
relationship among the various returns that you find for each of these stocks.
LO 1 	 32.	Stock Valuation.  Most corporations pay quarterly dividends on their 
common stock rather than annual dividends. Barring any unusual 
circumstances during the year, the board raises, lowers, or maintains the 
current dividend once a year and then pays this dividend out in equal 
quarterly installments to its shareholders.
a.	
Suppose a company currently pays an annual dividend of $2.20 on its 
common stock in a single annual installment, and management plans on 
raising this dividend by 6 percent per year indefinitely. If the required 
return on this stock is 12 percent, what is the current share price?
b.	 Now suppose the company in part (a) actually pays its annual 
dividend in equal quarterly installments; thus, the company has just 
paid a dividend of $.55 per share, as it has for the previous three 
quarters. What is your value for the current share price now? (Hint: 
Find the equivalent annual end-of-year dividend for each year.) 
Comment on whether you think this model of stock valuation is 
appropriate.

234	
p a r t  4
Valuing Stocks and Bonds
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
In practice, the use of the dividend discount model is refined from the method we pre-
sented in the textbook. Many analysts will estimate the dividend for the next five years and 
then estimate a perpetual growth rate at some point in the future, typically 10 years. Rather 
than have the dividend growth fall dramatically from the fast growth period to the perpet-
ual growth period, linear interpolation is applied. That is, the dividend growth is projected 
to fall by an equal amount each year. For example, if the high growth period is 15 percent 
for the next five years and the dividends are expected to fall to a 5 percent perpetual growth 
rate five years later, the dividend growth rate would decline by 2 percent each year.
The Value Line Investment Survey provides information for investors. Below, you will 
find information for General Electric (GE) found in the 2015 edition of Value Line:
2014 dividend:
$.88
Five-year dividend growth rate:
12.0%
a.	
Assume that a perpetual growth rate of 5 percent begins 10 years from now and use 
linear interpolation between the high growth rate and perpetual growth rate. 
Construct a table that shows the dividend growth rate and dividend each year. What 
is the stock price at Year 10? What is the stock price today?
b.	 Instead of applying the constant dividend growth model to find the stock price in the 
future, analysts will often combine the dividend discount method with price ratio 
valuation, often with the PE ratio. Remember that the PE ratio is the price per share 
divided by the earnings per share. So, if we know what the PE ratio is, we can solve 
for the stock price. Suppose we also have the following information about GE:  
Payout ratio: 
20%
PE at constant growth rate:
15
	
Use the PE ratio to calculate the stock price when GE reaches a perpetual growth rate 
in dividends. Now supply the value of the stock today by finding the present value of 
the dividends during the supernormal growth rate and the price you calculated using 
the PE ratio.
c.	
How sensitive is the current stock price to changes in PE ratio when the stock 
reaches the perpetual growth rate? Graph the current stock price against the PE ratio 
in 10 years to find out.
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
7.1 Dividend Discount Model.  According to the 2015 Value Line Investment Survey, the 
dividend growth rate for ExxonMobil (XOM) is 6 percent. Find the current stock price 
quote and dividend information at finance.yahoo.com. If this dividend growth rate is 
correct, what is the required return for ExxonMobil? Does this number make sense to you?
7.2 Stock Quotes.  What is the most expensive publicly traded stock in the United 
States? Go to finance.yahoo.com and enter BRKA (for Berkshire Hathaway Class A). 
What is the current price per share? What is the 52-week high and low? How many 
shares trade on an average day? How many shares have traded today?
7.3 Supernormal Growth.  You are interested in buying stock in Coca-Cola (KO). You 
believe that the dividends will grow at 15 percent for the next four years and level off at 
6 percent thereafter. Using the most recent dividend on finance.yahoo.com, if you want 
a 12 percent return, how much should you be willing to pay for a share of stock?
7.4 Market Operations.  How does a stock trade take place? Go to www.nyse.com to 
find out. Describe the process of a trade on the NYSE.

	
c h a p t e r  7
Equity Markets and Stock Valuation	
235
CHAPTER CASE
Stock Valuation at Ragan, Inc.
R
agan, Inc., was founded nine years ago by brother 
and sister Carrington and Genevieve Ragan. The 
company manufactures and installs commercial heat-
ing, ventilation, and cooling (HVAC) units. Ragan, Inc., 
has experienced rapid growth because of a proprietary 
technology that increases the energy efficiency of its 
units. The company is equally owned by Carrington 
and Genevieve. The original partnership agreement 
between the siblings gave each 50,000 shares of 
stock. In the event either wished to sell stock, the 
shares first had to be offered to the other at a dis-
counted price.
	
Although neither sibling wants to sell, they have de-
cided they should value their holdings in the company. 
To get started, they have gathered the following infor-
mation about their main competitors:
Ragan, Inc. — Competitors
EPS
Div.
Stock 
Price
ROE
R
Arctic Cooling,  
  Inc.
$.84
$.39 $17.83   16.00%    10.00%
National  
  Heating &  
  Cooling
1.34
  .65
  19.23
14.00
13.00
Expert HVAC  
  Corp.
−.55
  .43
  18.14
15.00
12.00
Industry  
  average
$.54
$.49 $18.40
15.00
11.67
	
Expert HVAC Corporation’s negative earnings per 
share were the result of an accounting write-off last year. 
Without the write-off, earnings per share for the com-
pany would have been $.54.
	
Last year, Ragan, Inc., had an EPS of $4.85 and paid 
a dividend to Carrington and Genevieve of $75,000 
each. The company also had a return on equity of  
17 percent. The siblings believe that 14 percent is an ap-
propriate required return for the company.
QU E ST I O N S
1.	
Assuming the company continues its current 
growth rate, what is the value per share of the 
company’s stock?
2.	
To verify their calculations, Carrington and Genevieve 
have hired Josh Schlessman as a consultant. Josh 
was previously an equity analyst and covered the 
HVAC industry. Josh has examined the company’s 
financial statements, as well as those of its com-
petitors. Although Ragan, Inc., currently has a tech-
nological advantage, his research indicates that 
other companies are investigating methods to im-
prove efficiency. Given this, Josh believes that the 
company’s technological advantage will last only 
for the next five years. After that period, the com-
pany’s growth will likely slow to the industry growth 
average. Additionally, Josh believes that the re-
quired return used by the company is too high. He 
believes the industry average required return is 
more appropriate. Under this growth rate assump-
tion, what is your estimate of the stock price?

236
8
I
s there green in green? General Electric (GE) thinks so. Through its 
“Ecomagination” program, the company planned to double research 
and development spending on green products. In fact, by 2014, GE 
had already invested more than $12 billion in its Ecomagination pro-
gram and announced it would invest another $10 billion by 2020.
With products such as a hybrid railroad locomotive (described as 
a 200-ton, 6,000-horsepower “Prius on rails”), GE’s green initiative 
seems to be paying off. Revenue from the company’s green products 
was more than $160 billion from 2005 to 2014. Further, revenues 
from Ecomagination products were growing twice as fast as the com-
pany’s other revenues. GE’s internal commitment to reduced energy 
consumption through green “Treasure Hunts” saved it more than 
$100 million, and, by 2014, the company had reduced water con-
sumption by 47 percent relative to its 2006 baseline, another consid-
erable cost savings.
While GE was in part motivated by the desire to go green, from a 
financial perspective the decision only makes sense if the company 
makes some green. Given that GE plans to spend about $2 billion per year on such under-
takings, it is obviously a major financial decision, and the risks and rewards must be carefully 
weighed. In this chapter, we discuss the basic tools used in making such decisions.
This chapter introduces you to the practice of capital budgeting. Back in Chapter 1, we 
saw that increasing the value of the stock in a company is the goal of financial management. 
Thus, what we need to learn is how to tell whether a particular investment will achieve that 
or not. This chapter considers a variety of techniques that are actually used in practice. More 
importantly, it shows how many of these techniques can be misleading, and it explains why 
the net present value approach is the right one.
Net Present Value and  
Other Investment Criteria
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
PART FIVE 
Capital Budgeting
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Summarize the payback rule and 
some of its shortcomings.
LO 2 	 Discuss accounting rates of return 
and some of the problems with 
them.
LO 3 	 Explain the internal rate of return 
criterion and its associated 
strengths and weaknesses.
LO 4 	 Evaluate proposed investments by 
using the net present value criterion.
LO 5 	 Apply the modified internal rate of 
return.
LO 6 	 Calculate the profitability index 
and understand its relation to net 
present value.

I
n Chapter 1, we identified the three key areas of concern to the financial manager. The 
first of these was the following: What long-term investments should we make? We called 
this the capital budgeting decision. In this chapter, we begin to deal with the issues that 
arise in answering this question.
The process of allocating, or budgeting, capital is usually more involved than just de-
ciding whether or not to buy a particular fixed asset. We will frequently face broader issues 
like whether or not we should launch a new product or enter a new market. Decisions such 
as these will determine the nature of a firm’s operations and products for years to come, 
primarily because fixed asset investments are generally long-lived and not easily reversed 
once they are made.
For these reasons, the capital budgeting question is probably the most important issue 
in corporate finance. How a firm chooses to finance its operations (the capital structure 
question) and how a firm manages its short-term operating activities (the working capital 
question) are certainly issues of concern, but it is the fixed assets that define the business 
of the firm. Airlines, for example, are airlines because they operate airplanes, regardless of 
how they finance them.
Any firm possesses a huge number of possible investments. Each possible investment 
is an option available to the firm. Some options are valuable and some are not. The essence 
of successful financial management, of course, is learning to identify which are which. 
With this in mind, our goal in this chapter is to introduce you to the techniques used to ana-
lyze potential business ventures to decide which are worth undertaking.
We present and compare several different procedures used in practice. Our primary 
goal is to acquaint you with the advantages and disadvantages of the various approaches. 
As we shall see, the most important concept in this area is the idea of net present value. We 
consider this next.
NET PRESENT VALUE
In Chapter 1, we argued that the goal of financial management is to create value for the 
stockholders. The financial manager must therefore examine a potential investment in light 
of its likely effect on the price of the firm’s shares. In this section, we describe a widely 
used procedure for doing this, the net present value approach.
The Basic Idea
An investment is worth undertaking if it creates value for its owners. In the most general 
sense, we create value by identifying an investment worth more in the marketplace than it 
costs us to acquire. How can something be worth more than it costs? It’s a case of the 
whole being worth more than the cost of the parts.
For example, suppose you buy a run-down house for $25,000 and spend another 
$25,000 on painters, plumbers, and so on to get it fixed up. Your total investment is 
$50,000. When the work is completed, you place the house back on the market and find 
that it’s worth $60,000. The market value ($60,000) exceeds the cost ($50,000) by $10,000. 
What you have done here is to act as a manager and bring together some fixed assets (a 
house), some labor (plumbers, carpenters, and others), and some materials (carpeting, 
paint, and so on). The net result is that you have created $10,000 in value. Put another way, 
this $10,000 is the value added by management.
With our house example, it turned out after the fact that $10,000 in value was created. 
Things thus worked out very nicely. The real challenge, of course, would have been to 
8.1
coverage online
Excel 
Master
	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
237

238	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
somehow identify ahead of time whether or not investing the necessary $50,000 was a 
good idea in the first place. This is what capital budgeting is all about, namely, trying to 
determine whether a proposed investment or project will be worth more than it costs once 
it is in place.
For reasons that will be obvious in a moment, the difference between an investment’s 
market value and its cost is called the net present value of the investment, abbreviated NPV. 
In other words, net present value is a measure of how much value is created or added today by 
undertaking an investment. Given our goal of creating value for the stockholders, the capital 
budgeting process can be viewed as a search for investments with positive net present values.
With our run-down house, you can probably imagine how we would go about making 
the capital budgeting decision. We would first look at what comparable, fixed-up properties 
were selling for in the market. We would then get estimates of the cost of buying a particular 
property, fixing it up, and bringing it to market. At this point, we have an estimated total 
cost and an estimated market value. If the difference is positive, then this investment is 
worth undertaking because it has a positive estimated net present value. There is risk, of 
course, because there is no guarantee that our estimates will turn out to be correct.
As our example illustrates, investment decisions are greatly simplified when there is a 
market for assets similar to the investment we are considering. Capital budgeting becomes 
much more difficult when we cannot observe the market price for at least roughly compa-
rable investments. The reason is that we are then faced with the problem of estimating the 
value of an investment using only indirect market information. Unfortunately, this is pre-
cisely the situation the financial manager usually encounters. We examine this issue next.
Estimating Net Present Value
Imagine we are thinking of starting a business to produce and sell a new product, say, organic 
fertilizer. We can estimate the start-up costs with reasonable accuracy because we know what 
we will need to buy to begin production. Would this be a good investment? Based on our dis-
cussion, you know that the answer depends on whether or not the value of the new business 
exceeds the cost of starting it. In other words, does this investment have a positive NPV?
This problem is much more difficult than our “fixer-upper” house example, because 
entire fertilizer companies are not routinely bought and sold in the marketplace; so it is es-
sentially impossible to observe the market value of a similar investment. As a result, we 
must somehow estimate this value by other means.
Based on our work in Chapters 4 and 5, you may be able to guess how we will go 
about estimating the value of our fertilizer business. We will first try to estimate the future 
cash flows we expect the new business to produce. We will then apply our basic discounted 
cash flow procedure to estimate the present value of those cash flows. Once we have this 
estimate, we then estimate NPV as the difference between the present value of the future 
cash flows and the cost of the investment. As we mentioned in Chapter 5, this procedure is 
often called discounted cash flow, or DCF, valuation.
To see how we might go about estimating NPV, suppose we believe the cash revenues 
from our fertilizer business will be $20,000 per year, assuming everything goes as ex-
pected. Cash costs (including taxes) will be $14,000 per year. We will wind down the busi-
ness in eight years. The plant, property, and equipment will be worth $2,000 as salvage at 
that time. The project costs $30,000 to launch. We use a 15 percent discount rate on new 
projects such as this one. Is this a good investment? If there are 1,000 shares of stock out-
standing, what will be the effect on the price per share from taking the investment?
From a purely mechanical perspective, we need to calculate the present value of the 
future cash flows at 15 percent. The net cash inflow will be $20,000 cash income less 
$14,000 in costs per year for eight years. These cash flows are illustrated in Figure 8.1. As 
net present value 
(NPV)
The difference between 
an ­investment’s market 
value and its cost.
discounted cash 
flow (DCF) valuation
(a) Calculating the present 
value of a future cash flow 
to determine its value 
today. (b) The process of 
valuing an investment by 
discounting its future cash 
flows.

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
239
Figure 8.1 suggests, we effectively have an eight-year annuity of $20,000 − 14,000 = 
$6,000 per year along with a single lump-sum inflow of $2,000 in eight years. Calculating 
the present value of the future cash flows thus comes down to the same type of problem we 
considered in Chapter 5. The total present value is:
Present value = $6,000 × (1 − 1/1.158)/.15 + 2,000/1.158
	
= $6,000 × 4.4873 + 2,000/3.0590
	
= $26,924 + 654
	
= $27,578
When we compare this to the $30,000 estimated cost, the NPV is:
NPV = −$30,000 + 27,578 = −$2,422
Therefore, this is not a good investment. Based on our estimates, taking it would decrease 
the total value of the stock by $2,422. With 1,000 shares outstanding, our best estimate of 
the impact of taking this project is a loss of value of $2,422/1,000 = $2.422 per share.
Our fertilizer example illustrates how NPV estimates can be used to determine whether 
or not an investment is desirable. From our example, notice that if the NPV is negative, the 
effect on share value will be unfavorable. If the NPV were positive, the effect would be 
favorable. As a consequence, all we need to know about a particular proposal for the pur-
pose of making an accept-reject decision is whether the NPV is positive or negative.
Given that the goal of financial management is to increase share value, our discussion 
in this section leads us to the net present value rule:
f i g u r e  8.1
Project cash flows 
($000)
$20
–  14
$  6
$  6
0
 
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
 
5
 
6
 
7
 
8
Time
(years)
–$30
–$30
Initial cost
Inflows
Outflows
Net inflow
Salvage
Net cash flow
$20
–  14
$  6
$  6
$20
–  14
$  6
$  6
$20
–  14
$  6
$  6
$20
–  14
$  6
$  6
$20
–  14
$  6
$  6
$20
–  14
$  6
$  6
$20
–  14
$  6
2
$  8
An investment should be accepted if the net present value is positive and rejected if 
it is negative.
In the unlikely event that the net present value turned out to be exactly zero, we would 
be indifferent between taking the investment and not taking it.
Two comments about our example are in order. First and foremost, it is not the rather 
mechanical process of discounting the cash flows that is important. Once we have the cash 
flows and the appropriate discount rate, the required calculations are fairly straightforward. 
The task of coming up with the cash flows and the discount rate in the first place is much 
more challenging. We will have much more to say about this in our next chapter. For the 
remainder of this chapter, we take it as given that we have estimates of the cash revenues 
and costs and, where needed, an appropriate discount rate.
The second thing to keep in mind about our example is that the −$2,422 NPV is an 
estimate. Like any estimate, it can be high or low. The only way to find out the true NPV 
would be to place the investment up for sale and see what we could get for it. We generally 
won’t be doing this, so it is important that our estimates be reliable. Once again, we will 
have more to say about this later. For the rest of this chapter, we will assume that the esti-
mates are accurate.

240	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
EXAMPLE
8.1
 Using the NPV Rule
Suppose we are asked to decide whether or not a new consumer product should be launched. 
Based on projected sales and costs, we expect that the cash flows over the five-year life of the 
project will be $2,000 in the first two years, $4,000 in the next two, and $5,000 in the last year. It 
will cost about $10,000 to begin production. We use a 10 percent discount rate to evaluate new 
products. What should we do here?
	
Given the cash flows and discount rate, we can calculate the total value of the product by 
discounting the cash flows back to the present:
Present value = $2,000/1.1 + 2,000/1.12 + 4,000/1.13 + 4,000/1.14 + 5,000/1.15 
	
= $1,818 + 1,653 + 3,005 + 2,732 + 3,105
	
= $12,313
The present value of the expected cash flows is $12,313, but the cost of getting those cash flows is 
only $10,000, so the NPV is $12,313 − 10,000 = $2,313. This is positive; so, based on the net present 
value rule, we should take on the project.
CALCULATING NPVs WITH A SPREADSHEET
Spreadsheets and financial calculators are commonly used to calculate NPVs. The procedures used by 
various financial calculators are too different for us to illustrate here, so we will focus on using a spread-
sheet (financial calculators are covered in Appendix D). Examining the use of spreadsheets in this con-
text also allows us to issue an important warning. Let’s rework Example 8.1:
SPREADSHEET 
STRATEGIES
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1
2
Using a spreadsheet to calculate net present values
3
4
From Example 8.1, the project’s cost is $10,000. The cash flows are $2,000 per year for the first two 
5
years, $4,000 per year for the next two, and $5,000 in the last year. The discount rate is 
6
10 percent; what’s the NPV?
7
8
Year
Cash flow
9
0
−$10,000
Discount rate =
10%
10
1
2,000
11
2
2,000
NPV =
$2,102.72
(wrong answer)
12
3
4,000
NPV =
$2,312.99
(right answer)
13
4
4,000
14
5
5,000
15
16
The formula entered in cell F11 is = NPV(F9,C9:C14). This gives the wrong answer because the 
17
NPV function actually calculates present values, not net present values.
18
19
The formula entered in cell F12 is = NPV(F9,C10:C14) + C9. This gives the right answer because the 
20
NPV function is used to calculate the present value of the cash flows and then the initial cost is 
21
subtracted to calculate the answer. Notice that we added cell C9 because it is already negative.

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
241
As we have seen in this section, estimating NPV is one way of assessing the profit-
ability of a proposed investment. It is certainly not the only way profitability is assessed, 
and we now turn to some alternatives. As we will see, when compared to NPV, each of the 
ways of assessing profitability that we examine is flawed in some key way; so, NPV is the 
preferred approach in principle, if not always in practice.
In our nearby Spreadsheet Strategies box, we rework Example 8.1. Notice that we 
have provided two answers. By comparing the answers to that found in Example 8.1, we 
see that the first answer is wrong even though we used the spreadsheet’s NPV formula. 
What happened is that the “NPV” function in our spreadsheet is actually a PV function; 
unfortunately, one of the original spreadsheet programs many years ago got the definition 
wrong, and subsequent spreadsheets have copied it! Our second answer shows how to use 
the formula properly.
The example here illustrates the danger of blindly using calculators or computers with-
out understanding what is going on; we shudder to think of how many capital budgeting 
decisions in the real world are based on incorrect use of this particular function. We see 
another example of something that can go wrong with a spreadsheet later in the chapter.
concept questions
8.1a	
What is the net present value rule?
8.1b	
If we say an investment has an NPV of $1,000, what exactly do we mean?
THE PAYBACK RULE
It is very common in practice to talk of the payback on a proposed investment. Loosely, the 
payback is the length of time it takes to recover our initial investment, or “get our bait 
back.” Because this idea is widely understood and used, we examine it in some detail.
Defining the Rule
We can illustrate how to calculate a payback with an example. Figure 8.2 shows the cash 
flows from a proposed investment. How many years do we have to wait until the accumulated 
cash flows from this investment equal or exceed the cost of the investment? As Figure 8.2 
indicates, the initial investment is $50,000. After the first year, the firm has recovered 
$30,000, leaving $20,000 outstanding. The cash flow in the second year is exactly $20,000, 
so this investment “pays for itself” in exactly two years. Put another way, the payback period 
(or just payback) is two years. If we require a payback of, say, three years or less, then this 
investment is acceptable. This illustrates the payback period rule:
8.2
coverage online
Excel 
Master
payback period
The amount of time 
required for an investment 
to generate cash flows 
sufficient to recover its 
initial cost.
Based on the payback rule, an investment is acceptable if its calculated payback 
period is less than some prespecified number of years.
f i g u r e  8.2
Net project cash 
flows
0
1
2
3
4
$30,000
$20,000
$10,000
$5,000
Year
–$50,000

242	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
In our example, the payback works out to be exactly two years. This won’t usually hap-
pen, of course. When the numbers don’t work out exactly, it is customary to work with 
fractional years. For example, suppose the initial investment is $60,000, and the cash flows 
are $20,000 in the first year and $90,000 in the second. The cash flows over the first two 
years are $110,000, so the project obviously pays back sometime in the second year. After 
the first year, the project has paid back $20,000, leaving $40,000 to be recovered. To figure 
out the fractional year, note that this $40,000 is $40,000/90,000 = 4/9 of the second year’s 
cash flow. Assuming that the $90,000 cash flow is paid uniformly throughout the year, the 
payback would thus be 14/9 years.
EXAMPLE
8.2  Calculating Payback
The projected cash flows from a proposed investment are:
Year
Cash Flow
1
$100
2
  200
3
  500
This project costs $500. What is the payback period for this investment?
	
The initial cost is $500. After the first two years, the cash flows total $300. After the third year, 
the total cash flow is $800, so the project pays back sometime between the end of Year 2 and the end 
of Year 3. Because the accumulated cash flows for the first two years are $300, we need to recover 
$200 in the third year. The third-year cash flow is $500, so we will have to wait $200/500 = .40 year 
to do this. The payback period is thus 2.4 years, or about two years and five months.
Now that we know how to calculate the payback period on an investment, using the 
payback period rule for making decisions is straightforward. A particular cutoff time is 
selected, say, two years, and all investment projects that have payback periods of two years 
or less are accepted, and all of those that pay back in more than two years are rejected.
Table 8.1 illustrates cash flows for five different projects. The figures shown as the 
Year 0 cash flows are the cost of the investment. We examine these to indicate some pecu-
liarities that can, in principle, arise with payback periods.
The payback for the first project, A, is easily calculated. The sum of the cash flows for 
the first two years is $70, leaving us with $100 − 70 = $30 to go. The cash flow in the third 
year is $50, so the payback occurs sometime in that year. When we compare the $30 we 
need to the $50 that will be coming in, we get $30/50 = .60; so, payback will occur 60 
percent of the way into the year. The payback period is thus 2.6 years.
Project B’s payback is also easy to calculate: It never pays back because the cash flows 
never total up to the original investment. Project C has a payback of exactly four years be-
cause it supplies the $130 that B is missing in Year 4. Project D is a little strange. Because 
Year
A
B
C
D
E
0
−$100
−$200
−$200
−$200
−$                50
1
      30
      40
      40
    100
	
100
2
      40
      20
      20
    100
−    50,000,000 
3
      50
      10
      10
−  200
4
      60
    130
    200
ta b le  8.1
Expected cash flows 
for projects A 
through E

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
243
of the negative cash flow in Year 3, you can easily verify that it has two different payback 
periods, two years and four years. Which of these is correct? Both of them; the way the 
payback period is calculated doesn’t guarantee a single answer. Finally, Project E is obvi-
ously unrealistic, but it does pay back in six months, thereby illustrating the point that a 
rapid payback does not guarantee a good investment.
Analyzing the Rule
When compared to the NPV rule, the payback period rule has some rather severe short-
comings. First, the payback period is calculated by simply adding up the future cash flows. 
There is no discounting involved, so the time value of money is completely ignored. The 
payback rule also fails to consider risk differences. The payback would be calculated the 
same way for both very risky and very safe projects.
Perhaps the biggest problem with the payback period rule is coming up with the right 
cutoff period because we don’t really have an objective basis for choosing a particular 
number. Put another way, there is no economic rationale for looking at payback in the first 
place, so we have no guide as to how to pick the cutoff. As a result, we end up using a 
number that is arbitrarily chosen.
Suppose we have somehow decided on an appropriate payback period, say, two years or 
less. As we have seen, the payback period rule ignores the time value of money for the first 
two years. More seriously, cash flows after the second year are ignored entirely. To see this, 
consider the two investments, Long and Short, in Table 8.2. Both projects cost $250. Based 
on our discussion, the payback on Long is 2 + $50/100 = 2.5 years, and the payback on Short 
is 1 + $150/200 = 1.75 years. With a cutoff of two years, Short is acceptable and Long is not.
Is the payback period rule giving us the right decisions? Maybe not. Suppose again 
that we require a 15 percent return on this type of investment. We can calculate the NPV 
for these two investments as:
NPV (Short) = −$250 + 100/1.15 + 200/1.152 = −$11.81
NPV (Long)  = −$250 + 100 × (1 − 1/1.154)/.15 = $35.50
Now we have a problem. The NPV of the shorter-term investment is actually negative, 
meaning that taking it diminishes the value of the shareholders’ equity. The opposite is true 
for the longer-term investment—it increases share value.
Our example illustrates two primary shortcomings of the payback period rule. First, by 
ignoring time value, we may be led to take investments (like Short) that actually are worth 
less than they cost. Second, by ignoring cash flows beyond the cutoff, we may be led to 
reject profitable long-term investments (like Long). More generally, using a payback pe-
riod rule will tend to bias us towards shorter-term investments.
Redeeming Qualities of the Rule
Despite its shortcomings, the payback period rule is often used by large and sophisticated 
companies when they are making relatively minor decisions. There are several reasons for 
ta b l e  8.2
Investment projected 
cash flows
Year
Long
Short
0
−$250
−$250 
1
     100
     100 
2
     100
     200 
3
     100
        0 
4
     100
        0

244	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
this. The primary reason is that many decisions simply do not warrant detailed analysis 
because the cost of the analysis would exceed the possible loss from a mistake. As a practi-
cal matter, an investment that pays back rapidly and has benefits extending beyond the 
cutoff period probably has a positive NPV.
Small investment decisions are made by the hundreds every day in large organizations. 
Moreover, they are made at all levels. As a result, it would not be uncommon for a corpora-
tion to require, for example, a two-year payback on all investments of less than $10,000. 
Investments larger than this are subjected to greater scrutiny. The requirement of a two-
year payback is not perfect for reasons we have seen, but it does exercise some control over 
expenditures and thus has the effect of limiting possible losses.
In addition to its simplicity, the payback rule has two other positive features. First, 
because it is biased toward short-term projects, it is biased toward liquidity. In other 
words, a payback rule tends to favor investments that free up cash for other uses more 
quickly. This could be very important for a small business; it would be less so for a 
large corporation. Second, the cash flows that are expected to occur later in a project’s 
life are probably more uncertain. Arguably, a payback period rule adjusts for the extra 
riskiness of later cash flows, but it does so in a rather draconian fashion—by ignoring 
them altogether.
We should note here that some of the apparent simplicity of the payback rule is 
an illusion. The reason is that we still must come up with the cash flows first, and, as 
we discuss above, this is not at all easy to do. Thus, it would probably be more accu-
rate to say that the concept of a payback period is both intuitive and easy to 
understand.
Summary of the Rule
To summarize, the payback period is a kind of “break-even” measure. Because time value 
is ignored, you can think of the payback period as the length of time it takes to break even 
in an accounting sense, but not in an economic sense. The biggest drawback to the payback 
period rule is that it doesn’t ask the right question. The relevant issue is the impact an in-
vestment will have on the value of our stock, not how long it takes to recover the initial 
investment.
Nevertheless, because it is so simple, companies often use it as a screen for dealing 
with the myriad of minor investment decisions they have to make. There is certainly noth-
ing wrong with this practice. Like any simple rule of thumb, there will be some errors in 
using it, but it wouldn’t have survived all this time if it weren’t useful. Now that you under-
stand the rule, you can be on the alert for those circumstances under which it might lead to 
problems. To help you remember, the following table lists the pros and cons of the payback 
period rule:
Advantages and Disadvantages of the Payback Period Rule
Advantages
Disadvantages
1.  Easy to understand.
1.  Ignores the time value of money.
2.  Adjusts for uncertainty of later cash flows.
2.  Requires an arbitrary cutoff point.
3.  Biased toward liquidity.
3.  Ignores cash flows beyond the cutoff date.
4.  Biased against long-term projects, such as 
research and development, and new 
projects.

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
245
THE AVERAGE ACCOUNTING RETURN
Another attractive, but flawed, approach to making capital budgeting decisions involves 
the average accounting return (AAR). There are many different definitions of the AAR. 
However, in one form or another, the AAR is always defined as:
Some measure of average accounting profit
Some measure of average accounting value 
The specific definition we will use is:
Average net income
Average book value 
To see how we might calculate this number, suppose we are deciding whether or not to 
open a store in a new shopping mall. The required investment in improvements is $500,000. 
The store would have a five-year life because everything reverts to the mall owners after 
that time. The required investment would be 100 percent depreciated (straight-line) over 
five years, so the depreciation would be $500,000/5 = $100,000 per year. The tax rate is 
25 percent. Table 8.3 contains the projected revenues and expenses. Based on these fig-
ures, net income in each year is also shown.
To calculate the average book value for this investment, we note that we started out 
with a book value of $500,000 (the initial cost) and ended up at $0. The average book value 
during the life of the investment is thus ($500,000 + 0)/2 = $250,000. As long as we use 
straight-line depreciation and a zero salvage value, the average investment will always be 
one-half of the initial investment.1
8.3
coverage online
Excel 
Master
average accounting 
return (AAR)
An investment’s average 
net income divided by its 
average book value.
concept questions
8.2a	
In words, what is the payback period? The payback period rule?
8.2b	
Why do we say that the payback period is, in a sense, an accounting break-even measure?
ta b l e  8.3
Projected yearly 
revenues and costs 
for average 
accounting return
Year 1  
Year 2  
Year 3  
Year 4  
Year 5  
Revenue
$433,333
$450,000
$266,667
$200,000
$133,333
Expenses
  200,000
  150,000
  100,000
  100,000
    100,000
Earnings before  
  depreciation
$233,333
$300,000
$166,667
$100,000
$  33,333
Depreciation
  100,000
  100,000
  100,000
  100,000
     100,000
Earnings before taxes
$133,333
$200,000
$  66,667
$             0
−$  66,667
Taxes (25%)
    33,333
    50,000
    16,667
               0
−      16,667
Net income
$100,000
$150,000
$  50,000
$            0
−$  50,000
Average net income = ($100,000 + $150,000 + $50,000 + $0 −$50,000)
5
= $50,000
Average book value = $500,000 + $0
2
= $250,000
1 We could, of course, calculate the average of the six book values directly. In thousands, we would have 
($500 + 400 + 300 + 200 + 100 + 0)/6 = $250.

246	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
Looking at Table 8.3, we see that net income is $100,000 in the first year, $150,000 in 
the second year, $50,000 in the third year, $0 in Year 4, and −$50,000 in Year 5. The aver-
age net income, then, is:
[$100,000 + 150,000 + 50,000 + 0 + (−50,000)]/5 = $50,000
The average accounting return is:
AAR = Average net income
Average book value = $50,000
250,000 = 20%
If the firm has a target AAR less than 20 percent, then this investment is acceptable; other-
wise, it is not. The average accounting return rule is thus:
Based on the average accounting return rule, a project is acceptable if its average  
accounting return exceeds a target average accounting return.
As we will see next, this rule has a number of problems.
You should recognize the chief drawback to the AAR immediately. Above all else, the AAR 
is not a rate of return in any meaningful economic sense. Instead, it is the ratio of two accounting 
numbers, and it is not comparable to the returns offered, for example, in financial markets.2
One of the reasons the AAR is not a true rate of return is that it ignores time value. 
When we average figures that occur at different times, we are treating the near future and 
the more distant future the same way. There was no discounting involved when we com-
puted the average net income, for example.
The second problem with the AAR is similar to the problem we had with the payback 
period rule concerning the lack of an objective cutoff period. A calculated AAR is really 
not comparable to a market return, so the target AAR must somehow be specified. There is 
no generally agreed-upon way to do this. One way of doing it is to calculate the AAR for 
the firm as a whole and use this as a benchmark, but there are lots of other ways as well.
The third, and perhaps worst, flaw in the AAR is that it doesn’t even look at the right 
things. Instead of cash flow and market value, it uses net income and book value. These are 
both poor substitutes. As a result, an AAR doesn’t tell us what the effect on share price will 
be from taking an investment, so it doesn’t tell us what we really want to know.
Does the AAR have any redeeming features? About the only one is that it almost always 
can be computed. The reason is that accounting information will almost always be available, 
both for the project under consideration and for the firm as a whole. We hasten to add that 
once the accounting information is available, we can always convert it to cash flows, so even 
this is not a particularly important fact. The AAR is summarized in the table that follows:
2 The AAR is closely related to the return on assets, or ROA, discussed in Chapter 3. In practice, the AAR is 
sometimes computed by first calculating the ROA for each year and then averaging the results. This produces a 
number that is similar, but not identical, to the one we computed.
Advantages and Disadvantages of the Average Accounting Return
Advantages
Disadvantages
1.  Easy to calculate.
2.  Needed information will usually  
be available.
1.  Not a true rate of return; time value of money 
is ignored.
2.  Uses an arbitrary benchmark cutoff rate.
3.  Based on accounting net income and book 
values, not cash flows and market values.

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
247
THE INTERNAL RATE OF RETURN
We now come to the most important alternative to NPV, the internal rate of return, univer-
sally known as the IRR. As we will see, the IRR is closely related to NPV. With the IRR, we 
try to find a single rate of return that summarizes the merits of a project. Furthermore, we 
want this rate to be an “internal” rate in the sense that it only depends on the cash flows of 
a particular investment, not on rates offered elsewhere.
To illustrate the idea behind the IRR, consider a project that costs $100 today and pays 
$110 in one year. Suppose you were asked, “What is the return on this investment?” What 
would you say? It seems both natural and obvious to say that the return is 10 percent be-
cause, for every dollar we put in, we get $1.10 back. In fact, as we will see in a moment, 10 
percent is the internal rate of return, or IRR, on this investment.
Is this project with its 10 percent IRR a good investment? Once again, it would seem 
apparent that this is a good investment only if our required return is less than 10 percent. 
This intuition is also correct and illustrates the IRR rule:
8.4
internal rate of 
return (IRR)
The discount rate that 
makes the net present 
value of an investment 
zero.
coverage online
Excel 
Master
concept questions
8.3a	
What is an average accounting rate of return, or AAR?
8.3b	
What are the weaknesses of the AAR rule?
Based on the IRR rule, an investment is acceptable if the IRR exceeds the required 
return. It should be rejected otherwise.
Imagine that we wanted to calculate the NPV for our simple investment. At a discount 
rate of R, the NPV is:
NPV = −$100 + 110/(1 + R)
Now, suppose we didn’t know the discount rate. This presents a problem, but we could still 
ask how high the discount rate would have to be before this project was unacceptable. We 
know that we are indifferent between taking and not taking this investment when its NPV 
is just equal to zero. In other words, this investment is economically a break-even proposi-
tion when the NPV is zero because value is neither created nor destroyed. To find the 
break-even discount rate, we set NPV equal to zero and solve for R:
	NPV = 0 = −$100 + 110/(1 + R)
	$100 = $110/(1 + R)
	1 + R = $110/100 = 1.10
	
R = 10%
This 10 percent is what we already have called the return on this investment. What we have 
now illustrated is that the internal rate of return on an investment (or just “return” for short) 
is the discount rate that makes the NPV equal to zero. This is an important observation, so 
it bears repeating:
The IRR on an investment is the required return that results in a zero NPV when it is 
used as the discount rate.

248	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
The fact that the IRR is simply the discount rate that makes the NPV equal to zero 
is important because it tells us how to calculate the returns on more complicated in-
vestments. As we have seen, finding the IRR turns out to be relatively easy for a single-
period investment. However, suppose you were now looking at an investment with the 
cash flows shown in Figure 8.3. As illustrated, this investment costs $100 and has a 
cash flow of $60 per year for two years, so it’s only slightly more complicated than our 
single-period example. However, if you were asked for the return on this investment, 
what would you say? There doesn’t seem to be any obvious answer (at least to us). 
However, based on what we now know, we can set the NPV equal to zero and solve for 
the discount rate:
NPV = 0 = −$100 + 60/(1 + IRR) + 60/(1 + IRR)2
Unfortunately, the only way to find the IRR in general is by trial and error, either by 
hand or by calculator. This is precisely the same problem that came up in Chapter 5 
when we found the unknown rate for an annuity and in Chapter 6 when we found the 
yield to maturity on a bond. In fact, we now see that, in both of those cases, we were 
finding an IRR.
In this particular case, the cash flows form a two-period, $60 annuity. To find the un-
known rate, we can try some different rates until we get the answer. If we were to start with 
a 0 percent rate, the NPV would obviously be $120 − 100 = $20. At a 10 percent discount 
rate, we would have:
NPV = −$100 + 60/1.1 + 60/1.12 = $4.13
Now, we’re getting close. We can summarize these and some other possibilities as shown 
in Table 8.4. From our calculations, the NPV appears to be zero between 10 percent and 
15 percent, so the IRR is somewhere in that range. With a little more effort, we can find 
that the IRR is about 13.1 percent. So, if our required return is less than 13.1 percent, 
we would take this investment. If our required return exceeds 13.1 percent, we would 
reject it.
By now, you have probably noticed that the IRR rule and the NPV rule appear to 
be quite similar. In fact, the IRR is sometimes simply called the discounted cash flow, 
or DCF, return. The easiest way to illustrate the relationship between NPV and IRR is 
to plot the numbers we calculated in Table 8.4. We put the different NPVs on the verti-
cal axis, or y-axis, and the discount rates on the horizontal axis, or x-axis. If we had 
a very large number of points, the resulting picture would be a smooth curve called a 
f i g u r e  8.3
Project cash flows
0
1
2
1$60
1$60
Year
–$100
Discount Rate
NPV
   0%
$20.00
5
11.56
10
4.13
15
−     2.46
20
−     8.33
ta b l e  8.4
NPV at different 
discount rates 

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
249
net present value profile. Figure 8.4 illustrates the NPV profile for this project. Begin-
ning with a 0 percent discount rate, we have $20 plotted directly on the y-axis. As the 
discount rate increases, the NPV declines smoothly. Where will the curve cut through 
the x-axis? This will occur where the NPV is just equal to zero, so it will happen right 
at the IRR of 13.1 percent.
In our example, the NPV rule and the IRR rule lead to identical accept-reject deci-
sions. We will accept an investment using the IRR rule if the required return is less than 
13.1 percent. As Figure 8.4 illustrates, however, the NPV is positive at any discount rate 
less than 13.1 percent, so we would accept the investment using the NPV rule as well. The 
two rules are equivalent in this case.
net present value 
profile
A graphical representation 
of the relationship 
between an investment’s 
net present value and 
various discount rates.
f i g u r e  8.4
An NPV profile
20
NPV ($)
R (%)
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
5
10
15
20
25
30
IRR 5 13.1%
NPV . 0
NPV , 0
EXAMPLE
8.3  Calculating the IRR
A project has a total up-front cost of $435.44. The cash flows are $100 in the first year, $200 in the 
second year, and $300 in the third year. What’s the IRR? If we require an 18 percent return, should 
we take this investment?
	
We’ll describe the NPV profile and find the IRR by calculating some NPVs at different discount 
rates. You should check our answers for practice. Beginning with 0 percent, we have:
Discount Rate
NPV
0%
5
10
15
20
$164.56
100.36
46.15
.00
−     39.61
The NPV is zero at 15 percent, so 15 percent is the IRR. If we require an 18 percent return, then we 
should not take the investment. The reason is that the NPV is negative at 18 percent (verify that it is 
–$24.47). The IRR rule tells us the same thing in this case. We shouldn’t take this investment be-
cause its 15 percent return is below our required 18 percent return.

250	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
At this point, you may be wondering whether the IRR and NPV rules always lead to 
identical decisions. The answer is yes as long as two very important conditions are met. 
First, the project’s cash flows must be conventional, meaning that the first cash flow (the 
initial investment) is negative and all the rest are positive. Second, the project must be in-
dependent, meaning that the decision to accept or reject this project does not affect the 
decision to accept or reject any other. The first of these conditions is typically met, but the 
second often is not. In any case, when one or both of these conditions are not met, prob-
lems can arise. We discuss some of these in a moment.
CALCULATING IRRs WITH A SPREADSHEET
Because IRRs are so tedious to calculate by hand, financial calculators and, especially, spreadsheets are 
generally used. The procedures used by various financial calculators are too different for us to illustrate 
here, so we will focus on using a spreadsheet (financial calculators are covered in Appendix D). As the 
following example illustrates, using a spreadsheet is very easy:
SPREADSHEET 
STRATEGIES
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1
2
Using a spreadsheet to calculate internal rates of return
3
4
Suppose we have a four-year project that costs $500. The cash flows over the four-year life will be
5
$100, $200, $300, and $400. What is the IRR?
6
7
Year
Cash flow
8
0
–$500
9
1
100
IRR =
27.3%
10
2
200
11
3
300
12
4
400
13
14
15
The formula entered in cell F9 is = IRR(C8:C12). Notice that the Year 0 cash flow has a negative sign,
16
representing the initial cost of the project.
17
Problems with the IRR
The problems with the IRR come about when the cash flows are not conventional or when 
we are trying to compare two or more investments to see which is best. In the first case, 
surprisingly, the simple question “What’s the return?” can become very difficult to answer. 
In the second case, the IRR can be a misleading guide.
Nonconventional Cash Flows 
Suppose we have a strip-mining project that re-
quires a $60 investment. Our cash flow in the first year will be $155. In the second year, 
the mine is depleted, but we have to spend $100 to restore the terrain. As Figure 8.5 illus-
trates, both the first and third cash flows are negative.

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
251
To find the IRR on this project, we can calculate the NPV at various rates:
Discount Rate
NPV
      0%
−$5.00
10
−   1.74
20
−         .28
30
.06
40
−       .31
The NPV appears to be behaving in a very peculiar fashion here. First, as the discount 
rate increases from 0 percent to 30 percent, the NPV starts out negative and becomes posi-
tive. This seems backward because the NPV is rising as the discount rate rises. It then 
starts getting smaller and becomes negative again. What’s the IRR? To find out, we draw 
the NPV profile in Figure 8.6.
f i g u r e  8.5
f i g u r e  8.6
Project cash flows
NPV profile
0
1
2
1$155
–$100
Year
–$60
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
10
20
30
40
50
IRR 5 25%
IRR 5 331/3%
R (%)
NPV ($)

252	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
In Figure 8.6, notice that the NPV is zero when the discount rate is 25 percent, so this 
is the IRR. Or is it? The NPV is also zero at 331/3 percent. Which of these is correct? The 
answer is both or neither; more precisely, there is no unambiguously correct answer. This 
is the multiple rates of return problem. Many computer spreadsheet packages aren’t aware 
of this problem and just report the first IRR that is found. Others report only the smallest 
positive IRR, even though this answer is no better than any other. For example, if you enter 
this problem in our spreadsheet example, it will simply report that the IRR is 25 percent.
In our current example, the IRR rule breaks down completely. Suppose our required 
return was 10 percent. Should we take this investment? Both IRRs are greater than 10 per-
cent, so, by the IRR rule, maybe we should. However, as Figure 8.6 shows, the NPV is 
negative at any discount rate less than 25 percent, so this is not a good investment. When 
should we take it? Looking at Figure 8.6 one last time, we see that the NPV is positive only 
if our required return is between 25 percent and 331/3 percent.
The moral of the story is that when the cash flows aren’t conventional, strange things 
can start to happen to the IRR. This is not anything to get upset about, however, because 
the NPV rule, as always, works just fine. This illustrates that, oddly enough, the obvious 
question “What’s the rate of return?” may not always have a good answer.
multiple rates of 
return
The possibility that more 
than one discount rate  
will make the net present 
value of an investment 
zero.
EXAMPLE
8.4  What’s the IRR?
You are looking at an investment that requires you to invest $51 today. You’ll get $100 in one year, 
but you must pay out $50 in two years. What is the IRR on this investment?
	
You’re on the alert now to the nonconventional cash flow problem, so you probably wouldn’t 
be surprised to see more than one IRR. However, if you start looking for an IRR by trial and error, it 
will take you a long time. The reason is that there is no IRR. The NPV is negative at every discount 
rate, so we shouldn’t take this investment under any circumstances. What’s the return on this invest-
ment? Your guess is as good as ours.
Mutually Exclusive Investments 
Even if there is a single IRR, another problem 
can arise concerning mutually exclusive investment decisions. If two investments, X and 
Y, are mutually exclusive, then taking one of them means that we cannot take the other. 
Two projects that are not mutually exclusive are said to be independent. For example, if we 
own one corner lot, then we can build a gas station or an apartment building, but not both. 
These are mutually exclusive alternatives.
Thus far, we have asked whether or not a given investment is worth undertaking. There 
is a related question, however, that comes up very often: Given two or more mutually ex-
clusive investments, which one is the best? The answer is simple enough: The best one is 
the one with the largest NPV. Can we also say that the best one has the highest return? As 
we show, the answer is no.
To illustrate the problem with the IRR rule and mutually exclusive investments, con-
sider the cash flows from the following two mutually exclusive investments:
Year
Investment A
Investment B
0
−$100
−$100
1
50
20
2
40
40
3
40
50
4
30
60
mutually exclusive 
investment 
decisions
A situation where taking 
one investment prevents 
the taking of another.

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
253
The IRR for A is 24 percent, and the IRR for B is 21 percent. Because these invest-
ments are mutually exclusive, we can only take one of them. Simple intuition suggests that 
Investment A is better because of its higher return. Unfortunately, simple intuition is not 
always correct.
To see why Investment A is not necessarily the better of the two investments, we’ve 
calculated the NPV of these investments for different required returns:
Discount Rate
NPV (A)
NPV (B)
           0%
$60.00
$70.00
    5
43.13
47.88
10
29.06
29.79
15
17.18
14.82
20
7.06
2.31
25
−     1.63
−     8.22
The IRR for A (24 percent) is larger than the IRR for B (21 percent). However, if you com-
pare the NPVs, you’ll see that which investment has the higher NPV depends on our re-
quired return. B has greater total cash flow, but it pays back more slowly than A. As a 
result, it has a higher NPV at lower discount rates.
In our example, the NPV and IRR rankings conflict for some discount rates. If our 
required return is 10 percent, for instance, then B has the higher NPV and is thus the better 
of the two, even though A has the higher IRR. If our required return is 15 percent, then 
there is no ranking conflict: A is better.
The conflict between the IRR and NPV for mutually exclusive investments can be il-
lustrated by plotting their NPV profiles as we have done in Figure 8.7. In Figure 8.7, notice 
f i g u r e  8.7
NPV profiles for 
mutually exclusive 
investments
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
–10
5
26.34
10
15
11.1%
20
IRRB 5 21%
25
30
IRRA 5 24%
Crossover point
Investment
B
Investment
A
NPVB . NPVA
NPVA . NPVB
NPV ($)
R (%)

254	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
that the NPV profiles cross at 11.1 percent. Notice also that at any discount rate less than 
11.1 percent, the NPV for B is higher. In this range, taking B benefits us more than taking 
A, even though A’s IRR is higher. At any rate greater than 11.1 percent, Investment A has 
the greater NPV.
This example illustrates that whenever we have mutually exclusive projects, we 
shouldn’t rank them based on their returns. More generally, any time we are comparing 
investments to determine which is best, IRRs can be misleading. Instead, we need to look 
at the relative NPVs to avoid the possibility of choosing incorrectly. Remember, we’re ul-
timately interested in creating value for the shareholders, so the option with the higher 
NPV is preferred, regardless of the relative returns.
If this seems counterintuitive, think of it this way. Suppose you have two invest-
ments. One has a 10 percent return and makes you $100 richer immediately. The other 
has a 20 percent return and makes you $50 richer immediately. Which one do you like 
better? We would rather have $100 than $50, regardless of the returns, so we like the first 
one better.
As we saw from Figure 8.7, the crossover rate for Investment A and Investment B is 
11.1 percent. You might be wondering how we got this number. Actually, the calculation is 
fairly easy. We begin by subtracting the cash flows from one project from the cash flows of 
the second project. In this case, we will subtract Investment B from Investment A. Doing 
so, we get:
Year
Investment A
Investment B
Cash Flow Difference (A – B)
0
−$100
−$100
 $  0
1
50
20
30
2
40
40
0
3
40
50
−  10
4
30
60
−  30
Now all we have to do is calculate the IRR for these differential cash flows, which works 
out to be 11.1 percent. Verify for yourself that if you subtract Investment A’s cash flows 
from Investment B’s cash flows the crossover rate is still 11.1 percent, so it doesn’t matter 
which one you subtract from which.
Redeeming Qualities of the IRR
Despite its flaws, the IRR is very popular in practice, more so than even the NPV. It prob-
ably survives because it fills a need that the NPV does not. In analyzing investments, peo-
ple in general, and financial analysts in particular, seem to prefer talking about rates of 
return rather than dollar values.
In a similar vein, the IRR also appears to provide a simple way of communicating in-
formation about a proposal. One manager might say to another, “Remodeling the clerical 
wing has a 20 percent return.” This may somehow be simpler than saying, “At a 10 percent 
discount rate, the net present value is $4,000.”
Finally, under certain circumstances, the IRR may have a practical advantage 
over the NPV. We can’t estimate the NPV unless we know the appropriate discount 
rate, but we can still estimate the IRR. Suppose we didn’t know the required return 
on an investment, but we found, for example, that it had a 40 percent return. We 
would probably be inclined to take it because it is very unlikely that the required 
return would be that high. The advantages and disadvantages of the IRR are sum-
marized in the following table.

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
255
The Modified Internal Rate of Return (MIRR)
To address some of the problems that can crop up with the standard IRR, it is often pro-
posed that a modified version be used. As we will see, there are several different ways of 
calculating a modified IRR, or MIRR, but the idea is to modify the cash flows first and 
then calculate IRR using the modified cash flows.
To illustrate, let’s go back to the cash flows in Figure 8.5: −$60, +$155, and −$100. 
As we saw, there are two IRRs, 25 percent and 331/3 percent. We next illustrate three differ-
ent MIRRs, all of which have the property that only one answer will result, thereby elimi-
nating the multiple IRR problem.
Method 1: The Discounting Approach 
With the discounting approach, the idea 
is to discount all negative cash flows back to the present at the required return and add 
them to the initial cost. Then, calculate the IRR. Because only the first modified cash 
flow is negative, there will be only one IRR. The discount rate used might be the re-
quired return, or it might be some other exernally supplied rate. We use the project’s re-
quired return.
If the required return on the project is 20 percent, then the modified cash flows look 
like this:
Time 0:	 −$60 + −$100
1.202  = −$129.44
Time 1:	 +$155
Time 2:	 +$0
If you calculate the MIRR now, you should get 19.74 percent.
Method 2: The Reinvestment Approach 
With the reinvestment approach, we 
compound all cash flows (positive and negative) except the first out to the end of the proj-
ect’s life and then calculate the IRR. In a sense, we are “reinvesting” the cash flows and not 
taking them out of the project until the very end. The rate we use could be the required 
return on the project, or it could be a separately specified “reinvestment rate.” We use the 
project’s required return. When we do, here are the modified cash flows:
Time 0:	
−$60
Time 1:	
+0
Time 2:	
−$100 + ($155 × 1.2) = $86
The MIRR on this set of cash flows is 19.72 percent, or a little lower than we got using the 
discounting approach.
Method 3: The Combination Approach 
As the name suggests, the combination 
approach blends our first two methods. Negative cash flows are discounted back to the 
present, and positive cash flows are compounded to the end of the project. In practice, 
Advantages and Disadvantages of the Internal Rate of Return
Advantages
Disadvantages
1.  Closely related to NPV, often leading to 
identical decisions.
2.  Easy to understand and communicate.
1.  May result in multiple answers with 
nonconventional cash flows.
2. May lead to incorrect decisions in 
comparisons of mutually exclusive 
investments.

256	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
different discount or compounding rates might be used, but we again stick with the proj-
ect’s required return.
With the combination approach, the modified cash flows are as follows:
Time 0:	
−$60 + −$100
1.202  = −$129.44
Time 1:	
+0
Time 2:	
$155 × 1.2 = $186
See if you don’t agree that the MIRR is 19.87, the highest of the three.
MIRR or IRR: Which Is Better? 
MIRRs are controversial. At one extreme are those 
who claim that MIRRs are superior to IRRs, period. For example, by design, they clearly 
don’t suffer from the multiple rate of return problem.
At the other end, detractors say that MIRR should stand for “meaningless internal rate 
of return.” As our example makes clear, one problem with MIRRs is that there are different 
ways of calculating them, and there is no clear reason to say one of our three methods is 
better than any other. The differences are small with our simple cash flows, but they could 
be much larger for a more complex project. Further, it’s not clear how to interpret an 
MIRR. It may look like a rate of return; but it’s a rate of return on a modified set of cash 
flows, not the project’s actual cash flows.
We’re not going to take sides. However, notice that calculating an MIRR requires discount-
ing, compounding, or both, which leads to two obvious observations. First, if we have the rele-
vant discount rate, why not calculate the NPV and be done with it? Second, because an MIRR 
depends on an externally supplied discount (or compounding) rate, the answer you get is not 
truly an “internal” rate of return, which, by definition, depends on only the project’s cash flows.
We will take a stand on one issue that frequently comes up in this context. The value of a 
project does not depend on what the firm does with the cash flows generated by that project. A 
firm might use a project’s cash flows to fund other projects, to pay dividends, or to buy an execu-
tive jet. It doesn’t matter: How the cash flows are spent in the future does not affect their value 
today. As a result, there is generally no need to consider reinvestment of interim cash flows.
concept questions
8.4a	
Under what circumstances will the IRR and NPV rules lead to the same accept-
reject decisions? When might they conflict?
8.4b	
Is it generally true that an advantage of the IRR rule over the NPV rule is that we 
don’t need to know the required return to use the IRR rule?
THE PROFITABILITY INDEX
Another method used to evaluate projects involves the profitability index (PI), or benefit-
cost ratio. This index is defined as the present value of the future cash flows divided by the 
initial investment. So, if a project costs $200 and the present value of its future cash flows 
is $220, the profitability index value would be $220/200 = 1.10. Notice that the NPV for 
this investment is $20, so it is a desirable investment.
More generally, if a project has a positive NPV, then the present value of the future cash 
flows must be bigger than the initial investment. The profitability index would thus be bigger 
than 1.00 for a positive NPV investment and less than 1.00 for a negative NPV investment.
8.5
profitability index 
(PI)
The present value of an 
investment’s future cash 
flows divided by its initial 
cost. Also ­benefit-cost 
ratio.

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
257
How do we interpret the profitability index? In our example, the PI was 1.10. This tells 
us that, per dollar invested, $1.10 in value or $.10 in NPV results. The profitability index 
thus measures “bang for the buck,” that is, the value created per dollar invested. For this 
reason, it is often proposed as a measure of performance for government or other not-for-
profit investments. Also, when capital is scarce, it may make sense to allocate it to those 
projects with the highest PIs.
The PI is obviously very similar to the NPV. However, consider an investment that 
costs $5 and has a $10 present value and an investment that costs $100 with a $150 present 
value. The first of these investments has an NPV of $5 and a PI of 2. The second has an 
NPV of $50 and a PI of 1.50. If these are mutually exclusive investments, then the second 
one is preferred, even though it has a lower PI. This ranking problem is very similar to the 
IRR ranking problem we saw in the previous section. In all, there seems to be little reason 
to rely on the PI instead of the NPV. Our discussion of the PI is summarized here:
Advantages and Disadvantages of the Profitability Index
Advantages
Disadvantages
1.  Closely related to NPV, generally 
leading to identical decisions.
2.  Easy to understand and communicate.
3.  May be useful when available 
investment funds are limited.
1.  May lead to incorrect decisions in 
comparisons of mutually exclusive 
investments.
concept questions
8.5a	
What does the profitability index measure?
8.5b	
How would you state the profitability index rule?
THE PRACTICE OF CAPITAL BUDGETING
Given that NPV seems to be telling us directly what we want to know, you might be won-
dering why there are so many other procedures and why alternative procedures are com-
monly used. Recall that we are trying to make an investment decision and that we are 
frequently operating under considerable uncertainty about the future. We can only estimate 
the NPV of an investment in this case. The resulting estimate can be very “soft,” meaning 
that the true NPV might be quite different.
Because the true NPV is unknown, the astute financial manager seeks clues to assess 
whether the estimated NPV is reliable. For this reason, firms would typically use multiple 
criteria for evaluating a proposal. For example, suppose we have an investment with a posi-
tive estimated NPV. Based on our experience with other projects, this one appears to have 
a short payback and a very high AAR. In this case, the different indicators seem to agree 
that it’s “all systems go.” Put another way, the payback and the AAR are consistent with 
the conclusion that the NPV is positive.
On the other hand, suppose we had a positive estimated NPV, a long payback, and a low 
AAR. This could still be a good investment, but it looks like we need to be much more care-
ful in making the decision because we are getting conflicting signals. If the estimated NPV is 
based on projections in which we have little confidence, then further analysis is probably in 
order. We consider how to go about this analysis in more detail in the next chapter.
coverage online
Excel 
Master
8.6

258	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
Large firms often have huge capital budgets. For example, for 2015, ExxonMobil an-
nounced that it expected to have about $37 billion in capital outlays during the year, up 
from $34 billion in 2014. In fact, ExxonMobil was expected to spend $34 billion per year 
for several years beyond 2015. About the same time, competitor Chevron announced that 
its capital budget for 2015 would be $35 billion, down slightly from $39.8 billion in 2014. 
Other companies with large capital spending budgets were Walmart, which projected capi-
tal spending of about $11.8 to $12.8 billion for 2015, and McDonald’s, which projected 
capital spending of about $2 billion, down from $2.7 billion in 2014.
Large-scale capital spending is often an industrywide occurrence. For example, in 
2015, capital spending in the semiconductor industry was expected to be $65.7 billion. 
This sum actually represented a .8 percent decrease compared to 2014. However, semicon-
ductor capital spending in 2014 had increased about 13 percent from 2013.
According to information released by the Census Bureau in 2014, capital investment 
for the economy as a whole was $1.090 trillion in 2009, $1.106 trillion in 2010, and $1.226 
trillion in 2011. The totals for the three years therefore exceeded $3.4 trillion! Given the 
sums at stake, it is not too surprising that careful analysis of capital expenditures is some-
thing at which successful businesses seek to become adept.
There have been a number of surveys conducted asking firms what types of investment 
criteria they actually use. Table 8.5 summarizes the results of several of these. The first 
part of the table is a historical comparison looking at the primary capital budgeting tech-
niques used by large firms through time. In 1959, only 19 percent of the firms surveyed 
used either IRR or NPV, and 68 percent used either payback periods or accounting returns. 
It is clear that, by the 1980s, IRR and NPV had become the dominant criteria.
A. Historical Comparison of the Primary Use of Various Capital Budgeting Techniques
	
1959	
1964	
1970	
1975	
1977	
1979	
1981
Payback period	
34%	
24%	
12%	
15%	
  9%	
10%	
  5.0%
Average accounting return (AAR)	
34	
30	
26	
10	
25	
14	
10.7
Internal rate of return (IRR)	
19	
38	
57	
37	
54	
60	
65.3
Net present value (NPV)	
—	
—	
—	
26	
10	
14	
16.5
IRR or NPV	
19	
38	
57	
63	
64	
74	
81.8
B. Percentage of CFOs Who Always or Almost Always Use a Given Technique in 1999
	
Percentage	
	
Average Score 
Capital Budgeting 	
 Always or Almost	
	
Scale is 4 (always) to 0 (never)
    Technique	
 Always Use	
Overall	
 Large Firms	
Small Firms
Internal rate of return	
   76%	
3.09	
3.41	
2.87
Net present value	
75	
3.08	
3.42	
2.83
Payback period	
57	
2.53	
2.25	
2.72
Accounting rate of return	
20	
1.34	
1.25	
1.41
Profitability index	
12	
  .83	
  .75	
  .88
Sources: J. R. Graham and C. R. Harvey, “The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of Financial Economics, 
May–June 2001, pp. 187–244; J. S. Moore and A. K. Reichert, “An Analysis of the Financial Management Techniques Currently Employed by Large U.S. 
Corporations,” Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, Winter 1983, pp. 623–45; M. T. Stanley and S. B. Block, “A Survey of Multinational Capital 
Budgeting,” The Financial Review, March 1984, pp. 36–51.
ta b l e  8.5
Capital budgeting techniques in practice

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
259
Panel B of Table 8.5 summarizes the results of a 1999 survey of chief financial offi-
cers (CFOs) at both large and small firms in the United States. A total of 392 CFOs re-
sponded. What is shown is the percentage of CFOs who always or almost always use the 
various capital budgeting techniques we described in this chapter. Not surprisingly, IRR 
and NPV are the two most widely used techniques, particularly at larger firms. However, 
over half of the respondents always, or almost always, use the payback criterion as well. In 
fact, among smaller firms, payback is used just about as much as NPV and IRR. Less com-
monly used are accounting rate of return and the profitability index. For quick reference, 
these criteria are briefly summarized in Table 8.6.
concept questions
8.6a	
What are the most commonly used capital budgeting procedures?
8.6b	
If NPV is conceptually the best tool for capital budgeting, why do you think 
multiple measures are used in practice?
  I.	 Discounted cash flow criteria
	
A.	Net present value (NPV). The NPV of an investment is the difference between its 
market value and its cost. The NPV rule is to take a project if its NPV is positive. NPV is 
frequently estimated by calculating the present value of the future cash flows (to 
estimate market value) and then subtracting the cost. NPV has no serious flaws; it is 
the preferred decision criterion.
	
B.	Internal rate of return (IRR). The IRR is the discount rate that makes the estimated NPV 
of an investment equal to zero; it is sometimes called the discounted cash flow (DCF) 
return. The IRR rule is to take a project when its IRR exceeds the required return. IRR is 
closely related to NPV, and it leads to exactly the same decisions as NPV for 
conventional, independent projects. When project cash flows are not conventional, 
there may be no IRR or there may be more than one. More seriously, the IRR cannot be 
used to rank mutually exclusive projects; the project with the highest IRR is not 
necessarily the preferred investment.
	
C.	Modified internal rate of return (MIRR). The MIRR is a modification to the IRR. A 
project’s cash flows are modified by (1) discounting the negative cash flows back to the 
present; (2) compounding all cash flows to the end of the project’s life; or (3) combining 
(1) and (2). An IRR is then computed on the modified cash flows. MIRRs are guaranteed 
to avoid the multiple rate of return problem. But, it is unclear how to interpret them, 
and they are not truly “internal” because they depend on externally supplied 
discounting or compounding rates.
	
D.	Profitability index (PI). The PI, also called the benefit-cost ratio, is the ratio of present 
value to cost. The PI rule is to take an investment if the index exceeds 1. The PI 
measures the present value of an investment per dollar invested. It is quite similar to 
NPV, but, like IRR, it cannot be used to rank mutually exclusive projects. However, it is 
sometimes used to rank projects when a firm has more positive NPV investments than 
it can currently finance.
 II.	 Payback criteria
	
A.	Payback period. The payback period is the length of time until the sum of an investment’s 
cash flows equals its cost. The payback period rule is to take a project if its payback is less 
than some cutoff. The payback period is a flawed criterion primarily because it ignores risk, 
the time value of money, and cash flows beyond the cutoff point.
III.	 Accounting criteria
	
A.	Average accounting return (AAR). The AAR is a measure of accounting profit relative to book 
value. It is not related to the IRR, but it is similar to the accounting return on assets (ROA) 
measure in Chapter 3. The AAR rule is to take an investment if its AAR exceeds a benchmark 
AAR. The AAR is seriously flawed for a variety of reasons, and it has little to recommend it.
ta b l e  8.6
Summary of 
investment criteria

260	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has covered the different criteria used to evaluate proposed investments. The 
criteria, in the order in which we discussed them, are:
1.	
Net present value (NPV)
2.	
Payback period
3.	
Average accounting return (AAR)
4.	
Internal rate of return (IRR)
5.	
Modified internal rate of return (MIRR)
6.	
Profitability index (PI)
	
We illustrated how to calculate each of these and discussed the interpretation of the 
results. We also described the advantages and disadvantages of each of them. Ultimately, a 
good capital budgeting criterion must tell us two things. First, is a particular project a good 
investment? Second, if we have more than one good project, but we can only take one of 
them, which one should we take? The main point of this chapter is that only the NPV cri-
terion can always provide the correct answer to both questions.
	
For this reason, NPV is one of the two or three most important concepts in finance, 
and we refer to it many times in the chapters ahead. When we do, keep two things in mind: 
(1) NPV is always just the difference between the market value of an asset or project and 
its cost, and (2) the financial manager acts in the shareholders’ best interests by identifying 
and taking positive NPV projects.
	
Finally, we noted that NPVs can’t normally be observed in the market; instead, they 
must be estimated. Because there is always the possibility of a poor estimate, financial 
managers use multiple criteria for examining projects. These other criteria provide addi-
tional information about whether a project truly has a positive NPV.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 8.1 Describe the basic NPV investment rule.
Section 8.2 What are the advantages of the payback period method for 
management?
Section 8.3 How would you define the average accounting return rule?
Section 8.4 What is the IRR for a project with an initial investment of $250 and sub-
sequent cash inflows of $100 per year for 3 years?

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
261
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
8.1	
Investment Criteria.  This problem will give you some practice calculating NPVs 
and paybacks. A proposed overseas expansion has the following cash flows:
Year
Cash Flow
0
−$100
1
       50
2
       40
3
       40
4
       15
	
Calculate the payback and NPV at a required return of 15 percent. (See Problem 21.)
8.2	
Mutually Exclusive Investments.  Consider the following two mutually exclusive 
investments. Calculate the IRR for each. Under what circumstances will the IRR 
and NPV criteria rank the two projects differently? (See Problem 8.)
Year
Investment A
Investment B
0
−$100
−$100
1
        50
         70
2
        70
         75
3
         40
         10
8.3	
Average Accounting Return.  You are looking at a three-year project with a 
projected net income of $1,000 in Year 1, $2,000 in Year 2, and $4,000 in Year 3. 
The cost is $9,000, which will be depreciated straight-line to zero over the three-
year life of the project. What is the average accounting return, or AAR? (See 
Problem 4.)
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
8.1	
In the following table, we have listed the cash flows and their discounted values (at 
15 percent).
Cash Flow
Year
Undiscounted
Discounted (at 15%)
1
$    50
$  43.48
2
       40
    30.25
3
       40
    26.30
4
       15
       8.58
Total
$145
$108.61
	
Recall that the initial investment is $100. Examining the undiscounted cash flows, 
we see that the payback occurs between Years 2 and 3. The cash flows for the first 
two years are $90 total, so, going into the third year, we are short by $10. The total 
cash flow in Year 3 is $40, so the payback is 2 + $10/40 = 2.25 years.

262	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
	
	
Looking at the discounted cash flows, we see that the sum is $108.61, so the 
NPV is $8.61.
8.2	
To calculate the IRR, we might try some guesses as in the following table:
Discount Rate
NPV(A)
NPV(B)
     0%
 $60.00
$55.00
10
   33.36
  33.13
20
   13.43
  16.20
30
−    1.91
    2.78
40
−                            13.99
−    8.09
	
Several things are immediately apparent from our guesses. First, the IRR on A must 
be just a little less than 30 percent (why?). With some more effort, we find that it’s 
28.61 percent. For B, the IRR must be a little more than 30 percent (again, why?); it 
works out to be 32.37 percent. Also, notice that at 10 percent, the NPVs are very 
close, indicating that the NPV profiles cross in that vicinity. Verify that the NPVs 
are the same at 10.61 percent.
	
	
Now, the IRR for B is always higher. As we’ve seen, A has the larger NPV for 
any discount rate less than 10.61 percent, so the NPV and IRR rankings will 
conflict in that range. Remember, if there’s a conflict, we will go with the higher 
NPV. Our decision rule is thus very simple: Take A if the required return is less 
than 10.61 percent, take B if the required return is between 10.61 percent and 
32.37 percent (the IRR on B), and take neither if the required return is more than 
32.37 percent.
8.3	
Here we need to calculate the ratio of average net income to average book value to 
get the AAR. Average net income is:
Average net income = ($1,000 + 2,000 + 4,000)/3
	
= $2,333.33
Average book value is:
Average book value = $9,000/2 = $4,500
So, the average accounting return is:
AAR = $2,333.33/4,500 = 51.85%
	
This is an impressive return. Remember, however, that it isn’t really a rate of return 
like an interest rate or an IRR, so the size doesn’t tell us a lot. In particular, our 
money is probably not going to grow at 51.85 percent per year, sorry to say.
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 4 	 8.1.	 Payback Period and Net Present Value.  If a project with conventional 
LO 1 	 	
cash flows has a payback period less than its life, can you definitively state 
the algebraic sign of the NPV? Why or why not?
LO 4 	 8.2.	 Net Present Value.  Suppose a project has conventional cash flows and a 
positive NPV. What do you know about its payback? Its profitability 
index? Its IRR? Explain.

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
263
LO 1 	 8.3.	 Payback Period.  Concerning payback:
a.	
Describe how the payback period is calculated and describe the 
information this measure provides about a sequence of cash flows. 
What is the payback criterion decision rule?
b.	 What are the problems associated with using the payback period as a 
means of evaluating cash flows?
c.	
What are the advantages of using the payback period to evaluate cash 
flows? Are there any circumstances under which using payback might 
be appropriate? Explain.
LO 2 	 8.4.	 Average Accounting Return.  Concerning AAR:
a.	
Describe how the average accounting return is usually calculated and 
describe the information this measure provides about a sequence of 
cash flows. What is the AAR criterion decision rule?
b.	 What are the problems associated with using the AAR as a means of 
evaluating a project’s cash flows? What underlying feature of AAR is 
most troubling to you from a financial perspective? Does the AAR 
have any redeeming qualities?
LO 4 	 8.5.	 Net Present Value.  Concerning NPV:
a.	
Describe how NPV is calculated and describe the information this 
measure provides about a sequence of cash flows. What is the NPV 
criterion decision rule?
b.	 Why is NPV considered to be a superior method of evaluating the 
cash flows from a project? Suppose the NPV for a project’s cash flows 
is computed to be $2,500. What does this number represent with 
respect to the firm’s shareholders?
LO 3 	 8.6.	 Internal Rate of Return.  Concerning IRR:
a.	
Describe how the IRR is calculated, and describe the information this 
measure provides about a sequence of cash flows. What is the IRR 
criterion decision rule?
b.	 What is the relationship between IRR and NPV? Are there any situations 
in which you might prefer one method over the other? Explain.
c.	
Despite its shortcomings in some situations, why do most financial 
managers use IRR along with NPV when evaluating projects? Can 
you think of a situation in which IRR might be a more appropriate 
measure to use than NPV? Explain.
LO 6 	 8.7.	 Profitability Index.  Concerning the profitability index:
a.	
Describe how the profitability index is calculated and describe the 
information this measure provides about a sequence of cash flows. 
What is the profitability index decision rule?
b.	 What is the relationship between the profitability index and the NPV? 
Are there any situations in which you might prefer one method over 
the other? Explain.
LO 3 	 8.8.	 Payback and Internal Rate of Return.  A project has perpetual cash flows 
LO 1 	   	
of C per period, a cost of I, and a required return of R. What is the 
relationship between the project’s payback and its IRR? What implications 
does your answer have for long-lived projects with relatively constant cash 
flows?

264	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
LO 4 	 8.9.	 International Investment Projects.  In October 2011, automobile 
manufacturer Daimler AG announced plans to invest $350 million to 
manufacture an entirely new Mercedes-Benz model at its Alabama plant. 
Daimler AG apparently felt that it would be better able to compete and 
create value with U.S-based facilities. Other companies such as Fuji Film 
and Swiss chemical company Lonza have reached similar conclusions and 
taken similar actions. What are some of the reasons that foreign 
manufacturers of products as diverse as automobiles, film, and chemicals 
might arrive at this same conclusion?
LO 4 	 8.10.	Capital Budgeting Problems.  What are some of the difficulties that 
might come up in actual applications of the various criteria we discussed 
in this chapter? Which one would be the easiest to implement in actual 
applications? The most difficult?
LO 4 	 8.11.	 Capital Budgeting in Not-for-Profit Entities.  Are the capital budgeting 
criteria we discussed applicable to not-for-profit corporations? How 
should such entities make capital budgeting decisions? What about the 
U.S. government? Should it evaluate spending proposals using these 
techniques?
LO 3 	 8.12.	Internal Rate of Return.  In a previous chapter, we discussed the yield to 
maturity (YTM) of a bond. In what ways are the IRR and the YTM 
similar? How are they different?
LO 5 	 8.13.	Modified Internal Rate of Return.  One of the less flattering 
interpretations of the acronym MIRR is “meaningless internal rate of 
return.” Why do you think this term is applied to MIRR?
LO 4 	 8.14.	Net Present Value.  It is sometimes stated that “the net present value 
approach assumes reinvestment of the intermediate cash flows at the 
required return.” Is this claim correct? To answer, suppose you calculate 
the NPV of a project in the usual way. Next, suppose you do the following:
a.	
Calculate the future value (as of the end of the project) of all the cash 
flows other than the initial outlay assuming they are reinvested at the 
required return, producing a single future value figure for the project.
b.	 Calculate the NPV of the project using the single future value 
calculated in the previous step and the initial outlay. It is easy to verify 
that you will get the same NPV as in your original calculation only if 
you use the required return as the reinvestment rate in the previous 
step.
LO 3 	 8.15.	Internal Rate of Return.  It is sometimes stated that “the internal rate of 
return approach assumes reinvestment of the intermediate cash flows at the 
internal rate of return.” Is this claim correct? To answer, suppose you 
calculate the IRR of a project in the usual way. Next, suppose you do the 
following:
a.	
Calculate the future value (as of the end of the project) of all the cash 
flows other than the initial outlay assuming they are reinvested at the 
IRR, producing a single future value figure for the project.
b.	 Calculate the IRR of the project using the single future value 
calculated in the previous step and the initial outlay. It is easy to verify 
that you will get the same IRR as in your original calculation only if 
you use the IRR as the reinvestment rate in the previous step.

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
265
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the Preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–22)
LO 1 	 1.	 Calculating Payback.  What is the payback period for the following set of 
cash flows?
Year
Cash Flow
0
−$6,700
1
     2,800
2
     3,200
3
     2,200
4
     1,400
LO 1 	 2.	 Calculating Payback.  An investment project provides cash inflows of $935 
per year for eight years. What is the project payback period if the initial cost 
is $3,100? What if the initial cost is $4,300? What if it is $7,900?
LO 1 	 3.	 Calculating Payback.  Global Toys Inc. imposes a payback cutoff of three 
years for its international investment projects. If the company has the 
following two projects available, should it accept either of them?
Year
Cash Flow (A)
Cash Flow (B)
0
−$60,000
−$105,000
1
     23,000
       21,000
2
     28,000
       26,000
3
     19,000
       29,000
4
       9,000
     260,000
LO 2 	 4.	 Calculating AAR.  You’re trying to determine whether or not to expand 
your business by building a new manufacturing plant. The plant has an 
installation cost of $12.5 million, which will be depreciated straight-line to 
zero over its four-year life. If the plant has projected net income of 
$1,368,000, $1,935,000, $1,738,000, and $1,310,000 over these four years, 
what is the project’s average accounting return (AAR)?
LO 3  	 5.	 Calculating IRR.  A firm evaluates all of its projects by applying the IRR rule. 
If the required return is 11 percent, should the firm accept the following project?
Year
Cash Flow
0
−$168,500
1
      86,000
2
      91,000
3
      53,000
LO 4 	 6.	 Calculating NPV.  For the cash flows in the previous problem, suppose the 
firm uses the NPV decision rule. At a required return of 9 percent, should 
the firm accept this project? What if the required return was 21 percent?

266	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
LO 3 	 7.	 Calculating NPV and IRR.  A project that provides annual cash flows of 
LO 4 	   	 $2,145 for eight years costs $8,450 today. Is this a good project if the 
required return is 8 percent? What if it’s 24 percent? At what discount 
rate would you be indifferent between accepting the project and 
rejecting it?
LO 3 	 8.	 Calculating IRR.  What is the IRR of the following set of cash flows?
Year
Cash Flow
0
−$19,400
1
      9,800
2
    11,300
3
      6,900
LO 4 	 9.	 Calculating NPV.  For the cash flows in the previous problem, what is 
the NPV at a discount rate of 0 percent? What if the discount rate is  
10 percent? If it is 20 percent? If it is 30 percent?
LO 3 	 10.	NPV versus IRR.  Zayas, LLC, has identified the following two mutually 
LO 4   	
exclusive projects:
Year
Cash Flow (A)
Cash Flow (B)
0
−$78,500
−$78,500
1
     43,000
     21,000
2
     29,000
     28,000
3
     23,000
     34,000
4
     21,000
     41,000
	
	
a.  What is the IRR for each of these projects? If you apply the IRR 
decision rule, which project should the company accept? Is this decision 
necessarily correct?
	
	
b.  If the required return is 11 percent, what is the NPV for each of these 
projects? Which project will you choose if you apply the NPV decision 
rule?
	
	
c.  Over what range of discount rates would you choose Project A? Project B? 
At what discount rate would you be indifferent between these two 
projects? Explain.
LO 3 	 11.	 NPV versus IRR.  Consider the following two mutually exclusive projects:
LO 4
Year
Cash Flow (X)
Cash Flow (Y)
0
−$23,400
−$23,400
1
     13,100
       9,200
2
       9,480
     10,620
3
       7,890
     11,180
	
  	 Sketch the NPV profiles for X and Y over a range of discount rates from  
0 to 25 percent. What is the crossover rate for these two projects?

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
267
LO 3 	 12.	Problems with IRR.  Howell Petroleum, Inc., is trying to evaluate a 
generation project with the following cash flows:
Year
Cash Flow
0
−$39,000,000
1
     57,000,000
2
−        9,000,000
	
	
a.  If the company requires a return of 10 percent on its investments, should 
it accept this project? Why?
	
	
b.  Compute the IRR for this project. How many IRRs are there? If you 
apply the IRR decision rule, should you accept the project or not? 
What’s going on here?
LO 6 	 13.	 Calculating Profitability Index.  What is the profitability index for the 
following set of cash flows if the relevant discount rate is 10 percent? What 
if the discount rate is 15 percent? If it is 22 percent?
Year
Cash Flow
0
−$27,500
1
    15,800
2
    13,600
3
      8,300
LO 4 	 14.	Problems with Profitability Index.  The Matterhorn Corporation is trying to 
LO 6 	   	 choose between the following two mutually exclusive design projects:
Year
Cash Flow (I)
Cash Flow (II)
0
−$78,000
−$28,800
1
     28,300
       9,600
2
     34,800
     17,400
3
     43,700
     15,600
	
	
a.  If the required return is 11 percent and the company applies the 
profitability index decision rule, which project should the firm accept?
	
	
b.  If the company applies the NPV decision rule, which project should it 
take?
	
	
c.  Explain why your answers in parts (a) and (b) are different.
LO 1 	 15.	Comparing Investment Criteria.  Consider the following two mutually 
exclusive projects:
Year
Cash Flow (A)
Cash Flow (B)
0
−$235,000
−$47,000
1
       29,000
     28,700
2
       45,000
     19,900
3
       51,000
     17,300
4
     325,000
     16,200
LO 6
LO 4
LO 3

268	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
	
  	 Whichever project you choose, if any, you require a return of 13 percent on 
your investment.
	
	
a.  If you apply the payback criterion, which investment will you choose? 
Why?
	
	
b.  If you apply the NPV criterion, which investment will you choose? Why?
	
	
c.  If you apply the IRR criterion, which investment will you choose? Why?
	
	
d.  If you apply the profitability index criterion, which investment will you 
choose? Why?
	
	
e.  Based on your answers in parts (a) through (d), which project will you 
finally choose? Why?
LO 3 	 16.	NPV and IRR.  Reece Company is presented with the following two mutually 
LO 4 	   	 exclusive projects. The required return for both projects is 15 percent.
Year
Project M
Project N
0
−$150,000
−$372,000
1
       68,600
     159,300
2
       76,800
     193,200
3
       71,300
     154,800
4
       40,500
     110,400
	
	
a.  What is the IRR for each project?
	
	
b.  What is the NPV for each project?
	
	
c.  Which, if either, of the projects should the company accept?
LO 4 	 17.	 NPV and Profitability Index.  Robben Manufacturing has the following two 
LO 6    	
possible projects. The required return is 12 percent.
Year
Project Y
Project Z
0
−$43,400
−$78,000
1
     19,800
     32,000
2
     17,500
     30,100
3
     20,700
     29,500
4
     14,600
     27,300
a.	
What is the profitability index for each project?
b.	 What is the NPV for each project?
c.	
Which, if either, of the projects should the company accept?
LO 3 	 18.	Crossover Point.  Hodgkiss Enterprises has gathered projected cash flows 
for two projects. At what interest rate would the company be indifferent 
between the two projects? Which project is better if the required return is 
above this interest rate? Why?
Year
Project I
Project J
0
−$172,000
−$172,000
1
       83,200
       60,000
2
       74,400
       68,800
3
       63,200
       76,800
4
       57,800
       84,000

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
269
LO 1 	 19.	 Payback Period and IRR.  Suppose you have a project with a payback 
period exactly equal to the life of the project. What do you know about the 
IRR of the project? Suppose that the payback period is never. What do you 
know about the IRR of the project now?
LO 4 	 20.	NPV and Discount Rates.  An investment has an installed cost of $745,382. 
The cash flows over the four-year life of the investment are projected to be 
$265,381, $304,172, $225,153, and $208,614. If the discount rate is zero, 
what is the NPV? If the discount rate is infinite, what is the NPV? At what 
discount rate is the NPV just equal to zero? Sketch the NPV profile for this 
investment based on these three points.
LO 1 	 21.	NPV and Payback Period.  Kaleb Konstruction, Inc., has the following 
mutually exclusive projects available. The company has historically used a 
three-year cutoff for projects. The required return is 10 percent.
Year
Project F
Project G
0
−$180,000
−$280,000
1
         93,600
         64,800
2
         64,800
         86,400
3
         81,600
     123,600
4
         72,000
     166,800
5
         64,800
     187,200
a.	
Calculate the payback period for both projects.
b.	 Calculate the NPV for both projects.
c.	
Which project, if any, should the company accept?
LO 5 	 22.	MIRR.  Mittuch Corp. is evaluating a project with the following cash flows:
Year
Cash Flow
0
−$27,500
1
     10,430
2
     13,850
3
     11,270
4
       9,830
5
−     4,050
The company uses an interest rate of 10 percent on all of its projects. Calculate 
the MIRR of the project using all three methods.
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 23–27)
LO 5 	 23.	MIRR.  Suppose the company in the previous problem uses a discount rate 
of 11 percent and a reinvestment rate of 8 percent on all of its projects. 
Calculate the MIRR of the project using all three methods with these rates.
LO 4 	 24.	Crossover and NPV.  Seether, Inc., has the following two mutually 
exclusive projects available.
Year
Project R
Project S
0
−$45,000
−$76,000
1
    17,000
     20,000
2
    19,000
     20,000
3
    21,000
     35,000
4
      9,000
     30,000
5
      7,000
     10,000
LO 3
LO 4

270	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
What is the crossover rate for these two projects? What is the NPV of each 
project at the crossover rate?
LO 3 	 25.	Calculating IRR.  A project has the following cash flows:
Year
Cash Flow
0
 $91,000
1
−  55,000
2
−  46,000
What is the IRR for this project? If the required return is 10 percent, 
should the firm accept the project? What is the NPV of this project? What 
is the NPV of the project if the required return is 0 percent? 24 percent? 
What is going on here? Sketch the NPV profile to help you with your 
answer.
LO 4 	 26.	NPV and the Profitability Index.  If we define the NPV index as the ratio of 
NPV to cost, what is the relationship between this index and the profitability 
index?
LO 1 	 27.	Cash Flow Intuition.  A project has an initial cost of I, has a required return 
of R, and pays C annually for N years.
a.	
Find C in terms of I and N such that the project has a payback period 
just equal to its life.
b.	 Find C in terms of I, N, and R such that this is a profitable project 
according to the NPV decision rule.
c.	
Find C in terms of I, N, and R such that the project has a benefit-cost 
ratio of 2.
CHALLENGE (Questions 28–30)
LO 4 	 28.	NPV Valuation.  The Yurdone Corporation wants to set up a private cemetery 
business. According to the CFO, Barry M. Deep, business is “looking up.” As 
a result, the cemetery project will provide a net cash inflow of $135,000 for 
the firm during the first year, and the cash flows are projected to grow at a 
rate of 4.7 percent per year forever. The project requires an initial investment 
of $1,575,000.
a.	
If Yurdone requires a return of 12 percent on such undertakings, should 
the cemetery business be started?
b.	 The company is somewhat unsure about the assumption of a 4.7 percent 
growth rate in its cash flows. At what constant growth rate would the 
company just break even if it still required a return of 12 percent on its 
investment?
LO 3 	 29.	Problems with IRR.  Rosalee Corp. has a project with the following cash 
flows:
Year
Cash Flow
0
 $35,000
1
−  27,000
2
   29,000
What is the IRR of the project? What is happening here?
LO 4
LO 6
LO 4
LO 6

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
271
LO 3 	 30.	NPV and IRR.  Anderson International Limited is evaluating a project in 
Erewhon. The project will create the following cash flows:
Year
Cash Flow
0
−$862,000
1
     303,800
2
     219,700
3
     320,000
4
     288,700
All cash flows will occur in Erewhon and are expressed in dollars. In an 
attempt to improve its economy, the Erewhonian government has declared 
that all cash flows created by a foreign company are “blocked” and must be 
reinvested with the government for one year. The reinvestment rate for these 
funds is 4 percent. If Anderson uses a required return of 10 percent on this 
project, what are the NPV and IRR of the project? Is the IRR you calculated 
the MIRR of the project? Why or why not?
LO 4
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
8.1 Net Present Value.  You have a project that has an initial cash outflow of −$20,000 
and cash inflows of $6,000, $5,000, $4,000, and $3,000, respectively, for the next four 
years. Go to www.vindeep.com and find the IRR calculator. Enter the cash flows. If the 
required return is 12 percent, what is the IRR of the project? The NPV?
8.2 Internal Rate of Return.  Using the online calculator from the previous problem, 
find the IRR for a project with cash flows of −$500, $1,200, and −$400. What is 
going on here?
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
As you have already seen, Excel does not have a function to calculate the payback period. 
We have shown three ways to calculate the payback period, but there are numerous other 
methods as well. Below, the cash flows for a project are shown. You need to calculate the 
payback period using two different methods.
a.	
Calculate the payback period in a table. The first three columns of the table will be 
the year, the cash flow for that year, and the cumulative cash flow. The fourth 
column will show the whole year for the payback. In other words, if the payback 
period is 3+ years, this column will have a 3, otherwise it will be a zero. The next 
column will calculate the fractional part of the payback period, or else it will display 
zero. The last column will add the previous two columns and display the final 
payback period calculation. You should also have a cell that displays the final 
payback period by itself, and a cell that returns the correct accept or reject decision 
based on the payback criteria.
b.	 Write a nested IF statement that calculates the payback period using only the project 
cash flow column. The IF statement should return a value of “Never” if the project 
has no payback period. In contrast to the example we showed previously, the nested 
IF function should test for the payback period starting with shorter payback periods 

272	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
and working towards longer payback periods. Another cell should display the correct 
accept or reject decision based on the payback criteria.
Year
Cash Flow
0
−$250,000
1
       41,000
2
       48,000
3
       63,000
4
       79,000
5
       88,000
6
       64,000
7
       41,000

	
c h a p t e r  8
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria	
273
CHAPTER CASE
Bullock Gold Mining
S
eth Bullock, the owner of Bullock Gold Mining, is eval-
uating a new gold mine in South Dakota. Dan Dority, 
the company’s geologist, has just finished his analysis of 
the mine site. He has estimated that the mine would be 
productive for eight years, after which the gold would be 
completely mined. Dan has taken an estimate of the gold 
deposits to Alma Garrett, the company’s financial officer. 
Alma has been asked by Seth to perform an analysis of 
the new mine and present her recommendation on 
whether the company should open the new mine.
Year
Cash Flow
0
−$650,000,000
1
      80,000,000
2
    121,000,000
3
    162,000,000
4
    221,000,000
5
    210,000,000
6
    154,000,000
7
    108,000,000
8
      86,000,000
9
−     72,000,000
	
Alma has used the estimates provided by Dan to 
determine the revenues that could be expected from 
the mine. She has also projected the expense of open-
ing the mine and the annual operating expenses. If the 
company opens the mine, it will cost $650 million today, 
and it will have a cash outflow of $72 million nine years 
from today in costs associated with closing the mine and 
reclaiming the area surrounding it. The expected cash 
flows each year from the mine are shown in the table on 
this page. Bullock Gold Mining has a 12 percent required 
return on all of its gold mines.
1.	
Construct a spreadsheet to calculate the payback 
period, internal rate of return, modified internal 
rate of return, and net present value of the pro-
posed mine.
2.	
Based on your analysis, should the company open 
the mine?
3.	
Bonus question: Most spreadsheets do not have a 
built-in formula to calculate the payback period. 
Write a VBA script that calculates the payback pe-
riod for a project.
QU E ST I O N S

274
9
I
n early 2014, the movie The Legend of Hercules failed at the task of 
drawing movie goers to the theater. And according to critics, just 
watching the movie amounted to a 13th labor of Hercules. One said, 
“Somehow more cartoonish than Disney’s version, which was a cartoon.” 
Others were even more harsh, saying, “When awfulness reaches a 
certain point, it achieves unintentional hilarity,” and “Even dental 
­extraction is more enjoyable to endure.”
Looking at the numbers, Paramount Pictures spent close to 
$70 million making the movie, plus millions more for marketing and 
distribution. Unfortunately for Paramount, The Legend of Hercules 
was not the Golden Hind the executives believed, pulling in only $18.8 million worldwide. Of 
course, there are movies that do quite well. Also in 2014, The Hunger Games: Mockingjay 
Part 1 raked in about $752 million worldwide at a production cost of about $125 million.
Obviously, Paramount didn’t plan to lose $50 or so million on The Legend of Hercules, 
but it happened. As the box office crash of The Legend of Hercules shows, projects don’t 
always go as companies think they will. This chapter explores how this can happen and what 
companies can do to analyze and possibly avoid these situations.
In broader terms, this chapter follows up on our previous one by delving more deeply 
into capital budgeting. We have two main tasks. First, recall that in the last chapter, we saw 
that cash flow estimates are the critical input into a net present value analysis, but we didn’t 
say very much about where these cash flows come from; so, we will now examine this ques-
tion in some detail. Our second goal is to learn how to critically examine NPV estimates and, 
in particular, how to evaluate the sensitivity of NPV estimates to assumptions made about the 
uncertain future.
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Determine the relevant cash flows 
for a proposed investment.
LO 2 	 Analyze a project’s projected cash 
flows.
LO 3 	 Evaluate an estimated NPV.
Making Capital  
Investment Decisions

S
o far, we’ve covered various parts of the capital budgeting decision. Our task in this 
chapter is to start bringing these pieces together. In particular, we will show you how 
to “spread the numbers” for a proposed investment or project and, based on those numbers, 
make an initial assessment about whether or not the project should be undertaken.
In the discussion that follows, we focus on the process of setting up a discounted cash 
flow analysis. From the last chapter, we know that the projected future cash flows are the 
key element in such an evaluation. Accordingly, we emphasize working with financial and 
accounting information to come up with these figures.
In evaluating a proposed investment, we pay special attention to deciding what infor-
mation is relevant to the decision at hand and what information is not. As we shall see, it is 
easy to overlook important pieces of the capital budgeting puzzle. We also describe how to 
go about evaluating the results of our discounted cash flow analysis.
PROJECT CASH FLOWS: A FIRST LOOK
The effect of taking a project is to change the firm’s overall cash flows today and in the 
future. To evaluate a proposed investment, we must consider these changes in the firm’s 
cash flows and then decide whether or not they add value to the firm. The first (and most 
important) step, therefore, is to decide which cash flows are relevant and which are not.
Relevant Cash Flows
What is a relevant cash flow for a project? The general principle is simple enough: A rel-
evant cash flow for a project is a change in the firm’s overall future cash flow that comes 
about as a direct consequence of the decision to take that project. Because the relevant cash 
flows are defined in terms of changes in, or increments to, the firm’s existing cash flow, 
they are called the incremental cash flows associated with the project.
The concept of incremental cash flow is central to our analysis, so we will state a gen-
eral definition and refer back to it as needed:
9.1
incremental cash 
flows
The difference between a 
firm’s future cash flows 
with a project and those 
without the project.
The incremental cash flows for project evaluation consist of any and all changes in 
the firm’s future cash flows that are a direct consequence of taking the project.
This definition of incremental cash flows has an obvious and important corollary: Any 
cash flow that exists regardless of whether or not a project is undertaken is not relevant.
The Stand-Alone Principle
In practice, it would be very cumbersome to actually calculate the future total cash flows to 
the firm with and without a project, especially for a large firm. Fortunately, it is not really 
necessary to do so. Once we identify the effect of undertaking the proposed project on the 
firm’s cash flows, we need only focus on the project’s resulting incremental cash flows. 
This is called the stand-alone principle.
What the stand-alone principle says is that, once we have determined the incremental 
cash flows from undertaking a project, we can view that project as a kind of “minifirm” 
with its own future revenues and costs, its own assets, and, of course, its own cash flows. 
We will then be primarily interested in comparing the cash flows from this minifirm to the 
cost of acquiring it. An important consequence of this approach is that we will be evaluat-
ing the proposed project purely on its own merits, in isolation from any other activities or 
projects.
stand-alone 
principle
The assumption that 
evaluation of a project 
may be based on the 
project’s incremental cash 
flows.
	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
275

276	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
INCREMENTAL CASH FLOWS
We are concerned here only with those cash flows that are incremental and that result 
from a project. Looking back at our general definition, it seems easy enough to decide 
whether a cash flow is incremental or not. Even so, there are a few situations where mis-
takes are easy to make. In this section, we describe some of these common pitfalls and 
how to avoid them.
Sunk Costs
A sunk cost, by definition, is a cost we have already paid or have already incurred the lia-
bility to pay. Such a cost cannot be changed by the decision today to accept or reject a 
project. Put another way, the firm will have to pay this cost no matter what. Based on our 
general definition of incremental cash flow, such a cost is clearly not relevant to the deci-
sion at hand. So, we will always be careful to exclude sunk costs from our analysis.
That a sunk cost is not relevant seems obvious given our discussion. Nonetheless, it’s 
easy to fall prey to the sunk cost fallacy. For example, suppose General Milk Company 
hires a financial consultant to help evaluate whether or not a line of chocolate milk should 
be launched. When the consultant turns in the report, General Milk objects to the analysis 
because the consultant did not include the hefty consulting fee as a cost of the chocolate 
milk project.
Who is correct? By now, we know that the consulting fee is a sunk cost because the 
consulting fee must be paid whether or not the chocolate milk line is actually launched 
(this is an attractive feature of the consulting business).
Opportunity Costs
When we think of costs, we normally think of out-of-pocket costs, namely, those that re-
quire us to actually spend some amount of cash. An opportunity cost is slightly different; 
it requires us to give up a benefit. A common situation arises where a firm already owns 
some of the assets a proposed project will be using. For example, we might be thinking of 
converting an old rustic cotton mill we bought years ago for $100,000 into “upmarket” 
condominiums.
If we undertake this project, there will be no direct cash outflow associated with buy-
ing the old mill since we already own it. For purposes of evaluating the condo project, 
should we then treat the mill as “free”? The answer is no. The mill is a valuable resource 
used by the project. If we didn’t use it here, we could do something else with it. Like what? 
The obvious answer is that, at a minimum, we could sell it. Using the mill for the condo 
complex thus has an opportunity cost: We give up the valuable opportunity to do some-
thing else with it.1
9.2
sunk cost
A cost that has already 
been incurred and cannot 
be recouped and 
therefore should not be 
considered in an 
investment decision.
opportunity cost
The most valuable 
alternative that is given up 
if a particular investment 
is undertaken.
concept questions
9.1a	
What are the relevant incremental cash flows for project evaluation?
9.1b	
What is the stand-alone principle?
1 Economists sometimes use the acronym TANSTAAFL, which is short for “There ain’t no such thing as a free 
lunch,” to describe the fact that only very rarely is something truly free.

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
277
There is another issue here. Once we agree that the use of the mill has an opportunity 
cost, how much should the condo project be charged? Given that we paid $100,000, it 
might seem that we should charge this amount to the condo project. Is this correct? The 
answer is no, and the reason is based on our discussion concerning sunk costs.
The fact that we paid $100,000 some years ago is irrelevant. That cost is sunk. At a 
minimum, the opportunity cost that we charge the project is what the mill would sell for 
today (net of any selling costs) because this is the amount that we give up by using it in-
stead of selling it.
Side Effects
Remember that the incremental cash flows for a project include all the changes in the 
firm’s future cash flows. It would not be unusual for a project to have side, or spillover, ef-
fects, both good and bad. For example, if the Innovative Motors Company (IMC) intro-
duces a new car, some of the sales might come at the expense of other IMC cars. This is 
called erosion, and the same general problem could occur for any multiline consumer 
product producer or seller.2 In this case, the cash flows from the new line should be ad-
justed downward to reflect lost profits on other lines.
In accounting for erosion, it is important to recognize that any sales lost as a result of 
our launching a new product might be lost anyway because of future competition. Erosion 
is only relevant when the sales would not otherwise be lost.
Net Working Capital
Normally, a project will require that the firm invest in net working capital in addition 
to long-term assets. For example, a project will generally need some amount of cash on 
hand to pay any expenses that arise. In addition, a project will need an initial invest-
ment in inventories and accounts receivable (to cover credit sales). Some of this fi-
nancing will be in the form of amounts owed to suppliers (accounts payable), but the 
firm will have to supply the balance. This balance represents the investment in net 
working capital.
It’s easy to overlook an important feature of net working capital in capital budgeting. 
As a project winds down, inventories are sold, receivables are collected, bills are paid, 
and cash balances can be drawn down. These activities free up the net working capital 
originally invested. So, the firm’s investment in project net working capital closely re-
sembles a loan. The firm supplies working capital at the beginning and recovers it to-
wards the end.
Financing Costs
In analyzing a proposed investment, we will not include interest paid or any other financing 
costs such as dividends or principal repaid because we are interested in the cash flow gen-
erated by the assets of the project. As we mentioned in Chapter 2, interest paid, for exam-
ple, is a component of cash flow to creditors, not cash flow from assets.
More generally, our goal in project evaluation is to compare the cash flow from a proj-
ect to the cost of acquiring that project in order to estimate NPV. The particular mixture of 
debt and equity a firm actually chooses to use in financing a project is a managerial vari-
able and primarily determines how project cash flow is divided between owners and credi-
tors. This is not to say that financing arrangements are unimportant. They are just 
something to be analyzed separately. We will cover this in later chapters.
erosion
The cash flows of a new 
project that come at the 
expense of a firm’s 
existing projects.
2 More colorfully, erosion is sometimes called piracy or cannibalism.

278	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
Other Issues
There are some other things to watch out for. First, we are only interested in measuring 
cash flow. Moreover, we are interested in measuring it when it actually occurs, not when it 
accrues in an accounting sense. Second, we are always interested in aftertax cash flow 
because taxes are definitely a cash outflow. In fact, whenever we write “incremental cash 
flows,” we mean aftertax incremental cash flows. Remember, however, that aftertax cash 
flow and accounting profit, or net income, are entirely different things.
concept questions
9.2a	
What is a sunk cost? An opportunity cost?
9.2b	
Explain what erosion is, and why it is relevant.
9.2c	
Explain why interest paid is not a relevant cash flow for project evaluation.
PRO FORMA FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  
AND PROJECT CASH FLOWS
The first thing we need when we begin evaluating a proposed investment is a set of pro 
forma, or projected, financial statements. Given these, we can develop the projected cash 
flows from the project. Once we have the cash flows, we can estimate the value of the proj-
ect using the techniques we described in the previous chapter.
Getting Started: Pro Forma Financial Statements
Pro forma financial statements are a convenient and easily understood means of summa-
rizing much of the relevant information for a project. To prepare these statements, we will 
need estimates of quantities such as unit sales, the selling price per unit, the variable cost 
per unit, and total fixed costs. We will also need to know the total investment required, in-
cluding any investment in net working capital.
To illustrate, suppose we think we can sell 50,000 cans of shark attractant per year at 
a price of $4.00 per can. It costs us about $2.50 per can to make the attractant, and a new 
product such as this one typically has only a three-year life (perhaps because the customer 
base dwindles rapidly). We require a 20 percent return on new products.
Fixed costs for the project, including such things as rent on the production facility, will 
run $12,000 per year. Further, we will need to invest a total of $90,000 in manufacturing 
equipment. For simplicity, we will assume that this $90,000 will be 100 percent depreci-
ated over the three-year life of the project. Furthermore, the cost of removing the equip-
ment will roughly equal its actual value in three years, so it will be essentially worthless on 
a market value basis as well. Finally, the project will require an initial $20,000 investment 
in net working capital. As usual, the tax rate is 34 percent.
In Table 9.1, we organize these initial projections by first preparing the pro forma in-
come statement for each of the three years. Once again, notice that we have not deducted 
any interest expense. This will always be so. As we described earlier, interest paid is a fi-
nancing expense, not a component of operating cash flow.
We can also prepare a series of abbreviated balance sheets that show the capital re-
quirements for the project as we’ve done in Table 9.2. Here we have net working capital of 
9.3
coverage online
Excel 
Master
pro forma financial 
statements
Financial statements 
projecting future years’ 
operations.

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
279
$20,000 in each year. Fixed assets are $90,000 at the start of the project’s life (Year 0), and 
they decline by the $30,000 in depreciation each year, ending up at zero. Notice that the 
total investment given here for future years is the total book, or accounting, value, not 
­market value.
At this point, we need to start converting this accounting information into cash flows. 
We consider how to do this next.
Project Cash Flows
To develop the cash flows from a project, we need to recall (from Chapter 2) that cash flow 
from assets has three components: operating cash flow, capital spending, and additions to 
net working capital. To evaluate a project, or minifirm, we need to arrive at estimates for 
each of these.
Once we have estimates of the components of cash flow, we will calculate cash flow 
for our minifirm just as we did in Chapter 2 for an entire firm:
Project cash flow = Project operating cash flow     
	
− Project change in net working capital     
	
− Project capital spending
We consider these components next.
Project Operating Cash Flow 
To determine the operating cash flow associated 
with a project, we first need to recall the definition of operating cash flow:
Operating cash flow = Earnings before interest and taxes
	
+ Depreciation
	
− Taxes
To illustrate the calculation of operating cash flow, we will use the projected information 
from the shark attractant project. For ease of reference, Table 9.3 repeats the income 
statement.
ta b l e  9.2
Projected capital 
requirements, shark 
attractant project
Year
         0
          1
          2
          3
Net working capital
$   20,000
$20,000
$20,000
$20,000
Net fixed assets
     90,000
  60,000
   30,000
             0
Total investment
$110,000
$80,000
$50,000
$20,000
Sales (50,000 units at $4.00/unit)
$200,000
Variable costs ($2.50/unit)
  125,000
Gross profit
$  75,000
Fixed costs
12,000
Depreciation (=$90,000/3)
    30,000
EBIT
$  33,000
Taxes (34%)
    11,220
Net income
$  21,780
ta b l e  9.1
Projected income 
statement, shark 
attractant project, 
Years 1–3

280	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
Given the income statement in Table 9.3, calculating the operating cash flow is very 
straightforward. As we see in Table 9.4, projected operating cash flow for the shark attrac-
tant project is $51,780.
Project Net Working Capital and Capital Spending 
We next need to take 
care of the fixed asset and net working capital requirements. Based on our balance sheets 
above, the firm must spend $90,000 up front for fixed assets and invest an additional 
$20,000 in net working capital. The immediate outflow is thus $110,000. At the end of the 
project’s life, the fixed assets will be worthless (the salvage value will be zero), but the firm 
will recover the $20,000 that was tied up in working capital. This will lead to a $20,000 
cash inflow in the last year.
On a purely mechanical level, notice that whenever we have an investment in net 
working capital, that same investment has to be recovered; in other words, the same num-
ber needs to appear at some time in the future with the opposite sign.
Projected Total Cash Flow and Value
Given the information we’ve accumulated, we can finish the preliminary cash flow analy-
sis as illustrated in Table 9.5.
Now that we have cash flow projections, we are ready to apply the various criteria we 
discussed in the last chapter. First, the NPV at the 20 percent required return is:
NPV = −$110,000 + 51,780/1.2 + 51,780/1.22 + 71,780/1.23 
	
= $10,648
EBIT
$33,000
Depreciation
+30,000
Taxes
 −11,220
Operating cash flow
$ 51,780
ta b l e  9.4
Projected operating 
cash flow, shark 
attractant project
 
Year
 
0
1
2
3
Operating cash flow
 
$51,780
$51,780
$51,780
Change in NWC
−$  20,000
 
 
+  20,000
Capital spending
−     90,000
               
              
                 
Total project cash flow
−$110,000
$51,780
$51,780
  $71,780
ta b l e  9.5
Projected total  
cash flows, shark 
attractant project
ta b l e  9.3
Projected income 
statement, shark 
attractant project, 
Years 1–3
Sales
$200,000
Variable costs
125,000
Fixed costs
12,000
Depreciation
    30,000
EBIT
$   33,000
Taxes (34%)
    11,220
Net income
$  21,780

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
281
So, based on these projections, the project creates more than $10,000 in value and should 
be accepted. Also, the return on this investment obviously exceeds 20 percent (because the 
NPV is positive at 20 percent). After some trial and error, we find that the IRR works out 
to be about 25.8 percent.
In addition, if required, we could go ahead and calculate the payback and the average 
accounting return, or AAR. Inspection of the cash flows shows that the payback on this 
project is just a little over two years (verify that it’s about 2.1 years).
From the last chapter, we know that the AAR is average net income divided by 
average book value. The net income each year is $21,780. The average (in thousands) 
of the four book values (from Table 9.2) for a total investment is ($110 + 80 + 50 + 
20)/4 = $65, so the AAR is $21,780/65,000 = 33.51 percent. We’ve already seen that 
the return on this investment (the IRR) is about 26 percent. The fact that the AAR is 
larger illustrates again why the AAR cannot be meaningfully interpreted as the return 
on a project.
The Tax Shield Approach
A useful variation on our basic definition of operating cash flow (OCF) is the tax shield 
approach. The tax shield definition of OCF is:
OCF = (Sales − Costs) × (1 − Tc) + Depreciation × Tc
where Tc is the corporate tax rate. Assuming that Tc = 34%, the OCF works out to be:
	OCF = ($200,000 − 137,000) × .66 + 30,000 × .34
	
= $41,580 + 10,200 
	
= $51,780
This is just as we had before.
This approach views OCF as having two components. The first part is what the proj-
ect’s cash flow would be if there were no depreciation expense. In this case, this would-
have-been cash flow is $41,580.
The second part of OCF in this approach is the depreciation deduction multiplied by 
the tax rate. This is called the depreciation tax shield. We know that depreciation is a non-
cash expense. The only cash flow effect of deducting depreciation is to reduce our taxes, a 
benefit to us. At the current 34 percent corporate tax rate, every dollar in depreciation ex-
pense saves us 34 cents in taxes. So, in our example, the $30,000 depreciation deduction 
saves us $30,000 × .34 = $10,200 in taxes.
The tax shield approach will always give the same answer as our basic approach, so 
you might wonder why we bother. The answer is that it is sometimes a little simpler to use, 
particularly for projects that involve cost-cutting.
concept questions
9.3a	
What is the definition of project operating cash flow? How does this differ from net 
income?
9.3b	
In the shark attractant project, why did we add back the firm’s net working capital 
investment in the final year?
9.3c	
What is the “depreciation tax shield”?
depreciation tax 
shield
The tax saving that results 
from the depreciation 
deduction, calculated as 
depreciation multiplied by 
the corporate tax rate.

282	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
MORE ON PROJECT CASH FLOW
In this section, we take a closer look at some aspects of project cash flow. In particular, we 
discuss project net working capital in more detail. We then examine current tax laws re-
garding depreciation.
A Closer Look at Net Working Capital
In calculating operating cash flow, we did not explicitly consider the fact that some of our 
sales might be on credit. Also, we may not have actually paid some of the costs shown. In 
either case, the cash flow has not yet occurred. We show here that these possibilities are 
not a problem as long as we don’t forget to include additions to net working capital in our 
analysis. This discussion thus emphasizes the importance and the effect of doing so.
Suppose during a particular year of a project we have the following simplified income 
statement:
Sales
$500
Costs
  310
Net income
$190
Depreciation and taxes are zero. No fixed assets are purchased during the year. Also, to 
illustrate a point, we assume that the only components of net working capital are accounts 
receivable and payable. The beginning and ending amounts for these accounts are:
Beginning of Year
End of Year
Change
Accounts receivable
$880
$910
+$30
Accounts payable
  550
  605
+  55
Net working capital
$330
$305
−$25
Based on this information, what is total cash flow for the year? We can first just mechani-
cally apply what we have been discussing to come up with the answer. Operating cash flow 
in this particular case is the same as EBIT because there are no taxes or depreciation and 
thus equals $190. Also, notice that net working capital actually declined by $25, so the 
change in net working capital is negative. This just means that $25 was freed up during the 
year. There was no capital spending, so the total cash flow for the year is:
	Total cash flow = Operating cash flow − Change in NWC − Capital spending
	
= $190 − (−25) − 0 
	
= $215
Now, we know that this $215 total cash flow has to be “dollars in” less “dollars out” 
for the year. We could, therefore, ask a different question: What were cash revenues for the 
year? Also, what were cash costs?
To determine cash revenues, we need to look more closely at net working capital. Dur-
ing the year, we had sales of $500. However, accounts receivable rose by $30 over the same 
time period. What does this mean? The $30 increase tells us that sales exceeded collections 
by $30. In other words, we haven’t yet received the cash from $30 of the $500 in sales. As 
a result, our cash inflow is $500 − 30 = $470. In general, cash inflow is sales minus the 
increase in accounts receivable.
9.4
coverage online
Excel 
Master

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
283
Cash outflows can be similarly determined. We show costs of $310 on the income 
statement, but accounts payable increased by $55 during the year. This means that we have 
not yet paid $55 of the $310, so cash costs for the period are just $310 − 55 = $255. In 
other words, in this case, cash costs equal costs less the increase in accounts payable.
Putting this information together, cash inflows less cash outflows is $470 − 255 = $215, 
just as we had before. Notice that:
	Cash flow = Cash inflow − Cash outflow
	
= ($500 − 30) − (310 − 55) 
	
= ($500 − 310) − (30 − 55) 
	
= Operating cash flow − Change in NWC
	
= $190 − (−25)
	
= $215
More generally, this example illustrates that including net working capital changes in our 
calculations has the effect of adjusting for the discrepancy between accounting sales and 
costs and actual cash receipts and payments.
EXAMPLE
9.1
 Cash Collections and Costs
For the year just completed, the Combat Wombat Telestat Co. (CWT) reports sales of $998 and costs 
of $734. You have collected the following beginning and ending balance sheet information:
Beginning
Ending
Accounts receivable
$100
$110
Inventory
  100
    80
Accounts payable
  100
    70
Net working capital
$100
$120
Based on these figures, what are cash inflows? Cash outflows? What happened to each account? 
What is net cash flow?
	
Sales were $998, but receivables rose by $10. So, cash collections were $10 less than sales, or 
$988. Costs were $734, but inventories fell by $20. This means that we didn’t replace $20 worth of 
inventory, so costs are actually overstated by this amount. Also, payables fell by $30. This means 
that, on a net basis, we actually paid our suppliers $30 more than we received from them, resulting 
in a $30 understatement of costs. Adjusting for these events, cash costs are $734 – 20 + 30 = $744. 
Net cash flow is $988 – 744 = $244.
	
Finally, notice that net working capital increased by $20 overall. We can check our answer by 
noting that the original accounting sales less costs of $998 – 734 is $264. In addition, CWT spent 
$20 on net working capital, so the net result is a cash flow of $264 – 20 = $244, as we calculated.
Depreciation
As we note elsewhere, accounting depreciation is a noncash deduction. As a result, de-
preciation has cash flow consequences only because it influences the tax bill. The way 
that depreciation is computed for tax purposes is thus the relevant method for capital 
investment decisions. Not surprisingly, the procedures are governed by tax law. We now 
discuss some specifics of the depreciation system enacted by the Tax Reform Act of 
1986. This system is a modification of the Accelerated Cost Recovery System (ACRS) 
instituted in 1981.
Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System 
(ACRS)
Depreciation method 
under U.S. tax law 
allowing for the 
accelerated write-off of 
property under various 
classifications.

284	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
Modified ACRS (MACRS) Depreciation 
Calculating depreciation is normally 
very mechanical. While there are a number of ifs, ands, and buts involved, the basic idea is 
that every asset is assigned to a particular class. An asset’s class establishes its life for tax 
purposes. Once an asset’s tax life is determined, we compute the depreciation for each year 
by multiplying the cost of the asset by a fixed percentage. The expected salvage value 
(what we think the asset will be worth when we dispose of it) and the actual expected eco-
nomic life (how long we expect the asset to be in service) are not explicitly considered in 
the calculation of depreciation.
Some typical depreciation classes are described in Table 9.6, and associated percent-
ages (rounded to two decimal places) are shown in Table 9.7. Remember that land cannot 
be depreciated.
To illustrate how depreciation is calculated, we consider an automobile costing 
$12,000. Autos are normally classified as five-year property. Looking at Table 9.7, we see 
that the relevant figure for the first year of a five-year asset is 20 percent. The depreciation 
in the first year is thus $12,000 × .20 = $2,400. The relevant percentage in the second year 
is 32 percent, so the depreciation in the second year is $12,000 × .32 = $3,840, and so on. 
We can summarize these calculations as follows:
Year
MACRS Percentage
Depreciation
1
    20.00%
	
.2000 × 	$12,000 =	 $  2,400.00
2
    32.00
	
.3200 ×	   12,000 =	     3,840.00
3
    19.20
    	
.1920 ×	   12,000 =      2,304.00
4
   11.52
	
   .1152 ×	   12,000 =	     1,382.40
5
   11.52
	
   .1152 ×	   12,000 =     1,382.40
6
     5.76
	
   .0576 ×	   12,000 =         691.20
  100.00%
	
$12,000.00
ta b l e  9.6
Modified ACRS 
property classes
Class
Examples
3-year
Equipment used in research
5-year
Autos, computers
7-year
Most industrial equipment
ta b l e  9.7
Modified ACRS 
depreciation 
allowances
Property Class
Year
3-Year
5-Year
7-Year
1
   33.33%
   20.00%
   14.29%
2
44.45   
32.00   
24.49   
3
14.81   
19.20   
17.49   
4
  7.41   
11.52   
12.49   
5
11.52   
  8.93   
6
  5.76   
  8.92   
7
  8.93   
8
  4.46  

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
285
Notice that the MACRS percentages sum up to 100 percent. As a result, we write off 
100 percent of the cost of the asset, or $12,000 in this case.
Book Value versus Market Value 
In calculating depreciation under current tax 
law, the economic life and future market value of the asset are not an issue. As a result, the 
book value of an asset can differ substantially from its actual market value. For example, 
with our $12,000 car, book value after the first year is $12,000 less the first year’s depre-
ciation of $2,400, or $9,600. The remaining book values are summarized in Table 9.8. 
After six years, the book value of the car is zero.
Suppose we wanted to sell the car after five years. Based on historical averages, it will 
be worth, say, 25 percent of the purchase price, or .25 × $12,000 = $3,000. If we actually 
sold it for this, then we would have to pay taxes at the ordinary income tax rate on the dif-
ference between the sale price of $3,000 and the book value of $691.20. For a corporation 
in the 34 percent bracket, the tax liability is .34 × $2,308.80 = $784.99.
The reason that taxes must be paid in this case is that the difference in market value 
and book value is “excess” depreciation, and it must be “recaptured” when the asset is sold. 
What this means is that, as it turns out, we overdepreciated the asset by $3,000 − 691.20 = 
$2,308.80. Because we deducted $2,308.80 too much in depreciation, we paid $784.99 too 
little in taxes, and we simply have to make up the difference.
Notice that this is not a tax on a capital gain. As a general (albeit rough) rule, a capital 
gain only occurs if the market price exceeds the original cost. However, what is and what 
is not a capital gain is ultimately up to taxing authorities, and the specific rules can be very 
complex. We will ignore capital gains taxes for the most part.
Finally, if the book value exceeds the market value, then the difference is treated as a 
loss for tax purposes. For example, if we sell the car after two years for $4,000, then the 
book value exceeds the market value by $1,760. In this case, a tax saving of .34 × $1,760 = 
$598.40 occurs.
ta b l e  9.8
MACRS book values
Year
Beginning Book Value
Depreciation
Ending Book Value
1
$12,000.00
$2,400.00
$9,600.00
2
    9,600.00
  3,840.00
  5,760.00
3
    5,760.00
  2,304.00
  3,456.00
4
    3,456.00
  1,382.40
  2,073.60
5
    2,073.60
  1,382.40
     691.20
6
       691.20
     691.20
         0.00
EXAMPLE
9.2  MACRS Depreciation
The Staple Supply Co. has just purchased a new computerized information system with an installed 
cost of $160,000. The computer is treated as five-year property. What are the yearly depreciation 
allowances? Based on historical experience, we think that the system will be worth only $10,000 
when we get rid of it in four years. What are the tax consequences of the sale? What is the total 
aftertax cash flow from the sale?
	
The yearly depreciation allowances are calculated by just multiplying $160,000 by the five-year 
percentages in Table 9.7:
(continued )

286	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
An Example: The Majestic Mulch  
and Compost Company (MMCC)
At this point, we want to go through a somewhat more involved capital budgeting analysis. 
Keep in mind as you read that the basic approach here is exactly the same as that in our 
earlier shark attractant example. We have only added some more “real-world” detail (and a 
lot more numbers).
MMCC is investigating the feasibility of a new line of power mulching tools aimed at 
the growing number of home composters. Based on exploratory conversations with buyers 
for large garden shops, it projects unit sales as follows:
Year
Unit Sales
1
3,000
2
5,000
3
6,000
4
6,500
5
6,000
6
5,000
7
4,000
8
3,000
The new power mulcher will be priced to sell at $120 per unit to start. When the competition 
catches up after three years, however, MMCC anticipates that the price will drop to $110.
The power mulcher project will require $20,000 in net working capital at the start. Sub-
sequently, total net working capital at the end of each year will be about 15 percent of sales 
for that year. The variable cost per unit is $60, and total fixed costs are $25,000 per year.
It will cost about $800,000 to buy the equipment necessary to begin production. This 
investment is primarily in industrial equipment and thus qualifies as seven-year MACRS 
property. The equipment will actually be worth about 20 percent of its cost in eight years, 
or .20 × $800,000 = $160,000. The relevant tax rate is 34 percent, and the required return 
is 15 percent. Based on this information, should MMCC proceed?
Year
MACRS Percentage
Depreciation
Ending Book Value
1
	
20.00%
.2000 × $160,000 = $   32,000
$128,000
2
	
32.00
.3200 ×   160,000 =      51,200
    76,800
3
	
19.20   
.1920 ×   160,000 =      30,720
    46,080
4
	
11.52   
.1152 ×   160,000 =      18,432
    27,648
5
	
11.52   
.1152 ×   160,000 =      18,432
      9,216
6
	
   5.76
.0576 ×   160,000 =        9,216
             0
	
100.00%
                                  $160,000
Notice that we have also computed the book value of the system as of the end of each year. The 
book value at the end of Year 4 is $27,648. If we sell the system for $10,000 at that time, we will have 
a loss of $17,648 (the difference) for tax purposes. This loss, of course, is like depreciation because 
it isn’t a cash expense.
	
What really happens? Two things. First: We get $10,000 from the buyer. Second: We save .34 × 
$17,648 = $6,000 in taxes. So, the total aftertax cash flow from the sale is a $16,000 cash inflow.

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
287
Operating Cash Flows 
There is a lot of information here that we need to organize. 
The first thing we can do is calculate projected sales. Sales in the first year are projected at 
3,000 units at $120 apiece, or $360,000 total. The remaining figures are shown in Table 9.9.
Next, we compute the depreciation on the $800,000 investment in Table 9.10. With 
this information, we can prepare the pro forma income statements, as shown in Table 9.11. 
From here, computing the operating cash flows is straightforward. The results are illus-
trated in the first part of Table 9.13.
ta b l e  9.9
Projected revenues, 
power mulcher 
project
Year
Unit Price
Unit Sales
Revenues
1
$120
3,000
$360,000
2
  120
5,000
  600,000
3
  120
6,000
  720,000
4
  110
6,500
  715,000
5
  110
6,000
  660,000
6
  110
5,000
  550,000
7
  110
4,000
  440,000
8
  110
3,000
  330,000
ta b l e  9.10
Annual depreciation, 
power mulcher 
project
Year
MACRS Percentage
Depreciation
Ending Book Value
1
	
14.29%
.1429 × $800,000 = $114,320
$685,680
2
	
24.49   
.2449 ×   800,000 =   195,920
  489,760
3
	
17.49   
.1749 ×   800,000 =    139,920
  349,840
4
	
12.49   
.1249 ×   800,000 =      99,920
  249,920
5
	
8.93   
.0893 ×   800,000 =      71,440
  178,480
6
	
8.92   
.0892 ×   800,000 =      71,360
  107,120
7
	
8.93   
.0893 ×   800,000 =      71,440
    35,680
8
	
  4.46   
.0446 ×   800,000 =      35,680
             0
	
100.00%
                                     $800,000
ta b l e  9.11
Pro forma income statements, power mulcher project
Year
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Unit price
$        120
$        120
$         120
$        110
$        110
$        110
$        110
$       110
Unit sales
      3,000
      5,000
      6,000
      6,500
      6,000
      5,000
      4,000
      3,000
Revenues
$360,000
$600,000
$720,000
$715,000
$660,000
$550,000
$440,000
$330,000
Variable costs
  180,000
  300,000
  360,000
  390,000
  360,000
  300,000
  240,000
  180,000
Fixed costs
    25,000
    25,000
    25,000
    25,000
    25,000
    25,000
    25,000
    25,000
Depreciation
  114,320
  195,920
   139,920
    99,920
     71,440
    71,360
     71,440
    35,680
EBIT
$  40,680
$   79,080
$ 195,080
$200,080
$203,560
$153,640
$103,560
$  89,320
Taxes (34%)
    13,831
    26,887
    66,327
     68,027
     69,210
    52,238
     35,210
     30,369
Net income
$  26,849
$  52,193
$128,753
$ 132,053
$134,350
$101,402
$   68,350
$  58,951

288	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
Changes in NWC 
Now that we have the operating cash flows, we need to determine 
the changes in NWC. By assumption, net working capital requirements change as sales 
change. In each year, we will generally either add to or recover some of our project net 
working capital. Recalling that NWC starts out at $20,000 and then rises to 15 percent of 
sales, we can calculate the amount of NWC for each year as illustrated in Table 9.12.
As illustrated, during the first year, net working capital grows from $20,000 to .15 × 
$360,000 = $54,000. The increase in net working capital for the year is thus $54,000 − 
20,000 = $34,000. The remaining figures are calculated the same way.
Remember that an increase in net working capital is a cash outflow, so we use a negative 
sign in this table to indicate an additional investment that the firm makes in net working capi-
tal. A positive sign represents net working capital returning to the firm. Thus, for example, 
$16,500 in NWC flows back to the firm in Year 6. Over the project’s life, net working capital 
builds to a peak of $108,000 and declines from there as sales begin to drop off.
We show the result for changes in net working capital in the second part of Table 9.13. 
Notice that at the end of the project’s life there is $49,500 in net working capital still to be 
recovered. Therefore, in the last year, the project returns $16,500 of NWC during the year 
and then returns the remaining $49,500 at the end of the year for a total of $66,000.
Capital Spending 
Finally, we have to account for the long-term capital invested in the 
project. In this case, we invest $800,000 at Year 0. By assumption, this equipment will be worth 
$160,000 at the end of the project. It will have a book value of zero at that time. As we discussed 
above, this $160,000 excess of market value over book value is taxable, so the aftertax proceeds 
will be $160,000 × (1 − .34) = $105,600. These figures are shown in the third part of Table 9.13.
Total Cash Flow and Value 
We now have all the cash flow pieces, and we put them 
together in Table 9.14. In addition to the total project cash flows, we have calculated the 
cumulative cash flows. At this point, it’s essentially plug-and-chug to calculate the net 
present value, internal rate of return, and payback.
If we sum the discounted cash flows and the initial investment, the net present value 
(at 15 percent) works out to be $65,485. This is positive; so, based on these preliminary 
projections, the power mulcher project is acceptable. The internal, or DCF, rate of return is 
greater than 15 percent since the NPV is positive. It works out to be 17.24 percent, again, 
indicating that the project is acceptable.
Looking at the cumulative cash flows, we see that the project has almost paid back 
after four years since the cumulative cash flow is almost zero at that time. As indicated, the 
fractional year works out to be $17,322/214,040 = .08, so the payback is 4.08 years. We 
can’t say whether or not this is good since we don’t have a benchmark for MMCC. This is 
the usual problem with payback periods.
ta b l e  9.12
Changes in net 
working capital, 
power mulcher 
project
Year
Revenues
Net Working Capital
Cash Flow
0
$  20,000
−$20,000
1
$360,000
   54,000
−  34,000
2
  600,000
   90,000
−  36,000
3
  720,000
 108,000
−  18,000
4
  715,000
 107,250
          750
5
  660,000
   99,000
       8,250
6
  550,000
   82,500
     16,500
7
  440,000
   66,000
     16,500
8
  330,000
   49,500
     16,500

289
ta b l e 9.13
Projected cash flows, power mulcher project
Year
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
I. Operating Cash Flow
EBIT
$  40,680
   $  79,080
   $195,080
$200,080
 $203,560
 $153,640
$103,560
 $  89,320
Depreciation
  114,320
     195,920
     139,920
    99,920
     71,440
     71,360
    71,440
     35,680
Taxes
                   
−    13,831
−    26,887
−    66,327
−    68,027
−    69,210
−    52,238
−    35,210
−    30,369
Operating cash flow
$141,169
   $248,113
   $268,673
$231,973
$205,790
 $172,762
$139,790
 $  94,631
II. Net Working Capital
Initial NWC
−$  20,000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Increases in NWC
−$  34,000  
−$  36,000
−$  18,000
$       750
 $    8,250
 $  16,500
$  16,500
 $  16,500
NWC recovery
                    
                    
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                    
      49,500
Changes in NWC
−$  20,000
−$  34,000  
−$  36,000
−$  18,000
$       750
 $    8,250
 $  16,500
$  16,500
 $    66,000
III. Capital Spending
Initial outlay
−$800,000
Aftertax salvage
                    
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                    
  $105,600
Capital spending
−$800,000
  $105,600
ta b l e  9.14
Projected total cash flows, power mulcher project
Year
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Operating cash flow
  $141,169
  $248,113
  $268,673
  $231,973
$205,790
$172,762
$139,790
$  94,631
Changes in NWC
−$  20,000
−     34,000
−     36,000
−     18,000
           750
      8,250
    16,500
    16,500
    66,000
Capital spending
−  800,000
                    
                    
                    
                    
                 
                 
                  
  105,600
Total project cash flow
−$820,000
  $107,169
   $212,113
  $250,673
  $232,723
$214,040
$189,262
$156,290
$266,231
Cumulative cash flow
−$820,000
−$712,831
−$500,718
−$250,046
−$  17,323
$196,717
$385,979
$542,269
$808,500
Net present value (15%) = $65,485
Internal rate of return     = 17.24%
Payback                          = 4.08 years

290	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
Conclusion
This completes our preliminary DCF analysis. Where do we go from here? If we have 
a great deal of confidence in our projections, then there is no further analysis to be 
done. We should begin production and marketing immediately. It is unlikely that this 
will be the case. It is important to remember that the result of our analysis is an esti-
mate of NPV, and we will usually have less than complete confidence in our projec-
tions. This means we have more work to do. In particular, we will almost surely want 
to spend some time evaluating the quality of our estimates. We take up this subject in 
the next several sections.
concept questions
9.4a	
Why is it important to consider changes in net working capital in developing cash 
flows? What is the effect of doing so?
9.4b	
How is depreciation calculated for fixed assets under current tax law? What effect do 
expected salvage value and estimated economic life have on the calculated 
depreciation deduction?
EVALUATING NPV ESTIMATES
As we discussed in Chapter 8, an investment has a positive net present value if its market 
value exceeds its cost. Such an investment is desirable because it creates value for its 
owner. The primary problem in identifying such opportunities is that most of the time we 
can’t actually observe the relevant market value. Instead, we estimate it. Having done so, it 
is only natural to wonder whether or not our estimates are at least close to the true values. 
We consider this question next.
The Basic Problem
Suppose we are working on a preliminary DCF analysis along the lines we described in 
previous sections. We carefully identify the relevant cash flows, avoiding such things as 
sunk costs, and we remember to consider working capital requirements. We add back any 
depreciation, we account for possible erosion, and we pay attention to opportunity costs. 
Finally, we double-check our calculations, and, when all is said and done, the bottom line 
is that the estimated NPV is positive.
Now what? Do we stop here and move on to the next proposal? Probably not. The fact 
that the estimated NPV is positive is definitely a good sign, but, more than anything, this 
tells us that we need to take a closer look.
If you think about it, there are two circumstances under which a discounted cash flow 
analysis could lead us to conclude that a project has a positive NPV. The first possibility is 
that the project really does have a positive NPV. That’s the good news. The bad news is the 
second possibility: A project may appear to have a positive NPV because our estimate is 
inaccurate.
Notice that we could also err in the opposite way. If we conclude that a project has a 
negative NPV when the true NPV is positive, then we lose a valuable opportunity.
9.5

291
Forecasting Risk
The key inputs into a DCF analysis are projected future cash flows. If these projections are 
seriously in error, then we have a classic GIGO, or garbage-in, garbage-out, system. In this 
case, no matter how carefully we arrange the numbers and manipulate them, the resulting 
answer can still be grossly misleading. This is the danger in using a relatively sophisticated 
technique like DCF. It is sometimes easy to get caught up in number crunching and forget 
the underlying nuts-and-bolts economic reality.
The possibility that we will make a bad decision because of errors in the projected 
cash flows is called forecasting risk (or estimation risk). Because of forecasting risk, there 
is the danger that we will think a project has a positive NPV when it really does not. How 
is this possible? It occurs if we are overly optimistic about the future, and, as a result, our 
projected cash flows don’t realistically reflect the possible future cash flows. Our nearby 
Finance Matters box shows what can happen in such cases.
So far, we have not explicitly considered what to do about the possibility of errors 
in our forecasts, so our goal is to develop some tools that will be useful in identifying 
areas where potential errors exist and where they might be especially damaging. In one 
form or another, we will be trying to assess the economic “reasonableness” of our es-
timates. We will also be wondering how much damage will be done by errors in those 
estimates.
forecasting risk
The possibility that errors 
in projected cash flows 
will lead to incorrect 
decisions. Also estimation 
risk.
When Things Go Wrong . . .
I
f you think about it, the decision by a company to ac-
quire another company is a capital budgeting decision. 
One important difference, however, is that an acquisition 
may be more expensive than a typical project and, possi-
bly, much more expensive. Of course, as with any other 
project, acquisitions can fail. When they do, the losses 
can be huge.
	
For example, in April 2010, Hewlett-Packard (HP) an-
nounced that it was acquiring Palm, Inc., for $1.2 billion. HP 
stated that its global scale and financial strength, combined 
with Palm’s webOS operating system, would allow HP to 
enter the $100 billion mobile device market. Of course, the 
merger did not go as planned. For example, HP debuted its 
webOS TouchPad tablet on July 1, 2011. About eight weeks 
later, with sales lagging behind projections, HP dropped 
the price on the tablet from the original $499 price to $99. 
Finally, in November 2011, less than two years after the ac-
quisition, HP announced that it would write off its invest-
ment in Palm for $3.3 billion, almost three times the 
acquisition price.
	
In another example, in early 2015, the Royal Bank of 
Scotland (RBS) announced that it would write off $6.2 billion 
of its investment in Citizens Financial, which it had 
purchased in 1988 for $130 billion. This write-off completely 
wiped out RBS’s 2014 profit. In late 2014, RBS had sold 
25 percent of its stake in Citizens in an initial public offering 
that valued Citizens at $14 billion.
	
One of the largest acquisitions in U.S. history was 
America Online’s (AOL) purchase of Time Warner in 
2001. AOL purchased Time Warner under the assump-
tion that AOL was part of the “new economy” and primed 
for fast growth. Time Warner was the “old” communica-
tions company, owning cable stations and a music label, 
among other things. But things didn’t work as well as 
planned. Infighting among employees from the two com-
panies hurt production and morale. In 2002, accounting 
irregularities were uncovered at AOL, and, as a result of 
the acquisition costs, the company was saddled with 
massive debt. To make matters worse, AOL began to 
lose customers and money. Although AOL was the ac-
quirer, and the once-dominant partner, things got so bad 
at AOL that the company changed its name back to Time 
Warner. To cap things off, in 2002, Time Warner wrote off 
a stunning $54 billion in assets associated with the ac-
quisition, which was at the time the largest such write-off 
in history.
FINANCE MATTERS

292	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
Sources of Value
The first line of defense against forecasting risk is simply to ask: What is it about this invest-
ment that leads to a positive NPV? We should be able to point to something specific as the 
source of value. For example, if the proposal under consideration involved a new product, then 
we might ask questions such as the following: Are we certain that our new product is signifi-
cantly better than that of the competition? Can we truly manufacture at lower cost, or distribute 
more effectively, or identify undeveloped market niches, or gain control of a market?
These are just a few of the potential sources of value. There are many others. A key 
factor to keep in mind is the degree of competition in the market. It is a basic principle of 
economics that positive NPV investments will be rare in a highly competitive environment. 
Therefore, proposals that appear to show significant value in the face of stiff competition 
are particularly troublesome, and the likely reaction of the competition to any innovations 
must be closely examined.
The point to remember is that positive NPV investments are probably not all that com-
mon, and the number of positive NPV projects is almost certainly limited for any given 
firm. If we can’t articulate some sound economic basis for thinking ahead of time that we 
have found something special, then the conclusion that our project has a positive NPV 
should be viewed with some suspicion.
concept questions
9.5a 	 What is forecasting risk? Why is it a concern for the financial manager?
9.5b 	 What are some potential sources of value in a new project?
SCENARIO AND OTHER WHAT-IF ANALYSES
Our basic approach to evaluating cash flow and NPV estimates involves asking what-if 
questions. Accordingly, we discuss some organized ways of going about a what-if analysis. 
Our goal in doing so is to assess the degree of forecasting risk and to identify those com-
ponents most critical to the success or failure of an investment.
Getting Started
We are investigating a new project. Naturally, the first thing we do is estimate NPV based on 
our projected cash flows. We will call this the base case. Now, however, we recognize the 
possibility of error in those cash flow projections. After completing the base case, we thus 
wish to investigate the impact of different assumptions about the future on our estimates.
One way to organize this investigation is to put an upper and lower bound on the various 
components of the project. For example, suppose we forecast sales at 100 units per year. We 
know this estimate may be high or low, but we are relatively certain it is not off by more than 
10 units in either direction. We would thus pick a lower bound of 90 and an upper bound of 
110. We go on to assign such bounds to any other cash flow components we are unsure about.
When we pick these upper and lower bounds, we are not ruling out the possibility that 
the actual values could be outside this range. What we are saying, loosely speaking, is that 
it is unlikely that the true average (as opposed to our estimated average) of the possible 
values is outside this range.
An example is useful to illustrate the idea here. The project under consideration costs 
$200,000, has a five-year life, and has no salvage value. Depreciation is straight-line to 
9.6
coverage online
Excel 
Master

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
293
zero. The required return is 12 percent, and the tax rate is 34 percent. In addition, we have 
compiled the following information:
Base Case
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
Unit sales
	
6,000
    5,500
    6,500
Price per unit
	
$80
$75
$85
Variable cost per unit
	
$60
$58
$62
Fixed costs per year
$50,000
$45,000
$55,000
With this information, we can calculate the base-case NPV by first calculating net 
income:
Sales
$480,000
Variable costs
  360,000
Fixed costs
    50,000
Depreciation
    40,000
EBIT
$  30,000
Taxes (34%)
   10,200
Net income
$  19,800
Operating cash flow is thus $30,000 + 40,000 − 10,200 = $59,800 per year. At 12 percent, 
the five-year annuity factor is 3.6048, so the base-case NPV is:
Base-case NPV = −$200,000 + 59,800 × 3.6048 
	
= $15,566
Thus, the project looks good so far.
Scenario Analysis
The basic form of what-if analysis is called scenario analysis. What we do is investigate 
the changes in our NPV estimates that result from asking questions like: “What if unit sales 
realistically should be projected at 5,500 units instead of 6,000?”
Once we start looking at alternative scenarios, we might find that most of the plausible 
ones result in positive NPVs. In this case, we have some confidence in proceeding with the 
project. If a substantial percentage of the scenarios look bad, then the degree of forecasting 
risk is high and further investigation is in order.
There are a number of possible scenarios we could consider. A good place to start is 
with the worst-case scenario. This will tell us the minimum NPV of the project. If this is 
positive, we will be in good shape. While we are at it, we will go ahead and determine the 
other extreme, the best case. This puts an upper bound on our NPV.
To get the worst case, we assign the least favorable value to each item. This means low 
values for items such as units sold and price per unit and high values for costs. We do the 
reverse for the best case. For our project, these values would be:
Worst Case
Best Case
Unit sales
    5,500
6,500
Price per unit
$75
$85
Variable cost per unit
$62
$58
Fixed costs
$55,000
$45,000
scenario analysis
The determination of what 
happens to net present 
value estimates when we 
ask what-if questions.

294	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
With this information, we can calculate the net income and cash flows under each 
scenario (check these for yourself):
Scenario
Net Income
Cash Flow
Net Present Value
   IRR
Base case
 $19,800
$59,800
$  15,566
 15.1%
Worst case*
−  15,510
  24,490
−  111,719
−14.4
Best case
   59,730
  99,730
   159,504
 40.9
* We assume a tax credit is created in our worst-case scenario.
What we learn is that under the worst scenario, the cash flow is still positive at $24,490. 
That’s good news. The bad news is that the return is −14.4 percent in this case, and the 
NPV is −$111,719. Since the project costs $200,000, we stand to lose a little more than 
half of the original investment under the worst possible scenario. The best case offers an 
attractive 41 percent return.
The terms best case and worst case are very commonly used, and we will stick with 
them, but we should note that they are somewhat misleading. The absolute best thing that 
could happen would be something absurdly unlikely, such as launching a new diet soda and 
subsequently learning that our (patented) formulation also just happens to cure the com-
mon cold. Of course, on rare occasions, things do go very, very wrong. For example, in 
April 2010, BP’s Gulf of Mexico oil rig Deepwater Horizon caught fire and sank following 
an explosion, leading to a massive oil spill. The leak was finally stopped in July after re-
leasing more than 200 million gallons of crude oil into the Gulf. BP’s costs associated with 
the disaster are expected to exceed $40 billion, perhaps by a wide margin. By the middle of 
2014, BP had already paid out $28 billion in claims and cleanup costs. Then, in September 
2014, a federal judge found that BP had violated the Clean Water Act and could be respon-
sible for up to $18 billion in additional penalties. Nonetheless, our point is that in assessing 
the reasonableness of an NPV estimate, we need to stick to cases that are reasonably likely 
to occur.
Instead of best and worst, then, it is probably more accurate to say optimistic and pes-
simistic. In broad terms, if we were thinking about a reasonable range for, say, unit sales, 
then what we call the best case would correspond to something near the upper end of that 
range. The worst case would simply correspond to the lower end.
As we have mentioned, there are an unlimited number of different scenarios that we 
could examine. At a minimum, we might want to investigate two intermediate cases by go-
ing halfway between the base amounts and the extreme amounts. This would give us five 
scenarios in all, including the base case.
Beyond this point, it is hard to know when to stop. As we generate more and more pos-
sibilities, we run the risk of “paralysis of analysis.” The difficulty is that no matter how 
many scenarios we run, all we can learn are possibilities, some good and some bad. Be-
yond that, we don’t get any guidance as to what to do. Scenario analysis is thus useful in 
telling us what can happen and in helping us gauge the potential for disaster, but it does not 
tell us whether or not to take the project.
Sensitivity Analysis
Sensitivity analysis is a variation on scenario analysis that is useful in pinpointing the areas 
where forecasting risk is especially severe. The basic idea with a sensitivity analysis is to 
freeze all of the variables except one and then see how sensitive our estimate of NPV is to 
changes in that one variable. If our NPV estimate turns out to be very sensitive to relatively 
sensitivity analysis
Investigation of what 
happens to net present 
value when only one 
variable is changed.

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
295
small changes in the projected value of some component of project cash flow, then the 
forecasting risk associated with that variable is high.
To illustrate how sensitivity analysis works, we go back to our base case for every item 
except unit sales. We can then calculate cash flow and NPV using the largest and smallest 
unit sales figures.
Scenario
Unit Sales
Cash Flow
Net Present Value
IRR
Base case
6,000
$59,800
$15,566
15.1%
Worst case
5,500
  53,200
−     8,226
10.3   
Best case
6,500
  66,400
  39,357
19.7  
The results of our sensitivity analysis for unit sales can be illustrated graphically as in 
Figure 9.1. Here we place NPV on the vertical axis and unit sales on the horizontal axis. 
When we plot the combinations of unit sales versus NPV, we see that all possible combina-
tions fall on a straight line. The steeper the resulting line is, the greater is the sensitivity of 
the estimated NPV to the projected value of the variable being investigated.
By way of comparison, we now freeze everything except fixed costs and repeat the 
analysis:
Scenario
Fixed Costs
Cash Flow
Net Present Value
IRR
Base case
$50,000
$59,800
$15,566
15.1%
Worst case
  55,000
  56,500
    3,670
12.7   
Best case
  45,000
  63,100
   27,461
17.4  
What we see here is that, given our ranges, the estimated NPV of this project is more sensi-
tive to projected unit sales than it is to projected fixed costs. In fact, under the worst case 
for fixed costs, the NPV is still positive.
As we have illustrated, sensitivity analysis is useful in pinpointing those variables that 
deserve the most attention. If we find that our estimated NPV is especially sensitive to a 
variable that is difficult to forecast (such as unit sales), then the degree of forecasting risk 
is high. We might decide that further market research would be a good idea in this case.
f i g u r e  9.1
Sensitivity analysis 
for unit sales
50
40
30
20
10
0
–10
(Worst
case)
(Base
case)
6,000
(Best
case)
6,500
5,500
NPV 5 –$8,226
NPV 5 $15,566
NPV 5 $39,357
Net present
value ($000)
Unit
sales

296	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
Because sensitivity analysis is a form of scenario analysis, it suffers from the same 
drawbacks. Sensitivity analysis is useful for pointing out where forecasting errors will do 
the most damage, but it does not tell us what to do about possible errors.
concept questions
9.6a	
What are scenario and sensitivity analyses?
9.6b	
What are the drawbacks to what-if analyses?
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS  
IN CAPITAL BUDGETING
Our final task for this chapter is a brief discussion of two additional considerations in capi-
tal budgeting: managerial options and capital rationing. Both of these can be very impor-
tant in practice, but, as we will see, explicitly dealing with either of them is difficult.
Managerial Options and Capital Budgeting
In our capital budgeting analysis thus far, we have more or less ignored the possibility of 
future managerial actions. Implicitly, we have assumed that once a project is launched, its 
basic features cannot be changed. For this reason, we say that our analysis is static (as op-
posed to dynamic).
In reality, depending on what actually happens in the future, there will always be ways 
to modify a project. We will call these opportunities managerial options. Because they 
involve real (as opposed to financial) assets, such options are often called “real” options. 
There are a great number of these options. The way a product is priced, manufactured, ad-
vertised, and produced can all be changed, and these are just a few of the possibilities. We 
discuss some of the most important managerial options in the next few sections.
Contingency Planning 
The various what-if procedures in this chapter have another 
use. We can also view them as primitive ways of exploring the dynamics of a project and 
investigating managerial options. What we think about in this case are some of the possible 
futures that could come about and what actions we might take if they do.
For example, we might find that a project fails to break even when sales drop below 
10,000 units. This is a fact that is interesting to know, but the more important thing is to 
then go on and ask “What actions are we going to take if this actually occurs?” This is 
called contingency planning, and it amounts to an investigation of some of the managerial 
options implicit in a project.
There is no limit to the number of possible futures, or contingencies, that we could 
investigate. However, there are some broad classes, and we consider these next.
The option to expand  One particularly important option we have not explicitly addressed 
is the option to expand. If we truly find a positive NPV project, then there is an obvious 
consideration: Can we expand the project or repeat it to get an even larger NPV? Our static 
analysis implicitly assumes that the scale of the project is fixed.
For example, if the sales demand for a particular product were to greatly exceed ex-
pectations, we might investigate increasing production. If this were not feasible for some 
9.7
managerial options
Opportunities that 
managers can exploit if 
certain things happen in 
the future. Also known as 
“real” options.
contingency 
planning
Taking into account the 
managerial options 
implicit in a project.

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
297
reason, then we could always increase cash flow by raising the price. Either way, the poten-
tial cash flow is higher than we have indicated because we have implicitly assumed that no 
expansion or price increase is possible. Overall, because we ignore the option to expand in 
our analysis, we underestimate NPV (all other things being equal).
The option to abandon  At the other extreme, the option to scale back or even abandon a 
project is also quite valuable. For example, if a project does not even cover its own ex-
penses, we might be better off if we just abandoned it. Our DCF analysis implicitly as-
sumes that we would keep operating even in this case.
In reality, if sales demand were significantly below expectations, we might be able to 
sell off some capacity or put it to another use. Maybe the product or service could be rede-
signed or otherwise improved. Regardless of the specifics, we once again underestimate 
NPV if we assume that the project must last for some fixed number of years, no matter 
what happens in the future.
The option to wait  Implicitly, we have treated proposed investments as if they were “go 
or no-go” decisions. Actually, there is a third possibility. The project can be postponed, 
perhaps in hope of more favorable conditions. We call this the option to wait.
For example, suppose an investment costs $120 and has a perpetual cash flow of $10 
per year. If the discount rate is 10 percent, then the NPV is $10/.10 − 120 = −$20, so the 
project should not be undertaken now. However, this does not mean that we should forget 
about the project forever, because in the next period, the appropriate discount rate could be 
different. If it fell to, say, 5 percent, then the NPV would be $10/.05 − 120 = $80, and we 
would take the project.
More generally, as long as there is some possible future scenario under which a project 
has a positive NPV, then the option to wait is valuable.
To illustrate some of these ideas, consider the case of Euro Disney (known today as 
Disneyland Paris). The deal to open Euro Disney occurred in 1987, and the park opened its 
doors outside of Paris in 1992. Disney’s management thought Europeans would go goofy 
over the new park, but trouble soon began. The number of visitors never met expectations, 
in part because the company priced tickets too high. Disney also decided not to serve alco-
hol in a country that was accustomed to wine with meals. French labor inspectors fought 
Disney’s strict dress codes, and so on.
After several years of operations, the park began serving wine in its restaurants, low-
ered ticket prices, and made other adjustments. In other words, management exercised its 
option to reformulate the product. The park began to make a small profit. Then, the com-
pany exercised the option to expand by adding a “second gate,” which was another theme 
park next to Euro Disney named Walt Disney Studios. The second gate was intended to 
encourage visitors to extend their stays. But the new park flopped. The reasons ranged 
from high ticket prices, attractions geared toward Hollywood rather than European film-
making, labor strikes in Paris, and a summer heat wave.
By the summer of 2003, Euro Disney was close to bankruptcy again. Executives dis-
cussed a variety of options. These options ranged from letting the company go broke (the 
option to abandon) to pulling the Disney name from the park. In 2005, the company finally 
agreed to a restructuring with the help of the French government.
After all the changes made at Euro Disney, the park gained momentum for several 
years, almost breaking even in 2008. In 2014, the resort posted revenues that were 2 per-
cent lower than the previous year and the net loss increased €35 million to €115 million.
Disney hopes to leverage the lessons learned in its other theme parks around the world. 
For example, in 2014, Hong Kong Disneyland had a total of 7.5 million visitors for the 

298	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
year, resulting in a record revenue of $5.5 billion and a record net income of $332 million. 
And in April 2011, the groundbreaking occurred on a new $4.4 billion theme park in 
Shanghai that would be opened in the spring of 2016.
The whole idea of managerial options was summed up aptly by Jay Rasulo, the over-
seer of Disney’s theme parks, when he said: “One thing we know for sure is that you never 
get it 100 percent right the first time. We open every one of our parks with the notion that 
we’re going to add content.”
Strategic Options 
Companies sometimes undertake new projects just to explore pos-
sibilities and evaluate potential future business strategies. This is a little like testing the 
water by sticking a toe in before diving. Such projects are difficult to analyze using conven-
tional DCF methods because most of the benefits come in the form of strategic options, 
that is, options for future, related business moves. Projects that create such options may be 
very valuable, but that value is difficult to measure. Research and development, for exam-
ple, is an important and valuable activity for many firms precisely because it creates op-
tions for new products and procedures.
To give another example, a large manufacturer might decide to open a retail outlet as 
a pilot study. The primary goal is to gain some market insight. Because of the high start-up 
costs, this one operation won’t break even. However, based on the sales experience from 
the pilot, we can then evaluate whether or not to open more outlets, to change the product 
mix, to enter new markets, and so on. The information gained and the resulting options for 
actions are all valuable, but coming up with a reliable dollar figure is probably not 
feasible.
Conclusion 
We have seen that incorporating options into capital budgeting analysis is 
not easy. What can we do about them in practice? The answer is that we can only keep 
them in the back of our minds as we work with the projected cash flows. We will tend to 
underestimate NPV by ignoring options. The damage might be small for a highly struc-
tured, very specific proposal, but it might be great for an exploratory one.
Capital Rationing
Capital rationing is said to exist when we have profitable (positive NPV) investments avail-
able but we can’t get the needed funds to undertake them. For example, as division manag-
ers for a large corporation, we might identify $5 million in excellent projects, but find that, 
for whatever reason, we can spend only $2 million. Now what? Unfortunately, for reasons 
we will discuss, there may be no truly satisfactory answer.
Soft Rationing 
The situation we have just described is soft rationing. This occurs 
when, for example, different units in a business are allocated some fixed amount of money 
each year for capital spending. Such an allocation is primarily a means of controlling and 
keeping track of overall spending. The important thing about soft rationing is that the cor-
poration as a whole isn’t short of capital; more can be raised on ordinary terms if manage-
ment so desires.
If we face soft rationing, the first thing to do is try and get a larger allocation. Failing 
that, one common suggestion is to generate as large a net present value as possible within 
the existing budget. This amounts to choosing those projects with the largest benefit-cost 
ratio (profitability index).
Strictly speaking, this is the correct thing to do only if the soft rationing is a one-time 
event; that is, it won’t exist next year. If the soft rationing is a chronic problem, then some-
thing is amiss. The reason goes all the way back to Chapter 1. Ongoing soft rationing 
strategic options
Options for future, related 
business products or 
strategies.
capital rationing
The situation that exists if 
a firm has positive net 
present value projects but 
cannot obtain the 
necessary financing.
soft rationing
The situation that occurs 
when units in a business 
are allocated a certain 
amount of financing for 
capital budgeting.

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
299
means we are constantly bypassing positive NPV investments. This contradicts our goal of 
the firm. If we are not trying to maximize value, then the question of which projects to take 
becomes ambiguous because we no longer have an objective goal in the first place.
Hard Rationing 
With hard rationing, a business cannot raise capital for a project un-
der any circumstances. For large, healthy corporations, this situation probably does not 
occur very often. This is fortunate because with hard rationing, our DCF analysis breaks 
down, and the best course of action is ambiguous.
The reason DCF analysis breaks down has to do with the required return. Suppose we 
say that our required return is 20 percent. Implicitly, we are saying that we will take a proj-
ect with a return that exceeds this. However, if we face hard rationing, then we are not go-
ing to take a new project no matter what the return on that project is, so the whole concept 
of a required return is ambiguous. About the only interpretation we can give this situation 
is that the required return is so large that no project has a positive NPV in the first place.
Hard rationing can occur when a company experiences financial distress, meaning that 
bankruptcy is a possibility. Also, a firm may not be able to raise capital without violating a 
preexisting contractual agreement. We discuss these situations in greater detail in a later 
chapter.
hard rationing
The situation that occurs 
when a business cannot 
raise financing for a 
project under any 
circumstances.
concept questions
9.7a	
Why do we say that our standard discounted cash flow analysis is static?
9.7b	
What are managerial options in capital budgeting? Give some examples.
9.7c	
What is capital rationing? What types are there? What problems does capital rationing 
create for discounted cash flow analysis?
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has described how to go about putting together a discounted cash flow analy-
sis and evaluating the results. In it, we covered:
  1.	 The identification of relevant project cash flows. We discussed project cash flows 
and described how to handle some issues that often come up, including sunk costs, 
opportunity costs, financing costs, net working capital, and erosion.
  2.	 Preparing and using pro forma, or projected, financial statements. We showed how pro 
forma financial statement information is useful in coming up with projected cash flows.
  3.	 The use of scenario and sensitivity analysis. These tools are widely used to evaluate 
the impact of assumptions made about future cash flows and NPV estimates.
  4.	 Additional issues in capital budgeting. We examined the managerial options implicit 
in many capital budgeting situations. We also discussed the capital rationing problem.
The discounted cash flow analysis we’ve covered here is a standard tool in the business 
world. It is a very powerful tool, so care should be taken in its use. The most important 
thing is to get the cash flows identified in a way that makes economic sense. This chapter 
gives you a good start on learning to do this.

300	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
9.1	
Calculating Operating Cash Flow.  Mater Pasta, Inc., has projected a sales volume 
of $1,432 for the second year of a proposed expansion project. Costs normally run 
70 percent of sales, or about $1,002 in this case. The depreciation expense will be 
$80, and the tax rate is 34 percent. What is the operating cash flow? (See Problem 9.)
9.2	
Scenario Analysis.  A project under consideration costs $500,000, has a five-year 
life, and has no salvage value. Depreciation is straight-line to zero. The required 
return is 15 percent, and the tax rate is 34 percent. Sales are projected at 400 units 
per year. Price per unit is $3,000, variable cost per unit is $1,900, and fixed costs 
are $250,000 per year. No net working capital is required.
	
Suppose you think the unit sales, price, variable cost, and fixed cost projections 
are accurate to within 5 percent. What are the upper and lower bounds for these 
projections? What is the base-case NPV? What are the best- and worst-case scenario 
NPVs? (See Problem 19.)
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
9.1	
First, we can calculate the project’s EBIT, its tax bill, and its net income.
   
 EBIT = $1,432 − 1,002 − 80 = $350
     Taxes = $350 × .34 = $119
Net income = $350 − 119 = $231
	
With these numbers, operating cash flow is:
OCF = EBIT + Depreciation − Taxes     
     = $350 + 80 − 119
     =   $311
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 9.1 What is the first step in estimating cash flow?
Section 9.2 What are sunk costs?
Section 9.3 What investment criteria can be applied to estimated cash flows?
Section 9.4 If a firm’s current assets are $150,000, its total assets are $320,000, 
and its current liabilities are $80,000, what is its net working capital?
Section 9.5 A project has a positive NPV. What could drive this result?
Section 9.6 If a firm’s variable cost per unit estimate used in its base case analysis 
is $50 per unit and it anticipates the upper and lower bounds to be +/− 10 percent, 
what is the “worst case” for variable cost per unit?
Section 9.7 Capital rationing exists when a company has identified positive NPV 
projects but can’t or won’t find what?

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
301
9.2	
We can summarize the relevant information as follows:
Base Case
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
Unit sales
            400
380
420
Price per unit
$3,000
$2,850
$3,150
Variable cost per unit
$1,900
$1,805  
$1,995
Fixed costs
   $250,000
$237,500
$262,500
	
The depreciation is $100,000 per year, and the tax rate is 34 percent, so we can 
calculate the cash flows under each scenario. Remember that we assign high costs and 
low prices and volume under the worst case and just the opposite for the best case.
Scenario
Unit Sales
Price
Variable Costs
Fixed Costs
Cash Flow
Base case
400
$3,000
$1,900
$250,000
$159,400
Best case
420
  3,150
  1,805
  237,500
  250,084
Worst case
380
  2,850
  1,995
  262,500
    75,184
	
At 15 percent, the five-year annuity factor is 3.35216, so the NPVs are: 
  Base-case NPV = −$500,000 + 159,400 × 3.35216 =      $34,334
  Best-case NPV = −$500,000 + 250,084 × 3.35216 =    $338,320
Worst-case NPV = −$500,000 +   75,184 × 3.35216 = −$247,972
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 1 	 9.1	
Opportunity Cost.  In the context of capital budgeting, what is an 
opportunity cost?
LO 1 	 9.2	 Depreciation.  Given the choice, would a firm prefer to use MACRS 
depreciation or straight-line depreciation? Why?
LO 1 	 9.3	 Net Working Capital.  In our capital budgeting examples, we assumed that 
a firm would recover all of the working capital it invested in a project. Is 
this a reasonable assumption? When might it not be valid?
LO 1 	 9.4	 Stand-Alone Principle.  Suppose a financial manager is quoted as saying, 
“Our firm uses the stand-alone principle. Because we treat projects like 
minifirms in our evaluation process, we include financing costs because 
they are relevant at the firm level.” Critically evaluate this statement.
LO 1 	 9.5	 Cash Flow and Depreciation.  “When evaluating projects, we’re only 
concerned with the relevant incremental aftertax cash flows. Therefore, 
because depreciation is a noncash expense, we should ignore its effects 
when evaluating projects.” Critically evaluate this statement.
LO 1 	 9.6	 Capital Budgeting Considerations.  A major college textbook publisher 
has an existing finance textbook. The publisher is debating whether or not 
to produce an “essentialized” version, meaning a shorter (and lower-priced) 
book. What are some of the considerations that should come into play?
To answer the next three questions, refer to the following example. In 2003, 
Porsche unveiled its new sports-utility vehicle (SUV), the Cayenne. With a price 
tag of more than $40,000, the Cayenne went from zero to 62 mph in 9.7 seconds. 
Porsche’s decision to enter the SUV market was in response to the runaway suc-
cess of other high-priced SUVs such as the Mercedes-Benz M-class. Vehicles in 

302	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
this class had generated years of very high profits. The Cayenne certainly spiced 
up the market, and Porsche subsequently introduced the Cayenne Turbo S, which 
goes from zero to 60 mph in 4.8 seconds and has a top speed of 168 mph. The 
price tag for the Cayenne Turbo S? About $114,000 in 2015.
Some analysts questioned Porsche’s entry into the luxury SUV market. The 
analysts were concerned not only that Porsche was a late entry into the market, 
but also that the introduction of the Cayenne would damage Porsche’s reputation 
as a maker of high-performance automobiles.
LO 1 	 9.7	 Erosion.  In evaluating the Cayenne, would you consider the possible 
damage to Porsche’s reputation?
LO 1 	 9.8	 Capital Budgeting.  Porsche was one of the last manufacturers to enter 
the sports-utility vehicle market. Why would one company decide to 
proceed with a product when other companies, at least initially, decide 
not to enter the market?
LO 1 	 9.9	 Capital Budgeting.  In evaluating the Cayenne, what do you think Porsche 
needs to assume regarding the substantial profit margins that exist in this 
market? Is it likely they will be maintained as the market becomes more 
competitive, or will Porsche be able to maintain the profit margin because 
of its image and the performance of the Cayenne?
LO 2 	 9.10	 Sensitivity Analysis and Scenario Analysis.  What is the essential 
difference between sensitivity analysis and scenario analysis?
LO 1 	 9.11	 Marginal Cash Flows.  A co-worker claims that looking at all this marginal 
this and incremental that is just a bunch of nonsense and states: “Listen, if 
our average revenue doesn’t exceed our average cost, then we will have a 
negative cash flow, and we will go broke!” How do you respond?
LO 1 	 9.12	 Capital Rationing.  Going all the way back to Chapter 1, recall that we 
saw that partnerships and proprietorships can face difficulties when it 
comes to raising capital. In the context of this chapter, the implication is 
that small businesses will generally face what problem?
LO 2 	 9.13	 Forecasting Risk.  What is forecasting risk? In general, would the degree of 
forecasting risk be greater for a new product or a cost-cutting proposal? Why?
LO 2 	 9.14	 Options and NPV.  What is the option to abandon? The option to expand? 
Explain why we tend to underestimate NPV when we ignore these options.
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–20)
LO 1 	 1.	 Relevant Cash Flows.  Kenny, Inc., is looking at setting up a new 
manufacturing plant in South Park. The company bought some land six years 
ago for $5.3 million in anticipation of using it as a warehouse and distribution 
site, but the company has since decided to rent facilities elsewhere. The land 
would net $7.4 million if it were sold today. The company now wants to build its 
new manufacturing plant on this land; the plant will cost $26.5 million to build, 

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
303
and the site requires $1.32 million worth of grading before it is suitable for 
construction. What is the proper cash flow amount to use as the initial 
investment in fixed assets when evaluating this project? Why?
LO 1 	 2.	 Relevant Cash Flows.  Winnebagel Corp. currently sells 28,000 motor 
homes per year at $77,000 each and 7,000 luxury motor coaches per year at 
$120,000 each. The company wants to introduce a new portable camper to 
fill out its product line; it hopes to sell 29,000 of these campers per year at 
$23,500 each. An independent consultant has determined that if the 
company introduces the new campers, it should boost the sales of its 
existing motor homes by 2,500 units per year and reduce the sales of its 
motor coaches by 750 units per year. What is the amount to use as the 
annual sales figure when evaluating this project? Why?
LO 2 	 3.	 Calculating Projected Net Income.  A proposed new investment has projected 
sales of $645,000. Variable costs are 40 percent of sales, and fixed costs are 
$168,000; depreciation is $83,000. Prepare a pro forma income statement 
assuming a tax rate of 35 percent. What is the projected net income?
LO 2 	 4.	 Calculating OCF.  Consider the following income statement:
Sales
$558,400
Costs
  346,800
Depreciation
    94,500
EBIT
                 
Taxes (35%)
                
Net income
                
Fill in the missing numbers and then calculate the OCF. What is the deprecia-
tion tax shield?
LO 2 	 5.	 Calculating Depreciation.  A piece of newly purchased industrial 
equipment costs $715,000 and is classified as seven-year property under 
MACRS. Calculate the annual depreciation allowances and end-of-the-year 
book values for this equipment.
LO 2 	 6.	 Calculating Salvage Value.  Consider an asset that costs $545,000 and is 
depreciated straight-line to zero over its eight-year tax life. The asset is to be 
used in a five-year project; at the end of the project, the asset can be sold for 
$95,000. If the relevant tax rate is 35 percent, what is the aftertax cash flow 
from the sale of this asset?
LO 2 	 7.	 Calculating Salvage Value.  An asset used in a four-year project falls in the 
five-year MACRS class for tax purposes. The asset has an acquisition cost 
of $7,100,000 and will be sold for $1,460,000 at the end of the project. If 
the tax rate is 34 percent, what is the aftertax salvage value of the asset?
LO 2 	 8.	 Calculating Project OCF.  Rolston Music Company is considering the sale 
of a new sound board used in recording studios. The new board would sell 
for $27,300, and the company expects to sell 1,500 per year. The company 
currently sells 1,850 units of its existing model per year. If the new model is 
introduced, sales of the existing model will fall to 1,520 units per year. The 
old board retails for $24,900. Variable costs are 55 percent of sales, 
depreciation on the equipment to produce the new board will be $2,150,000 
per year, and fixed costs are $3,200,000 per year. If the tax rate is 38 percent, 
what is the annual OCF for the project?
?
?
?

304	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
LO 2 	 9.	 Calculating Project OCF.  H. Cochran, Inc., is considering a new three-year 
expansion project that requires an initial fixed asset investment of 
$1,950,000. The fixed asset will be depreciated straight-line to zero over its 
three-year tax life, after which time it will be worthless. The project is 
estimated to generate $2,145,000 in annual sales, with costs of $1,205,000. 
If the tax rate is 35 percent, what is the OCF for this project?
LO 2 	 10.	Calculating Project NPV.  In the previous problem, suppose the required 
return on the project is 14 percent. What is the project’s NPV?
LO 2 	 11.	 Calculating Project Cash Flow from Assets.  In the previous problem, 
suppose the project requires an initial investment in net working capital of 
$150,000, and the fixed asset will have a market value of $175,000 at the 
end of the project. What is the project’s Year 0 net cash flow? Year 1? Year 
2? Year 3? What is the new NPV?
LO 2 	 12.	NPV and Modified ACRS.  In the previous problem, suppose the fixed asset 
actually falls into the three-year MACRS class. All the other facts are the 
same. What is the project’s Year 1 net cash flow now? Year 2? Year 3? 
What is the new NPV?
LO 2 	 13.	 Project Evaluation.  Kolby’s Korndogs is looking at a new sausage system 
with an installed cost of $655,000. This cost will be depreciated straight-line 
to zero over the project’s five-year life, at the end of which the sausage 
system can be scrapped for $85,000. The sausage system will save the firm 
$183,000 per year in pretax operating costs, and the system requires an 
initial investment in net working capital of $35,000. If the tax rate is 34 percent 
and the discount rate is 8 percent, what is the NPV of this project?
LO 2 	 14.	Project Evaluation.  Your firm is contemplating the purchase of a new 
$410,000 computer-based order entry system. The system will be 
depreciated straight-line to zero over its five-year life. It will be worth 
$30,000 at the end of that time. You will save $125,000 before taxes per 
year in order processing costs, and you will be able to reduce working 
capital by $35,000 at the beginning of the project. Working capital will 
revert back to normal at the end of the project. If the tax rate is 35 percent, 
what is the IRR for this project?
LO 2 	 15.	Project Evaluation.  In the previous problem, suppose your required return 
on the project is 10 percent and your pretax cost savings are $145,000 per 
year. Will you accept the project? What if the pretax cost savings are only 
$105,000 per year?
LO 3 	 16.	Scenario Analysis.  Automatic Transmissions, Inc., has the following 
estimates for its new gear assembly project: price = $960 per unit; variable 
cost = $350 per unit; fixed costs = $3.6 million; quantity = 55,000 units. 
Suppose the company believes all of its estimates are accurate only to 
within ±15 percent. What values should the company use for the four 
variables given here when it performs its best-case scenario analysis? What 
about the worst-case scenario?
LO 3 	 17.	 Sensitivity Analysis.  For the company in the previous problem, suppose 
management is most concerned about the impact of its price estimate on the 
project’s profitability. How could you address this concern for Automatic 
Transmissions? Describe how you would calculate your answer. What 
values would you use for the other forecast variables?

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
305
LO 3 	 18.	Sensitivity Analysis.  We are evaluating a project that costs $1,720,000, has 
a six-year life, and has no salvage value. Assume that depreciation is 
straight-line to zero over the life of the project. Sales are projected at 91,000 
units per year. Price per unit is $37.95, variable cost per unit is $23.20, and 
fixed costs are $815,000 per year. The tax rate is 35 percent, and we require 
a return of 11 percent on this project.
a.	
Calculate the base-case cash flow and NPV. What is the sensitivity of 
NPV to changes in the sales figure? Explain what your answer tells you 
about a 500-unit decrease in projected sales.
b.	 What is the sensitivity of OCF to changes in the variable cost figure? 
Explain what your answer tells you about a $1 decrease in estimated 
variable costs.
LO 3 	 19. Scenario Analysis.  In the previous problem, suppose the projections given 
for price, quantity, variable costs, and fixed costs are all accurate to within 
±10 percent. Calculate the best-case and worst-case NPV figures.
LO 2 	 20.	Calculating Project Cash Flows and NPV.  Pappy’s Potato has come up 
with a new product, the Potato Pet (they are freeze-dried to last longer). 
Pappy’s paid $120,000 for a marketing survey to determine the viability of 
the product. It is felt that Potato Pet will generate sales of $815,000 per year. 
The fixed costs associated with this will be $196,000 per year, and variable 
costs will amount to 20 percent of sales. The equipment necessary for 
production of the Potato Pet will cost $865,000 and will be depreciated in a 
straight-line manner for the 4 years of the product life (as with all fads, it is 
felt the sales will end quickly). This is the only initial cost for the 
production. Pappy’s has a tax rate of 40 percent and a required return of 
13 percent. Calculate the payback period, NPV, and IRR.
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 21–24)
LO 2 	 21.	Cost-Cutting Proposals.  CSM Machine Shop is considering a four-year 
project to improve its production efficiency. Buying a new machine press 
for $375,000 is estimated to result in $142,000 in annual pretax cost 
savings. The press falls in the MACRS five-year class, and it will have a 
salvage value at the end of the project of $45,000. The press also requires an 
initial investment in spare parts inventory of $15,000, along with an 
additional $2,000 in inventory for each succeeding year of the project. If the 
shop’s tax rate is 34 percent and its discount rate is 11 percent, should the 
company buy and install the machine press?
LO 3 	 22.	Sensitivity Analysis.  Consider a three-year project with the following 
information: initial fixed asset investment = $645,000; straight-line 
depreciation to zero over the five-year life; zero salvage value; price = 
$38.70; variable costs = $29.65; fixed costs = $315,000; quantity sold = 
90,000 units; tax rate = 34 percent. How sensitive is OCF to changes in 
quantity sold?
LO 2 	 23.	Project Analysis.  You are considering a new product launch. The project 
will cost $780,000, have a four-year life, and have no salvage value; 
depreciation is straight-line to zero. Sales are projected at 180 units per 
year; price per unit will be $16,300, variable cost per unit will be $11,100, 
and fixed costs will be $535,000 per year. The required return on the project 
is 11 percent, and the relevant tax rate is 35 percent.

306	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
a.	
Based on your experience, you think the unit sales, variable cost, and fixed 
cost projections given here are probably accurate to within ±10 percent. 
What are the best and worst cases for these projections? What is the 
base-case NPV? What are the best-case and worst-case scenarios?
b.	 Evaluate the sensitivity of your base-case NPV to changes in fixed costs.
LO 2 	 24.	Project Analysis.  McGilla Golf has decided to sell a new line of golf clubs. 
The clubs will sell for $825 per set and have a variable cost of $370 per set. 
The company has spent $150,000 for a marketing study that determined the 
company will sell 74,000 sets per year for seven years. The marketing study 
also determined that the company will lose sales of 8,900 sets per year of its 
high-priced clubs. The high-priced clubs sell at $1,250 and have variable 
costs of $630. The company will also increase sales of its cheap clubs by 
11,000 sets per year. The cheap clubs sell for $375 and have variable costs 
of $140 per set. The fixed costs each year will be $14,350,000. The 
company has also spent $1,000,000 on research and development for the 
new clubs. The plant and equipment required will cost $29,400,000 and will 
be depreciated on a straight-line basis. The new clubs will also require an 
increase in net working capital of $3,500,000 that will be returned at the 
end of the project. The tax rate is 40 percent, and the cost of capital is  
14 percent. Calculate the payback period, the NPV, and the IRR.
CHALLENGE (Questions 25–26)
LO 2 	 25.	Project Evaluation.  Aria Acoustics, Inc. (AAI), projects unit sales for a 
new seven-octave voice emulation implant as follows:
Year
Unit Sales
1
67,500
2
83,900
3
98,700
4
86,000
5
72,000
Production of the implants will require $1,500,000 in net working capital to 
start and additional net working capital investments each year equal to 15 per-
cent of the projected sales increase for the following year. Total fixed costs are 
$1,950,000 per year, variable production costs are $230 per unit, and the units 
are priced at $355 each. The equipment needed to begin production has an in-
stalled cost of $18,500,000. Because the implants are intended for professional 
singers, this equipment is considered industrial machinery and thus qualifies 
as seven-year MACRS property. In five years, this equipment can be sold for 
about 20 percent of its acquisition cost. AAI is in the 35 percent marginal tax 
bracket and has a required return on all its projects of 15 percent. Based on these 
preliminary project estimates, what is the NPV of the project? What is the IRR?
LO 2 	 26.	Calculating Required Savings.  A proposed cost-saving device has an 
installed cost of $535,000. The device will be used in a five-year project but 
is classified as three-year MACRS property for tax purposes. The required 
initial net working capital investment is $38,000, the marginal tax rate is 35 
percent, and the project discount rate is 12 percent. The device has an 
estimated Year 5 salvage value of $50,000. What level of pretax cost savings 
do we require for this project to be profitable?

	
c h a p t e r  9
Making Capital Investment Decisions	
307
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
For this Master It! assignment, refer to the Conch Republic Electronics case at the end of 
Chapter 9. For your convenience, we have entered the relevant values in the case, such as 
the price and variable cost, already. For this project, answer the following questions.
a.	
What is the profitability index of the project?
b.	 What is the IRR of the project?
c.	
What is the NPV of the project?
d.	 How sensitive is the NPV to changes in the price of the new smartphone? Construct 
a one-way data table to help you.
e.	
How sensitive is the NPV to changes in the quantity sold?

308	
p a r t  5
Capital Budgeting
CHAPTER CASE
Conch Republic Electronics
C
onch Republic Electronics is a midsized electronics 
manufacturer located in Key West, Florida. The com-
pany president is Shelly Couts, who inherited the com-
pany. The company originally repaired radios and other 
household appliances when it was founded more than 
70 years ago. Over the years, the company has expanded, 
and it is now a reputable manufacturer of various specialty 
electronic items. Jay McCanless, a recent MBA graduate, 
has been hired by the company in its finance department.
	
One of the major revenue-producing items manu-
factured by Conch Republic is a smartphone. Conch 
Republic currently has one smartphone model on the 
market and sales have been excellent. The smartphone 
is a unique item in that it comes in a variety of tropical 
colors and is preprogrammed to play Jimmy Buffett mu-
sic. However, as with any electronic item, technology 
changes rapidly, and the current smartphone has limited 
features in comparison with newer models. Conch Re-
public spent $750,000 to develop a prototype for a new 
smartphone that has all the features of the existing one 
but adds new features such as wifi tethering. The 
company has spent a further $200,000 for a marketing 
study to determine the expected sales figures for the 
new smartphone.
	
Conch Republic can manufacture the new smart-
phone for $205 each in variable costs. Fixed costs for 
the operation are estimated to run $5.1 million per year. 
The estimated sales volume is 64,000, 106,000, 87,000, 
78,000, and 54,000 per year for the next five years, re-
spectively. The unit price of the new smartphone will be 
$485. The necessary equipment can be purchased for 
$34.5 million and will be depreciated on a seven-year 
MACRS schedule. It is believed the value of the equip-
ment in five years will be $5.5 million.
	
Net working capital for the smartphones will be 
20 percent of sales and will occur with the timing of the 
cash flows for the year (i.e., there is no initial outlay for 
NWC). Changes in NWC will thus first occur in Year 1 with 
the first year’s sales. Conch Republic has a 35 percent 
corporate tax rate and a required return of 12 percent.
	
Shelly has asked Jay to prepare a report that an-
swers the following questions:
Q U E ST I ONS
1.	
What is the payback period of the project?
2.	
What is the profitability index of the project?
3.	
What is the IRR of the project?
4.	
What is the NPV of the project?
5.	
How sensitive is the NPV to changes in the price 
of the new smartphone?
6.	
How sensitive is the NPV to changes in the quan-
tity sold?
7.	
Should Conch Republic produce the new 
smartphone?
8.	
Suppose Conch Republic loses sales on other 
models because of the introduction of the new 
model. How would this affect your analysis?

309
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
W
ith the S&P 500 and NASDAQ Composite Index both return-
ing about 14 percent in 2014, stock market performance 
overall was pretty good. However, investors in outpatient diagnostic 
imaging services company RadNet, Inc., had to be happy about the 
411 percent gain in that stock, and investors in biopharmaceutical 
company Achillon Pharmaceutical had to feel good following that 
company’s 269 percent gain. On the other hand, investors in Trans-
ocean, Ltd., had to experience a sinking feeling about that stock’s 
63 percent decline during the year, while stock in Avon Products 
dropped 44 percent. These examples show that there were tremen-
dous potential profits to be made during 2014, but there was also 
the risk of losing money—and lots of it. So what should you, as a 
stock market investor, expect when you invest your own money? In 
this chapter, we study more than eight decades of market history to 
find out.
This chapter and the next take us into new territory: the relation between risk and return. 
As you will see, this chapter has a lot of very practical information for anyone thinking of in-
vesting in financial assets such as stocks and bonds. For example, suppose you were to start 
investing in stocks today. Do you think your money would grow at an average rate of 5 per-
cent per year? Or 10 percent? Or 20 percent? This chapter gives you an idea of what to ex-
pect (the answer may surprise you). The chapter also shows how risky certain investments 
can be, and it gives you the tools to think about risk in an objective way.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Calculate the return on an 
investment.
LO 2 	 Discuss the historical returns on 
various important types of 
investments.
LO 3 	 Explain the historical risks on 
various important types of 
investments.
LO 4 	 Assess the implications of market 
efficiency.
Some Lessons from  
Capital Market History
10
PART SIX 
Risk and Return

310	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
T
hus far, we haven’t had much to say about what determines the required return on an 
investment. In one sense, the answer is very simple: The required return depends on 
the risk of the investment. The greater the risk, the greater is the required return.
Having said this, we are left with a somewhat more difficult problem. How can we 
measure the amount of risk present in an investment? Put another way, what does it mean 
to say that one investment is riskier than another? Obviously, we need to define what we 
mean by risk if we are going to answer these questions. This is our task in the next two 
chapters.
From the last several chapters, we know that one of the responsibilities of the financial 
manager is to assess the value of proposed investments. In doing this, it is important that 
we first look at what financial investments have to offer. At a minimum, the return we re-
quire from a proposed nonfinancial investment must be at least as large as what we can get 
from buying financial assets of similar risk.
Our goal in this chapter is to provide a perspective on what capital market history can 
tell us about risk and return. The most important thing to get out of this chapter is a feel for 
the numbers. What is a high return? What is a low one? More generally, what returns should 
we expect from financial assets and what are the risks from such investments? This perspec-
tive is essential for understanding how to analyze and value risky investment projects.
We start our discussion of risk and return by describing the historical experience of 
investors in the U.S. financial markets. In 1931, for example, the stock market lost 43 per-
cent of its value. Just two years later, the stock market gained 54 percent. In more recent 
memory, the market lost about 25 percent of its value on October 19, 1987, alone, and 
stocks lost almost 40 percent in 2008. What lessons, if any, can financial managers learn 
from such shifts in the stock market? We will explore the last half century (and then some) 
of market history to find out.
Not everyone agrees on the value of studying history. On the one hand, there is phi-
losopher George Santayana’s famous comment “Those who cannot remember the past are 
condemned to repeat it.” On the other hand, there is industrialist Henry Ford’s equally fa-
mous comment “History is more or less bunk.” Nonetheless, perhaps everyone would 
agree with the following observation from Mark Twain: “October. This is one of the pecu-
liarly dangerous months to speculate in stocks in. The others are July, January, September, 
April, November, May, March, June, December, August, and February.”
There are two central lessons that emerge from our study of market history. First: 
There is a reward for bearing risk. Second: The greater the potential reward is, the greater 
is the risk. To understand these facts about market returns, we devote much of this chapter 
to reporting the statistics and numbers that make up the modern capital market history of 
the United States. In the next chapter, these facts provide the foundation for our study of 
how financial markets put a price on risk.
RETURNS
We wish to discuss historical returns on different types of financial assets. The first thing 
we need to do, then, is to briefly discuss how to calculate the return from investing.
Dollar Returns
If you buy an asset of any sort, your gain (or loss) from that investment is called your re-
turn on investment. This return will usually have two components. First: You may receive 
some cash directly while you own the investment. This is called the income component of 
10.1
coverage online
Excel 
Master

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
311
your return. Second: The value of the asset you purchase will often change. In this case, 
you have a capital gain or capital loss on your investment.1
To illustrate, suppose the Video Concept Company has several thousand shares of 
stock outstanding. You purchased some of these shares of stock in the company at the be-
ginning of the year. It is now year-end, and you want to determine how well you have done 
on your investment.
First, over the year, a company may pay cash dividends to its shareholders. As a stock-
holder in Video Concept Company, you are a part owner of the company. If the company is 
profitable, it may choose to distribute some of its profits to shareholders (we discuss the 
details of dividend policy in a later chapter). So, as the owner of some stock, you will re-
ceive some cash. This cash is the income component from owning the stock.
In addition to the dividend, the other part of your return is the capital gain or capital 
loss on the stock. This part arises from changes in the value of your investment. For ex-
ample, consider the cash flows illustrated in Figure 10.1. At the beginning of the year, the 
stock is selling for $37 per share. If you buy 100 shares, you have a total outlay of $3,700. 
Suppose, over the year, the stock pays a dividend of $1.85 per share. By the end of the year, 
then, you will have received income of:
Dividend = $1.85 × 100 = $185
Also, the value of the stock rises to $40.33 per share by the end of the year. Your 100 shares 
are worth $4,033, so you have a capital gain of:
Capital gain = ($40.33 − 37) × 100 = $333
On the other hand, if the price had dropped to, say, $34.78, you would have had a capital 
loss of:
Capital loss = ($34.78 − 37) × 100 = −$222
Notice that a capital loss is the same thing as a negative capital gain.
How did the market do 
today? Find out at 
finance.yahoo.com.
1 As we mentioned in an earlier chapter, strictly speaking, what is and what is not a capital gain (or loss) is 
determined by the IRS. We thus use the terms loosely.
f i g u r e  10.1
Dollar returns
$4,218
$185
$4,033
Total
Dividends
Ending
market
value
Initial
investment
–$3,700
Time
Outﬂows
Inﬂows
0
1

312	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
The total dollar return on your investment is the sum of the dividend and the capital 
gain:
Total dollar return = Dividend income + Capital gain (or loss)	
[10.1]
In our first example, the total dollar return is thus given by:
Total dollar return = $185 + 333 = $518
Notice that, if you sold the stock at the end of the year, the total amount of cash you would 
have would be your initial investment plus the total return. In the preceding example, then:
Total cash if stock is sold = Initial investment + Total return	
[10.2]
	
= $3,700 + 518	
	
= $4,218
As a check, notice that this is the same as the proceeds from the sale of the stock plus the 
dividends:
Proceeds from stock sale + Dividends = $40.33 × 100 + 185
	
= $4,033 + 185 
	
= $4,218
Suppose you hold on to your Video Concept stock and don’t sell it at the end of the year. 
Should you still consider the capital gain as part of your return? Isn’t this only a “paper” 
gain and not really a return if you don’t sell the stock?
The answer to the first question is a strong yes, and the answer to the second is an 
equally strong no. The capital gain is every bit as much a part of your return as the dividend, 
and you should certainly count it as part of your return. That you actually decided to keep 
the stock and not sell (you don’t “realize” the gain) is irrelevant because you could have 
converted it to cash if you had wanted to. Whether you choose to do so or not is up to you.
After all, if you insisted on converting your gain to cash, you could always sell the 
stock at year-end and immediately reinvest by buying the stock back. There is no net differ-
ence between doing this and just not selling (assuming, of course, that there are no tax 
consequences from selling the stock). Again, the point is that whether you actually cash out 
and buy sodas (or whatever) or reinvest by not selling doesn’t affect the return you earn.
Percentage Returns
It is usually more convenient to summarize information about returns in percentage terms, 
rather than dollar terms, because that way your return doesn’t depend on how much you 
actually invest. The question we want to answer is this: How much do we get for each dol-
lar we invest?
To answer this question, let Pt be the price of the stock at the beginning of the year 
and let Dt+1 be the dividend paid on the stock during the year. Consider the cash flows in 
Figure 10.2. These are the same as those in Figure 10.1, except that we have now ex-
pressed everything on a per-share basis.
In our example, the price at the beginning of the year was $37 per share and the divi-
dend paid during the year on each share was $1.85. As we discussed in Chapter 7, express-
ing the dividend as a percentage of the beginning stock price results in the dividend yield:
Dividend yield = Dt+1/Pt 
	
= $1.85/37 = .05 = 5%
This says that, for each dollar we invest, we get five cents in dividends.

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
313
The second component of our percentage return is the capital gains yield. Recall (from 
Chapter 7) that this is calculated as the change in the price during the year (the capital 
gain) divided by the beginning price:
	Capital gains yield = (Pt+1 − Pt)/Pt 
	
= ($40.33 − 37)/37
	
= $3.33/37
	
= 9%
So, per dollar invested, we get nine cents in capital gains.
Putting it together, per dollar invested, we get 5 cents in dividends and 9 cents in capi-
tal gains; so, we get a total of 14 cents. Our percentage return is 14 cents on the dollar, or 
14 percent.
To check this, notice that we invested $3,700 and ended up with $4,218. By what per-
centage did our $3,700 increase? As we saw, we picked up $4,218 − 3,700 = $518. This is 
a $518/3,700 = 14% increase.
To give a more concrete example, stock in Keurig Green Mountain (GMCR), of coffee-
making by the cup fame, began 2014 at $75.54 per share. Keurig Green Mountain paid divi-
dends of $1.00 during 2014, and the stock price at the end of the year was $132.40. What was 
the return on GMCR for the year? For practice, see if you agree that the answer is 76.60 per-
cent. Of course, negative returns occur as well. For example, again in 2014, GameStop’s stock 
price at the beginning of the year was $49.26 per share, and dividends of $1.32 were paid. The 
stock ended the year at $33.80 per share. Verify that the loss was 28.70 percent for the year.
f i g u r e  10.2
Dollar returns per 
share
$42.18
$1.85
$40.33
Total
Dividends
Ending
market
value
2$37
Time
Outﬂows
Inﬂows
t
t 11
EXAMPLE
10.1  Calculating Returns
Suppose you buy some stock for $25 per share. At the end of the year, the price is $35 per share. 
During the year, you get a $2 dividend per share. This is the situation illustrated in Figure 10.3. What 
is the dividend yield? The capital gains yield? The percentage return? If your total investment was 
$1,000, how much do you have at the end of the year?
	
Your $2 dividend per share works out to a dividend yield of:
Dividend yield = Dt+1/Pt
	
= $2/25 = .08 = 8%
(continued )

314	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
THE HISTORICAL RECORD
Roger Ibbotson and Rex Sinquefield conducted a famous set of studies dealing with rates 
of return in U.S. financial markets.2 They presented year-to-year historical rates of return 
on five important types of financial investments. The returns can be interpreted as what 
you would have earned if you had held portfolios of the following:
  1.	 Large-company stocks. The large-company stock portfolio is based on the Standard 
& Poor’s 500 index, which contains 500 of the largest companies (in terms of total 
market value of outstanding stock) in the United States.
10.2
coverage online
Excel 
Master
The per-share capital gain is $10, so the capital gains yield is:
Capital gains yield = (Pt+1 − Pt)/Pt
	
= ($35 − 25)/25
	
= $10/25
	
= 40%
The total percentage return is thus 48 percent.
	
If you had invested $1,000, you would have had $1,480 at the end of the year, representing 
a 48 percent increase. To check this, note that your $1,000 would have bought you $1,000/25 = 
40 shares. Your 40 shares would then have paid you a total of 40 × $2 = $80 in cash dividends. 
Your $10 per share gain would have given you a total capital gain of $10 × 40 = $400. Add these 
together, and you get the $480 increase.
f i g u r e  10.3
Cash flow—an 
investment example
$37
$2
$35
Total
Dividends
(D1)
Ending
price per
share (P1)
2$25 (P0)
Time
Outﬂows
Inﬂows
0
1
concept questions
10.1a	
What are the two parts of total return?
10.1b	
Why are unrealized capital gains or losses included in the calculation of returns?
10.1c	
What is the difference between a dollar return and a percentage return? Why are 
percentage returns more convenient?
2 R. G. Ibbotson and R. A. Sinquefield, Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation [SBBI] (Charlottesville, VA: 
Financial Analysis Research Foundation, 1982).

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
315
  2.	 Small-company stocks. This is a portfolio composed of stock of smaller companies, 
where “small” corresponds to the smallest 20 percent of the companies listed on the 
New York Stock Exchange, again as measured by market value of outstanding stock.
  3.	 Long-term corporate bonds. This is a portfolio of high-quality bonds with 20 years to 
maturity.
  4.	 Long-term U.S. government bonds. This is a portfolio of U.S. government bonds with 
20 years to maturity.
  5.	 U.S. Treasury bills. This is based on Treasury bills (T-bills for short) with a one-
month maturity.
These returns are not adjusted for inflation or taxes; thus, they are nominal, pretax 
returns.
In addition to the year-to-year returns on these financial instruments, the year-to-
year percentage change in the consumer price index (CPI) is also computed. This is a 
commonly used measure of inflation, so we can calculate real returns using this as the 
inflation rate.
A First Look
Before looking closely at the different portfolio returns, we take a look at the big picture. 
Figure 10.4 shows what happened to $1 invested in these different portfolios at the begin-
ning of 1926. The growth in value for each of the different portfolios over the 89-year pe-
riod ending in 2014 is given separately (the long-term corporate bonds are omitted). Notice 
that to get everything on a single graph, some modification in scaling is used. As is com-
monly done with financial series, the vertical axis is scaled such that equal distances mea-
sure equal percentage (as opposed to dollar) changes in values.
Looking at Figure 10.4, we see that the small-company, or “small-cap” (short for 
small-capitalization), investment did the best overall. Every dollar invested grew to a re-
markable $27,419.32 over the 89 years. The larger common stock portfolio did less well; a 
dollar invested in it grew to $5,316.85.
At the other end, the T-bill portfolio grew to only $20.58. This is even less impressive 
when we consider the inflation over this period. As illustrated, the increase in the price 
level was such that $13.10 is needed just to replace the original $1.
Given the historical record, why would anybody buy anything other than small-cap 
stocks? If you look closely at Figure 10.4, you will probably see the answer. The T-bill 
portfolio and the long-term government bond portfolio grew more slowly than did the 
stock portfolios, but they also grew much more steadily. The small stocks ended up on top, 
but, as you can see, they grew quite erratically at times. For example, the small stocks were 
the worst performers for about the first 10 years and had a smaller return than long-term 
government bonds for almost 15 years.
A Closer Look
To illustrate the variability of the different investments, Figures 10.5 through 10.8 plot the 
year-to-year percentage returns in the form of vertical bars drawn from the horizontal axis. 
The height of the bar tells us the return for the particular year. For example, looking at the 
long-term government bonds (Figure 10.7), we see that the largest historical return 
(40.35 percent) occurred in 1982. This was a good year for bonds. In comparing these 
charts, notice the differences in the vertical axis scales. With these differences in mind, you 
can see how predictably the Treasury bills (Figure 10.7) behaved compared to the small 
stocks (Figure 10.6).
For more on market 
history, visit  
www.globalfinancialdata.
com where you can 
download free sample 
data.
Go to www.bigcharts.com 
to see both intraday and 
long-term charts.

316	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
Index
$13.10
$20.58
$135.18
$5,316.85
$27,419.32
Inflation
Treasury bills
Small-company stocks
Large-company
stocks
Long-term
government bonds
1925
$0
1935
1930
1945
1940
1955
1950
1965
1960
Year-end
1975
1970
1985
1980
1995
1990
2005 2010
$1
$10
$100
$1,000
$10,000
$100,000
2000
f i g u r e  10.4
A $1 investment in different types of portfolios: 1925–2014 (year-end 1925 = $1)
Source: Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation YearbookTM, Morningstar, Inc., Chicago (annually updates work by Roger G. Ibbotson and Rex A. 
Sinquefield). All rights reserved.

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
317
f i g u r e  10.5
Year-to-year total 
returns on large-
company stocks: 
1926–2014
260
240
220
0
20
40
60
Total annual returns (in percent)
1925
1935
1945
1955
Year-end
1965
1975
1985
1995
2005
2014
Source: Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation YearbookTM, Morningstar, Inc., Chicago (annually updates work by Roger 
G. Ibbotson and Rex A. Sinquefield). All rights reserved.
2100
250
0
50
100
150
Total annual returns (in percent)
1925
1935
1945
1955
Year-end
1965
1975
1985
1995
2005
2014
f i g u r e  10.6
Year-to-year total 
returns on small-
company stocks: 
1926–2014
Source: Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation YearbookTM, Morningstar, Inc., Chicago (annually updates work by Roger 
G. Ibbotson and Rex A. Sinquefield). All rights reserved.
The returns shown in these bar graphs are sometimes very large. Looking at the 
graphs, we see, for example, that the largest single-year return was a remarkable 143 per-
cent for the small-cap stocks in 1933. In the same year, the large-company stocks “only” 
returned 53 percent. In contrast, the largest Treasury bill return was 15 percent in 1981. For 
future reference, the actual year-to-year returns for the S&P 500, long-term government 
bonds, Treasury bills, and the CPI are shown in Table 10.1.

318
 
Year
Large-Company 
Stocks
Long-Term 
Government Bonds
U.S. Treasury 
Bills
Consumer 
Price Index
1926
      11.14%
        7.90%
     3.30%
     −   1.12%
1927
   37.13
   10.36
  3.15
  −   2.26
1928
   43.31
  −  1.37
  4.05
  −   1.16
1929
  −   8.91
     5.23
  4.47
       .58
1930
−25.26
     5.80
  2.27
  −   6.40
1931
−43.86
  −  8.04
  1.15
  −   9.32
1932
  −   8.85
   14.11
    .88
−10.27
1933
   52.88
       .31
    .52
       .76
1934
  −   2.34
   12.98
    .27
     1.52
1935
   47.22
     5.88
    .17
     2.99
1936
   32.80
     8.22
    .17
     1.45
1937
−35.26
    −     .13
    .27
     2.86
1938
   33.20
     6.26
    .06
  −   2.78
1939
     −     .91
     5.71
    .04
       .00
1940
−10.08
   10.34
    .04
        .71
1941
−11.77
  −  8.66
    .14
     9.93
1942
   21.07
     2.67
    .34
     9.03
1943
   25.76
     2.50
    .38
     2.96
1944
   19.69
     2.88
    .38
     2.30
1945
   36.46
     5.17
    .38
     2.25
1946
  −   8.18
     4.07
    .38
   18.13
1947
     5.24
  −  1.15
    .62
     8.84
1948
     5.10
     2.10
  1.06
     2.99
1949
   18.06
     7.02
  1.12
  −   2.07
1950
   30.58
  −  1.44
  1.22
     5.93
1951
   24.55
  −  3.53
  1.56
     6.00
1952
   18.50
     1.82
  1.75
       .75
1953
  −   1.10
    −     .88
  1.87
       .75
1954
   52.40
     7.89
    .93
 −     .74
1955
   31.43
  −  1.03
  1.80
       .37
1956
     6.63
  −  3.14
  2.66
     2.99
1957
−10.85
     5.25
  3.28
     2.90
1958
   43.34
  −  6.70
  1.71
     1.76
1959
   11.90
  −  1.35
  3.48
     1.73
1960
       .48
     7.74
  2.81
     1.36
1961
   26.81
     3.02
  2.40
        .67
1962
  −   8.78
     4.63
  2.82
     1.33
1963
   22.69
     1.37
  3.23
     1.64
1964
   16.36
     4.43
  3.62
       .97
1965
   12.36
     1.40
  4.06
     1.92
1966
−10.10
  −  1.61
  4.94
     3.46
1967
   23.94
  −  6.38
  4.39
     3.04 
1968
    11.00
    5.33  
   5.49  
    4.72   
1969
  −   8.47
  −  7.45
  6.90
     6.20
1970
     3.94
   12.24
  6.50
     5.57
 
Year
Large-Company 
Stocks
Long-Term 
Government Bonds
U.S. Treasury 
Bills
Consumer 
Price Index
1971
   14.30
   12.67
  4.36
     3.27
1972
   18.99
     9.15
  4.23
     3.41
1973
−14.69
−12.66
  7.29
     8.71
1974
−26.47
  −   3.28
  7.99
   12.34
1975
   37.23
     4.67
  5.87
     6.94
1976
   23.93
   18.34
  5.07
     4.86
1977
  −   7.16
     2.31
  5.45
     6.70
1978
     6.57
  −   2.07
  7.64
     9.02
1979
   18.61
  −   2.76
10.56
   13.29
1980
   32.50
  −   5.91
12.10
   12.52
1981
  −   4.92
    −     .16
14.60
     8.92
1982
   21.55
   49.99
10.94
     3.83
1983
   22.56
  −   2.11
  8.99
     3.79
1984
     6.27
   16.53
  9.90
     3.95
1985
   31.73
   39.03
  7.71
     3.80
1986
   18.67
   32.51
  6.09
     1.10
1987
     5.25
  −   8.09
  5.88
     4.43
1988
   16.61
     8.71
  6.94
     4.42
1989
   31.69
   22.15
  8.44
     4.65
1990
  −   3.10
     5.44
  7.69
     6.11
1991
   30.46
   20.04
  5.43
     3.06
1992
     7.62
     8.09
  3.48
     2.90
1993
   10.08
   22.32
  3.03
     2.75
1994
     1.32
−11.46
  4.39
     2.67
1995
   37.58
   37.28
  5.61
     2.54
1996
   22.96
  −   2.59
  5.14
     3.32
1997
   33.36
   17.70
  5.19
     1.70
1998
   28.58
   19.22
  4.86
     1.61
1999
   21.04
−12.76
  4.80
     2.68
2000
  −   9.10
   22.16
  5.98
     3.39
2001
−11.89
     5.30
  3.33
     1.55
2002
−22.10
   14.08
  1.61
     2.38
2003
   28.68
     1.62
  1.03
     1.88
2004
   10.88
   10.34
  1.43
     3.26
2005
     4.91
   10.35
  3.30
     3.42
2006
   15.79
     0.28
  4.97
     2.54
2007
     5.49
   10.85
  4.52
     4.08
2008
−37.00
   39.46
  1.24
       .09
2009
   26.46
−25.61
    .15
     2.72
2010
   15.06
     7.73
    .14
     1.50
2011
     2.11
   35.75
    .06
     2.96
2012
   16.00
     1.80
    .08
     1.74
2013
   32.39
−14.69
    .05
     1.50
2014
   13.69
  
 
22.6
    .03
       .76
Year-to-year total returns: 1926–2014
Source: Author calculations based on data from Global Financial Data and other sources.
ta b l e  10.1

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
319
22
0
2
6
4
12
10
8
14
16
Treasury bills
Total annual returns (in percent)
1925
1935
1945
1955
Year-end
1965
1975
1985
1995
2005
2014
f i g u r e  10.7
Year-to-year total 
returns on bonds and 
bills: 1926–2014
Source: Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation YearbookTM, Morningstar, Inc., Chicago (annually updates work by Roger 
G. Ibbotson and Rex A. Sinquefield). All rights reserved.
210
220
0
10
30
20
40
50
Long-term government bonds
Total annual returns (in percent)
1925
1935
1945
1955
Year-end
1965
1975
1985
1995
2005
2014
concept questions
10.2a 	 With 20-20 hindsight, what was the best investment for the period 1926–1935?
10.2b	 Why doesn’t everyone just buy small stocks as investments?
10.2c	 What was the smallest return observed over the 89 years for each of these 
investments? Approximately when did it occur?
10.2d	 About how many times did large stocks (common stocks) return more than 
30 percent? How many times did they return less than −20 percent?
10.2e	 What was the longest “winning streak” (years without a negative return) for large 
stocks? For long-term government bonds?
10.2f	 How often did the T-bill portfolio have a negative return?

320	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
AVERAGE RETURNS: THE FIRST LESSON
As you’ve probably begun to notice, the history of capital market returns is too compli-
cated to be of much use in its undigested form. We need to begin summarizing all these 
numbers. Accordingly, we discuss how to go about condensing the detailed data. We start 
out by calculating average returns.
Calculating Average Returns
The obvious way to calculate the average returns on the different investments in Table 10.1 
is simply to add up the yearly returns and divide by 89. The result is the historical average 
of the individual values.
For example, if you add up the returns for the large-company common stocks for the 
89 years, you will get about 10.77. The average annual return is thus 10.77/89 = .121, or 
12.1%. You interpret this 12.1 percent just like any other average. If you picked a year at 
random from the 89-year history and you had to guess what the return in that year was, the 
best guess would be 12.1 percent.
Average Returns: The Historical Record
Table 10.2 shows the average returns for the investments we have discussed. As shown, in 
a typical year, the small stocks increased in value by 16.7 percent. Notice also how much 
larger the stock returns are than the bond returns.
These averages are, of course, nominal since we haven’t worried about inflation. Notice that 
the average inflation rate was 3.0 percent per year over this 89-year span. The nominal return on 
U.S. Treasury bills was 3.5 percent per year. The average real return on Treasury bills was thus 
approximately .5 percent per year; so, the real return on T-bills has been quite low historically.
At the other extreme, small stocks had an average real return of about 16.7% − 3.0% = 
13.7%, which is relatively large. If you remember the Rule of 72 (Chapter 4), then you re-
call that a quick back-of-the-envelope calculation tells us that 13.7 percent real growth 
doubles your buying power about every five years. Notice also that the real value of the 
large stock portfolio increased by 9.1 percent in a typical year.
10.3
coverage online
Excel 
Master
f i g u r e  10.8
Year-to-year 
inflation: 1926–2014
1925
215
210
25
5
0
15
10
20
1935
1945
1955
Year-end
Annual inﬂation (in percent)
1965
1975
1985
1995
2005
2014
Source: Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation YearbookTM, Morningstar, Inc., Chicago (annually updates work by Roger 
G. Ibbotson and Rex A. Sinquefield). All rights reserved.

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
321
Risk Premiums
Now that we have computed some average returns, it seems logical to see how they compare with 
each other. Based on our previous discussion, one such comparison involves government-issued 
securities. These are free of much of the variability we see in, for example, the stock market.
The government borrows money by issuing bonds. These bonds come in different forms. 
The ones we will focus on are Treasury bills. These have the shortest time to maturity of the 
different government bonds. Because the government can always raise taxes to pay its bills, 
this debt is virtually free of any default risk over its short life. Thus, we will call the rate of 
return on such debt the risk-free return, and we will use it as a kind of benchmark.
A particularly interesting comparison involves the virtually risk-free return on T-bills 
and the very risky return on common stocks. The difference between these two returns can 
be interpreted as a measure of the excess return on the average risky asset (assuming the 
stock of a large U.S. corporation has about average risk compared to all risky assets).
We call this the “excess” return since it is the additional return we earn by moving 
from a relatively risk-free investment to a risky one. Because it can be interpreted as a re-
ward for bearing risk, we will call it a risk premium.
From Table 10.2, we can calculate the risk premiums for the different investments. We 
report only the nominal risk premium in Table 10.3 because there is only a slight differ-
ence between the historical nominal and real risk premiums.
The risk premium on T-bills is shown as zero in the table because we have assumed 
that they are riskless.
The First Lesson
Looking at Table 10.3, we see that the average risk premium earned by a typical large com-
mon stock is 12.1% − 3.5% = 8.6%. This is a significant reward. The fact that it exists 
historically is an important observation, and it is the basis for our first lesson: Risky assets, 
on average, earn a risk premium. Put another way: There is a reward for bearing risk.
Why is this so? Why, for example, is the risk premium for small stocks so much larger 
than the risk premium for large stocks? More generally, what determines the relative sizes of 
risk premium
The excess return required 
from an investment in a 
risky asset over that 
required from a risk-free 
investment.
ta b l e  10.2
ta b l e  10.3
Average annual 
returns: 1926–2014
Average annual 
returns and risk 
premiums: 
1926–2014
Investment
Average Return
Large stocks
  12.1%
Small stocks
16.7   
Long-term corporate bonds
  6.4 
Long-term government bonds
  6.1 
U.S. Treasury bills
  3.5 
Inflation
  3.0
Source: Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation YearbookTM, Morningstar, 
Inc., Chicago (annually updates work by Roger G. Ibbotson and Rex 
A. Sinquefield). All rights reserved.
Source: Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation YearbookTM, Morningstar, Inc., Chicago (annually 
updates work by Roger G. Ibbotson and Rex A. Sinquefield). All rights reserved.
Investment
Average Return
Risk Premium
Large stocks
   12.1%
   8.6%
Small stocks
16.7   
13.2     
Long-term corporate bonds
  6.4 
  2.9   
Long-term government bonds
  6.1 
  2.6   
U.S. Treasury bills
  3.5 
—

322	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
the risk premiums for the different assets? The answers to these questions are at the heart of 
modern finance, and the next chapter is devoted to them. For now, part of the answer can be 
found by looking at the historical variability of the returns of these different investments. So, 
to get started, we now turn our attention to measuring variability in returns.
concept questions
10.3a	 What do we mean by excess return and risk premium?
10.3b	 What was the real (as opposed to nominal) risk premium on the common stock portfolio?
10.3c	 What was the nominal risk premium on corporate bonds? The real risk premium?
10.3d	 What is the first lesson from capital market history?
THE VARIABILITY OF RETURNS:  
THE SECOND LESSON
We have already seen that the year-to-year returns on common stocks tend to be more vola-
tile than the returns on, say, long-term government bonds. We now discuss measuring this 
variability so we can begin examining the subject of risk.
Frequency Distributions and Variability
To get started, we can draw a frequency distribution for the common stock returns like the one 
in Figure 10.9. What we have done here is to count up the number of times the annual return on 
the large stock portfolio falls within each 10 percent range. For example, in Figure 10.9, the 
height of 14 in the range 20 percent to 30 percent means that 14 of the 89 annual returns were 
in that range. Notice also that the returns are very concentrated between −10 and 40 percent.
What we need to do now is to actually measure the spread in returns. We know, for exam-
ple, that the return on small stocks in a typical year was 16.7 percent. We now want to know 
how far the actual return deviates from this average in a typical year. In other words, we need a 
10.4
coverage online
Excel 
Master
f i g u r e  10.9
Frequency 
distribution of 
returns on common 
stocks: 1926–2014
Source: Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation YearbookTM, Morningstar, Inc., Chicago (annually updates work by Roger G. 
Ibbotson and Rex A. Sinquefield). All rights reserved.
250 240 230 220 210
280 270 260
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
Percent
1931 1937
2008
1930 1941
1957
1929 1947 1926 1942 1927 1928 1933
1974
1966
2002
1932 1948 1944 1943 1936 1935 1954
1973
1934 1956 1949 1951 1938 1958
2001
1939 1960 1952 1961 1945
1940 1970 1959 1963 1950
1946 1978 1964 1967 1955
1953 1984 1965 1976 1975
1962 1987 1968 1982 1980
1969 1992 1971 1983 1985
1977 1993 1972 1996
1998
1999
2003
1989
1981
1990 2005
1994 1979
1991
2000 2007
2009
2011
1986
1995
1988
2004
2006
2010
2012
2014
1997
2013

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
323
measure of how volatile the return is. The variance and its square root, the standard deviation, 
are the most commonly used measures of volatility. We describe how to calculate them next.
The Historical Variance and Standard Deviation
The variance essentially measures the average squared difference between the actual re-
turns and the average return. The bigger this number is, the more the actual returns tend to 
differ from the average return. Also, the larger the variance or standard deviation is, the 
more spread out the returns will be.
The way we will calculate the variance and standard deviation depends on the specific 
situation. In this chapter, we are looking at historical returns; so, the procedure we describe 
here is the correct one for calculating the historical variance and standard deviation. If we 
were examining projected future returns, then the procedure would be different. We de-
scribe this procedure in the next chapter.
To illustrate how we calculate the historical variance, suppose a particular investment 
had returns of 10 percent, 12 percent, 3 percent, and −9 percent over the last four years. The 
average return is (.10 + .12 + .03 − .09)/4 = 4%. Notice that the return is never actually equal 
to 4 percent. Instead, the first return deviates from the average by .10 − .04 = .06, the second 
return deviates from the average by .12 − .04 = .08, and so on. To compute the variance, we 
square each of these deviations, add up the squares, and divide the result by the number of 
returns less 1, or 3 in this case. This information is summarized in the following table:
Year
(1) 
Actual 
Return
(2) 
Average 
Return
(3) 
Deviation 
(1) − (2)
(4) 
Squared 
Deviation
1
   .10
.04
  .06
.0036
2
   .12
.04
  .08
.0064
3
   .03
.04
−.01
.0001
4
−.09
.04
−.13 
.0169
Totals
   .16
    .00
.0270
In the first column, we write down the four actual returns. In the third column, we calculate 
the difference between the actual returns and the average by subtracting out 4 percent. 
­Finally, in the fourth column, we square the numbers in Column 3 to get the squared devia-
tions from the average.
The variance can now be calculated by dividing .0270, the sum of the squared devia-
tions, by the number of returns less 1. Let Var(R), or σ2 (read this as “sigma squared”), 
stand for the variance of the return:
Var(R) =  σ2 = .027/(4 − 1) = .009
The standard deviation is the square root of the variance. So, if SD(R), or σ, stands for the 
standard deviation of the return:
SD(R) = σ = 1.009 = .09487
The square root of the variance is used because the variance is measured in “squared” 
percentages and thus is hard to interpret. The standard deviation is an ordinary percentage, 
so the answer here could be written as 9.487 percent.
In the preceding table, notice that the sum of the deviations is equal to zero. This will 
always be the case, and it provides a good way to check your work. In general, if we have T 
historical returns, where T is some number, we can write the historical variance as:
Var(R) =
1
T −1 [(R1 −R)2 + . . . + (RT −R)2]	
[10.3]
variance
The average squared 
difference between the 
actual return and the 
average return.
standard deviation
The positive square root 
of the variance.
For an easy-to-read 
review of basic stats, 
check out www.
robertniles.com/stats.

324	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
This formula tells us to do just what we did above: Take each of the T individual returns 
(R1, R2, . . .) and subtract the average return, R; square the results, and add up all these 
squares; and finally, divide this total by the number of returns less 1 (= T − 1). The stan-
dard deviation is always the square root of Var(R). Standard deviations are a widely used 
measure of volatility. Our nearby Work the Web box gives a real-world example.
S
tandard deviations are widely reported for mutual funds. For example, the Fidelity Magellan 
Fund is a large mutual fund. How volatile is it? To find out, we went to www.morningstar.com, 
entered the ticker symbol FMAGX, and hit the “Ratings & Risk” link. Here is what we found:
	
The standard deviation for the Fidelity Magellan Fund is 10.48 percent. When you consider 
the average stock has a standard deviation of about 50 percent, this seems like a low number. The 
reason for the low standard deviation has to do with the power of diversification, a topic we dis-
cuss in the next chapter. The return is the average return, so over the last three years, investors in 
the Magellan Fund gained 18.94 percent per year. Also under the Volatility Measures section, you 
will see the Sharpe ratio. The Sharpe ratio is calculated as the risk premium of the asset divided by 
the standard deviation. As such, it is a measure of return to the level of risk taken (as measured by 
standard deviation). The “beta” for the Fidelity Magellan Fund is 1.06. We will have more to say 
about this number—lots more—in the next chapter.
W
RK THE  WE B
QUESTIONS
	
1.	 Go to the Morningstar website at www.morningstar.com. What does the Bear Market 
Decile Rank measure?
	
2.	 Get a quote for the Fidelity Magellan fund at Morningstar. What are the five sectors 
that have the highest percentage investment for this fund? What are the five stocks 
with the highest percentage investment?

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
325
EXAMPLE
10.2  Calculating the Variance and Standard Deviation
Suppose the Supertech Company and the Hyperdrive Company have experienced the following 
returns in the last four years:
Year
Supertech Returns
Hyperdrive Returns
2014
−.20   
.05
2015
.50
.09
2016
.30
−.12
2017
.10
.20
What are the average returns? The variances? The standard deviations? Which investment was more 
volatile?
To calculate the average returns, we add up the returns and divide by 4. The results are:
Supertech average return = R = .70/4 = .175
Hyperdrive average return = R = .22/4 = .055
To calculate the variance for Supertech, we can summarize the relevant calculations as follows:
Year
(1) 
Actual 
Return
(2) 
Average 
Return
(3) 
Deviation 
(1) − (2)
(4) 
Squared 
Deviation
2014
−.20
.175
−.375
.140625
2015
   .50
.175
   .325
.105625
2016
   .30
.175
   .125
.015625
2017
   .10
.175
−.075
.005625
Totals
   .70
   .000 
.267500
Because there are four years of returns, we calculate the variance by dividing .2675 by (4 − 1) = 3:
Supertech
Hyperdrive
Variance (σ2)
.2675/3 = .0892
.0529/3 = .0176
Standard deviation (σ)
1.0892 = .2986
1.0176 = .1328
For practice, verify that you get the same answer as we do for Hyperdrive. Notice that the standard 
deviation for Supertech, 29.86 percent, is a little more than twice Hyperdrive’s 13.28 percent; Super-
tech was thus the more volatile investment.
The Historical Record
Figure 10.10 summarizes much of our discussion of capital market history so far. It dis-
plays average returns, standard deviations, and frequency distributions of annual returns on 
a common scale. In Figure 10.10, notice, for example, that the standard deviation for the 
small-stock portfolio (32.1 percent per year) is more than 10 times larger than the T-bill 
portfolio’s standard deviation (3.1 percent per year). We will return to these figures 
momentarily.

326	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
Normal Distribution
For many different random events in nature, a particular frequency distribution, the normal 
distribution (or bell curve), is useful for describing the probability of ending up in a given 
range. For example, the idea behind “grading on a curve” comes from the fact that exam 
scores often resemble a bell curve.
Figure 10.11 illustrates a normal distribution and its distinctive bell shape. As you can 
see, this distribution has a much cleaner appearance than the actual return distributions il-
lustrated in Figure 10.10. Even so, like the normal distribution, the actual distributions do 
appear to be at least roughly mound-shaped and symmetric. When this is true, the normal 
distribution is often a very good approximation.
Also, keep in mind that the distributions in Figure 10.10 are based on only 89 yearly 
observations, while Figure 10.11 is, in principle, based on an infinite number. So, if we had 
normal distribution
A symmetric, bell-shaped 
frequency distribution that 
is completely defined by 
its average and standard 
deviation.
f i g u r e  10.10
Historical average returns, standard deviations, and frequency distributions: 1926–2014
Series
Arithmetic  
Mean (%)
Standard  
Deviation (%)
Distribution (%)
Small-company stocks*
16.7
32.1
Large-company stocks
12.1
20.1
Long-term corporate bonds
6.4
8.4
Long-term government 
bonds
6.1
10.0
Intermediate-term 
government bonds
5.4
5.6
U.S. Treasury bills
3.5
3.1
Inflation
3.0
4.1
290
90
0
*The 1933 small-company stocks total return was 142.9 percent.
Source: Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation YearbookTM, Morningstar, Inc., Chicago (annually updates work by Roger G. Ibbotson and Rex A. 
Sinquefield). All rights reserved.

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
327
been able to observe returns for, say, 1,000 years, we might have filled in a lot of the 
­irregularities and ended up with a much smoother picture. For our purposes, it is enough to 
observe that the returns are at least roughly normally distributed.
The usefulness of the normal distribution stems from the fact that it is completely de-
scribed by the average and the standard deviation. If you have these two numbers, then 
there is nothing else to know. For example, with a normal distribution, the probability that 
we end up within one standard deviation of the average is about . The probability that we 
end up within two standard deviations is about 95 percent. Finally, the probability of being 
more than three standard deviations away from the average is less than 1 percent. These 
ranges and the probabilities are illustrated in Figure 10.11.
To see why this is useful, recall from Figure 10.10 that the standard deviation of 
returns on the large common stocks is 20.1 percent. The average return is 12.1 percent. 
So, assuming that the frequency distribution is at least approximately normal, the prob-
ability that the return in a given year is in the range of −8.0 percent to 32.2 percent 
(12.1 percent plus or minus one standard deviation, 20.1 percent) is about . This range 
is illustrated in Figure 10.11. In other words, there is about one chance in three that the 
return will be outside this range. This literally tells you that, if you buy stocks in large 
companies, you should expect to be outside this range in one year out of every three. 
This reinforces our earlier observations about stock market volatility. However, there is 
only a 5 percent chance (approximately) that we would end up outside the range of 
−28.1 percent to 52.3 percent (12.1 percent plus or minus 2 × 20.1%). These points are 
also illustrated in Figure 10.11.
The Second Lesson
Our observations concerning the year-to-year variability in returns are the basis for our 
second lesson from capital market history. On average, bearing risk is handsomely re-
warded, but, in a given year, there is a significant chance of a dramatic change in 
value. Thus, our second lesson is this: The greater the potential reward, the greater is 
the risk.
Thus far in this chapter, we have emphasized the year-to-year variability in returns. We 
should note that even day-to-day movements can exhibit considerable volatility. For ex-
ample, on September 17, 2001, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) plummeted 
684.81 points, or 7.13 percent. By historical standards, it was one of the worst days ever for 
the 30 stocks that comprise the DJIA (as well as for a majority of stocks in the market). 
Still, while the drop was the largest decrease in the DJIA ever in terms of points at the time, 
Probability
Return on
large common
stocks
68%
95%
.99%
23s
248.2% 228.1%
28.0%
12.1%
32.2%
52.3%
72.4%
22s
21s
0
11s
12s
13s
f i g u r e  10.11
The normal 
distribution
Illustrated returns are 
based on the historical 
return and standard 
deviation for a portfolio 
of large common 
stocks.

328	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
it actually wasn’t quite in the top 12 largest one-day percentage decreases in history, as 
­illustrated in the following table:
Top 12 One-Day Percentage Changes in the 
Dow Jones Industrial Average
  1
October 19, 1987
−22.61
  2
October 28, 1929
−12.82
  3
October 29, 1929
−11.73
  4
November 6, 1929
−  9.92
  5
December 18, 1899
−  8.72
  6
August 12, 1932
−  8.40
  7
March 14, 1907
−  8.29
  8
October 26, 1987
−  8.04
  9
October 15, 2008
−  7.87
10
July 21, 1933
−  7.84
11
October 18, 1937
−  7.75
12
December 1, 2008
−  7.70
Source: http://online.wsj.com/mdc/public/page/2_3047-djia_alltime.html
This discussion also highlights the importance of looking at returns in terms of per-
centages rather than dollar amounts or index points. For example, as we noted before, the 
biggest one-day loss in terms of points was on September 29, 2008, when the DJIA de-
clined by 778 points. The second worst was the 733-point drop of October 15, 2008. In 
contrast, the 5.57-point drop in the DJIA on December 18, 1899, marked the fifth worst 
day in the history of the index, but a 5.6-point loss in the DJIA in today’s market would 
hardly be noticed. This is precisely why we relied on percentage returns when we exam-
ined market history in this chapter.3
2008: The Bear Growled and Investors Howled
To reinforce our point concerning stock market volatility, consider that just a few short 
years ago, 2008 entered the record books as one of the worst years for stock market inves-
tors in U.S. history. How bad was it? As shown in several exhibits in the chapter (e.g., 
­Table 10.1), the widely followed S&P 500 index plunged 37 percent. Of the 500 stocks in 
the index, 485 were down for the year.
Over the period 1926–2014, only the year 1931 had a lower return than 2008 
(−44 percent versus −37 percent). Making matters worse, the downdraft continued with a 
further decline of 8.43 percent in January 2009. In all, from November 2007 (when the decline 
began) through March 2009 (when it ended), the S&P 500 lost 50 percent of its value.
Figure 10.12 shows the month-by-month performance of the S&P 500 during 2008. 
As indicated, returns were negative in 8 of the 12 months. Most of the damage occurred in 
the fall, with investors losing almost 17 percent in October alone. Small stocks fared no 
better. They also fell 37 percent for the year (with a 21 percent drop in October), their worst 
performance since losing 58 percent in 1937.
As Figure 10.12 suggests, stock prices were highly volatile during the year. Oddly, the 
S&P had 126 up days and 126 down days (remember the markets are closed weekends and 
3 By the way, as you may have noticed, what’s kind of weird is that 6 of the 12 worst days in the history of the 
DJIA occurred in October, including the top 3. We have no clue as to why. Furthermore, looking back at the 
Mark Twain quote near the beginning of the chapter, how do you suppose he knew? Sounds like a case for CSI: 
Wall Street.

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
329
holidays). Of course, the down days were much worse on average. To see how extraordinary 
volatility was in 2008, consider that there were 18 days during which the value of the S&P 
changed by more than five percent. There were only 17 such moves between 1956 and 2007!
The drop in stock prices was a global phenomenon, and many of the world’s major 
markets were off by much more than the S&P. China, India, and Russia, for example, all 
experienced declines of more than 50 percent. Tiny Iceland saw share prices drop by more 
than 90 percent for the year. Trading on the Icelandic exchange was temporarily suspended 
on October 9. In what has to be a modern record for a single day, stocks fell by 76 percent 
when trading resumed on October 14.
Were there any bright spots in 2008 for U.S. investors? The answer is yes because, as 
stocks tanked, bonds soared, particularly U.S. Treasury bonds. In fact, long-term Treasur-
ies gained 40 percent, while shorter-term Treasury bonds were up 13 percent. Long-term 
corporate bonds did less well, but still managed to finish in positive territory, up 9 percent. 
These returns were especially impressive considering that the rate of inflation, as measured 
by the CPI, was essentially zero.
Of course, stock prices can be volatile in both directions. From March 2009 through 
February 2011, a period of about 700 days, the S&P 500 doubled in value. This climb was 
the fastest doubling since 1936 when the S&P did it in just 500 days. So, what lessons 
should investors take away from this very recent, and very turbulent, bit of capital market 
history? First, and most obviously, stocks have significant risk! But there is a second, 
equally important lesson. Depending on the mix, a diversified portfolio of stocks and 
bonds might have suffered in 2008, but the losses would have been much smaller than 
those experienced by an all-stock portfolio. In other words, diversification matters, a point 
we will examine in detail in our next chapter.
Using Capital Market History
Based on the discussion in this section, you should begin to have an idea of the risks and 
rewards from investing. For example, in early 2015, Treasury bills were paying about 
.1 percent. Suppose we had an investment that we thought had about the same risk as a 
f i g u r e  10.12
S&P 500 monthly 
returns: 2008
220
215
210
25
0
5
10
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Dec
Nov

330
portfolio of large-company common stocks. At a minimum, what return would this invest-
ment have to offer for us to be interested?
From Table 10.3, the risk premium on larger common stocks has been 8.6 percent 
historically, so a reasonable estimate of our required return would be this premium plus the 
T-bill rate, 8.6% + .1% = 8.7%. If we were thinking of starting a new business, then the 
risks of doing so might resemble those of investing in small-company stocks. In this case, 
the risk premium is 13.2 percent, so we might require more like 13 percent from such an 
investment at a minimum.
We will discuss the relationship between risk and required return in more detail in the 
next chapter. For now, you should notice that a projected internal rate of return, or IRR, on 
a risky investment in the 10 percent to 20 percent range isn’t particularly outstanding. It 
depends on how much risk there is. This, too, is an important lesson from capital market 
history.
The discussion in this section shows that there is much to be learned from capital mar-
ket history. As the accompanying Finance Matters box describes, capital market history 
also provides some odd coincidences.
The Super Guide to Investing
E
very year, in late January or early February, about 
90 million people in the United States watch television 
for a prediction of how well the stock market is going to 
do in the upcoming year. So you missed it this year? 
Maybe not. The stock market predictor we’re talking 
about is the Super Bowl!
	
The Super Bowl indicator has become one of the more 
famous (or infamous) indicators of stock market perfor-
mance. Here’s how it works. In the 1960s, the original Na-
tional Football League (NFL) and the upstart American 
Football League (AFL) were fighting for dominance. The Su-
per Bowl indicator says that if a team from the original AFL 
wins the Super Bowl, the market posts a negative return for 
the year, and, if a team from the original NFL wins, the mar-
ket will post a gain for the year.
	
So are you ready to bet the ranch on the Super Bowl 
indicator? Maybe that’s not a super idea. Between 1997 and 
2014, the Super Bowl indicator has only been right 10 out of 
17 years. Of course, you could follow the second Super Bowl 
indicator. When there are 50 points or more scored in the 
game, the stock market had an average return of 18.6 per-
cent. When 39 points or fewer are scored, the average mar-
ket return is only 3.7 percent.
	
The New England Patriots won the Super Bowl in 
2015. In the years following the Patriots’ three previous 
victories, the market fell 18 percent, .6 percent, and was 
up 4.4 percent, so the indicator was correct in two out of 
three Patriots’ previous Super Bowl victories. Was it right 
in 2015?
	
For those of you who like horse racing, there is the 
­Triple Crown winner indicator. According to this indicator, if a 
horse wins the Kentucky Derby, Preakness, and Belmont 
Stakes, better known as the Triple Crown, the stock market 
will fall dramatically. However, when you consider that the 
youngest of these races, the Kentucky Derby, began in 1875 
and to date there have only been 12 Triple Crown winners, 
what do you do in the 100+ years when there is no Triple 
Crown winner?
	
So you want more predictors? How about the hemline 
indicator, also known as the “bull markets and bare knees” 
indicator? Through much of the nineteenth century, long 
skirts dominated women’s fashion, and the stock market ex-
perienced many bear markets. In the 1920s, flappers re-
vealed their knees and the stock market boomed. Even the 
stock market crash of October 1987 was predicted by hem-
lines. During the 1980s, miniskirts flourished, but by October 
1987 a fashion shift had women wearing longer skirts.
	
These are only three examples of what are known as 
“technical” trading rules. There are lots of others. How seri-
ously should you take them? That’s up to you, but our advice 
is to keep in mind that life is full of odd coincidences. Just 
because a bizarre stock market predictor seems to have 
worked well in the past doesn’t mean that it’s going to work 
in the future.
FINANCE MATTERS

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
331
More on the Stock Market Risk Premium
As we have discussed, the historical stock market risk premium has been substantial. 
In fact, based on standard economic models, it has been argued that the historical risk 
premium is too big and is thus an overestimate of what is likely to happen in the 
future.
Of course, any time we use the past to predict the future, there is the danger that the 
past period we observe isn’t representative of what the future will hold. For example, in 
this chapter, we studied the period 1926–2014. Perhaps investors got lucky over this period 
and earned particularly high returns. Data from earlier years is available, though it is not of 
the same quality. With that caveat in mind, researchers have traced returns back to 1802, 
and the risk premiums seen in the pre-1926 era are perhaps a little smaller, but not dramati-
cally so.
Another possibility is that the U.S. stock market experience was unusually good. 
Investors in at least some other major countries did not do as well because their finan-
cial markets were nearly or completely wiped out because of revolution, war, and/or 
hyperinflation. A recent study addresses this issue by examining data from 1900–2010 
for 17 countries.
Figure 10.13 shows the historical average stock market risk premium for all 17 coun-
tries over the 111-year period. Looking at the numbers, the U.S. risk premium is the 7th 
highest at 7.2 percent (which differs from our earlier estimate because of the differing time 
periods examined). The overall average risk premium is 6.9 percent. These numbers make 
it clear that U.S. investors did well, but not exceptionally so relative to investors in many 
other countries.
So, is the U.S. stock market risk premium estimated from 1926–2014 too high? The 
evidence seems to suggest that the answer is “maybe a little.” One thing we haven’t stressed 
so far is that even with 111 years of data, the average risk premium is still not measured 
with great precision. From a statistical standpoint, the standard error associated with the 
U.S. estimated risk premium of 7.2 percent is about 2 percent.4 So, even one standard error 
range covers 5.2 to 9.2 percent.
EXAMPLE
10.3  Investing in Growth Stocks
The term growth stock is frequently a euphemism for small-company stock. Are such invest-
ments suitable for “widows and orphans”? Before answering, you should consider the historical 
volatility. For example, from the historical record, what is the approximate probability that you 
will actually lose 16 percent or more of your money in a single year if you buy a portfolio of such 
companies?
	
Looking back at Figure 10.10, we see that the average return on small stocks is 16.7 percent, 
and the standard deviation is 32.1 percent. Assuming that the returns are approximately normal, 
there is about a  probability that you will experience a return outside the range of –15.4 percent to 
48.8 percent (= 16.7% ± 32.1%).
	
Because the normal distribution is symmetric, the odds of being above or below this range are 
equal. There is thus a 
 chance (half of ) that you will lose more than 15.4 percent. So, you should 
expect this to happen once in every six years, on average. Such investments can thus be very vola-
tile, and they are not well suited for those who cannot afford the risk.
4 Recall from basic “sadistics” that the standard error of a sample mean is the sample standard deviation divided 
by the square root of the sample size. In our case, the standard deviation over the 1900–2010 period (not shown) 
was 19.8 percent, so the standard error is .198/√111 = .019.

332	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
Belgium
Switzerland
Spain
Norway
Canada
Ireland
UK
Netherlands
U.S.
Sweden
South Africa
Australia
Germany
France
Japan
Italy
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
Risk premium (% per year)
Country
Denmark
4.6%
5.1% 5.3% 5.4% 5.5% 5.6% 5.9% 6.0%
Average = 6.9%
7.2%
8.3% 8.3%
8.7% 9.0%
9.8% 9.8%
6.5% 6.6%
f i g u r e  10.13
Stock market risk premiums for 17 countries: 1900–2010
Source: Based on information in Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, and Michael Staunton, “The Worldwide Equity Premium: A Smaller Puzzle,” in 
Handbook of the Equity Risk Premium, Rajnish Mehra, ed. (Elsevier: 2007). Updates by the authors.
concept questions
10.4a	 In words, how do we calculate a variance? A standard deviation?
10.4b	 With a normal distribution, what is the probability of ending up more than one 
standard deviation below the average?
10.4c	 Assuming that long-term corporate bonds have an approximately normal distribution, 
what is the approximate probability of earning 14.6 percent or more in a given year? 
With T-bills, approximately what is this probability?
10.4d	 What is the second lesson from capital market history?

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
333
MORE ON AVERAGE RETURNS
Thus far in this chapter, we have looked closely at simple average returns. But there 
is another way of computing an average return. The fact that average returns are cal-
culated two different ways leads to some confusion, so our goal in this section is to 
explain the two approaches and also the circumstances under which each is 
appropriate.
Arithmetic versus Geometric Averages
Let’s start with a simple example. Suppose you buy a particular stock for $100. Unfortu-
nately, the first year you own it, it falls to $50. The second year you own it, it rises back to 
$100, leaving you where you started (no dividends were paid).
What was your average return on this investment? Common sense seems to say 
that your average return must be exactly zero since you started with $100 and ended 
with $100. But if we calculate the returns year-by-year, we see that you lost 50 percent 
the first year (you lost half of your money). The second year, you made 100 percent 
(you doubled your money). Your average return over the two years was thus (−50% + 
100%)/2 = 25%!
So which is correct, 0 percent or 25 percent? The answer is that both are correct: They 
just answer different questions. The 0 percent is called the geometric average return. The 
25 percent is called the arithmetic average return. The geometric average return answers 
the question “What was your average compound return per year over a particular pe-
riod?” The arithmetic average return answers the question “What was your return in an 
average year over a particular period?”
Notice that, in previous sections, the average returns we calculated were all arithmetic 
averages, so we already know how to calculate them. What we need to do now is (1) learn 
how to calculate geometric averages and (2) learn the circumstances under which one aver-
age is more meaningful than the other.
Calculating Geometric Average Returns
First, to illustrate how we calculate a geometric average return, suppose a particular in-
vestment had annual returns of 10 percent, 12 percent, 3 percent, and −9 percent over the 
last four years. The geometric average return over this four-year period is calculated as 
(1.10 × 1.12 × 1.03 × .91)1/4 − 1 = 3.66%. In contrast, the average arithmetic return we 
have been calculating is (.10 + .12 + .03 − .09)/4 = 4.0%.
In general, if we have T years of returns, the geometric average return over these T 
years is calculated using this formula:
Geometric average return = [(1 + R1) × (1 + R2) ×   ·   ·   ·   × (1 + RT)]1/T − 1	
[10.4]
This formula tells us that four steps are required:
  1.	 Take each of the T annual returns R1, R2, …, RT and add a one to each (after 
converting them to decimals!).
  2.	 Multiply all the numbers from step 1 together.
  3.	 Take the result from step 2 and raise it to the power of 1/T.
  4.	 Finally, subtract one from the result of step 3. The result is the geometric average 
return.
10.5
coverage online
Excel 
Master
geometric average 
return
The average compound 
return earned per year 
over a multiyear period.
arithmetic average 
return
The return earned in an 
average year over a 
particular period.

334	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
One thing you may have noticed in our examples thus far is that the geometric average 
returns seem to be smaller. It turns out that this will always be true (as long as the returns 
are not all identical, in which case the two “averages” would be the same). To illustrate, 
Table 10.4 shows the arithmetic averages and standard deviations from Figure 10.10, along 
with the geometric average returns.
As shown in Table 10.4, the geometric averages are all smaller, but the magnitude of 
the difference varies quite a bit. The reason is that the difference is greater for more vola-
tile investments. In fact, there is a useful approximation. Assuming all the numbers are 
expressed in decimals (as opposed to percentages), the geometric average return is ap-
proximately equal to the arithmetic average return minus half the variance. For example, 
looking at the large-company stocks, the arithmetic average is .121 and the standard de-
viation is .201, implying that the variance is .0404. The approximate geometric average 
is thus .121 − .0404
2
 = .101, which, in this case, is the same as the actual value.
EXAMPLE
10.4  Calculating the Geometric Average Return
Calculate the geometric average return for the S&P 500 using the returns given below. To do so, 
convert percentages to decimal returns, add one, and then calculate their product:
S&P 500 Returns
Product
11.14%
   1.1114
        37.13
× 1.3713
        43.31
× 1.4331
     −  8.91
×   .9109
     −25.26
×   .7474
  1.4870
	
Notice that the number 1.4870 is what our investment is worth after five years if we started with 
a $1 investment. The geometric average return is then calculated as:
Geometric average return =  1.48701/5 − 1 = .0826, or 8.26%
Thus the geometric average return is about 8.26 percent in this example. Here is a tip: If you are 
using a financial calculator, you can put $1 in as the present value, $1.4870 as the future value, 
and 5 as the number of periods. Then, solve for the unknown rate. You should get the same 
answer we did.
ta b l e  10.4
Geometric versus 
arithmetic average 
returns: 1926–2014
Average Return
Series
Geometric
Arithmetic
Standard Deviation
Large-company stocks
   10.1%
  12.1%
   20.1%
Small-company stocks
12.2   
16.7   
32.1   
Long-term corporate bonds
  6.1   
  6.4   
  8.4   
Long-term government bonds
  5.7   
  6.1   
10.0   
Intermediate-term government bonds
  5.3   
  5.4   
  5.6   
U.S. Treasury bills
  3.5   
  3.5   
  3.1   
Inflation
  2.9   
  3.0   
  4.1  

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
335
Arithmetic Average Return  
or Geometric Average Return?
When we look at historical returns, the difference between the geometric and arithmetic 
average returns isn’t too hard to understand. To put it slightly differently, the geometric 
average tells you what you actually earned per year on average, compounded annually. The 
arithmetic average tells you what you earned in a typical year. You should use whichever 
one answers the question you want answered.
A somewhat trickier question concerns which average return to use when forecasting 
future wealth levels, and there’s a lot of confusion on this point among analysts and finan-
cial planners. First, let’s get one thing straight: If you know the true arithmetic average 
­return, then this is what you should use in your forecast. So, for example, if you know the 
arithmetic return is 10 percent, then your best guess of the value of a $1,000 investment in 
10 years is the future value of $1,000 at 10 percent for 10 years, or $2,593.74.
The problem we face, however, is that we usually only have estimates of the arithmetic 
and geometric returns, and estimates have errors. In this case, the arithmetic average return 
is probably too high for longer periods and the geometric average is probably too low for 
shorter periods. So, you should regard long-run projected wealth levels calculated using 
arithmetic averages as optimistic. Short-run projected wealth levels calculated using geo-
metric averages are probably pessimistic.
As a practical matter, if you are using averages calculated over a long period of time 
(such as the 89 years we use) to forecast up to a decade or so into the future, then you 
should use the arithmetic average. If you are forecasting a few decades into the future (such 
as you might do for retirement planning), then you should just split the difference between 
the arithmetic and geometric average returns. Finally, if for some reason you are doing very 
long forecasts covering many decades, use the geometric average.
This concludes our discussion of geometric versus arithmetic averages. One last note: 
In the future, when we say “average return,” we mean arithmetic unless we explicitly say 
otherwise.
concept questions
10.5a	 If you wanted to forecast what the stock market is going to do over the next year, 
should you use an arithmetic or geometric average?
10.5b	 If you wanted to forecast what the stock market is going to do over the next century, 
should you use an arithmetic or geometric average?
EXAMPLE
10.5  More Geometric Averages
Take a look back at Figure 10.4. There, we showed the value of a $1 investment after 89 years. Use 
the value for the large-company stock investment to check the geometric average in Table 10.4.
	
In Figure 10.4, the large-company investment grew to $5,316.85 over 89 years. The geometric 
average return is thus:
Geometric average return = 5,316.851/89 − 1 = .101, or 10.1%
This 10.1% is the value shown in Table 10.4. For practice, check some of the other numbers in 
Table 10.4 the same way.

336	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
CAPITAL MARKET EFFICIENCY
Capital market history suggests that the market values of stocks and bonds can fluctuate widely 
from year to year. Why does this occur? At least part of the answer is that prices change because 
new information arrives, and investors reassess asset values based on that information.
The behavior of market prices has been extensively studied. A question that has re-
ceived particular attention is whether prices adjust quickly and correctly when new infor-
mation arrives. A market is said to be efficient if this is the case. To be more precise, in an 
efficient capital market, current market prices fully reflect available information. By this 
we simply mean that, based on available information, there is no reason to believe that the 
current price is too low or too high.
The concept of market efficiency is a rich one, and much has been written about it. A 
full discussion of the subject goes beyond the scope of our study of business finance. How-
ever, because the concept figures so prominently in studies of market history, we briefly 
describe the key points here.
Price Behavior in an Efficient Market
To illustrate how prices behave in an efficient market, suppose the F-Stop Camera Corpo-
ration (FCC) has, through years of secret research and development, developed a camera 
whose autofocusing system will double the speed of those now available. FCC’s capital 
budgeting analysis suggests that launching the new camera is a highly profitable move; in 
other words, the NPV appears to be positive and substantial. The key assumption thus far 
is that FCC has not released any information about the new system, so the fact of its exis-
tence is “inside” information only.
Now, consider a share of stock in FCC. In an efficient market, its price reflects what is 
known about FCC’s current operations and profitability, and it reflects market opinion 
about FCC’s potential for future growth and profits. The value of the new autofocusing 
system is not reflected, however, because the market is unaware of its existence.
If the market agrees with FCC’s assessment of the value of the new project, FCC’s stock 
price will rise when the decision to launch is made public. For example, assume the an-
nouncement is made in a press release on Wednesday morning. In an efficient market, the 
price of shares in FCC will adjust quickly to this new information. Investors should not be 
able to buy the stock on Wednesday afternoon and make a profit on Thursday. This would 
imply that it took the stock market a full day to realize the implication of the FCC press re-
lease. If the market is efficient, the price of shares of FCC stock on Wednesday afternoon will 
already reflect the information contained in the Wednesday morning press release.
Figure 10.14 presents three possible stock price adjustments for FCC. In the figure, 
Day 0 represents the announcement day. As illustrated, before the announcement, FCC’s 
stock sells for $140 per share. The NPV per share of the new system is, say, $40, so the 
new price will be $180 once the value of the new project is fully reflected.
The solid line in Figure 10.14 represents the path taken by the stock price in an efficient 
market. In this case, the price adjusts immediately to the new information and no further 
changes in the price of the stock take place. The broken line in Figure 10.14 depicts a delayed 
reaction. Here, it takes the market eight days or so to fully absorb the information. Finally, the 
dotted line illustrates an overreaction and subsequent adjustment to the correct price.
The broken line and the dotted line in Figure 10.14 illustrate paths that the stock price 
might take in an inefficient market. If, for example, stock prices don’t adjust immediately 
to new information (the broken line), then buying stock immediately following the release 
of new information and then selling it several days later would be a positive NPV activity 
because the price is too low for several days after the announcement.
10.6
efficient capital 
market
Market in which security 
prices reflect available 
information.

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
337
The Efficient Markets Hypothesis
The efficient markets hypothesis (EMH) asserts that well-organized capital markets, such as the 
NYSE, are efficient markets, at least as a practical matter. In other words, an advocate of the 
EMH might argue that while inefficiencies may exist, they are relatively small and not common.
If a market is efficient, then there is a very important implication for market partici-
pants: All investments in an efficient market are zero NPV investments. The reason is not 
complicated. If prices are neither too low nor too high, then the difference between the 
market value of an investment and its cost is zero; hence, the NPV is zero. As a result, in an 
efficient market, investors get exactly what they pay for when they buy securities, and 
firms receive exactly what their stocks and bonds are worth when they sell them.
What makes a market efficient is competition among investors. Many individuals 
spend their entire lives trying to find mispriced stocks. For any given stock, they study 
what has happened in the past to the stock’s price and its dividends. They learn, to the ex-
tent possible, what a company’s earnings have been, how much it owes to creditors, what 
taxes it pays, what businesses it is in, what new investments are planned, how sensitive it is 
to changes in the economy, and so on.
Not only is there a great deal to know about any particular company, there is a powerful 
incentive for knowing it, namely, the profit motive. If you know more about some company 
than other investors in the marketplace, you can profit from that knowledge by investing in 
the company’s stock if you have good news and by selling it if you have bad news.
The logical consequence of all this information being gathered and analyzed is that mis-
priced stocks will become fewer and fewer. In other words, because of competition among inves-
tors, the market will become increasingly efficient. A kind of equilibrium comes into being where 
there is just enough mispricing around for those who are best at identifying it to make a living at 
it. For most other investors, the activity of information gathering and analysis will not pay.5 
efficient markets 
hypothesis (EMH)
The hypothesis that actual 
capital markets, such as 
the New York Stock 
Exchange, are efficient.
Look under the 
“contents” link at  
www.investorhome.com 
for more info on the EMH.
f i g u r e  10.14
Reaction of stock price to new information in efficient and inefficient markets
Overreaction and
correction
Delayed reaction
Efﬁcient market reaction
220
180
140
100
28 26 24 22
0
12 14 16 18
Price ($)
Days relative
to announcement day
(Day 0)
Efﬁcient market reaction: The price instantaneously adjusts
to and fully reﬂects new information; there is no tendency for
subsequent increases and decreases.
Delayed reaction: The price partially adjusts to the new
information; eight days elapse before the price completely
reﬂects the new information.
Overreaction and correction: The price overadjusts to the
new information; it overshoots the new price and subsequently
corrects.
5 The idea behind the EMH can be illustrated by the following short story: A student was walking down the hall 
with her finance professor when they both saw a $20 bill on the ground. As the student bent down to pick it up, 
the professor shook her head slowly and, with a look of disappointment on her face, said patiently to the student, 
“Don’t bother. If it were really there, someone else would have picked it up already.” The moral of the story 
reflects the logic of the efficient markets hypothesis: If you think you have found a pattern in stock prices or a 
simple device for picking winners, you probably have not.

338
Can the Pros Beat the Market?
2
014 was a good year for investors in the Glenmede Large 
Cap Growth fund, which posted a gain of 20.0 percent 
for the year, the highest return for any stock mutual fund. In 
an industry where literally millions of dollars are at stake for 
mutual fund managers, it would seem that mutual funds 
should be able to consistently outperform the market. Unfor-
tunately for investors, during 2014, only 12 percent of large-
stock mutual funds outperformed the S&P 500 index for the 
year. And just so you don’t think this was a strange year for 
mutual funds, only 11 percent outperformed the S&P 500 
over the past decade.
	
Other facts point to the difficulty that mutual funds have 
in beating the market. For example, over the past 50 years, 
the stock market had an average return of 13.5 percent, 
while the average mutual fund returned 11.8 percent. And 
during the past five years, only 11 percent of mutual fund 
managers had a performance each year that was in the top 
half of the funds in its respective category. This underperfor-
mance is not limited to mutual funds managers. The Hulbert 
Financial Digest, which tracks the performance of invest-
ment letters, reported that 80 percent of investment letters 
underperformed the stock market over the long term.
	
One thing we know for sure is that past performance is 
no predictor of future returns. For example, in July 1994, the 
American Century Giftrust fund had been the best perform-
ing mutual fund for the previous 10 years, with an average 
annual return above 20 percent. But the next 10 years 
weren’t as kind to the investors in this fund. The average 
annual return for 1994 to 2004 was 2.87 percent, which was 
lower than U.S. Treasury bills during the same period. Fol-
lowing the old saying “What goes up, must come down,” 
other funds have had similar stories. The Van Wagoner 
Emerging Growth Fund returned 291.2 percent in 1999, only to 
lose 59.7 percent and 64.6 percent the next two years. Simi-
larly, the Oppenheimer Enterprise Fund gained 105.75 percent 
in 1999, but lost 40.6 percent in 2000, followed by two more 
years of double-digit losses.
	
Sometimes, we see proposed evidence showing that 
mutual fund managers collectively can beat the market. 
Consider 2005, when the S&P 500 gained about 3 percent. 
Diversified U.S. stock funds averaged 7 percent for the year, 
so it appears at first glance that mutual fund managers out-
performed the market. However, in 2008, only 42 percent of 
all managers outperformed the market, with an average re-
turn about 1 percent lower than the market return. Over the 
years, the track record of the pros is relatively clear: More 
often than not, they underperform. In fact, based on histori-
cal averages, about 70 percent of all managers will under-
perform in a typical year.
	
The inability of the pros to consistently beat the market 
doesn’t prove that markets are efficient. The evidence does, 
however, lend some credence to the semistrong form version 
of market efficiency. Plus, it adds to a growing body of evidence 
that tends to support a basic premise: While it may be possible 
to outperform the market for relatively short periods of time, it is 
very difficult to do so consistently over the long haul.
FINANCE MATTERS
­Having said this, the accompanying Finance Matters box indicates just how hard it is for anybody 
to “beat the market.”
Some Common Misconceptions about the EMH
No idea in finance has attracted as much attention as that of efficient markets, and not all 
of the attention has been flattering. Rather than rehash the arguments here, we will be con-
tent to observe that some markets are more efficient than others. For example, financial 
markets on the whole are probably much more efficient than real asset markets.
Having said this, it is the case that much of the criticism of the EMH is misguided 
because it is based on a misunderstanding of what the hypothesis says and what it doesn’t 
say. For example, when the notion of market efficiency was first publicized and debated in 
the popular financial press, it was often characterized by words to the effect that “throwing 
darts at the financial page will produce a portfolio that can be expected to do as well as any 
managed by professional security analysts.”
Confusion over statements of this sort has often led to a failure to understand the im-
plications of market efficiency. For example, sometimes it is wrongly argued that market 
efficiency means that it doesn’t matter how you invest your money because the efficiency 
of the market will protect you from making a mistake. However, a random dart-thrower 

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
339
might wind up with all of the darts sticking into one or two high-risk stocks that deal in 
genetic engineering. Would you really want all of your money in two such stocks?
What efficiency does imply is that the price a firm will obtain when it sells a share of 
its stock is a “fair” price in the sense that it reflects the value of that stock given the infor-
mation available about the firm. Shareholders do not have to worry that they are paying too 
much for a stock with a low dividend or some other sort of characteristic because the mar-
ket has already incorporated that characteristic into the price. We sometimes say the infor-
mation has been “priced in.”
The concept of efficient markets can be explained further by replying to a frequent 
objection. It is sometimes argued that the market cannot be efficient because stock prices 
fluctuate from day to day. If the prices are right, the argument goes, then why do they 
change so much and so often? From our earlier discussion, we can see that these price 
movements are in no way inconsistent with efficiency. Investors are bombarded with infor-
mation every day. The fact that prices fluctuate is, at least in part, a reflection of that infor-
mation flow. In fact, the absence of price movements in a world that changes as rapidly as 
ours would suggest inefficiency.
The Forms of Market Efficiency
It is common to distinguish between three forms of market efficiency. Depending on the 
degree of efficiency, we say that markets are either weak form efficient, semistrong form 
efficient, or strong form efficient. The difference between these forms relates to what infor-
mation is reflected in prices.
We start with the extreme case. If the market is strong form efficient, then all informa-
tion of every kind is reflected in stock prices. In such a market, there is no such thing as 
inside information. Therefore, in our FCC example, we apparently were assuming that the 
market was not strong form efficient.
Casual observation, particularly in recent years, suggests that inside information does 
exist and it can be valuable to possess. Whether it is lawful or ethical to use that informa-
tion is another issue. In any event, we conclude that private information about a particular 
stock may exist that is not currently reflected in the price of the stock. For example, prior 
knowledge of a takeover attempt could be very valuable.
The second form of efficiency, semistrong efficiency, is the most controversial. If a 
market is semistrong form efficient, then all public information is reflected in the stock 
price. The reason this form is controversial is that it implies that security analysts who try 
to identify mispriced stocks using, for example, financial statement information are wast-
ing their time because that information is already reflected in the current price.
The third form of efficiency, weak form efficiency, suggests that, at a minimum, the 
current price of a stock reflects its own past prices. In other words, studying past prices in 
an attempt to identify mispriced securities is futile if the market is weak form efficient. 
While this form of efficiency might seem rather mild, it implies that searching for patterns 
in historical prices that are useful in identifying mispriced stocks will not work (this prac-
tice, known as “technical” analysis, is quite common).
What does capital market history say about market efficiency? Here again, there is 
great controversy. At the risk of going out on a limb, the evidence does seem to tell us three 
things. First: Prices do appear to respond very rapidly to new information, and the response 
is at least not grossly different from what we would expect in an efficient market. Second: 
The future of market prices, particularly in the short run, is very difficult to predict based 
on publicly available information. Third: If mispriced stocks do exist, then there is no obvi-
ous means of identifying them. Put another way: Simpleminded schemes based on public 
information will probably not be successful.

340	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
concept questions
10.6a	 What is an efficient market?
10.6b	 What are the forms of market efficiency?
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has explored the subject of capital market history. Such history is useful be-
cause it tells us what to expect in the way of returns from risky assets. We summed up our 
study of market history with two key lessons:
  1.	 Risky assets, on average, earn a risk premium. There is a reward for bearing risk.
  2.	 The greater the potential reward from a risky investment, the greater is the risk.
These lessons have significant implications for the financial manager. We will be con-
sidering these implications in the chapters ahead.
We also discussed the concept of market efficiency. In an efficient market, prices adjust 
quickly and correctly to new information. Consequently, asset prices in efficient markets are 
rarely too high or too low. How efficient capital markets (such as the NYSE) are is a matter of 
debate, but, at a minimum, they are probably much more efficient than most real asset markets.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 10.1 Say you buy a share of stock for $50. Its price rises to $55, and it pays a 
$2 annual dividend. You do not sell the stock. What is your dividend yield for the year?
Section 10.3 What investments have the lowest historical risk premium?
Section 10.4 If stock ABC has a mean return of 10 percent with a standard deviation 
of 5 percent, what is the approximate probability of earning a negative return?
Section 10.5 If you use a geometric average to project short-run wealth levels, how 
would you expect your results to skew?
Section 10.6 Why do stock prices fluctuate from day to day?
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
10.1	
Recent Return History.  Use Table 10.1 to calculate the average return over the 
years 1997–2001 for large-company stocks, long-term government bonds, and 
Treasury bills. (See Problem 9.)
10.2	 More Recent Return History.  Calculate the standard deviations using information 
from Problem 10.1. Which of the investments was the most volatile over this 
period? (See Problem 7.)

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
341
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
10.1	
We calculate the averages as follows:
Actual Returns and Averages
 
	
Year
Large-Company  
Stocks
Long-Term 
Government Bonds
Treasury  
Bills
1997
   .3336
   .1770
.0519
1998
   .2858
   .1922
.0486
1999
   .2104
−.1276
.0480
2000
−.0910
   .2216
.0598
2001
−.1189
   .0530
.0333
Average:  
   .1240
   .1032
.0483
10.2	 We first need to calculate the deviations from the average returns. Using the 
averages from Problem 1, we get:
Deviations from Average Returns
 
Year
Large-Company  
Stocks
Long-Term 
Government Bonds
Treasury  
Bills
1997
   .2096
   .0738
   .0036
1998
   .1618
   .0890
   .0003
1999
   .0864
−.2308
−.0003
2000
−.2150
   .1184
   .0115
2001
−.2429
−.0502
−.0150
Total:
   .0000
   .0000
   .0000
	
We square these deviations and calculate the variances and standard deviations:
Squared Deviations from Average Returns
 
Year
Large-Company 
Stocks
Long-Term 
Government Bonds
Treasury  
Bills
1997
.043941
.005441
.000013
1998
.026186
.007914
.000000
1999
.007468
.053287
.000000
2000
.046216
.014009
.000132
2001
.058991
.002524
.000226
Variance:
.0457    
.0208    
.0001    
Standard deviation: 
.2138    
.1442    
.0096   
	
To calculate the variances, we added up the squared deviations and divided by 4, 
the number of returns less 1. Notice that the stocks had substantially greater 
volatility with a larger average return. Once again, such investments are risky, 
particularly over short periods of time.
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 3 	 10.1	 Investment Selection.  Given that RadNet, Inc., was up by 411 percent for 
2014, why didn’t all investors hold RadNet?
LO 3 	 10.2	 Investment Selection.  Given that Transocean Ltd. was down by 
63 percent for 2014, why did some investors hold the stock? Why didn’t 
they sell out before the price declined so sharply?

342	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
LO 3 	 10.3	
Risk and Return.  We have seen that over long periods of time, stock 
investments have tended to substantially outperform bond investments. 
However, it is not at all uncommon to observe investors with long 
horizons holding entirely bonds. Are such investors irrational?
LO 4 	 10.4	
Market Efficiency Implications.  Explain why a characteristic of an 
efficient market is that investments in that market have zero NPVs.
LO 4 	 10.5	
Efficient Markets Hypothesis.  A stock market analyst is able to identify 
mispriced stocks by comparing the average price for the last 10 days to 
the average price for the last 60 days. If this is true, what do you know 
about the market?
LO 4 	 10.6	
Semistrong Efficiency.  If a market is semistrong form efficient, is it 
also weak form efficient? Explain.
LO 4 	 10.7	
Efficient Markets Hypothesis.  What are the implications of the efficient 
markets hypothesis for investors who buy and sell stocks in an attempt to 
“beat the market”?
LO 4 	 10.8	
Stocks versus Gambling.  Critically evaluate the following statement: 
Playing the stock market is like gambling. Such speculative investing has no 
social value, other than the pleasure people get from this form of gambling.
LO 4 	 10.9	
Efficient Markets Hypothesis.  There are several celebrated investors and 
stock pickers frequently mentioned in the financial press who have recorded 
huge returns on their investments over the past two decades. Is the success 
of these particular investors an invalidation of the EMH? Explain.
LO 4 	 10.10	 Efficient Markets Hypothesis.  For each of the following scenarios, 
discuss whether profit opportunities exist from trading in the stock of the 
firm under the conditions that (1) the market is not weak form efficient, 
(2) the market is weak form but not semistrong form efficient, (3) the 
market is semistrong form but not strong form efficient, and (4) the 
market is strong form efficient.
a.	 The stock price has risen steadily each day for the past 30 days.
b.	 The financial statements for a company were released three days 
ago, and you believe you’ve uncovered some anomalies in the 
company’s inventory and cost control reporting techniques that are 
causing the firm’s true liquidity strength to be understated.
c.	
You observe that the senior management of a company has been buying 
a lot of the company’s stock on the open market over the past week.
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–18)
LO 1 	 1.	 Calculating Returns.  Suppose a stock had an initial price of $72 per share, 
paid a dividend of $1.65 per share during the year, and had an ending share 
price of $85. Compute the percentage total return. What was the dividend 
yield? The capital gains yield?

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
343
LO 1 	 2.	 Calculating Returns.  Rework Problem 1 assuming the ending share price 
is $62.
LO 1 	 3.	 Calculating Dollar Returns.  You purchased 250 shares of a particular stock 
at the beginning of the year at a price of $87.25. The stock paid a dividend 
of $1.15 per share, and the stock price at the end of the year was $94.86. 
What was your dollar return on this investment?
LO 1
	 4.	 Calculating Returns.  Suppose you bought a bond with an annual 
coupon rate of 6.5 percent one year ago for $1,032. The bond sells for 
$1,020 today.
a.	
Assuming a $1,000 face value, what was your total dollar return on this 
investment over the past year?
b.	 What was your total nominal rate of return on this investment over the 
past year?
c.	
If the inflation rate last year was 3 percent, what was your total real rate 
of return on this investment?
LO 2 	 5.	 Nominal versus Real Returns.  What was the arithmetic average annual 
return on large-company stocks from 1926 through 2014:
a.	
In nominal terms?
b.	 In real terms?
LO 2 	 6.	 Bond Returns.  What is the historical real return on long-term government 
bonds? On long-term corporate bonds?
LO 1
	 7.	 Calculating Returns and Variability.  Using the following returns, 
calculate the average returns, the variances, and the standard 
deviations for X and Y.
Returns
Year
X
Y
1
16%
36%
2
−17
−  8
3
   13
 21
4
   15
−15  
5
   24
 39
LO 2 	 8.	 Risk Premiums.  Refer to Table 10.1 in the text and look at the period from 
1973 through 1978.
a.	
Calculate the arithmetic average returns for large-company stocks and 
T-bills over this time period.
b.	 Calculate the standard deviation of the returns for large-company stocks 
and T-bills over this time period.
c.	
Calculate the observed risk premium in each year for the large-company 
stocks versus the T-bills. What was the arithmetic average risk premium 
over this period? What was the standard deviation of the risk premium 
over this period?
d.	 Is it possible for the risk premium to be negative before an 
investment is undertaken? Can the risk premium be negative after 
the fact? Explain.

344	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
LO 1 	 9.	
Calculating Returns and Variability.  You’ve observed the following 
returns on Barnett Corporation’s stock over the past five years: −12 
percent, 23 percent, 18 percent, 7 percent, and 13 percent.
a.	
What was the arithmetic average return on the stock over this five-
year period?
b.	 What was the variance of the returns over this period? The standard 
deviation?
LO 1 	 10.	
Calculating Real Returns and Risk Premiums.  For Problem 9, suppose 
the average inflation rate over this period was 3.2 percent and the average 
T-bill rate over the period was 4.3 percent.
a.	
What was the average real return on the stock?
b.	 What was the average nominal risk premium on the stock?
LO 1 	 11.	
Calculating Real Rates.  Given the information in Problem 10, what was 
the average real risk-free rate over this time period? What was the average 
real risk premium?
LO 2 	 12.	
Effects of Inflation.  Look at Table 10.1 and Figure 10.7 in the text. When 
were T-bill rates at their highest over the period from 1926 through 2014? 
Why do you think they were so high during this period? What relationship 
underlies your answer?
LO 1 	 13.	
Calculating Returns.  You purchased a zero-coupon bond one year ago for 
$352.81. The market interest rate is now 5.4 percent. If the bond had 
20 years to maturity when you originally purchased it, what was your total 
return for the past year? Assume semiannual compounding.
LO 1 	 14.	
Calculating Returns.  You bought a share of 5.5 percent preferred stock 
for $104.18 last year. The market price for your stock is now $102.67. 
What is your total return for last year?
LO 1 	 15.	
Calculating Returns.  You bought a stock three months ago for $42.67 per 
share. The stock paid no dividends. The current share price is $45.38. 
What is the APR of your investment? The EAR?
LO 1 	 16.	
Calculating Real Returns.  Refer to Table 10.1. What was the average real 
return for Treasury bills from 1926 through 1932?
LO 1 	 17.	
Return Distributions.  Refer back to Figure 10.10. What range of returns 
would you expect to see 68 percent of the time for long-term corporate 
bonds? What about 95 percent of the time?
LO 3 	 18.	
Return Distributions.  Refer back to Figure 10.10. What range of returns 
would you expect to see 68 percent of the time for large-company stocks? 
What about 95 percent of the time?
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 19–26)
LO 1 	 19.	
Calculating Returns and Variability.  You find a certain stock that had 
returns of 17 percent, −13 percent, 26 percent, and 8 percent for four of 
the last five years. If the average return of the stock over this period was 
10 percent, what was the stock’s return for the missing year? What is 
the standard deviation of the stock’s returns?
LO 1
	 20.	 Arithmetic and Geometric Returns.  A stock has had returns of  
−23 percent, 9 percent, 37 percent, −8 percent, 28 percent, and  
19 percent over the last six years. What are the arithmetic and 
geometric returns for the stock?
LO 3

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
345
LO 1 	 21.	
Arithmetic and Geometric Returns.  A stock has had the following 
year-end prices and dividends:
Year
Price
Dividend
1
$58.27
—
2
  67.32
$1.10
3
  61.46
  1.25
4
  69.32
  1.45
5
  75.18
  1.60
6
  84.32
  1.75
What are the arithmetic and geometric returns for the stock?
LO 2 	 22.	 Calculating Returns.  Refer to Table 10.1 in the text and look at the 
period from 1973 through 1980.
a.	
Calculate the average return for Treasury bills and the average annual 
inflation rate (consumer price index) for this period.
b.	 Calculate the standard deviation of Treasury bill returns and inflation 
over this time period.
c.	
Calculate the real return for each year. What is the average real return 
for Treasury bills?
d.	 Many people consider Treasury bills to be risk-free. What does this 
tell you about the potential risks of Treasury bills?
LO 1 	 23.	 Calculating Investment Returns.  You bought one of Rocky Mountain 
Manufacturing Co.’s 6.5 percent coupon bonds one year ago for 
$1,032.15. These bonds make annual payments and mature nine years 
from now. Suppose you decide to sell your bonds today, when the 
required return on the bonds is 5.2 percent. If the inflation rate was  
3.5 percent over the past year, what would be your total real return on 
investment?
LO 1 	 24.	 Using Return Distributions.  Suppose the returns on long-term 
government bonds are normally distributed. Based on the historical record, 
what is the approximate probability that your return on these bonds will be 
less than −3.9 percent in a given year? What range of returns would you 
expect to see 95 percent of the time? What range would you expect to see 
99 percent of the time?
LO 3 	 25.	 Using Return Distributions.  Assuming that the returns from holding 
small-company stocks are normally distributed, what is the approximate 
probability that your money will double in value in a single year? What 
about triple in value?
LO 1 	 26.	 Distributions.  In the previous problem, what is the probability that the 
return is less than −100 percent (think)? What are the implications for the 
distribution of returns?
CHALLENGE (Question 27–28)
LO 1 	 27.	 Using Probability Distributions.  Suppose the returns on large-company 
stocks are normally distributed. Based on the historical record, use the 
NORMDIST function in Excel® to determine the probability that in any 
given year you will lose money by investing in large-company common 
stock.
LO 3

346	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
LO 3 	 28.	 Using Probability Distributions.  Suppose the returns on long-term 
corporate bonds and T-bills are normally distributed. Based on the 
historical record, use the NORMDIST function in Excel® to answer the 
following questions:
a.	
What is the probability that in any given year, the return on long-term 
corporate bonds will be greater than 10 percent? Less than 0 percent?
b.	 What is the probability that in any given year, the return on T-bills 
will be greater than 10 percent? Less than 0 percent?
c.	
In 1979, the return on long-term corporate bonds was –4.18 percent. 
How likely is it that such a low return will recur at some point in the 
future? T-bills had a return of 10.56 percent in this same year. How 
likely is it that such a high return on T-bills will recur at some point in 
the future?
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
Historical Interest Rates.  Go to the St. Louis Federal Reserve website at www.stlouisfed.org 
and find the “FRED®” link and the “Interest Rates” link. You will find a list of links 
for different historical interest rates. Follow the “10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity 
Rate” link and you will find the monthly 10-year Treasury note interest rates. 
Calculate the average annual 10-year Treasury interest rate for 2013 and 2014. 
Compare this number to the long-term government bond returns and the U.S. Treasury 
bill returns found in Table 10.1. How does the 10-year Treasury interest rate compare 
to these numbers? Do you expect this relationship to always hold? Why or why not?
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
As we have seen, over the 1926–2014 period, small-company stocks had the highest re-
turn and the highest risk, while U.S. Treasury bills had the lowest return and the lowest 
risk. While we certainly hope you have an 89-year holding period, it is likely your invest-
ment will be for fewer years. One way risk and return are examined over shorter invest-
ment periods is by using rolling returns and standard deviations. Suppose you have a 
series of annual returns, and you want to calculate a three-year rolling average return. You 
would calculate the first rolling average at Year 3 using the returns for the first three 
years. The next rolling average would be calculated using the returns from Years 2, 3, and 
4, and so on.
a.	
Using the annual returns for large-company stocks and Treasury bills, calculate both 
the 5- and 10-year rolling average return and standard deviation.
b.	 Over how many 5-year periods did Treasury bills outperform large-company stocks? 
How many 10-year periods?
c.	
Over how many 5-year periods did Treasury bills have a larger standard deviation 
than large-company stocks? Over how many 10-year periods?
d.	 Graph the rolling 5-year and 10-year average returns for large-company stocks and 
Treasury bills.
e.	
What conclusions do you draw from the preceding results?

	
c h a p t e r  1 0
Some Lessons from Capital Market History	
347
CHAPTER CASE
A Job at S&S Air
Y
ou recently graduated from college, and your job 
search led you to S&S Air. Because you felt the com-
pany’s business was headed skyward, you accepted the 
job offer. As you are finishing your employment paper-
work, Chris Guthrie, who works in the finance depart-
ment, stops by to inform you about the company’s new 
401(k) plan.
	
A 401(k) is a type of retirement plan offered by many 
companies. A 401(k) is tax deferred, which means that 
any deposits you make into the plan are deducted from 
your current income, so no current taxes are paid on the 
money. For example, assume your salary will be $30,000 
per year. If you contribute $1,500 to the 401(k) plan, you 
will pay taxes only on $28,500 in income. No taxes will 
be due on any capital gains or plan income while you 
are invested in the plan, but you will pay taxes when you 
withdraw the money at retirement. You can contribute 
up to 15 percent of your salary to the plan. As is com-
mon, S&S Air also has a 5 percent match program. This 
means that the company will match your contribution 
dollar-for-dollar up to 5 percent of your salary, but you 
must contribute to get the match.
	
The 401(k) plan has several options for investments, 
most of which are mutual funds. As you know, a mutual 
fund is a portfolio of assets. When you purchase shares 
in a mutual fund, you are actually purchasing partial 
ownership of the fund’s assets, similar to purchasing 
shares of stock in a company. The return of the fund is 
the weighted average of the return of the assets owned 
by the fund, minus any expenses. The largest expense 
is typically the management fee paid to the fund man-
ager, who makes all of the investment decisions for the 
fund. S&S Air uses Arias Financial Services as its 401(k) 
plan administrator.
	
Chris Guthrie then explains that the retirement in-
vestment options offered for employees are as follows:
1.	
Company stock. One option is stock in S&S Air. The 
company is currently privately held. The price you 
would pay for the stock is based on an annual ap-
praisal, less a 20 percent discount. When you in-
terviewed with the owners, Mark Sexton and Todd 
Story, they informed you that the company stock 
was expected to be publicly sold in three to five 
years. If you needed to sell the stock before it be-
came publicly traded, the company would buy it 
back at the then-current appraised value.
2.	
Arias S&P 500 Index Fund. This mutual fund tracks 
the S&P 500. Stocks in the fund are weighted ex-
actly the same as they are in the S&P 500. This 
means that the fund’s return is approximately the 
return of the S&P 500, minus expenses. With an 
index fund, the manager is not required to research 
stocks and make investment decisions, so fund ex-
penses are usually low. The Arias S&P 500 Index 
Fund charges expenses of .20 percent of assets 
per year.
3.	
Arias Small-Cap Fund. This fund primarily invests in 
small capitalization stocks. As such, the returns of 
the fund are more volatile. The fund can also invest 
10 percent of its assets in companies based outside 
the United States. This fund charges 1.70 percent of 
assets in expenses per year.
4.	
Arias Large-Company Stock Fund. This fund invests 
primarily in large capitalization stocks of companies 
based in the United States. The fund is managed by 
Melissa Arias and has outperformed the market 
in six of the last eight years. The fund charges 
1.50 percent in expenses.
5.	
Arias Bond Fund. This fund invests in long-term 
corporate bonds issued by U.S. domiciled compa-
nies. The fund is restricted to investments in bonds 
with an investment grade credit rating. This fund 
charges 1.40 percent in expenses.
6.	
Arias Money Market Fund. This fund invests in 
short-term, high credit quality debt instruments, 
which include Treasury bills. As such, the return on 
money market funds is only slightly higher than the 
return on Treasury bills. Because of the credit qual-
ity and short-term nature of the investments, there 
is only a very slight risk of negative return. The fund 
charges .60 percent in expenses.

348	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
Q U E ST I ONS
1.	
What advantages/disadvantages do the mutual 
funds offer compared to company stock for your 
retirement investing?
2.	
Notice that, for every dollar you invest, S&S Air 
also invests a dollar. What return on your invest-
ment does this represent? What does your answer 
suggest about matching programs?
3.	
Assume you decide you should invest at least part 
of your money in large capitalization stocks of 
companies based in the United States. What are 
the advantages and disadvantages of choosing 
the Arias Large-Company Stock Fund compared 
to the Arias S&P 500 Index Fund?
4.	
The returns of the Arias Small-Cap Fund are the 
most volatile of all the mutual funds offered in the 
401 (k) plan. Why would you ever want to invest in 
this fund? When you examine the expenses of the 
mutual funds, you will notice that this fund also 
has the highest expenses. Will this affect your de-
cision to invest in this fund?
5.	
A measure of risk-adjusted performance that is of-
ten used in practice is the Sharpe ratio. The 
Sharpe ratio is calculated as the risk premium of 
an asset divided by its standard deviation. 
	
  The standard deviations and returns for the 
funds over the past 10 years are listed here. As-
suming a risk-free rate of 4 percent, calculate the 
Sharpe ratio for each of these. In broad terms, 
what do you suppose the Sharpe ratio is intended 
to measure?
10-Year Annual Return
Standard Deviation
Arias S&P 500 Index Fund
   9.15%
19.35%
Arias Small-Cap Fund
14.05  
26.82   
Arias Large-Company Stock Fund
9.53
23.82   
Arias Bond Fund
8.73
11.45  

349
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
I
n March 2015, Freeport-McMoRan, Mallinckrodt, and AbbVie all 
made major announcements. When a company makes an impor-
tant announcement, the stock price tends to change, and it was no 
different in these three cases. Global mining giant Freeport-­
McMoRan announced that it was reducing its dividend by 84 per-
cent, a huge cut. Mallinckrodt, the diagnostic treatment company, 
announced the acquisition of critical care company Ikaria for 
$2.3 billion. On the same day, pharmaceutical company AbbVie 
­announced the $21 billion acquisition of Pharmacyclics.
You would expect that these three cases represent bad news 
for Freeport-McMoRan and more-or-less the same news for 
Mallinckrodt and AbbVie, and usually you would be right. But here, Freeport-McMoRan’s 
stock price dropped about 1.5 percent on the day, a small price drop given the severity of the 
dividend cut. Mallinckrodt’s stock price jumped 4.7 percent, while AbbVie’s stock price fell 
5.7 percent. So when is good news really good news? The answer is fundamental to under-
standing risk and return, and—the good news is—this chapter explores it in detail.
This chapter continues the discussion we began in the previous chapter. We’ve seen 
pretty clearly that some investments have greater risks than others. We now begin to drill 
down a bit to investigate one of the most fundamental problems in finance: Just what is risk? 
What we will learn is that risk is not always what it seems, and the reward for bearing risk is 
more subtle than we have indicated so far. Understanding how risks are rewarded is impor-
tant for everyone in business for the simple reason that business is risky, and only busi-
nesses that manage risk wisely will survive over the long haul.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Calculate expected returns.
LO 2 	 Explain the impact of 
diversification.
LO 3 	 Define the systematic risk principle.
LO 4 	 Discuss the security market line 
and the risk-return trade-off.
Risk and Return
11

350	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
I
n our last chapter, we learned some important lessons from capital market history. Most 
important, there is a reward, on average, for bearing risk. We called this reward a risk 
premium. The second lesson is that this risk premium is larger for riskier investments. This 
chapter explores the economic and managerial implications of this basic idea.
Thus far, we have concentrated mainly on the return behavior of a few large portfolios. 
We need to expand our consideration to include individual assets. Specifically, we have 
two tasks to accomplish. First, we have to define risk and then discuss how to measure it. 
We then must quantify the relationship between an asset’s risk and its required return.
When we examine the risks associated with individual assets, we find there are two types 
of risk: systematic and unsystematic. This distinction is crucial because, as we will see, system-
atic risk affects almost all assets in the economy, at least to some degree, while unsystematic 
risk affects at most a small number of assets. We then develop the principle of diversification, 
which shows that highly diversified portfolios will tend to have almost no unsystematic risk.
The principle of diversification has an important implication: To a diversified investor, 
only systematic risk matters. It follows that in deciding whether or not to buy a particular 
individual asset, a diversified investor will only be concerned with that asset’s systematic 
risk. This is a key observation, and it allows us to say a great deal about the risks and re-
turns on individual assets. In particular, it is the basis for a famous relationship between 
risk and return called the security market line, or SML. To develop the SML, we introduce 
the equally famous “beta” coefficient, one of the centerpieces of modern finance. Beta and 
the SML are key concepts because they supply us with at least part of the answer to the 
question of how to go about determining the required return on an investment.
EXPECTED RETURNS AND VARIANCES
In our previous chapter, we discussed how to calculate average returns and variances using 
historical data. We now begin to discuss how to analyze returns and variances when the 
information we have concerns future possible returns and their probabilities.
Expected Return
We start with a straightforward case. Consider a single period of time, say, a year. We have 
two stocks, L and U, which have the following characteristics: Stock L is expected to have 
a return of 25 percent in the coming year. Stock U is expected to have a return of 20 percent 
for the same period.
In a situation like this, if all investors agreed on the expected returns, why would 
anyone want to hold Stock U? After all, why invest in one stock when the expectation is 
that another will do better? Clearly, the answer must depend on the risk of the two invest-
ments. The return on Stock L, although it is expected to be 25 percent, could actually turn 
out to be higher or lower.
For example, suppose the economy booms. In this case, we think Stock L will have a 
70 percent return. If the economy enters a recession, we think the return will be −20 percent. 
In this case, we say that there are two states of the economy, which means that these are the 
only two possible situations. This setup is oversimplified, of course, but it allows us to 
­illustrate some key ideas without a lot of computation.
Suppose we think a boom and a recession are equally likely to happen, for a 50–50 
chance of each. Table 11.1 illustrates the basic information we have described and some 
additional information about Stock U. Notice that Stock U earns 30 percent if there is a 
recession and 10 percent if there is a boom.
11.1

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
351
Obviously, if you buy one of these stocks, say Stock U, what you earn in any particular 
year depends on what the economy does during that year. However, suppose the probabili-
ties stay the same through time. If you hold U for a number of years, you’ll earn 30 percent 
about half the time and 10 percent the other half. In this case, we say that your expected 
return on Stock U, E(RU), is 20 percent:
E(RU) = .50 × 30% + .50 × 10% = 20%
In other words, you should expect to earn 20 percent from this stock, on average.
For Stock L, the probabilities are the same, but the possible returns are different. Here 
we lose 20 percent half the time, and we gain 70 percent the other half. The expected return 
on L, E(RL), is thus 25 percent:
E(RL) = .50 × −20% + .50 × 70% = 25%
Table 11.2 illustrates these calculations.
In the previous chapter, we defined the risk premium as the difference between the 
return on a risky investment and that on a risk-free investment, and we calculated the his-
torical risk premiums on some different investments. Using our projected returns, we can 
calculate the projected, or expected, risk premium as the difference between the expected 
return on a risky investment and the certain return on a risk-free investment.
For example, suppose risk-free investments are currently offering 8 percent. We will 
say that the risk-free rate, which we label as Rf, is 8 percent. Given this, what is the pro-
jected risk premium on Stock U? On Stock L? Because the expected return on Stock U, 
E(RU), is 20 percent, the projected risk premium is:
Risk premium = Expected return − Risk-free rate 	
[11.1]
	
= E(RU) − Rf 
	
= 20% − 8%    
	
= 12%
Similarly, the risk premium on Stock L is 25% − 8% = 17%.
expected return
Return on a risky asset 
expected in the future.
State of 
Economy
Probability of  
State of  
Economy
Security Returns If  
State Occurs
Stock L
Stock U
Recession
  .5
−20%
30%
Boom
  .5
   70   
10
1.0
ta b l e  11.1
States of the 
economy and stock 
returns
 
 
Stock L
Stock U
(1)  
State of  
Economy
(2)  
Probability  
of State of 
Economy
(3)  
Rate of  
Return  
If State 
Occurs
(4)  
Product  
(2) × (3)
(5)  
Rate of  
Return  
If State 
Occurs
(6)  
Product  
(2) × (5)
Recession
  .5
−.20
           −.10
.30
               .15
Boom
  .5
   .70
                .35
.10
               .05
1.0
E(RL) = .25
E(RU) = .20
ta b l e  11.2
Calculation of 
expected return

352	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
In general, the expected return on a security or other asset is simply equal to the sum 
of the possible returns multiplied by their probabilities. So, if we had 100 possible returns, 
we would multiply each one by its probability and then add the results up. The result would 
be the expected return. The risk premium would then be the difference between this ex-
pected return and the risk-free rate.
EXAMPLE
11.1  Unequal Probabilities
Look again at Tables 11.1 and 11.2. Suppose you thought a boom would occur only 20 percent of the 
time instead of 50 percent. What are the expected returns on Stocks U and L in this case? If the 
risk-free rate is 10 percent, what are the risk premiums?
	
The first thing to notice is that a recession must occur 80 percent of the time (1 – .20 = .80) 
because there are only two possibilities. With this in mind, we see that Stock U has a 30 per-
cent return in 80 percent of the years and a 10 percent return in 20 percent of the years. To 
calculate the expected return, we again just multiply the possibilities by the probabilities and 
add up the results:
E(RU) = .80 × 30% + .20 × 10% = 26%
Table 11.3 summarizes the calculations for both stocks. Notice that the expected return on L is  
–2 percent.
	
The risk premium for Stock U is 26% − 10% = 16% in this case. The risk premium for Stock L is 
negative:  –2% – 10% = –12%. This is a little odd, but, for reasons we discuss later, it is not 
impossible.
 
 
Stock L
Stock U
(1)  
State of 
Economy
(2)  
Probability  
of State of 
Economy
(3)  
Rate of  
Return  
If State 
Occurs
(4)  
Product  
(2) × (3)
(5)  
Rate of  
Return If  
State Occurs
(6)  
Product  
(2) × (5)
Recession
  .8
−.20
           −.16
.30
               .24
Boom
  .2
   .70
                .14
.10
               .02
1.0
E(RL) = −.02
E(RU) = .26
ta b l e  11.3
Calculation of 
expected return
Calculating the Variance
To calculate the variances of the returns on our two stocks, we first determine the squared 
deviations from the expected returns. We then multiply each possible squared deviation by 
its probability. We add these up, and the result is the variance. The standard deviation, as 
always, is the square root of the variance.
To illustrate, Stock U from earlier has an expected return of E(RU) = 20%. In a given 
year, it will actually return either 30 percent or 10 percent. The possible deviations are thus 
30% − 20% = 10% and 10% − 20% = −10%. In this case, the variance is:
Variance = σ2
U = .50 × (10%)2 + .50 × (−10%)2 = .01

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
353
The standard deviation is the square root of this:
Standard deviation = σU = 1.01 = .10 = 10%
Table 11.4 summarizes these calculations for both stocks. Notice that Stock L has a 
much larger variance.
When we put the expected return and variability information for our two stocks to-
gether, we have:
Stock L
Stock U
Expected return, E(R)
 25%
20%
Variance, σ2
.2025
.0100
Standard deviation, σ
 45%
10%
Stock L has a higher expected return, but U has less risk. You could get a 70 percent return 
on your investment in L, but you could also lose 20 percent. Notice that an investment in U 
will always pay at least 10 percent.
Which of these two stocks should you buy? We can’t really say; it depends on your 
personal preferences. We can be reasonably sure, however, that some investors would pre-
fer L to U and some would prefer U to L.
You’ve probably noticed that the way we calculated expected returns and vari-
ances here is somewhat different from the way we did it in the last chapter. The reason 
is that, in Chapter 10, we were examining actual historical returns, so we estimated the 
average return and the variance based on some actual events. Here, we have projected 
future returns and their associated probabilities, so this is the information with which 
we must work.
(1)  
State of  
Economy
(2)  
Probability  
of State  
of Economy
(3)   
Return Deviation  
from Expected  
Return
(4)  
Squared Return  
Deviation from  
Expected Return
(5) 
Product  
(2) × (4)
Stock L
  Recession
  .5
−.20 − .25 = −.45
−.452 = .2025
.10125
  Boom
  .5
   .70 − .25 =    .45
   .452 = .2025
.10125
1.0
σ2
L = .2025
Stock U
  Recession
  .5
  .30 − .20 =    .10
.102 = .01
.00500
  Boom
  .5
.10 − .20 = −.10
−.102 = .01
.00500
1.0
σ2
U = .0100 
ta b l e  11.4
Calculation of 
variance
EXAMPLE
11.2  More Unequal Probabilities
Going back to Example 11.1, what are the variances on the two stocks once we have unequal prob-
abilities? The standard deviations?
(continued)

354	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
concept questions
11.1a	
How do we calculate the expected return on a security?
11.1b	
In words, how do we calculate the variance of the expected return?
PORTFOLIOS
Thus far in this chapter, we have concentrated on individual assets considered separately. 
However, most investors actually hold a portfolio of assets. All we mean by this is that in-
vestors tend to own more than just a single stock, bond, or other asset. Given that this is so, 
portfolio return and portfolio risk are of obvious relevance. Accordingly, we now discuss 
portfolio expected returns and variances.
Portfolio Weights
There are many equivalent ways of describing a portfolio. The most convenient approach is 
to list the percentages of the total portfolio’s value that are invested in each portfolio asset. 
We call these percentages the portfolio weights.
For example, if we have $50 in one asset and $150 in another, then our total portfolio 
is worth $200. The percentage of our portfolio in the first asset is $50/200 = .25. The per-
centage of our portfolio in the second asset is $150/200, or .75. Our portfolio weights are 
thus .25 and .75. Notice that the weights have to add up to 1.00 since all of our money is 
invested somewhere.1
Portfolio Expected Returns
Let’s go back to Stocks L and U. You put half your money in each. The portfolio weights are 
obviously .50 and .50. What is the pattern of returns on this portfolio? The expected return?
11.2
portfolio
Group of assets such as 
stocks and bonds held by 
an investor.
portfolio weight
Percentage of a portfolio’s 
total value in a particular 
asset.
We can summarize the needed calculations as follows:
(1)  
State of 
Economy
(2)  
Probability  
of State  
of Economy
(3)  
Return Deviation 
from Expected 
Return 
(4)  
Squared Return 
Deviation from  
Expected Return
(5)  
Product  
(2) × (4)
Stock L 
  Recession 
  Boom
.80 
.20
−.20 − (−.02) = −.18
.70 − (−.02) =       .72
.0324 
.5184
.02592 
.10368  
σL
2 = .12960
Stock U 
  Recession 
  Boom
.80 
.20
       .30 − .26 =    .04 
       .10 − .26 = −.16
.0016 
.0256
.00128 
.00512  
σ2
U = .00640
Based on these calculations, the standard deviation for L is σL = 1.1296 = .36, or 36%. The stan-
dard deviation for U is much smaller; σU = 1.0064 = .08, or 8%.
1Some of it could be in cash, of course, but we would then just consider the cash to be one of the portfolio assets.

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
355
To answer these questions, suppose the economy actually enters a recession. In this 
case, half your money (the half in L) loses 20 percent. The other half (the half in U) gains 
30 percent. Your portfolio return, RP, in a recession will thus be:
RP = .50 × −20% + .50 × 30% = 5%
Table 11.5 summarizes the remaining calculations. Notice that when a boom occurs, your 
portfolio will return 40 percent:
RP = .50 × 70% + .50 × 10% = 40%
As indicated in Table 11.5, the expected return on your portfolio, E(RP), is 22.5 percent.
We can save ourselves some work by calculating the expected return more directly. 
Given these portfolio weights, we could have reasoned that we expect half of our money to 
earn 25 percent (the half in L) and half of our money to earn 20 percent (the half in U). Our 
portfolio expected return is thus:
	E(RP) = .50 × E(RL) + .50 × E(RU)
	
= .50 × 25% + .50 × 20% 
	
= 22.5%
This is the same portfolio expected return we had before.
This method of calculating the expected return on a portfolio works no matter how 
many assets there are in the portfolio. Suppose we had n assets in our portfolio, where n is 
any number. If we let xi stand for the percentage of our money in Asset i, then the expected 
return is:
E(RP) = x1 × E(R1) + x2 × E(R2) +  · · ·  + xn × E(Rn)	
[11.2]
This says that the expected return on a portfolio is a straightforward combination of the 
expected returns on the assets in that portfolio. This seems somewhat obvious, but, as we 
will examine next, the obvious approach is not always the right one.
ta b l e  11.5
Expected return on 
an equally weighted 
portfolio of Stock L 
and Stock U
(1)  
State  
of  
Economy
(2) 
Probability 
of State of  
Economy
(3)  
Portfolio Return If State Occurs
(4)  
Product  
(2) × (3)
Recession
     .50
.50 × −20% + .50 × 30% =     5%
     .025
Boom
     .50
.50 ×      70% + .50 × 10% = 40%
    .200
 1.00  
E(RP) = .225         
EXAMPLE
11.3  Portfolio Expected Return
Suppose we have the following projections on three stocks:
State of 
Economy
Probability  
of State
Returns
Stock A
Stock B
Stock C
Boom
.40
10%
15%
 20%
Bust
.60
8
4
0
(continued)

356	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
Portfolio Variance
From our discussion above, the expected return on a portfolio that contains equal invest-
ments in Stocks U and L is 22.5 percent. What is the standard deviation of return on this 
portfolio? Simple intuition might suggest that half of the money has a standard deviation of 
45 percent and the other half has a standard deviation of 10 percent, so the portfolio’s stan-
dard deviation might be calculated as:
σP = .50 × 45% + .50 × 10% = 27.5%
Unfortunately, this approach is completely incorrect!
Let’s see what the standard deviation really is. Table 11.6 summarizes the relevant 
calculations. As we see, the portfolio’s variance is about .031, and its standard deviation is 
less than we thought—it’s only 17.5 percent. What is illustrated here is that the variance on 
a portfolio is not generally a simple combination of the variances of the assets in the 
portfolio.
We can illustrate this point a little more dramatically by considering a slightly differ-
ent set of portfolio weights. Suppose we put 2⁄11 (about 18 percent) in L and the other 9⁄11 
(about 82 percent) in U. If a recession occurs, this portfolio will have a return of:
Rp = 2/11 × −20% + 9/11 × 30% = 20.91%
If a boom occurs, this portfolio will have a return of:
Rp = 2/11 × 70% + 9/11 × 10% = 20.91%
We want to calculate portfolio expected returns in two cases. First: What would be the expected 
return on a portfolio with equal amounts invested in each of the three stocks? Second: What would 
be the expected return if half of the portfolio were in A, with the remainder equally divided between 
B and C?
	
From our earlier discussions, the expected returns on the individual stocks are (check these 
for practice):
E(RA) = 8.8%
E(RB) = 8.4%
E(RC) = 8.0%
If a portfolio has equal investments in each asset, the portfolio weights are all the same. Such a 
portfolio is said to be equally weighted. Because there are three stocks in this case, the weights are 
all equal to ⅓. The portfolio expected return is thus:
E(RP) = ⅓ × 8.8% + ⅓ × 8.4% + ⅓ × 8.0% = 8.4%
In the second case, verify that the portfolio expected return is 8.5 percent.
ta b l e  11.6
Variance on an 
equally weighted 
portfolio of Stock L 
and Stock U
(1)  
State  
of  
Economy
(2) 
Probability 
of State of 
Economy
(3) 
Portfolio  
Return If  
State Occurs
(4)  
Squared Deviation  
from Expected  
Return
(5)  
Product  
(2) × (4)
Recession
     .50
5%
(.05 − .225)2 = .030625
 .0153125
Boom
     .50
40
(.40 − .225)2 = .030625
 .0153125
   1.00  
σP
2 = .030625
            
σP = 1.030625 = 17.5%

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
357
Notice that the return is the same no matter what happens. No further calculations are 
needed: This portfolio has a zero variance. Apparently, combining assets into portfolios 
can substantially alter the risks faced by the investor. This is a crucial observation, and we 
will begin to explore its implications in the next section.
EXAMPLE
11.4  Portfolio Variance and Standard Deviation
In Example 11.3, what are the standard deviations on the two portfolios? To answer, we first have to 
calculate the portfolio returns in the two states. We will work with the second portfolio, which has 
50 percent in Stock A and 25 percent in each of Stocks B and C. The relevant calculations can be 
summarized as follows:
State of  
Economy
Probability  
of State 
Returns
Stock A 
Stock B 
 Stock C   
Portfolio   
Boom
.40
 10%
 15%
 20%
 13.75%
Bust
.60
8
4
0
5.00
The portfolio return when the economy booms is calculated as:
.50 × 10% + .25 × 15% + .25 × 20% = 13.75%
The return when the economy goes bust is calculated the same way. The expected return on the 
portfolio is .085. The variance is thus:
σ2 = .40 × (.1375 − .085)2 + .60 × (.05 − .085)2
 
= .0018375
The standard deviation is thus about 4.3 percent. For our equally weighted portfolio, verify that the 
standard deviation is about 5.4 percent.
concept questions
11.2a	 What is a portfolio weight?
11.2b	 How do we calculate the expected return on a portfolio?
11.2c	
Is there a simple relationship between the standard deviation on a portfolio and the 
standard deviations of the assets in the portfolio?
ANNOUNCEMENTS, SURPRISES, AND 
EXPECTED RETURNS
Now that we know how to construct portfolios and evaluate their returns, we begin to 
describe more carefully the risks and returns associated with individual securities. Thus 
far, we have measured volatility by looking at the difference between the actual return on 
an asset or portfolio, R, and the expected return, E(R). We now look at why such devia-
tions exist.
11.3

358	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
Expected and Unexpected Returns
To begin, for concreteness, we consider the return on the stock of a company called Flyers. 
What will determine this stock’s return in, say, the coming year?
The return on any stock traded in a financial market is composed of two parts. First, 
the normal, or expected, return from the stock is the part of the return that shareholders in 
the market predict or expect. This return depends on the information shareholders have that 
bears on the stock, and it is based on the market’s understanding today of the important 
factors that will influence the stock in the coming year.
The second part of the return on the stock is the uncertain, or risky, part. This is the 
portion that comes from unexpected information revealed within the year. A list of all pos-
sible sources of such information would be endless, but here are a few examples:
∙	
News about research on Flyers
∙ 	
Government figures released on gross domestic product (GDP)
∙ 	
The results from the latest arms control talks
∙ 	
The news that Flyers’s sales figures are higher than expected
∙ 	
A sudden, unexpected drop in interest rates
Based on this discussion, one way to express the return on Flyers’s stock in the coming 
year would be:
Total return = Expected return + Unexpected return 
                  R = E(R) + U	
[11.3]
where R stands for the actual total return in the year, E(R) stands for the expected part of 
the return, and U stands for the unexpected part of the return. What this says is that the 
actual return, R, differs from the expected return, E(R), because of surprises that occur dur-
ing the year. In any given year, the unexpected return will be positive or negative, but, 
through time, the average value of U will be zero. This simply means that, on average, the 
actual return equals the expected return.
Announcements and News
We need to be careful when we talk about the effect of news items on the return. For ex-
ample, suppose Flyers’s business is such that the company prospers when GDP grows at a 
relatively high rate and suffers when GDP is relatively stagnant. In this case, in deciding 
what return to expect this year from owning stock in Flyers, shareholders either implicitly 
or explicitly must think about what GDP is likely to be for the year.
When the government actually announces GDP figures for the year, what will happen 
to the value of Flyers stock? Obviously, the answer depends on what figure is released. 
More to the point, however, the impact depends on how much of that figure is new 
information.
At the beginning of the year, market participants will have some idea or forecast of 
what the yearly GDP will be. To the extent that shareholders have predicted GDP, that 
prediction will already be factored into the expected part of the return on the stock, E(R). 
On the other hand, if the announced GDP is a surprise, then the effect will be part of U, the 
unanticipated portion of the return.
As an example, suppose shareholders in the market had forecast that the GDP in-
crease this year would be .5 percent. If the actual announcement this year is exactly 
.5 percent, the same as the forecast, then the shareholders don’t really learn anything, and 
the announcement isn’t news. There will be no impact on the stock price as a result. This 

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
359
is like receiving confirmation of something that you suspected all along; it doesn’t reveal 
anything new.
A common way of saying that an announcement isn’t news is to say that the market 
has already “discounted” the announcement. The use of the word discount here is different 
from the use of the term in computing present values, but the spirit is the same. When we 
discount a dollar in the future, we say it is worth less to us because of the time value of 
money. When we say that we discount an announcement, or a news item, we mean that it 
has less of an impact on the market because the market already knew much of it.
For example, going back to Flyers, suppose the government announces that the actual 
GDP increase during the year has been 1.5 percent. Now shareholders have learned some-
thing, namely, that the increase is one percentage point higher than they had forecast. This 
difference between the actual result and the forecast, one percentage point in this example, 
is sometimes called the innovation or the surprise.
An announcement, then, can be broken into two parts, the anticipated, or expected, 
part and the surprise, or innovation:
Announcement = Expected part + Surprise	
[11.4]
The expected part of any announcement is the part of the information that the market uses 
to form the expectation, E(R), of the return on the stock. The surprise is the news that in-
fluences the unanticipated return on the stock, U.
To take another example, if shareholders knew in January that the president of the 
firm was going to resign, the official announcement in February would be fully expected 
and would be discounted by the market. Because the announcement was expected before 
February, its influence on the stock would have taken place before February. The an-
nouncement itself will contain no surprise, and the stock’s price shouldn’t change at all 
when it is actually made.
The fact that only the unexpected, or surprise, part of an announcement matters ex-
plains why two companies can make similar announcements but experience different stock 
price reactions. For example, to open the chapter, we compared Freeport-McMoRan, 
Mallinckrodt, and AbbVie. In Freeport-McMoRan’s case, the company announced it would 
cut its dividend by 84 percent, from $1.25 per year to $.20 per year. Despite the size of the 
cut, the company’s stock price dropped by only 1.5 percent. The reason was that the divi-
dend cut had been anticipated by the market. For Mallinckrodt, the market obviously felt 
the acquisition was a positive NPV decision, while the market interpreted AbbVie’s acqui-
sition as a negative NPV decision.
Our discussion of market efficiency in the previous chapter bears on this discussion. 
We are assuming that relevant information known today is already reflected in the ex-
pected return. This is identical to saying that the current price reflects relevant publicly 
available information. We are thus implicitly assuming that markets are at least reasonably 
efficient in the semistrong form sense.
Henceforth, when we speak of news, we will mean the surprise part of an announce-
ment and not the portion that the market has expected and therefore already discounted.
concept questions
11.3a	 What are the two basic parts of a return?
11.3b	 Under what conditions will an announcement have no effect on common stock 
prices?

360	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
RISK: SYSTEMATIC AND UNSYSTEMATIC
The unanticipated part of the return, that portion resulting from surprises, is the true risk of 
any investment. After all, if we always receive exactly what we expect, then the investment 
is perfectly predictable and, by definition, risk-free. In other words, the risk of owning an 
asset comes from surprises—unanticipated events.
There are important differences, though, among various sources of risk. Look back at 
our previous list of news stories. Some of these stories are directed specifically at Flyers, and 
some are more general. Which of the news items are of specific importance to Flyers?
Announcements about interest rates or GDP are clearly important for nearly all com-
panies, whereas the news about Flyers’s president, its research, or its sales is of specific 
interest to Flyers. We distinguish between these two types of events, because, as we shall 
see, they have very different implications.
Systematic and Unsystematic Risk
The first type of surprise, the one that affects a large number of assets, we will label 
­systematic risk. Because systematic risks have marketwide effects, they are sometimes 
called market risks.
The second type of surprise we will call unsystematic risk. An unsystematic risk is 
one that affects a single asset or a small group of assets. Because these risks are unique to 
individual companies or assets, they are sometimes called unique or asset-specific risks. 
We will use these terms interchangeably.
As we have seen, uncertainties about general economic conditions, such as GDP, interest 
rates, or inflation, are examples of systematic risks. These conditions affect nearly all compa-
nies to some degree. An unanticipated increase, or surprise, in inflation, for example, affects 
wages and the costs of the supplies that companies buy; it affects the value of the assets that 
companies own; and it affects the prices at which companies sell their products. Forces such 
as these, to which all companies are susceptible, are the essence of systematic risk.
In contrast, the announcement of an oil strike by a company will primarily affect that 
company and, perhaps, a few others (such as primary competitors and suppliers). It is un-
likely to have much of an effect on the world oil market, however, or on the affairs of com-
panies not in the oil business, so this is an unsystematic event.
Systematic and Unsystematic Components of Return
The distinction between a systematic risk and an unsystematic risk is never really as exact 
as we make it out to be. Even the most narrow and peculiar bit of news about a company 
ripples through the economy. This is true because every enterprise, no matter how tiny, is 
a part of the economy. It’s like the tale of a kingdom that was lost because one horse lost a 
shoe. This is mostly hairsplitting, however. Some risks are clearly much more general than 
others. We’ll see some evidence on this point in just a moment.
The distinction between the types of risk allows us to break down the surprise portion, 
U, of the return on Flyers’s stock into two parts. From before, we had the actual return 
broken down into its expected and surprise components:
R = E(R) + U
We now recognize that the total surprise for Flyers, U, has a systematic and an unsystem-
atic component, so:
R = E(R) + Systematic portion + Unsystematic portion	
[11.5]
11.4
systematic risk
A risk that influences a 
large number of assets. 
Also market risk.
unsystematic risk
A risk that affects at most 
a small number of assets. 
Also unique or asset-
specific risk.

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
361
Because it is traditional, we will use the Greek letter epsilon, ϵ, to stand for the unsys-
tematic portion. And because systematic risks are often called market risks, we will use the 
letter m to stand for the systematic part of the surprise. With these symbols, we can rewrite 
the total return:
R = E(R) + U
  = E(R) + m + ε
The important thing about the way we have broken down the total surprise, U, is that the 
unsystematic portion, ϵ, is more or less unique to Flyers. For this reason, it is unrelated to 
the unsystematic portion of the return on most other assets. To see why this is important, 
we need to return to the subject of portfolio risk.
concept questions
11.4a	 What are the two basic types of risk?
11.4b	 What is the distinction between the two types of risk?
DIVERSIFICATION AND PORTFOLIO RISK
We saw earlier that portfolio risks can, in principle, be quite different from the risks of the 
assets that make up the portfolio. We now look more closely at the riskiness of an indi-
vidual asset versus the risk of a portfolio of many different assets. We will once again ex-
amine some market history to get an idea of what happens with actual investments in U.S. 
capital markets.
The Effect of Diversification: Another Lesson from 
Market History
In the previous chapter, we saw that the standard deviation of the annual return on a port-
folio of 500 large common stocks has historically been about 20 percent per year (see Fig-
ure 10.10, for example). Does this mean that the standard deviation of the annual return on 
a typical stock in that group of 500 is about 20 percent? As you might suspect by now, the 
answer is no. This is an extremely important observation.
To examine the relationship between portfolio size and portfolio risk, Table 11.7 il-
lustrates typical average annual standard deviations for portfolios that contain different 
numbers of randomly selected NYSE securities.
In Column 2 of Table 11.7, we see that the standard deviation for a “portfolio” of one 
security is about 49 percent. What this means is that, if you randomly selected a single NYSE 
stock and put all your money into it, your standard deviation of return would typically be a 
substantial 49 percent per year. If you were to randomly select two stocks and invest half your 
money in each, your standard deviation would be about 37 percent on average, and so on.
The important thing to notice in Table 11.7 is that the standard deviation declines as the 
number of securities is increased. By the time we have 100 randomly chosen stocks, the port-
folio’s standard deviation has declined by about 60 percent, from 49 percent to about 20 per-
cent. With 500 securities, the standard deviation is 19.27 percent, similar to the 20 percent we 
saw in our previous chapter for the large common stock portfolio. The small difference exists 
because the portfolio securities and time periods examined are not identical.
11.5
For more on risk and 
diversification, visit  
www.investopedia.com/
university.

362	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
The Principle of Diversification
Figure 11.1 illustrates the point we’ve been discussing. What we have plotted is the stan-
dard deviation of return versus the number of stocks in the portfolio. Notice in Figure 11.1 
that the benefit in terms of risk reduction from adding securities drops off as we add more 
and more. By the time we have 10 securities, most of the effect is already realized, and by 
the time we get to 30 or so, there is very little remaining benefit.
Figure 11.1 illustrates two key points. First: Some of the riskiness associated with 
­individual assets can be eliminated by forming portfolios. The process of spreading an 
­investment across assets (and thereby forming a portfolio) is called diversification. The 
­principle of diversification tells us that spreading an investment across many assets will 
eliminate some of the risk. The green shaded area in Figure 11.1, labeled “diversifiable 
risk,” is the part that can be eliminated by diversification.
The second point is equally important: There is a minimum level of risk that cannot be 
eliminated simply by diversifying. This minimum level is labeled “nondiversifiable risk” 
in Figure 11.1. Taken together, these two points are another important lesson from capital 
market history: Diversification reduces risk, but only up to a point. Put another way: Some 
risk is diversifiable and some is not.
Diversification and Unsystematic Risk
From our discussion of portfolio risk, we know that some of the risk associated with indi-
vidual assets can be diversified away and some cannot. We are left with an obvious ques-
tion: Why is this so? It turns out that the answer hinges on the distinction we made earlier 
between systematic and unsystematic risk.
By definition, an unsystematic risk is one that is particular to a single asset or, at most, a 
small group. For example, if the asset under consideration is stock in a single company, the 
discovery of positive NPV projects such as successful new products and innovative cost savings 
principle of 
diversification
Spreading an investment 
across a number of assets 
will eliminate some, but 
not all, of the risk.
Sources: These figures are from Table 1 in Meir Statman, “How Many Stocks Make a Diversified Portfolio?” Journal 
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22 (September 1987), pp. 353–64. They were derived from E. J. Elton and  
M. J. Gruber, “Risk Reduction and Portfolio Size: An Analytical Solution,” Journal of Business 50 (October 1977),  
pp. 415–37.	
ta b l e  11.7
Standard deviations 
of annual portfolio 
returns
(1)  
Number of Stocks  
in Portfolio
(2)  
Average Standard  
Deviation of Annual 
Portfolio Returns
(3)  
Ratio of Portfolio  
Standard Deviation to 
Standard Deviation  
of a Single Stock
       1
 49.24%
1.00  
       2
37.36  
.76
       4
29.69  
 .60
       6
26.64  
.54
       8
24.98  
.51
     10
23.93  
 .49
     20
21.68  
.44
     30
20.87  
.42
     40
20.46  
.42
     50
20.20  
.41
   100
19.69  
.40
   200
19.42  
.39
   300
19.34  
.39
   400
19.29  
.39
   500
19.27  
.39
1,000
19.21  
.39

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
363
will tend to increase the value of the stock. Unanticipated lawsuits, industrial accidents, strikes, 
and similar events will tend to decrease future cash flows and thereby reduce share values.
Here is the important observation: If we only held a single stock, then the value of our 
investment would fluctuate because of company-specific events. If we hold a large portfo-
lio, on the other hand, some of the stocks in the portfolio will go up in value because of 
positive company-specific events and some will go down in value because of negative 
events. The net effect on the overall value of the portfolio will be relatively small, however, 
as these effects will tend to cancel each other out.
Now we see why some of the variability associated with individual assets is eliminated by 
diversification. When we combine assets into portfolios, the unique, or unsystematic, events—
both positive and negative—tend to “wash out” once we have more than just a few assets.
This is an important point that bears restating:
f i g u r e  11.1
Portfolio 
diversification
Diversifiable risk
49.2
23.9
19.2
Nondiversifiable
risk
1
10
20
30
40
1,000
Number of stocks
in portfolio
Average annual
standard deviation (%)
Unsystematic risk is essentially eliminated by diversification, so a relatively large 
portfolio has almost no unsystematic risk.
In fact, the terms diversifiable risk and unsystematic risk are often used interchangeably.
Diversification and Systematic Risk
We’ve seen that unsystematic risk can be eliminated by diversifying. What about systematic 
risk? Can it also be eliminated by diversification? The answer is no because, by definition, a 
systematic risk affects almost all assets to some degree. As a result, no matter how many 
­assets we put into a portfolio, the systematic risk doesn’t go away. Thus, for obvious reasons, 
the terms systematic risk and nondiversifiable risk are used interchangeably.

364	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
Because we have introduced so many different terms, it is useful to summarize our 
discussion before moving on. What we have seen is that the total risk of an investment, as 
measured by the standard deviation of its return, can be written as:
Total risk = Systematic risk + Unsystematic risk	
[11.6]
Systematic risk is also called nondiversifiable risk or market risk. Unsystematic risk is also 
called diversifiable risk, unique risk, or asset-specific risk. For a well-diversified portfolio, the 
unsystematic risk is negligible. For such a portfolio, essentially all of the risk is systematic.
concept questions
11.5a	 What happens to the standard deviation of return for a portfolio if we increase the 
number of securities in the portfolio?
11.5b	 What is the principle of diversification?
11.5c	 Why is some risk diversifiable?
11.5d	 Why can’t systematic risk be diversified away?
SYSTEMATIC RISK AND BETA
The question that we now begin to address is this: What determines the size of the risk 
premium on a risky asset? Put another way: Why do some assets have a larger risk pre-
mium than other assets? The answer to these questions, as we discuss next, is also based on 
the distinction between systematic and unsystematic risk.
The Systematic Risk Principle
Thus far, we’ve seen that the total risk associated with an asset can be decomposed into two 
components: systematic and unsystematic risk. We have also seen that unsystematic risk 
can be essentially eliminated by diversification. The systematic risk present in an asset, on 
the other hand, cannot be eliminated by diversification.
Based on our study of capital market history, we know that there is a reward, on aver-
age, for bearing risk. However, we now need to be more precise about what we mean by 
risk. The systematic risk principle states that the reward for bearing risk depends only on 
the systematic risk of an investment. The underlying rationale for this principle is straight-
forward: Because unsystematic risk can be eliminated at virtually no cost (by diversifying), 
there is no reward for bearing it. Put another way: The market does not reward risks that are 
borne unnecessarily.
The systematic risk principle has a remarkable and very important implication:
11.6
For more on beta, see 
money.cnn.com.
systematic risk 
principle
The expected return on a 
risky asset depends only 
on that asset’s systematic 
risk.
The expected return on an asset depends only on that asset’s systematic risk.
There is an obvious corollary to this principle: No matter how much total risk an asset has, 
only the systematic portion is relevant in determining the expected return (and the risk 
premium) on that asset.
Measuring Systematic Risk
Because systematic risk is the crucial determinant of an asset’s expected return, we need 
some way of measuring the level of systematic risk for different investments. The specific 

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
365
measure we will use is called the beta coefficient, for which we will use the Greek symbol β. 
A beta coefficient, or beta for short, tells us how much systematic risk a particular asset has 
relative to an average asset. By definition, an average asset has a beta of 1.0 relative to it-
self. An asset with a beta of .50, therefore, has half as much systematic risk as an average 
asset; an asset with a beta of 2.0 has twice as much.
Table 11.8 contains the estimated beta coefficients for the stocks of some well-known 
companies. The range of betas in Table 11.8 is typical for stocks of large U.S. corporations. 
Betas outside this range occur, but they are less common. See our nearby Work the Web 
box to learn how to find betas online.
beta coefficient
Amount of systematic risk 
present in a particular 
risky asset relative to that 
in an average risky asset.
ta b l e  11.8
Beta coefficients for 
selected companies
Company
Beta Coefficient (βi)
Costco
  .79
Macy’s
  .84
Starbucks
  .88
Apple
  .96
Google (Alphabet)
1.07
Home Depot
1.19
Amazon
1.41
Tesla
1.47
Citigroup
1.84
Source: finance.yahoo.com, 2015.
S
uppose you want to find the beta for a company like casino owner Caesars Entertainment. One 
way is to go to the web. We went to finance.google.com and found and entered the ticker 
symbol for Caesars (CZR). Here is part of what we found:
	
The reported beta for Caesars is 1.75, which means that Caesars has about 1.75 times the 
systematic risk of a typical stock. You would expect that the company’s stock is a risky bet, and, 
looking at the other numbers, we agree. During 2014, Caesars reported a net loss of about 
$2.78 billion and a negative book value of equity of about $4.997 billion. So, the ROE for the 
company is about 56 percent, an extraordinarily good number. However, a closer look shows 
that the more Caesars loses, the higher its ROE becomes. Not a good situation! The reason is 
that Caesars has reported a loss every year from 2012 to 2014. In all, Caesars appears to be a 
good candidate for a high beta.
QUESTIONS
	
1.	 Has Caesars’ ROE “improved” since this was written? Check out the current numbers 
on the website to see.
	
2.	 What growth rate are analysts projecting for Caesars? How does this growth rate com-
pare to the industry?
W
RK TH E W E B

366
Beta, Beta, Who’s Got the Beta?
B
ased on what we’ve studied so far, you can see that beta 
is a pretty important topic. You might wonder then, are 
all published betas created equal? Read on for a partial 
­answer to this question.
	
We did some checking on betas and found some inter-
esting results. The Value Line Investment Survey is one of the 
best-known sources for information on publicly traded compa-
nies. However, with the explosion of online investing, there 
has been a corresponding increase in the amount of invest-
ment information available online. We decided to compare the 
betas presented by Value Line to those reported by Yahoo! 
Finance (finance.yahoo.com) and CNN Money (money.cnn.
com). What we found leads to an important note of caution.
	
Consider DuPont, the chemical company. Its beta ­reported 
on the Internet was 1.33, which is larger than Value Line’s beta 
of 1.10. DuPont wasn’t the only stock that showed a divergence 
in betas from different sources. In fact, for most of the technol-
ogy companies we looked at, Value Line reported betas that 
were significantly lower than their online cousins. For example, 
the online beta for Cisco Systems was 1.43, but Value Line 
­reported 1.10. The online beta for Adobe (maker of the ubiqui-
tous Acrobat software) was 1.27 versus a Value Line beta of 1.10. 
Value Line’s betas are not always lower. For example, the 
­online beta for eBay was .79, compared to Value Line’s 1.00.
	
We also found some unusual, and even hard to believe, 
estimates for beta. Tyson Foods had a very low online beta of .11, 
while Value Line reported Tyson Food’s beta as .75. The online 
estimate for Expedia was .19, compared to Value Line’s 1.25. 
­Perhaps the most outrageous reported betas were the online 
betas for Ghost Technology and Sollensys Corp., with betas of 
2,976.08 and –4,705.53 (notice the negative sign!), respectively. 
Value Line did not report a beta for these companies. How do 
you suppose we should interpret a beta of –4,705.53?
	
There are a few lessons to be learned from all of this. 
First, not all betas are created equal. Some are computed 
using weekly returns and some using daily returns. Some 
are computed using 60 months of stock returns; some con-
sider more or less. Some betas are computed by comparing 
the stock to the S&P 500 index, while others use alternative 
indices. Finally, some reporting firms (including Value Line) 
make adjustments to raw betas to reflect information other 
than just the fluctuation in stock prices.
	
The second lesson is perhaps more subtle. We are inter-
ested in knowing what the betas of the stocks will be in the 
future, but betas have to be estimated using historical data. 
Anytime we use the past to predict the future, there is the dan-
ger of a poor estimate. As we will see later in the chapter (and 
in the next one), it is very unlikely that Ghost Technology has a 
beta anything like 2,976.08 or that Sollensys Corp. has a beta 
of –4,705.53. Instead, the estimates are almost certainly poor 
ones. The moral of the story is that, as with any financial tool, 
beta is not a black box that should be taken without question.
FINANCE MATTERS
The important thing to remember is that the expected return, and thus the risk pre-
mium, on an asset depends only on its systematic risk. Since assets with larger betas have 
greater systematic risks, they will have greater expected returns. Thus, from Table 11.8, an 
investor who buys stock in Macy’s, with a beta of .84, should expect to earn less, on aver-
age, than an investor who buys stock in Tesla, with a beta of about 1.47. To learn more 
about “real-world” betas, see the nearby Finance Matters box.
EXAMPLE
11.5  Total Risk versus Beta
Consider the following information on two securities. Which has greater total risk? Which has 
greater systematic risk? Greater unsystematic risk? Which asset will have a higher risk premium?
Standard Deviation
Beta
Security A
40%
  .50
Security B
20   
1.50
From our discussion in this section, Security A has greater total risk, but it has substantially less 
systematic risk. Since total risk is the sum of systematic and unsystematic risk, Security A must have 
greater unsystematic risk. Finally, from the systematic risk principle, Security B will have a higher 
risk premium and a greater expected return, despite the fact that it has less total risk.

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
367
Portfolio Betas
Earlier, we saw that the total riskiness of a portfolio has no simple relationship to the risks 
of the assets in the portfolio. A portfolio beta, however, can be calculated just like a portfo-
lio expected return. For example, looking again at Table 11.8, suppose you put half of your 
money in Home Depot and half in Starbucks. What would the beta of this combination be? 
Since Home Depot has a beta of 1.19 and Starbucks has a beta of .88, the portfolio’s beta, 
βP, would be:
βP = .50 × βHome Depot + .50 × βStarbucks 
	
= .50 × 1.19 + .50 × .88 
	
= 1.04
In general, if we had a large number of assets in a portfolio, we would multiply each asset’s 
beta by its portfolio weight and then add the results up to get the portfolio’s beta.
Betas are easy to find on 
the web. Try  
finance.yahoo.com and 
money.cnn.com.
EXAMPLE
11.6  Portfolio Betas
Suppose we had the following investments:
Security
Amount Invested
Expected Return
Beta
Stock A
$1,000
  8%
  .80
Stock B
  2,000
12   
  .95
Stock C
  3,000
15   
1.10
Stock D
  4,000
18   
1.40
What is the expected return on this portfolio? What is the beta of this portfolio? Does this portfolio 
have more or less systematic risk than an average asset?
	
To answer, we first have to calculate the portfolio weights. Notice that the total amount 
­invested is $10,000. Of this, $1,000/10,000 = 10% is invested in Stock A. Similarly, 20 percent is 
­invested in Stock B, 30 percent is invested in Stock C, and 40 percent is invested in Stock D. The 
expected return, E(RP), is thus:
E(RP) = .10 × E(RA) + .20 × E(RB) + .30 × E(RC) + .40 × E(RD)
	
= .10 × 8% + .20 × 12% + .30 × 15% + .40 × 18%
	
= 14.9%
Similarly, the portfolio beta, βP, is:
βP = .10 × βA + .20 × βB + .30 × βC + .40 × βD
	
= .10 × .80 + .20 × .95 + .30 × 1.10 + .40 × 1.40
	
= 1.16
This portfolio thus has an expected return of 14.9 percent and a beta of 1.16. Because the beta is 
larger than 1.0, this portfolio has greater systematic risk than an average asset.
concept questions
11.6a	 What is the systematic risk principle?
11.6b	 What does a beta coefficient measure?
11.6c	
How do you calculate a portfolio beta?
11.6d	 True or false: The expected return on a risky asset depends on that asset’s total risk. 
Explain.

368	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
THE SECURITY MARKET LINE
We’re now in a position to see how risk is rewarded in the marketplace. To begin, suppose 
that Asset A has an expected return of E(RA) = 20% and a beta of βA = 1.6. Furthermore, 
the risk-free rate is Rf = 8%. Notice that a risk-free asset, by definition, has no systematic 
risk (or unsystematic risk), so a risk-free asset has a beta of 0.
Beta and the Risk Premium
Consider a portfolio made up of Asset A and a risk-free asset. We can calculate some dif-
ferent possible portfolio expected returns and betas by varying the percentages invested in 
these two assets. For example, if 25 percent of the portfolio is invested in Asset A, then the 
expected return is:
E(RP) = .25 × E(RA) + (1 − .25) × Rf
	
= .25 × 20% + .75 × 8%
	
= 11.0%
Similarly, the beta on the portfolio, βP, would be:
βP = .25 × βA + (1 − .25) × 0
	
= .25 × 1.6 
	
= .40
Notice that, because the weights have to add up to 1, the percentage invested in the risk-
free asset is equal to 1 minus the percentage invested in Asset A.
One thing that you might wonder about is whether it is possible for the percentage 
­invested in Asset A to exceed 100 percent. The answer is yes. The way this can happen is 
for the investor to borrow at the risk-free rate. For example, suppose an investor has $100 
and borrows an additional $50 at 8 percent, the risk-free rate. The total investment in Asset 
A would be $150, or 150 percent of the investor’s wealth. The expected return in this case 
would be:
E(RP) = 1.50 × E(RA) + (1 − 1.50) × Rf 
	
= 1.50 × 20% − .50 × 8%
	
= 26.0%
The beta on the portfolio would be:
βP = 1.50 × βA + (1 − 1.50) × 0
	
= 1.50 × 1.6 
	
= 2.4
We can calculate some other possibilities as follows:
Percentage of 
Portfolio in Asset A
Portfolio Expected 
Return
Portfolio  
Beta
    0%
  8%
  .0
  25   
11   
  .4
  50   
14   
  .8
  75   
17   
1.2
100   
20   
1.6
125   
23   
2.0
150   
26   
2.4
11.7

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
369
In Figure 11.2A, these portfolio expected returns are plotted against the portfolio 
­betas. Notice that all the combinations fall on a straight line.
The Reward-to-Risk Ratio 
What is the slope of the straight line in Figure 11.2A? As 
always, the slope of a straight line is equal to “the rise over the run.” In this case, as we move 
out of the risk-free asset into Asset A, the beta increases from 0 to 1.6 (a “run” of 1.6). At 
the same time, the expected return goes from 8 percent to 20 percent, a “rise” of 12 percent. 
The slope of the line is thus 12%/1.6 = 7.50%.
Notice that the slope of our line is just the risk premium on Asset A, E(RA) − Rf , 
­divided by Asset A’s beta, βA:
Slope = 
E(RA) −Rf
βA
      = 20% −8%
1.6
      = 7.50%
What this tells us is that Asset A offers a reward-to-risk ratio of 7.50 percent.2 In other 
words, Asset A has a risk premium of 7.50 percent per “unit” of systematic risk.
The Basic Argument 
Now suppose we consider a second asset, Asset B. This asset 
has a beta of 1.2 and an expected return of 16 percent. Which investment is better, Asset A 
or Asset B? You might think that, once again, we really cannot say. Some investors might 
prefer A; some investors might prefer B. Actually, however, we can say: A is better ­because, 
as we shall demonstrate, B offers inadequate compensation for its level of systematic risk, 
at least relative to A.
To begin, we calculate different combinations of expected returns and betas for port-
folios of Asset B and a risk-free asset just as we did for Asset A. For example, if we put 
25 percent in Asset B and the remaining 75 percent in the risk-free asset, the portfolio’s 
expected return would be:
	E(RP) = .25 × E(RB) + (1 − .25) × Rf 
	
= .25 × 16% + .75 × 8% 
	
= 10.0%
f i g u r e  11.2A
Portfolio expected 
returns and betas for 
Asset A
E(RA) 5 20%
Rf  5 8%
1.6 5 bA
Portfolio expected
return (E(RP))
Portfolio
beta (bP)
Asset A
5 7.50%
5 E(RA) – Rf
    bA
2This ratio is sometimes called the Treynor index, after one of its originators.

370	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
Similarly, the beta on the portfolio, βP, would be:
	βP = .25 × βB + (1 − .25) × 0
	
= .25 × 1.2
	
= .30
Some other possibilities are as follows:
Percentage of  
Portfolio in Asset B
Portfolio Expected 
Return
Portfolio 
Beta
         0%
      8%
  .0
     25   
10   
  .3
    50   
12   
  .6
     75   
14   
  .9
100   
16   
1.2
125   
18   
1.5
150   
20   
1.8
When we plot these combinations of portfolio expected returns and portfolio betas in 
­Figure 11.2B, we get a straight line just as we did for Asset A.
The key thing to notice is that when we compare the results for Assets A and B, as in 
Figure 11.2C, the line describing the combinations of expected returns and betas for Asset 
A is higher than the one for Asset B. What this tells us is that for any given level of system-
atic risk (as measured by β), some combination of Asset A and the risk-free asset always 
offers a larger return. This is why we were able to state that Asset A is a better investment 
than Asset B.
Another way of seeing that A offers a superior return for its level of risk is to note that 
the slope of our line for Asset B is:
 Slope =
E(RB) −Rf
βB
 = 16% −8%
1.2
= 6.67%
Thus, Asset B has a reward-to-risk ratio of 6.67 percent, which is less than the 7.5 percent 
offered by Asset A.
The Fundamental Result 
The situation we have described for Assets A and B can-
not persist in a well-organized, active market because investors would be attracted to Asset 
A and away from Asset B. As a result, Asset A’s price would rise and Asset B’s price 
would fall. Because prices and returns move in opposite directions, the result would be that 
A’s expected return would decline and B’s would rise.
This buying and selling would continue until the two assets plotted on exactly the 
same line, which means they would offer the same reward for bearing risk. In other words, 
in an active, competitive market, we must have that:
E(RA) −Rf
βA
=
E(RB) −Rf
βB
This is the fundamental relationship between risk and return.
Our basic argument can be extended to more than just two assets. In fact, no matter 
how many assets we had, we would always reach the same conclusion:
The reward-to-risk ratio must be the same for all the assets in the market.

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
371
This result is really not so surprising. What it says, for example, is that, if one asset has 
twice as much systematic risk as another asset, its risk premium will simply be twice 
as large.
Because all of the assets in the market must have the same reward-to-risk ratio, they 
all must plot on the same line. This argument is illustrated in Figure 11.3. As shown, 
­Assets A and B plot directly on the line and thus have the same reward-to-risk ratio. If an 
asset plotted above the line, such as C in Figure 11.3, its price would rise, and its 
­expected return would fall until it plotted exactly on the line. Similarly, if an asset plotted 
below the line, such as D in Figure 11.3, its expected return would rise until it too plotted 
directly on the line.
The arguments we have presented apply to active, competitive, well-functioning mar-
kets. The financial markets, such as the NYSE, best meet these criteria. Other markets, 
such as real asset markets, may or may not. For this reason, these concepts are most useful 
in examining financial markets. We thus focus on such markets here. However, as we dis-
cuss in a later section, the information about risk and return gleaned from financial markets 
is crucial in evaluating the investments that a corporation makes in real assets.
Rf 5 8%
Portfolio expected
return (E(RP))
Portfolio
beta (bP)
E(RB) 5 16%
Asset B
1.2 5 bB
5 6.67%
5 E(RB) – Rf
    bB
E(RA) 5 20%
Rf 5 8%
1.6 5 bA
Portfolio expected
return (E(RP))
Portfolio
beta (bP)
E(RB) 5 16%
5 7.50%
5 6.67%
Asset A
Asset B
1.2 5 bB
f i g u r e  11.2B
f i g u r e  11.2C
Portfolio expected 
returns and betas for 
Asset B
Portfolio expected 
returns and betas for 
both assets

372	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
5 E(Ri) 2 Rf
    bi
E(RC)
Rf
bA
Asset expected
return (E(Ri))
Asset
beta (bi)
E(RD)
E(RB)
E(RA)
bB
bC
bD
The fundamental relationship between beta and expected return is that all assets
must have the same reward-to-risk ratio, [E(Ri) 2 Rf ]/bi . This means that they would
all plot on the same straight line. Assets A and B are examples of this behavior.
Asset C’s expected return is too high; Asset D’s is too low.
A
B
C
D
f i g u r e  11.3
Expected returns and 
systematic risk
EXAMPLE
11.7  Buy Low, Sell High
An asset is said to be overvalued if its price is too high given its expected return and risk. Suppose 
you observe the following situation:
Security
Expected Return
Beta
Fama Co.
   14%
1.3
French Co.
10   
  .8
The risk-free rate is currently 6 percent. Is one of the two securities above overvalued relative to the 
other?
	
To answer, we compute the reward-to-risk ratio for both. For Fama, this ratio is (14% − 6%)/1.3 = 6.15%. 
For French, this ratio is 5 percent. What we conclude is that French offers an insufficient expected 
return for its level of risk, at least relative to Fama. Because its expected return is too low, its price 
is too high. In other words, French is overvalued relative to Fama, and we would expect to see its 
price fall relative to Fama’s. Notice that we could also say Fama is undervalued relative to French.
The Security Market Line
The line that results when we plot expected returns and beta coefficients is obviously of 
some importance, so it’s time we gave it a name. This line, which we use to describe the 
relationship between systematic risk and expected return in financial markets, is usually 
called the security market line, or SML. After NPV, the SML is arguably the most impor-
tant concept in modern finance.
Market Portfolios 
It will be very useful to know the equation of the SML. There are 
many different ways we could write it, but one way is particularly common. Suppose we 
consider a portfolio made up of all of the assets in the market. Such a portfolio is called a 
market portfolio, and we will express the expected return on this market portfolio as E(RM).
security market line 
(SML)
Positively sloped straight 
line displaying the 
relationship between 
expected return and beta.

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
373
Because all the assets in the market must plot on the SML, so must a market portfolio 
made up of those assets. To determine where it plots on the SML, we need to know the beta 
of the market portfolio, βM. Because this portfolio is representative of all of the assets in the 
market, it must have average systematic risk. In other words, it has a beta of 1.0. We could, 
therefore, write the slope of the SML as:
SML slope =
E(RM) −Rf
βM
=
E(RM) −Rf
1
= E(RM) −Rf
The term E(RM) − Rf is often called the market risk premium since it is the risk pre-
mium on a market portfolio.
The Capital Asset Pricing Model 
To finish up, if we let E(Ri) and βi stand for the 
expected return and beta, respectively, on any asset in the market, then we know that asset 
must plot on the SML. As a result, we know that its reward-to-risk ratio is the same as the 
overall market’s:
E(Ri) −Rf
βi
= E(RM) −Rf
If we rearrange this, then we can write the equation for the SML as:
E(Ri) = Rf + [E(RM) − Rf] × βi	
[11.7]
This result is identical to the famous capital asset pricing model (CAPM).
What the CAPM shows is that the expected return for a particular asset depends on 
three things:
  1.	 The pure time value of money. As measured by the risk-free rate, Rf, this is the reward 
for merely waiting for your money, without taking any risk.
  2.	 The reward for bearing systematic risk. As measured by the market risk premium, 
[E(RM) − Rf], this component is the reward the market offers for bearing an average 
amount of systematic risk in addition to waiting.
  3.	 The amount of systematic risk. As measured by βi, this is the amount of systematic 
risk present in a particular asset, relative to an average asset.
By the way, the CAPM works for portfolios of assets just as it does for individual as-
sets. In an earlier section, we saw how to calculate a portfolio’s β. To find the expected re-
turn on a portfolio, we simply use this β in the CAPM equation.
Figure 11.4 summarizes our discussion of the SML and the CAPM. As before, we plot 
expected return against beta. Now we recognize that, based on the CAPM, the slope of the 
SML is equal to the market risk premium, [E(RM) − Rf].
This concludes our presentation of concepts related to the risk-return trade-off. For 
future reference, Table 11.9 summarizes the various concepts in the order in which we 
discussed them.
market risk premium
Slope of the security 
market line; the difference 
between the expected 
return on a market 
portfolio and the  
risk-free rate.
capital asset pricing 
model (CAPM)
Equation of the security 
market line showing the 
relationship between 
expected return and beta.
EXAMPLE
11.8  Risk and Return
Suppose the risk-free rate is 4 percent, the market risk premium is 7 percent, and a particular stock 
has a beta of 1.3. Based on the CAPM, what is the expected return on this stock? What would the 
expected return be if the beta were to double?
	
With a beta of 1.3, the risk premium for the stock would be 1.3 × 7%, or 9.1 percent. The risk-free 
rate is 4 percent, so the expected return is 13.1 percent. If the beta doubled to 2.6, the risk premium 
would double to 18.2 percent, so the expected return would be 22.2 percent.

374	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
f i g u r e  11.4
The security market 
line, or SML
5 E(RM) 2 Rf
E(RM)
Rf
bM 5 1.0
The slope of the security market line is equal to the market risk
premium, i.e., the reward for bearing an average amount of
systematic risk. The equation describing the SML can be written:
E(Ri) 5 Rf  1 [E(RM) – Rf] 3 bi
which is the capital asset pricing model, or CAPM.
Asset
expected
return (E(Ri))
Asset
beta (bi)
  I.	Total return
The total return on an investment has two components: the expected return and the unexpected 
return. The unexpected return comes about because of unanticipated events. The risk from 
investing stems from the possibility of an unanticipated event.
   II.	Total risk
The total risk of an investment is measured by the variance or, more commonly, the standard 
deviation of its return.
  III.	Systematic and unsystematic risks
Systematic risks (also called market risks) are unanticipated events that affect almost all assets 
to some degree because the effects are economywide. Unsystematic risks are unanticipated 
events that affect single assets or small groups of assets. Unsystematic risks are also called 
unique or asset-specific risks.
 IV.	The effect of diversification
Some, but not all, of the risk associated with a risky investment can be eliminated by diversification. 
The reason is that unsystematic risks, which are unique to individual assets, tend to wash out in a 
large portfolio, but systematic risks, which affect all of the assets in a portfolio to some extent, do not.
  V.	The systematic risk principle and beta
Because unsystematic risk can be freely eliminated by diversification, the systematic risk principle 
states that the reward for bearing risk depends only on the level of systematic risk. The level of 
systematic risk in a particular asset, relative to the average, is given by the beta of that asset.
 VI.	The reward-to-risk ratio and the security market line
The reward-to-risk ratio for Asset i is the ratio of its risk premium, E(Ri − Rf), to its beta, βi:
	   
E(Ri) −Rf
βi
In a well-functioning market, this ratio is the same for every asset. As a result, when asset 
expected returns are plotted against asset betas, all assets plot on the same straight line, 
called the security market line (SML).
VII.	The capital asset pricing model
From the SML, the expected return on Asset i can be written:
  	  E(Ri) = Rf + [E(RM) − Rf] × βi
This is the capital asset pricing model (CAPM). The expected return on a risky asset thus has 
three components. The first is the pure time value of money, Rf; the second is the market risk 
premium, [E(RM) − Rf]; and the third is the beta for that asset, βi.
ta b l e  11.9
Summary of risk and 
return concepts

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
375
concept questions
11.7a 	 What is the fundamental relationship between risk and return in well-functioning markets?
11.7b 	 What is the security market line? Why must all assets plot directly on it in a well-
functioning market?
11.7c 	 What is the capital asset pricing model, or CAPM? What does it tell us about the 
required return on a risky investment?
THE SML AND THE COST OF CAPITAL:  
A PREVIEW
Our goal in studying risk and return is twofold. First, risk is an extremely important con-
sideration in almost all business decisions, so we want to discuss just what risk is and how 
it is rewarded in the market. Our second purpose is to learn what determines the appropri-
ate discount rate for future cash flows. We briefly discuss this second subject now; we 
discuss it in more detail in Chapter 12.
The Basic Idea
The security market line tells us the reward for bearing risk in financial markets. At an 
absolute minimum, any new investment our firm undertakes must offer an expected return 
that is no worse than what the financial markets offer for the same risk. The reason for this 
is simply that our shareholders can always invest for themselves in the financial markets.
The only way we benefit our shareholders is by finding investments with expected 
­returns that are superior to what the financial markets offer for the same risk. Such an 
­investment will have a positive NPV. So, if we ask: “What is the appropriate discount 
rate?” the answer is that we should use the expected return offered in financial markets on 
investments with the same systematic risk.
In other words, to determine whether or not an investment has a positive NPV, we 
­essentially compare the expected return on that new investment to what the financial mar-
ket offers on an investment with the same beta. This is why the SML is so important; it 
tells us the “going rate” for bearing risk in the economy.
The Cost of Capital
The appropriate discount rate on a new project is the minimum expected rate of return an 
investment must offer to be attractive. This minimum required return is often called the 
cost of capital associated with the investment. It is called this because the required return 
is what the firm must earn on its capital investment in a project just to break even. It can 
thus be interpreted as the opportunity cost associated with the firm’s capital investment.
Notice that when we say an investment is attractive if its expected return exceeds what 
is offered in financial markets for investments of the same risk, we are effectively using the 
internal rate of return, or IRR, criterion that we developed and discussed in Chapter 8. 
The only difference is that now we have a much better idea of what determines the required 
return on an investment. This understanding will be critical when we discuss cost of capital 
and capital structure in Part Seven of our book.
11.8
cost of capital
The minimum required 
return on a new 
investment.
concept questions
11.8a 	 If an investment has a positive NPV, would it plot above or below the SML? Why?
11.8b 	 What is meant by the term cost of capital?

376	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has covered the essentials of risk. Along the way, we have introduced a 
number of definitions and concepts. The most important of these is the security market 
line, or SML. The SML is important because it tells us the reward offered in financial 
markets for bearing risk. Once we know this, we have a benchmark against which we 
compare the returns expected from real asset investments to determine if they are 
desirable.
Because we have covered quite a bit of ground, it’s useful to summarize the basic eco-
nomic logic underlying the SML as follows:
  1.	 Based on capital market history, there is a reward for bearing risk. This reward is the 
risk premium on an asset.
  2.	 The total risk associated with an asset has two parts: systematic risk and 
unsystematic risk. Unsystematic risk can be freely eliminated by diversification (this 
is the principle of diversification), so only systematic risk is rewarded. As a result, 
the risk premium on an asset is determined by its systematic risk. This is the 
systematic risk principle.
  3.	 An asset’s systematic risk, relative to the average, can be measured by its beta 
coefficient, βi. The risk premium on an asset is then given by its beta coefficient 
multiplied by the market risk premium, [E(RM) − Rf] × βi.
  4.	 The expected return on an asset, E(Ri), is equal to the risk-free rate, Rf, plus the risk 
premium: 
	
E(Ri) = Rf + [E(RM) − Rf] × βi 
This is the equation of the SML, and it is often called the capital asset pricing model, 
or CAPM.
This chapter completes our discussion of risk and return and concludes Part Six of our 
book. Now that we have a better understanding of what determines a firm’s cost of capital 
for an investment, the next several chapters examine more closely how firms raise the long-
term capital needed for investment.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 11.1 What does variance measure?
Section 11.2 If the variance of a portfolio is .0025, what is the standard deviation?
Section 11.3 What is the equation for total return?
Section 11.4 What all will unsystematic risk affect?
Section 11.5 What type of risk is not reduced by diversification?
Section 11.6 By definition, what is the beta of the average asset equal to?
Section 11.7 What does the security market line show?

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
377
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
11.1	
Expected Return and Standard Deviation.  This problem will give you some 
practice calculating measures of prospective portfolio performance. There are two 
assets and three states of the economy:
 
(1)  
State of  
Economy
(2) 
Probability  
of State  
of Economy
(3)  
Stock A  
Rate of Return  
If State Occurs
(4)  
Stock B  
Rate of Return  
If State Occurs
Recession
.10
−.20  
.30
Normal
.60
.10
.20
Boom
.30
.70
.50
	
What are the expected returns and standard deviations for these two stocks? (See 
Problem 7.)
11.2	 Portfolio Risk and Return.  In the previous problem, suppose you have $20,000 
total. If you put $6,000 in Stock A and the remainder in Stock B, what will be the 
expected return and standard deviation on your portfolio? (See Problem 10.)
11.3	 Risk and Return.  Suppose you observe the following situation:
Security
Beta
Expected Return
Cooley, Inc.
1.6
19%
Moyer Co.
1.2
16  
	
If the risk-free rate is 8 percent, are these securities correctly priced? What would 
the risk-free rate have to be if they are correctly priced? (See Problems 19, 20.)
11.4	 CAPM.  Suppose the risk-free rate is 8 percent. The expected return on the market 
is 14 percent. If a particular stock has a beta of .60, what is its expected return 
based on the CAPM? If another stock has an expected return of 20 percent, what 
must its beta be? (See Problem 13.)
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
11.1	
The expected returns are just the possible returns multiplied by the associated 
probabilities: 
E(RA) = .10 × −.20 + .60 × .10 + .30 × .70 = 25%
E(RB) = .10 × .30 + .60 × .20 + .30 × .50 = 30%
	
The variances are given by the sums of the squared deviations from the expected 
returns multiplied by their probabilities: 
σ2
A = .10 × (−.20 − .25)2 + .60 × (.10 − .25)2 + .30 × (.70 − .25)2
	
= .10 × −.452 + .60 × −.152 + .30 × .452
	
= .10 × .2025 + .60 × .0225 + .30 × .2025
	
= .0945
σ2
B = .10 × (.30 − .30)2 + .60 × (.20 − .30)2 + .30 × (.50 − .30)2
	
= .10 × .002 + .60 × −.102 + .30 × .202 
	
= .10 × .00 + .60 × .01 + .30 × .04
	
= .0180

378	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
	
The standard deviations are thus: 
σA = 1.0945 = 30.74%
σB = 1.0180 = 13.42%
11.2	 The portfolio weights are $6,000/20,000 = .30 and $14,000/20,000 = .70. The 
expected return is thus: 
E(RP) = .30 × E(RA) + .70 × E(RB)
	
= .30 × 25% + .70 × 30%
	
= 28.50%
	
Alternatively, we could calculate the portfolio’s return in each of the states: 
(1)  
State of  
Economy
(2) 
Probability of 
State of Economy
(3)  
Portfolio Return  
If State Occurs
Recession
.10
.30 × −.20 + .70 × .30 = .15
Normal
.60
.30 × .10 + .70 × .20 = .17
Boom
.30
.30 × .70 + .70 × .50 = .56
	
The portfolio’s expected return is: 
E(RP) = .10 × .15 + .60 × .17 + .30 × .56 = 28.50%
	
This is the same as we had before.
	
	
The portfolio’s variance is: 
σ2
P = .10 × (.15 − .285)2 + .60 × (.17 − .285)2 + .30 × (.56 − .285)2
	
= .03245
	
So the standard deviation is 1.03245 = 18.01%
11.3	 If we compute the reward-to-risk ratios, we get (19% − 8%)/1.6 = 6.875% for 
Cooley versus 6.67% for Moyer. Relative to that of Cooley, Moyer’s expected return 
is too low, so its price is too high.
	
  If they are correctly priced, then they must offer the same reward-to-risk ratio. 
The risk-free rate would have to be such that: 
(19% − Rf )/1.6 = (16% − Rf )/1.2
	
With a little algebra, we find that the risk-free rate must be 7 percent: 
	
(19% − Rf ) = (16% − Rf ) (1.6/1.2)
19% − 16% × 4/3 = Rf − Rf × 4/3
	
Rf = 7%
11.4	 Because the expected return on the market is 14 percent, the market risk premium is 
14% − 8% = 6% (the risk-free rate is 8 percent). The first stock has a beta of .60, so 
its expected return is 8% + .60 × 6% = 11.6%.
	
  For the second stock, notice that the risk premium is 20% − 8% = 12%. Because 
this is twice as large as the market risk premium, the beta must be exactly equal to 2. 
We can verify this using the CAPM: 
E(Ri) = Rf + [E(RM) − Rf] × βi
	20% = 8% + (14% − 8%) × βi
	
βi = 12%/6% = 2.0

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
379
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 2 	 11.1	
Diversifiable and Nondiversifiable Risks.  In broad terms, why is some 
risk diversifiable? Why are some risks nondiversifiable? Does it follow 
that an investor can control the level of unsystematic risk in a portfolio, 
but not the level of systematic risk?
LO 3 	 11.2	
Information and Market Returns.  Suppose the government announces 
that, based on a just-completed survey, the growth rate in the economy is 
likely to be 2 percent in the coming year, as compared to 5 percent for the 
year just completed. Will security prices increase, decrease, or stay the 
same following this announcement? Does it make any difference whether 
or not the 2 percent figure was anticipated by the market? Explain.
LO 3 	 11.3	
Systematic versus Unsystematic Risk.  Classify the following events as mostly 
systematic or mostly unsystematic. Is the distinction clear in every case?
a.	
Short-term interest rates increase unexpectedly.
b.	 The interest rate a company pays on its short-term debt borrowing is 
increased by its bank.
c.	
Oil prices unexpectedly decline.
d.	 An oil tanker ruptures, creating a large oil spill.
e.	
A manufacturer loses a multimillion-dollar product liability suit.
f.	
A Supreme Court decision substantially broadens producer liability 
for injuries suffered by product users.
LO 3 	 11.4	
Systematic versus Unsystematic Risk.  Indicate whether the following 
events might cause stocks in general to change price, and whether they 
might cause Big Widget Corp.’s stock to change price.
a.	
The government announces that inflation unexpectedly jumped by 
2 percent last month.
b.	 Big Widget’s quarterly earnings report, just issued, generally fell in 
line with analysts’ expectations.
c.	
The government reports that economic growth last year was  
3 percent, which generally agreed with most economists’ forecasts.
d.	 The directors of Big Widget die in a plane crash.
e.	
Congress approves changes to the tax code that will increase the top 
marginal corporate tax rate. The legislation had been debated for the 
previous six months.
LO 1 	  11.5	
Expected Portfolio Returns.  If a portfolio has a positive investment in 
every asset, can the expected return on the portfolio be greater than that 
on every asset in the portfolio? Can it be less than that on every asset in 
the portfolio? If you answer yes to one or both of these questions, give an 
example to support your answer.
LO 2 	 11.6	
Diversification.  True or false: The most important characteristic in 
determining the expected return of a well-diversified portfolio is the 
variances of the individual assets in the portfolio. Explain.
LO 3 	 11.7	
Portfolio Risk.  If a portfolio has a positive investment in every asset, 
can the standard deviation on the portfolio be less than that on every 
asset in the portfolio? What about the portfolio beta?
LO 4 	 11.8	
Beta and CAPM.  Is it possible that a risky asset could have a beta of 
zero? Explain. Based on the CAPM, what is the expected return on such 

380	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
an asset? Is it possible that a risky asset could have a negative beta? What 
does the CAPM predict about the expected return on such an asset? Can 
you give an explanation for your answer?
LO 2 	 11.9	
Corporate Downsizing.  In recent years, it has been common for 
companies to experience significant stock price changes in reaction to 
announcements of massive layoffs. Critics charge that such events 
encourage companies to fire longtime employees and that Wall Street is 
cheering them on. Do you agree or disagree?
LO 1 	 11.10	 Earnings and Stock Returns.  As indicated by a number of examples in 
this chapter, earnings announcements by companies are closely followed 
by, and frequently result in, share price revisions. Two issues should come 
to mind. First: Earnings announcements concern past periods. If the market 
values stocks based on expectations of the future, why are numbers 
summarizing past performance relevant? Second: These announcements 
concern accounting earnings. Going back to Chapter 2, such earnings may 
have little to do with cash flow, so again, why are they relevant?
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–24)
LO 1 	 1.	 Determining Portfolio Weights.  What are the portfolio weights for a 
portfolio that has 165 shares of Stock A that sell for $69 per share and  
125 shares of Stock B that sell for $44 per share?
LO 1 	 2.	 Portfolio Expected Return.  You own a portfolio that has $2,750 invested in 
Stock A and $3,900 invested in Stock B. If the expected returns on these 
stocks are 9 percent and 14 percent, respectively, what is the expected return 
on the portfolio?
LO 1 	 3.	 Portfolio Expected Return.  You own a portfolio that is 15 percent invested 
in Stock X, 40 percent in Stock Y, and 45 percent in Stock Z. The expected 
returns on these three stocks are 10 percent, 13 percent, and 15 percent, 
respectively. What is the expected return on the portfolio?
LO 1 	 4.	 Portfolio Expected Return.  You have $10,000 to invest in a stock portfolio. 
Your choices are Stock X with an expected return of 13 percent and Stock Y 
with an expected return of 9.5 percent. If your goal is to create a portfolio 
with an expected return of 12.2 percent, how much money will you invest in 
Stock X? In Stock Y?
LO 1 	 5.	 Calculating Expected Return.  Based on the following information, 
calculate the expected return.
State of 
Economy
Probability of 
State of Economy
Rate of Return If 
State Occurs
Recession
.30
−.11
Boom
.70
   .21

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
381
LO 1 	 6.	 Calculating Expected Return.  Based on the following information, 
calculate the expected return.
State of 
Economy
Probability of 
State of Economy
Rate of Return If 
State Occurs
Recession
.15
−.09
Normal
.60
.11
Boom
.25
.30
LO 1 	 7.	 Calculating Returns and Standard Deviations.  Based on the following 
information, calculate the expected return and standard deviation for the 
two stocks.
State of  
Economy
Probability of  
State of Economy
Rate of Return If State Occurs
	
Stock A	
Stock B
Recession
.10
.02
−.30   
Normal
.50
.10
.18
Boom
.40
.15
.31
LO 1 	 8.	 Calculating Expected Returns.  A portfolio is invested 20 percent in Stock 
G, 35 percent in Stock J, and 45 percent in Stock K. The expected returns on 
these stocks are 9.2 percent, 11.1 percent, and 13.8 percent, respectively. 
What is the portfolio’s expected return? How do you interpret your answer?
LO 1 	 9.	 Returns and Standard Deviations.  Consider the following information:
State of  
Economy
Probability of  
State of Economy
Rate of Return If State Occurs
	 Stock A	
Stock B	
Stock C
Boom
.60
.15
.02
.34
Bust
.40
.03
.16
−.08 
a.	
What is the expected return on an equally weighted portfolio of these 
three stocks?
b.	 What is the variance of a portfolio invested 20 percent each in A and B 
and 60 percent in C?
LO 1 	 10.	Returns and Standard Deviations.  Consider the following information:
State of  
Economy
Probability of  
State of Economy
Rate of Return If State Occurs
	 Stock A	
Stock B	
Stock C
Boom
.15
 .35
 .45
 .33
Good
.50
 .12
 .10
 .17
Poor
.25
 .01
 .02
−.05 
Bust
.10
−.11 
−.25 
−.09 
a.	
Your portfolio is invested 25 percent each in A and C and 50 percent in B. 
What is the expected return of the portfolio?
b.	 What is the variance of this portfolio? The standard deviation?
LO 3 	 11.	 Calculating Portfolio Betas.  You own a stock portfolio invested 15 percent 
in Stock Q, 25 percent in Stock R, 40 percent in Stock S, and 20 percent in 
Stock T. The betas for these four stocks are .75, .87, 1.26, and 1.76, 
respectively. What is the portfolio beta?
LO 2
LO 2

382	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
LO 3 	 12.	Calculating Portfolio Betas.  You own a portfolio equally invested in a 
risk-free asset and two stocks. If one of the stocks has a beta of 1.63 and the 
total portfolio is equally as risky as the market, what must the beta be for the 
other stock in your portfolio?
LO 4 	 13.	 Using CAPM.  A stock has a beta of 1.23, the expected return on the market 
is 10.9 percent, and the risk-free rate is 3.6 percent. What must the expected 
return on this stock be?
LO 4 	 14.	Using CAPM.  A stock has an expected return of 11.4 percent, the risk-free 
rate is 3.7 percent, and the market risk premium is 7.1 percent. What must 
the beta of this stock be?
LO 4 	 15.	Using CAPM.  A stock has an expected return of 10.9 percent, its beta is .85, 
and the risk-free rate is 2.8 percent. What must the expected return on the 
market be?
LO 4 	 16.	Using CAPM.  A stock has an expected return of 10.7 percent and a beta of .91, 
and the expected return on the market is 11.5 percent. What must the 
risk-free rate be?
LO 4 	 17.	 Using CAPM.  A stock has a beta of 1.23 and an expected return of  
11.7 percent. A risk-free asset currently earns 3.5 percent.
a.	
What is the expected return on a portfolio that is equally invested in the 
two assets?
b.	 If a portfolio of the two assets has a beta of .7, what are the portfolio 
weights?
c.	
If a portfolio of the two assets has an expected return of 9 percent, what 
is its beta?
d.	 If a portfolio of the two assets has a beta of 2.46, what are the portfolio 
weights? How do you interpret the weights for the two assets in this 
case? Explain.
LO 4 	 18.	Using the SML.  Asset W has an expected return of 11.4 percent and a 
beta of 1.18. If the risk-free rate is 3.15 percent, complete the following 
table for portfolios of Asset W and a risk-free asset. Illustrate the 
relationship between portfolio expected return and portfolio beta by 
plotting the expected returns against the betas. What is the slope of the 
line that results?
Percentage of Portfolio  
in Asset W
Portfolio  
Expected Return
Portfolio  
Beta
    0%
  25   
  50   
  75   
100   
125   
150   
LO 4 	 19. Reward-to-Risk Ratios.  Stock Y has a beta of 1.20 and an expected return 
of 11.6 percent. Stock Z has a beta of .85 and an expected return of  
10.3 percent. If the risk-free rate is 4.1 percent and the market risk premium 
is 7 percent, are these stocks correctly priced?

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
383
LO 4 	 20.	Reward-to-Risk Ratios.  In the previous problem, what would the risk-free 
rate have to be for the two stocks to be correctly priced relative to each 
other?
LO 1 	 21.	Portfolio Returns.  Using information from Table 10.2 on capital market 
history, determine the return on a portfolio that was equally invested in 
large-company stocks and long-term corporate bonds. What was the 
return on a portfolio that was equally invested in small stocks and 
Treasury bills?
LO 1 	 22.	Portfolio Expected Return.  You have $250,000 to invest in a stock 
portfolio. Your choices are Stock H, with an expected return of 12.9 percent, 
and Stock L, with an expected return of 9.8 percent. If your goal is to create 
a portfolio with an expected return of 11.1 percent, how much money will 
you invest in Stock H? In Stock L?
LO 1 	 23.	Calculating Portfolio Weights.  Stock J has a beta of 1.19 and an expected 
return of 12.95 percent, while Stock K has a beta of .84 and an expected 
return of 10.40 percent. You want a portfolio with the same risk as the 
market. How much will you invest in each stock? What is the expected 
return of your portfolio?
LO 1 	 24.	Calculating Portfolio Weights and Expected Return.  You have a portfolio 
with the following:
Stock
Number  
of Shares
Price
Expected 
Return
W
645
$43
10%
X
830
  29
15%
Y
475
  94
11%
Z
765
  51
14%
	
What is the expected return of your portfolio?
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 25–27)
LO 1 	 25.	Portfolio Returns and Deviations.  Consider the following information on a 
portfolio of three stocks:
State of 
Economy
Probability of 
State of  
Economy
Stock A Rate  
of Return
Stock B Rate  
of Return
Stock C Rate 
of Return
Boom
.15
.02
   .32
   .60
Normal
.60
.10
   .12
   .20
Bust
.25
.16
−.11
−.35
a.	
 If your portfolio is invested 40 percent each in A and B and 20 percent 
in C, what is the portfolio’s expected return? The variance? The 
standard deviation?
b.	 If the expected T-bill rate is 3.75 percent, what is the expected risk 
premium on the portfolio?
LO 4 	 26.	CAPM.  Using the CAPM, show that the ratio of the risk premiums on two 
assets is equal to the ratio of their betas.
LO 2

384	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
LO 2 	 27.	Analyzing a Portfolio.  You want to create a portfolio equally as risky as the 
market, and you have $500,000 to invest. Given this information, fill in the 
rest of the following table:
Asset
Investment
Beta
Stock A
$105,000
  .80
Stock B
  155,000
1.15
Stock C
1.40
Risk-free asset
CHALLENGE (Questions 28–30)
LO 1 	 28.	Analyzing a Portfolio.  You have $100,000 to invest in either Stock D, 
Stock F, or a risk-free asset. You must invest all of your money. Your goal is 
to create a portfolio that has an expected return of 9.9 percent. If D has an 
expected return of 12.8 percent, F has an expected return of 9.3 percent, and 
the risk-free rate is 3.8 percent, and if you invest $50,000 in Stock D, how 
much will you invest in Stock F?
LO 4 	 29.	SML.  Suppose you observe the following situation:
State of 
Economy
Probability  
of State
	
Return If State Occurs
	
Stock A	
Stock B
Bust
.10
−.12 
−.05 
Normal
.65
 .09
.10
Boom
.25
 .35
 .21
a.	
Calculate the expected return on each stock.
b.	 Assuming the capital asset pricing model holds and Stock A’s beta is 
greater than Stock B’s beta by .25, what is the expected market risk 
premium?
LO 3 	 30.	Systematic versus Unsystematic Risk.  Consider the following information 
on Stocks I and II:
State of 
Economy
Probability of State 
of Economy
	
Rate of Return If State Occurs
	
Stock I	
Stock II
Recession
.25
.02
−.20
Normal
.60
.32
  .12
Irrational exuberance
.15
  .18
.40
The market risk premium is 7 percent, and the risk-free rate is 4 percent. 
Which stock has the most systematic risk? Which one has the most 
unsystematic risk? Which stock is “riskier”? Explain.
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
11.1	 Expected Return.  You want to find the expected return for Honeywell using the 
CAPM. First, you need the market risk premium. Use the average large-company 
stock return in Table 10.3 to estimate the market risk premium. Next, go to money 
.cnn.com and find the current interest rate for three-month Treasury bills. Finally, go 

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
385
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
The CAPM is one of the most thoroughly researched models in financial economics. When 
beta is estimated in practice, a variation of CAPM called the market model is often used. 
To derive the market model, we start with the CAPM:
E(Ri) = Rf + β[E(RM) − Rf]
Because CAPM is an equation, we can subtract the risk-free rate from both sides, which 
gives us:
E(Ri) − Rf = β[E(RM) − Rf]
This equation is deterministic, that is, exact. In a regression, we realize that there is some 
indeterminate error. We need to formally recognize this in the equation by adding epsilon, 
which represents this error:
E(Ri) − Rf = β[E(RM) − Rf] + ε
Finally, think of the above equation in a regression. Because there is no intercept in the 
equation, the intercept is zero. However, when we estimate the regression equation, we can 
add an intercept term, which we will call alpha:
E(Ri) − Rf = αi + β[E(RM) − Rf] + ε
This equation is often called the “market” model, though it is not the only equation with 
that name, which is a source of confusion. The intercept term is known as Jensen’s alpha, 
and it represents the “excess” return. If CAPM holds exactly, this intercept should be zero. 
If you think of alpha in terms of the SML, if the alpha is positive, the stock plots above the 
SML and if the alpha is negative, the stock plots below the SML.
a.	
You want to estimate the market model for an individual stock and a mutual fund. 
First, go to finance.yahoo.com and download the adjusted prices for the last 61 
months for an individual stock, a mutual fund, and the S&P 500. Next, go to the St. 
Louis Federal Reserve website at www.stlouisfed.org. You should find the FRED® 
database there. Look for the 1-Month Treasury Constant Maturity Rate and 
download this data. This series will be the proxy for the risk-free rate. When using 
to finance.yahoo.com, enter the ticker symbol HON for Honeywell, and find the beta 
for Honeywell. What is the expected return for Honeywell using CAPM? What 
assumptions have you made to arrive at this number?
11.2	 Portfolio Beta.  You have decided to invest in an equally weighted portfolio 
consisting of American Express, Procter & Gamble, Home Depot, and DuPont and 
need to find the beta of your portfolio. Go to finance.yahoo.com and find the ticker 
symbols for each of these companies. Next, find the beta for each company. What is the 
beta for your portfolio?
11.3	 Beta.  Which stock has the highest and lowest betas? Go to finance.yahoo.com and 
locate the Stock Screener. Enter 0 as the maximum value. How many stocks have a beta 
less than zero? Which stock has the lowest beta? Go back to the screener and enter 3 as 
the minimum value. How many stocks have a beta greater than 3? What about greater 
than 4? Which stock has the highest beta?

386	
p a r t  6
Risk and Return
this rate, you should be aware that this interest rate is the annualized interest rate. 
Since we are using monthly stock returns, you will need to adjust the 1-month T-bill 
rate. For the stock and mutual fund you select, estimate the beta and alpha using the 
market model. When you estimate the regression model, find the box that says 
“Residuals” and check this box when you do each regression. Because you are saving 
the residuals, you may want to save the regression output in a new worksheet. 
1.	
Are the alpha and beta for each regression statistically different from zero?
2.	
How do you interpret the alpha and beta for the stock and the mutual fund?
3.	
Which of the two regression estimates has the highest R-squared? Is this what 
you would have expected? Why?
b.	 In part (a), you asked Excel to return the residuals of the regression, which is the 
epsilon in the regression equation. If you remember back to basic statistics, the 
residuals are the distance from each observation to the regression line. In this 
context, the residuals are the part of the monthly return that is not explained by the 
market model estimate. The residuals can be used to calculate the appraisal ratio, 
which is the alpha divided by the standard deviation of the residuals. 
1.	
What do you think the appraisal ratio is intended to measure?
2.	
Calculate the appraisal ratios for the stock and the mutual fund. Which has a 
better appraisal ratio?
3.	
Often, the appraisal ratio is used to evaluate the performance of mutual fund 
managers. Why do you think the appraisal ratio is used more often for mutual 
funds, which are portfolios, than for individual stocks?

	
c h a p t e r  1 1
Risk and Return	
387
CHAPTER CASE
The Beta for FLIR Systems
J
oey Moss, a recent finance graduate, has just begun 
his job with the investment firm of Covili and Wyatt. 
Paul Covili, one of the firm’s founders, has been talking 
to Joey about the firm’s investment portfolio.
	
As with any investment, Paul is concerned about 
the risk of the investment as well as the potential return. 
More specifically, because the company holds a diversi-
fied portfolio, Paul is concerned about the systematic 
risk of current and potential investments. One position 
the company currently holds is stock in FLIR Systems, 
Inc. (FLIR). FLIR Systems designs, manufactures, and 
markets thermal imaging and infrared camera systems. 
Although better known for its military applications, the 
company has divisions that design products for other 
applications such as automotive night vision, 
commercial products that require minute temperature 
difference measurements, recreational marine usage, 
and firefighting.
	
Covili and Wyatt currently uses a commercial data 
vendor for information about its positions. Because of 
this, Paul is unsure exactly how the numbers provided 
are calculated. The data provider considers its methods 
proprietary, and it will not disclose how stock betas and 
other information are calculated. Paul is uncomfortable 
with not knowing exactly how these numbers are being 
computed and also believes that it could be less expen-
sive to calculate the necessary statistics in-house. To 
explore this question, Paul has asked Joey to do the fol-
lowing assignments:
QU E ST I O N S
1.	
Go to finance.yahoo.com and download the ending 
monthly stock prices for FLIR Systems (FLIR) for the 
last 60 months. Be sure to use the adjusted closing 
price to account for any stock splits and dividend 
payments. Next, download the ending value of the 
S&P 500 index over the same period. For the his-
torical risk-free rate, go to the St. Louis Federal 
­Reserve website (www.stlouisfed.org) and find the 
three-month Treasury bill constant maturity rate. 
Download this file. What are the monthly returns, 
average monthly returns, and standard deviations 
for FLIR Systems stock, the three-month Treasury 
bill, and the S&P 500 for this period?
2.	
Beta is often estimated by linear regression. A 
model often used is called the market model, 
which is:  
 	
Rt − Rft = αi + βi [RMt − Rft] + εt
	
In this regression, Rt is the return on the stock and 
Rft is the risk-free rate for the same period. RMt is 
the return on a stock market index such as the 
S&P 500 index. αi is the regression intercept, and 
βi is the slope (and the stock’s estimated beta). εt 
represents the residuals for the regression. What 
do you think is the motivation for this particular 
­regression? The intercept, αi, is often called 
­Jensen’s alpha. What does it measure? If an asset 
has a positive Jensen’s alpha, where would it plot 
with respect to the SML? What is the financial in-
terpretation of the residuals in the regression?
3.	
Use the market model to estimate the beta for 
FLIR Systems using the last 60 months of returns 
(the regression procedure in Excel is one easy 
way to do this). Plot the monthly returns on FLIR 
Systems against the index and also show the fit-
ted line.
4.	
Compare your beta for FLIR Systems to the beta 
you find on finance.yahoo.com. How similar are 
they? Why might they be different?

388
12
W
ith more than 112,000 employees on five continents, Germany-
based BASF is a major international company. BASF oper-
ates in a variety of industries, including agriculture, oil and gas, 
chemicals, and plastics. In an attempt to increase value, BASF 
launched Vision 2020, a comprehensive plan that included all func-
tions within the company and challenged and encouraged all em-
ployees to act in an entrepreneurial manner. The major financial 
component of the strategy was that the company expected to earn 
its weighted average cost of capital, or WACC, plus a premium. So, 
what exactly is the WACC?
The WACC is the minimum return a company needs to earn to 
satisfy all of its investors, including stockholders, bondholders, and 
preferred stockholders. In 2010, for example, BASF pegged its cost of 
capital at 9 percent and earned a company record premium of €3.9 billion over its target 
based on that number. From 2011 to 2014, the company pegged its WACC at 11 percent. In 
this chapter, we learn how to compute a firm’s cost of capital and find out what it means to 
the firm and its investors. We will also learn when to use the firm’s cost of capital and, per-
haps more important, when not to use it.
From our chapters on capital budgeting, we know that the discount rate, or required 
return, on an investment is a critical input. Thus far, however, we haven’t discussed how 
to come up with that particular number, so it’s time now to do so. This chapter brings 
­together many of our earlier discussions dealing with stocks and bonds, capital budget-
ing, and risk and return. Our goal is to illustrate how firms go about determining the 
­required return on a proposed investment. Understanding required returns is important 
to everyone because all proposed projects, whether they relate to marketing, manage-
ment, accounting, or any other area, must offer returns in excess of their required returns 
to be acceptable.
Cost of Capital
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
PART SEVEN 
Long-Term Financing
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be 
able to:
LO 1 	 Determine a firm’s cost of equity 
capital.
LO 2 	 Determine a firm’s cost of debt.
LO 3 	 Determine a firm’s overall cost of 
capital.
LO 4 	 Identify some of the pitfalls 
associated with a firm’s overall 
cost of capital and what to do 
about them.

S
uppose you have just become the president of a large company and the first decision 
you face is whether to go ahead with a plan to renovate the company’s warehouse dis-
tribution system. The plan will cost the company $50 million, and it is expected to save 
$12 million per year after taxes over the next six years.
This is a familiar problem in capital budgeting. To address it, you would determine the 
relevant cash flows, discount them, and, if the net present value is positive, take on the 
project; if the NPV is negative, you would scrap it. So far, so good; but what should you 
use as the discount rate?
From our discussion of risk and return, you know that the correct discount rate de-
pends on the riskiness of the warehouse distribution system. In particular, the new project 
will have a positive NPV only if its return exceeds what the financial markets offer on in-
vestments of similar risk. We called this minimum required return the cost of capital as-
sociated with the project.1
Thus, to make the right decision as president, you must examine what the capital mar-
kets have to offer and use this information to arrive at an estimate of the project’s cost of 
capital. Our primary purpose in this chapter is to describe how to go about doing this. 
There are a variety of approaches to this task, and a number of conceptual and practical 
issues arise.
One of the most important concepts we develop is that of the weighted average cost of 
capital (WACC). This is the cost of capital for the firm as a whole, and it can be interpreted 
as the required return on the overall firm. In discussing the WACC, we will recognize the 
fact that a firm will normally raise capital in a variety of forms and that these different 
forms of capital may have different costs associated with them.
We also recognize in this chapter that taxes are an important consideration in deter-
mining the required return on an investment, because we are always interested in valuing 
the aftertax cash flows from a project. Therefore, we will discuss how to incorporate taxes 
explicitly into our estimates of the cost of capital.
THE COST OF CAPITAL: SOME PRELIMINARIES
In Chapter 11, we developed the security market line, or SML, and used it to explore the 
relationship between the expected return on a security and its systematic risk. We concen-
trated on how the risky returns from buying securities looked from the viewpoint of, for 
example, a shareholder in the firm. This helped us understand more about the alternatives 
available to an investor in the capital markets.
In this chapter, we turn things around a bit and look more closely at the other side of 
the problem, which is how these returns and securities look from the viewpoint of the com-
panies that issue the securities. The important fact to note is that the return an investor in a 
security receives is the cost of that security to the company that issued it.
Required Return versus Cost of Capital
When we say that the required return on an investment is, say, 10 percent, we usually mean 
that the investment will have a positive NPV only if its return exceeds 10 percent. Another 
way of interpreting the required return is to observe that the firm must earn 10 percent on 
12.1
1 The term cost of money is also used.
	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
389

390	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
the investment just to compensate its investors for the use of the capital needed to finance 
the project. This is why we could also say that 10 percent is the cost of capital associated 
with the investment.
To illustrate the point further, imagine we are evaluating a risk-free project. In this 
case, how to determine the required return is obvious: We look at the capital markets and 
observe the current rate offered by risk-free investments, and we use this rate to discount 
the project’s cash flows. Thus, the cost of capital for a risk-free investment is the risk-free 
rate.
If this project is risky, then, assuming that all the other information is unchanged, the 
required return is obviously higher. In other words, the cost of capital for this project, if it 
is risky, is greater than the risk-free rate, and the appropriate discount rate would exceed 
the risk-free rate.
We will henceforth use the terms required return, appropriate discount rate, and cost 
of capital more or less interchangeably because, as the discussion in this section suggests, 
they all mean essentially the same thing. The key fact to grasp is that the cost of capital 
associated with an investment depends on the risk of that investment. In other words, it’s 
the use of the money, not the source, that matters. This is one of the most important lessons 
in corporate finance, so it bears repeating:
The cost of capital depends primarily on the use of the funds, not the source.
It is a common error to forget this crucial point and fall into the trap of thinking that the 
cost of capital for an investment depends primarily on how and where the capital is 
raised.
Financial Policy and Cost of Capital
We know that the particular mixture of debt and equity a firm chooses to employ—its capi-
tal structure—is a managerial variable. In this chapter, we will take the firm’s financial 
policy as given. In particular, we will assume that the firm has a fixed debt−equity ratio 
that it maintains. This ratio reflects the firm’s target capital structure. How a firm might 
choose that ratio is the subject of a later chapter.
From our discussion above, we know that a firm’s overall cost of capital will reflect 
the required return on the firm’s assets as a whole. Given that a firm uses both debt and 
equity capital, this overall cost of capital will be a mixture of the returns needed to com-
pensate its creditors and its stockholders. In other words, a firm’s cost of capital will reflect 
both its cost of debt capital and its cost of equity capital. We discuss these costs separately 
in the sections that follow.
concept questions
12.1a 	 What is the primary determinant of the cost of capital for an investment?
12.1b 	 What is the relationship between the required return on an investment and the cost of 
capital associated with that investment?

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
391
THE COST OF EQUITY
We begin with the most difficult question on the subject of cost of capital: What is the 
firm’s overall cost of equity? The reason this is a difficult question is that there is no way 
of directly observing the return that the firm’s equity investors require on their investment. 
Instead, we must somehow estimate it. This section discusses two approaches to determin-
ing the cost of equity: the dividend growth model approach and the security market line, or 
SML, approach.
The Dividend Growth Model Approach
The easiest way to estimate the cost of equity capital is to use the dividend growth model 
we developed in Chapter 7. Recall that, under the assumption that the firm’s dividend will 
grow at a constant rate, g, the price per share of the stock, P0, can be written as:
P0 =
D0 × (1 + g)
RE −g
=
D1
RE −g
where D0 is the dividend just paid and D1 is the next period’s projected dividend. Notice that 
we have used the symbol RE (the E stands for equity) for the required return on the stock.
As we discussed in Chapter 7, we can rearrange this to solve for RE as follows:
RE = D1/P0 + g	
[12.1]
Because RE is the return that the shareholders require on the stock, it can be interpreted as 
the firm’s cost of equity capital.
Implementing the Approach 
To estimate RE using the dividend growth model ap-
proach, we obviously need three pieces of information: P0, D0, and g. Of these, for a pub-
licly traded, dividend-paying company, the first two can be observed directly, so they are 
easily obtained.2 Only the third component, the expected growth rate in dividends, must be 
estimated.
To illustrate how we estimate RE, suppose Greater States Public Service, a large public 
utility, paid a dividend of $4 per share last year. The stock currently sells for $60 per share. 
You estimate that the dividend will grow steadily at 6 percent per year into the indefinite 
future. What is the cost of equity capital for Greater States?
Using the dividend growth model, we calculate that the expected dividend for the 
coming year, D1, is:
	D1 = D0 × (1 + g)
	
= $4 × 1.06
	
= $4.24
Given this, the cost of equity, RE, is:
	RE = D1/P0 + g
	
= $4.24/60 + .06
	
= 13.07%
The cost of equity is thus 13.07 percent.
12.2
coverage online
Excel 
Master
cost of equity
The return that equity 
investors require on their 
investment in the firm.
2 Notice that if we have D0 and g, we can simply calculate D1 by multiplying D0 by (1 + g).

392	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
Estimating g 
To use the dividend growth model, we must come up with an estimate 
for g, the growth rate. There are essentially two ways of doing this: (1) use historical 
growth rates or (2) use analysts’ forecasts of future growth rates. Analysts’ forecasts are 
available from a variety of sources. Naturally, different sources will have different esti-
mates, so one approach might be to obtain multiple estimates and then average them.
Alternatively, we might observe dividends for the previous, say, five years, calculate 
the year-to-year growth rates, and average them. For example, suppose we observe the fol-
lowing for some company:
Year
Dividend
2012
$1.10   
2013
  1.20   
2014
  1.35   
2015
  1.40   
2016
  1.55  
We can calculate the percentage change in the dividend for each year as follows:
Year
Dividend
Dollar Change
Percentage Change
2012
$1.10  
— 
—
2013
  1.20
$.10  
     9.09%
2014
  1.35
  .15
12.50  
2015
  1.40
  .05
  3.70  
2016
  1.55
  .15
10.71 
Notice that we calculated the change in the dividend on a year-to-year basis and then ex-
pressed the change as a percentage. Thus, in 2013, for example, the dividend rose from 
$1.10 to $1.20, for an increase of $.10. This represents a $.10/1.10 = 9.09% increase.
If we average the four growth rates, the result is (9.09 + 12.50 + 3.70 + 10.71)/4 = 
9%, so we could use this as an estimate for the expected growth rate, g. Notice that this 
9 percent growth rate we have calculated is a simple, or arithmetic average. Going back to 
Chapter 10, we also could calculate a geometric growth rate. Here, the dividend grows 
from $1.10 to $1.55 over a four-year period. What’s the compound, or geometric growth 
rate? See if you don’t agree that it’s 8.95 percent; you can view this as a simple time value 
of money problem where $1.10 is the present value and $1.55 is the future value.
As usual, the geometric average (8.95 percent) is lower than the arithmetic average (9.00 
percent), but the difference here is not likely to be of any practical significance. In general, if 
the dividend has grown at a relatively steady rate, as we assume when we use this approach, 
then it can’t make much difference which way we calculate the average dividend growth rate.
Advantages and Disadvantages of the Approach 
The primary advantage of 
the dividend growth model approach is its simplicity. It is both easy to understand and easy 
to use. However, there are a number of associated practical problems and disadvantages.
First and foremost, the dividend growth model is obviously only applicable to compa-
nies that pay dividends. This means that the approach is useless in many cases. Further-
more, even for companies that do pay dividends, the key underlying assumption is that the 
dividend grows at a constant rate. As our example above illustrates, this will never be 
exactly the case. More generally, the model is really only applicable to cases in which rea-
sonably steady growth is likely to occur.
Aggregate growth 
estimates can be found at 
www.zacks.com/research/
earnings.

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
393
A second problem is that the estimated cost of equity is very sensitive to the estimated 
growth rate. For a given stock price, an upward revision of g by just one percentage point, 
for example, increases the estimated cost of equity by at least a full percentage point. Be-
cause D1 will probably be revised upward as well, the increase will actually be somewhat 
larger than that.
Finally, this approach really does not explicitly consider risk. Unlike the SML ap-
proach (which we consider next), this one has no direct adjustment for the riskiness of the 
investment. For example, there is no allowance for the degree of certainty or uncertainty 
surrounding the estimated growth rate in dividends. As a result, it is difficult to say whether 
or not the estimated return is commensurate with the level of risk.3
The SML Approach
In Chapter 11, we discussed the security market line, or SML. Our primary conclusion was 
that the required or expected return on a risky investment depends on three things:
  1.	 The risk-free rate, Rf
  2.	 The market risk premium, E(RM) − Rf
  3.	 The systematic risk of the asset relative to that in an average risky asset, which we 
called its beta coefficient, β
Using the SML, we can write the expected return on the company’s equity, E(RE), as:
E(RE) = Rf + βE × [E(RM) − Rf]
where βE is the estimated beta for the equity. To make the SML approach consistent with 
the dividend growth model, we will drop the Es denoting expectations and henceforth 
write the required return from the SML, RE, as:
RE = Rf + βE × (RM − Rf)	
[12.2]
Implementing the Approach 
To use the SML approach, we need a risk-free rate, 
Rf, an estimate of the market risk premium, RM − Rf, and an estimate of the relevant beta, 
βE. In Chapter 10, we saw that one estimate of the market risk premium is about 7 percent. 
U.S. Treasury bills are paying about .05 percent as this is being written, so we will use this 
as our risk-free rate. Beta coefficients for publicly traded companies are widely 
available.4
To illustrate, in Chapter 11, we saw that Amazon had an estimated beta of 1.41 
(Table 11.8). We could thus estimate Amazon’s cost of equity as:
	RAmazon = Rf + βAmazon × (RM − Rf)
	
= .05% + 1.41 × 7%
	
= 9.92%
Thus, using the SML approach, Amazon’s cost of equity is about 9.9 percent.
Both betas and T-bill 
rates can be found at 
www.bloomberg.com.
3 There is an implicit adjustment for risk because the current stock price is used. All other things being equal, 
the higher the risk, the lower is the stock price. Further, the lower the stock price, the greater is the cost of 
equity, again assuming that all the other information is the same.
4 Beta coefficients can be estimated directly by using historical data. For a discussion of how to do this, see 
Chapters 10, 11, and 12 in S. A. Ross, R. W. Westerfield, J. F. Jaffe, and B. D. Jordan, Corporate Finance,  
11th ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill Education, 2016).

394	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
Advantages and Disadvantages of the Approach 
The SML approach has 
two primary advantages. First: It explicitly adjusts for risk. Second: It is applicable to com-
panies other than just those with steady dividend growth. Thus, it may be useful in a wider 
variety of circumstances.
There are drawbacks, of course. The SML approach requires that two things be esti-
mated, the market risk premium and the beta coefficient. To the extent that our estimates 
are poor, the resulting cost of equity will be inaccurate. For example, our estimate of the 
market risk premium, 7 percent, is based on about 100 years of returns on a particular port-
folio of stocks. Using different time periods or different stocks could result in very differ-
ent estimates.
Finally, as with the dividend growth model, we essentially rely on the past to predict 
the future when we use the SML approach. Economic conditions can change very quickly, 
so, as always, the past may not be a good guide to the future. In the best of all worlds, both 
approaches (dividend growth model and SML) are applicable and result in similar answers. 
If this happens, we might have some confidence in our estimates. We might also wish to 
compare the results to those for other, similar companies as a reality check.
EXAMPLE
12.1  The Cost of Equity
Suppose stock in Alpha Air Freight has a beta of 1.2. The market risk premium is 8 percent, and the 
risk-free rate is 6 percent. Alpha’s last dividend was $2 per share, and the dividend is expected to 
grow at 8 percent indefinitely. The stock currently sells for $30. What is Alpha’s cost of equity 
capital?
	
We can start off by using the SML. Doing this, we find that the expected return on the common 
stock of Alpha Air Freight is:
	
RE = Rf + βE × (RM − Rf)
	
= 6% + 1.2 × 8%
	
= 15.6%
This suggests that 15.6 percent is Alpha’s cost of equity. We next use the dividend growth model. 
The projected dividend is D0 × (1 + g) = $2 × 1.08 = $2.16, so the expected return using this 
­approach is:
	
RE = D1/P0 + g
	
= $2.16/30 + .08
	
= 15.2%
Our two estimates are reasonably close, so we might just average them to find that Alpha’s cost of 
equity is approximately 15.4 percent.
concept questions
12.2a 	 What do we mean when we say that a corporation’s cost of equity capital is 16 percent?
12.2b 	 What are two approaches to estimating the cost of equity capital?
THE COSTS OF DEBT AND PREFERRED STOCK
In addition to ordinary equity, firms use debt and, to a lesser extent, preferred stock to fi-
nance their investments. As we discuss next, determining the costs of capital associated 
with these sources of financing is much easier than determining the cost of equity.
12.3
coverage online
Excel 
Master

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
395
The Cost of Debt
The cost of debt is the return that the firm’s creditors demand on new borrowing. In prin-
ciple, we could determine the beta for the firm’s debt and then use the SML to estimate the 
required return on debt just as we estimate the required return on equity. This isn’t really 
necessary, however.
Unlike a firm’s cost of equity, its cost of debt can normally be observed either directly 
or indirectly, because the cost of debt is simply the interest rate the firm must pay on new 
borrowing, and we can observe interest rates in the financial markets. For example, if the 
firm already has bonds outstanding, then the yield to maturity on those bonds is the 
market-required rate on the firm’s debt.
Alternatively, if we knew that the firm’s bonds were rated, say, AA, then we could 
simply find out what the interest rate on newly issued AA-rated bonds was. Either way, 
there is no need to actually estimate a beta for the debt since we can directly observe the 
rate we want to know.
There is one thing to be careful about, though. The coupon rate on the firm’s outstand-
ing debt is irrelevant here. That just tells us roughly what the firm’s cost of debt was back 
when the bonds were issued, not what the cost of debt is today.5 This is why we have to 
look at the yield on the debt in today’s marketplace. For consistency with our other nota-
tion, we will use the symbol RD for the cost of debt.
cost of debt
The return that lenders 
require on the firm’s debt.
5 The firm’s cost of debt based on its historic borrowing is sometimes called the embedded debt cost.
EXAMPLE
12.2  The Cost of Debt
Suppose the General Tool Company issued a 30-year, 7 percent bond eight years ago. The bond is 
currently selling for 96 percent of its face value, or $960. What is General Tool’s cost of debt?
	
Going back to Chapter 6, we need to calculate the yield to maturity on this bond. Since the 
bond is selling at a discount, the yield is apparently greater than 7 percent, but not much greater, 
because the discount is fairly small. You can verify that the yield to maturity is about 7.37 percent, 
assuming annual coupons. General Tool’s cost of debt, RD, is thus 7.37 percent.
The Cost of Preferred Stock
Determining the cost of preferred stock is quite straightforward. As we discussed in 
Chapters 6 and 7, preferred stock has a fixed dividend paid every period forever, so a share 
of preferred stock is essentially a perpetuity. The cost of preferred stock, RP, is thus:
RP = D/P0	
[12.3]
where D is the fixed dividend and P0 is the current price per share of the preferred stock. 
Notice that the cost of preferred stock is simply equal to the dividend yield on the preferred 
stock. Alternatively, preferred stocks are rated in much the same way as bonds, so the cost 
of preferred stock can be estimated by observing the required returns on other, similarly 
rated shares of preferred stock.
EXAMPLE
12.3  Alabama Power’s Cost of Preferred Stock
In 2015, Alabama Power had several issues of preferred stock that traded on the NYSE. One issue 
paid $4.92 annually per share and sold for $97.00 per share. Another paid $4.52 per share annually 
and sold for $95.00 per share. What was Alabama Power’s cost of preferred stock?
(continued)

396	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
concept questions
12.3a 	 How can the cost of debt be calculated?
12.3b 	 How can the cost of preferred stock be calculated?
12.3c 	 Why is the coupon rate a bad estimate of a firm’s cost of debt?
THE WEIGHTED AVERAGE COST OF CAPITAL
Now that we have the costs associated with the main sources of capital the firm employs, 
we need to worry about the specific mix. As we mentioned above, we will take this mix, 
which is the firm’s capital structure, as given for now. Also, we will focus mostly on debt 
and ordinary equity in this discussion.
The Capital Structure Weights
We will use the symbol E (for equity) to stand for the market value of the firm’s equity. We 
calculate this by taking the number of shares outstanding and multiplying it by the price 
per share. Similarly, we will use the symbol D (for debt) to stand for the market value of 
the firm’s debt. For long-term debt, we calculate this by multiplying the market price of a 
single bond by the number of bonds outstanding.
If there are multiple bond issues (as there normally would be), we repeat this calcula-
tion for each and then add up the results. If there is debt that is not publicly traded (because 
it is held by a life insurance company, for example), we must observe the yield on similar, 
publicly traded debt and then estimate the market value of the privately held debt using this 
yield as the discount rate. For short-term debt, the book (accounting) values and market 
values should be somewhat similar, so we might use the book values as estimates of the 
market values.
Finally, we will use the symbol V (for value) to stand for the combined market value of 
the debt and equity:
V = E + D	
[12.4]
If we divide both sides by V, we can calculate the percentages of the total capital repre-
sented by the debt and equity:
100% = E/V + D/V	
[12.5]
12.4
coverage online
Excel 
Master
Using the first issue, the cost of preferred stock was:
	
RP = D/P0
	
= $4.92/97
	
= .0507, or 5.07%
Using the second issue, the cost was:
	
RP = D/P0
	
= $4.52/95
	
= .0476, or 4.76%
So, Alabama Power’s cost of preferred stock appears to have been just under 5 percent.

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
397
These percentages can be interpreted just like portfolio weights, and they are often 
called the capital structure weights.
For example, if the total market value of a company’s stock were calculated as 
$200 million and the total market value of the company’s debt were calculated as 
$50 million, then the combined value would be $250 million. Of this total, E/V = 
$200/250 = 80%, so 80 percent of the firm’s financing would be equity and the remain-
ing 20 percent would be debt.
We emphasize here that the correct way to proceed is to use the market values of 
the debt and equity. Under certain circumstances, such as when considering a privately 
owned company, it may not be possible to get reliable estimates of these quantities. In 
this case, we might go ahead and use the accounting values for debt and equity. While 
this would probably be better than nothing, we would have to take the answer with a 
grain of salt.
Taxes and the Weighted Average Cost of Capital
There is one final issue we need to discuss. Recall that we are always concerned with after-
tax cash flows. If we are determining the discount rate appropriate to those cash flows, 
then the discount rate also needs to be expressed on an aftertax basis.
As we discussed previously in various places in this book (and as we will discuss 
later), the interest paid by a corporation is deductible for tax purposes. Payments to stock-
holders, such as dividends, are not. What this means, effectively, is that the government 
pays some of the interest. Thus, in determining an aftertax discount rate, we need to distin-
guish between the pretax and the aftertax cost of debt.
To illustrate, suppose a firm borrows $1 million at 9 percent interest. The corporate 
tax rate is 34 percent. What is the aftertax interest rate on this loan? The total interest bill 
will be $90,000 per year. This amount is tax deductible, however, so the $90,000 interest 
reduces our tax bill by .34 × $90,000 = $30,600. The aftertax interest bill is thus $90,000 − 
30,600 = $59,400. The aftertax interest rate is thus $59,400/1 million = 5.94%.
Notice that, in general, the aftertax interest rate is simply equal to the pretax rate mul-
tiplied by 1 minus the tax rate. Thus, if we use the symbol TC to stand for the corporate tax 
rate, then the aftertax rate that we use for the cost of debt can be written as RD × (1 − TC). 
For example, using the numbers above, we find that the aftertax interest rate is 9% × 
(1 − .34) = 5.94%.
Collecting together the various topics we have discussed in this chapter, we now have 
the capital structure weights along with the cost of equity and the aftertax cost of debt. To 
calculate the firm’s overall cost of capital, we multiply the capital structure weights by the 
associated costs and add up the pieces. The result of this is the weighted average cost of 
capital, or WACC.
WACC = (E/V) × RE + (D/V) × RD × (1 − TC)	
[12.6]
This WACC has a very straightforward interpretation. It is the overall return the firm must 
earn on its existing assets to maintain the value of its stock. This is an important point, so 
it bears repeating:
The WACC is the overall return the firm must earn on its existing assets to maintain 
the value of its stock.
The WACC is also the required return on any investments by the firm that have essen-
tially the same risks as existing operations. So, if we were evaluating the cash flows 
weighted average 
cost of capital 
(WACC)
The weighted average of 
the cost of equity and the 
aftertax cost of debt.

398
from a proposed expansion of our existing operations, this is the discount rate we 
would use.
If a firm uses preferred stock in its capital structure, then our expression for the WACC 
needs a simple extension. If we define P/V as the percentage of the firm’s financing that 
comes from preferred stock, then the WACC is simply:
WACC = (E/V) × RE + (P/V) × RP + (D/V) × RD × (1 − TC)	
[12.7] 
where RP is the cost of preferred stock.
The WACC is increasingly being used by corporations to evaluate financial perfor-
mance. The accompanying Finance Matters box provides some details on how this is being 
done.
EVA: An Old Idea Moves into the Modern Age
Y
ou might not think of Briggs and Stratton, Coca-Cola, 
and Toys ‘R’ Us as having much in common. However, 
all three have linked their fortunes to a way of managing 
and measuring corporate performance that depends criti-
cally on the cost of capital. It goes by many names, but 
consulting firm Stern Stewart & Co., a well-known advo-
cate, calls its particular flavor “economic value added,” or 
EVA. Stockholder value added (SVA) is a common variant. 
Whatever the name, EVA and its cousins have become an 
important tool for corporate management since the 
mid-1990s.
	
Briefly stated, EVA is a method of measuring financial 
performance. To compute EVA, you must calculate your over-
all cost of capital. Then, you identify how much capital is tied 
up in your business. Next, you multiply the amount of capital 
by the cost of capital. The result is the amount, in dollars, you 
should be providing to your investors. Subtract out your ac-
tual operating cash flow, and the difference is a measure of 
EVA. A positive value means that you earned more than your 
cost of capital, thereby creating value, and vice versa (this is 
just a quick overview; for more detail visit www.eva.com).
	
Each year, Stern Stewart & Co. prepares the Stern Stew-
art 1000, a ranking of the 1,000 largest U.S. companies 
based on their respective EVAs. Over the history of the Stern 
Stewart 1000, several companies have shown consistently 
strong performances. For example, Microsoft, Intel, and Exx-
onMobil often appear near the top of the list. The list also 
has perennial poor performers, and some of the names may 
surprise you, for example, General Motors, Time Warner, 
Goodyear Tire & Rubber, and JDS Uniphase. Evidently, a 
well-known brand name does not always result in share-
holder wealth.
	
One thing the Stern Stewart 1000 has done is to show 
the changing face of the economy. For instance, Intel, Cisco 
Systems, and eBay have all ranked rather well on the list. 
Consider that Intel is the oldest of these companies, having 
been publicly traded since 1971, while eBay has been pub-
licly traded only since 1998. This highlights the dramatic im-
pact of technology companies on the economy. Of course, 
not all technology-related companies have performed as 
well. For example, WebMD has appeared near the bottom of 
the list every year.
	
According to Bennett Stewart, one of the cofounders 
of Stern Stewart, EVA shows an important distinction be-
tween accounting income and economic profit. Account-
ing rules dictate that the interest expense a company 
incurs must be deducted from its reported profit, but those 
same rules forbid deducting a charge for the shareholders’ 
funds used by a firm. In economic terms, equity capital is in 
fact a very costly financing source because shareholders 
bear the risk of being paid last, after all other stakeholders 
and investors are paid. But according to accountants, 
shareholder equity is essentially free. This oversight has 
dire practical consequences. For instance, it means that 
the profit figure accountants certify to be correct can con-
flict with the net present value decision rule. This conflict 
occurs when accounting rules lead to a focus on the ac-
countant’s bottom line rather than the more important 
question of whether a project’s projected return exceeds 
its required return.
	
While EVA and its variants are sound in principle, they 
still have shortcomings. For one thing, they are typically 
computed using asset book values instead of market values. 
For another, they sometimes are based on accounting mea-
sures of income when cash flow would be a better choice. 
Nonetheless, potential problems aside, the concept of EVA 
focuses management attention on creating wealth for inves-
tors. That, in itself, makes EVA a worthwhile tool.
FINANCE MATTERS

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
399
Solving the Warehouse Problem and Similar Capital 
Budgeting Problems
Now we can use the WACC to solve the warehouse problem we posed at the beginning of 
the chapter. However, before we rush to discount the cash flows at the WACC to estimate 
NPV, we need to first make sure we are doing the right thing.
Going back to first principles, we need to find an alternative in the financial markets 
that is comparable to the warehouse renovation. To be comparable, an alternative must be 
of the same risk as the warehouse project. Projects that have the same risk are said to be in 
the same risk class.
The WACC for a firm reflects the risk and the target capital structure of the firm’s 
existing assets as a whole. As a result, strictly speaking, the firm’s WACC is the appropri-
ate discount rate only if the proposed investment is a replica of the firm’s existing operat-
ing activities.
In broader terms, whether or not we can use the firm’s WACC to value the ware-
house project depends on whether the warehouse project is in the same risk class as the 
firm. We will assume that this project is an integral part of the overall business of the 
firm. In such cases, it is natural to think that the cost savings will be as risky as 
the general cash flows of the firm, and the project will thus be in the same risk class as 
the overall firm. More generally, projects like the warehouse renovation that are inti-
mately related to the firm’s existing operations are often viewed as being in the same 
risk class as the overall firm.
We can now see what the president should do. Suppose the firm has a target debt−equity 
ratio of 1/3. From Chapter 3, we know that a debt−equity ratio of D/E = 1/3 implies that 
E/V is .75 and D/V is .25. Further suppose the cost of debt is 10 percent, and the cost of 
equity is 20 percent. Assuming a 34 percent tax rate, the WACC will then be:
	WACC = (E/V) × RE + (D/V) × RD × (1 − TC)
	
= .75 × 20% + .25 × 10% × (1 − .34)
	
= 16.65%
EXAMPLE
12.4  Calculating the WACC
The B. B. Lean Co. has 1.4 million shares of stock outstanding. The stock currently sells for $20 per 
share. The firm’s debt is publicly traded and was recently quoted at 93 percent of face value. It has 
a total face value of $5 million, and it is currently priced to yield 11 percent. The risk-free rate is 
8 percent, and the market risk premium is 7 percent. You’ve estimated that Lean has a beta of .74. If 
the corporate tax rate is 34 percent, what is the WACC of Lean Co.?
	
We can first determine the cost of equity and the cost of debt. From the SML, the cost of equity 
is 8% + .74 × 7% = 13.18%. The total value of the equity is 1.4 million × $20 = $28 million. The pretax 
cost of debt is the current yield to maturity on the outstanding debt, 11 percent. The debt sells for 
93 percent of its face value, so its current market value is .93 × $5 million = $4.65 million. The total 
market value of the equity and debt together is $28 + 4.65 = $32.65 million.
	
From here, we can calculate the WACC easily enough. The percentage of equity used by Lean 
to finance its operations is $28/32.65 = 85.76%. Because the weights have to add up to 1.0, the 
percentage of debt is 1.0 − .8576 = 14.24%. The WACC is thus:
WACC = (E/V) × RE + (D/V) × RD × (1 − TC)
	
= .8576 × 13.18% + .1424 × 11% × (1 − .34)
	
= 12.34%
B. B. Lean thus has an overall weighted average cost of capital of 12.34 percent.

400	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
Recall that the warehouse project had a cost of $50 million and expected aftertax cash 
flows (the cost savings) of $12 million per year for six years. The NPV is thus:
NPV = −$50 +
12
(1 + WACC)1 + . . . +
12
(1 + WACC)6
Because the cash flows are in the form of an ordinary annuity, we can calculate this NPV 
using 16.65 percent (the WACC) as the discount rate as follows:
NPV = −$50 + 12 ×
1 −31/(1 + .1665)64
.1665
	
= −$50 + 12 × 3.6222
	
= −$6.53 million
Should the firm take on the warehouse renovation? The project has a negative NPV 
using the firm’s WACC. This means that the financial markets offer superior projects in the 
same risk class (namely, the firm itself). The answer is clear: The project should be re-
jected. For future reference, our discussion of the WACC is summarized in Table 12.1. Our 
upcoming Finance Matters box discusses a different use of the WACC.
Calculating the WACC for Eastman Chemical
In this section, we illustrate how to calculate the WACC for Eastman Chemical, a well-
known chemical, plastics, and fiber producer. Our goal is to take you through, on a step-by-
step basis, the process of finding and using the information needed using online sources. 
As you will see, there is a fair amount of detail involved, but the necessary information is, 
for the most part, readily available.
You can find the WACC 
for many companies at 
www.thatswacc.com.
ta b l e  12.1
Summary of capital 
cost calculations
I.	
The cost of equity, RE
	
A.  Dividend growth model approach (from Chapter 7):     
	
	
	
RE = D1/P0 + g
	
	
where D1 is the expected dividend in one period, g is the dividend growth rate, and P0 
is the current stock price.
	
B.  SML approach (from Chapter 11):     
	
	
	
RE = Rf + βE × (RM − Rf)
	
	
where Rf is the risk-free rate, RM is the expected return on the overall market, and βE is 
the systematic risk of the equity.
II.	 The cost of debt, RD
	
A.  For a firm with publicly held debt, the cost of debt can be measured as the yield to 
maturity on the outstanding debt. The coupon rate is irrelevant. Yield to maturity is 
covered in Chapter 6.
	
B.  If the firm has no publicly traded debt, then the cost of debt can be measured as the 
yield to maturity on similarly rated bonds (bond ratings are discussed in Chapter 6).
III.	 The weighted average cost of capital, WACC
	
A.  The firm’s WACC is the overall required return on the firm as a whole. It is the 
appropriate discount rate to use for cash flows similar in risk to the overall firm.
	
B.  The WACC is calculated as:    
	
	
	
WACC = (E/V) × RE + (D/V) × RD × (1 − TC) 
	
	
where TC is the corporate tax rate, E is the market value of the firm’s equity, D is the market 
value of the firm’s debt, and V = E + D. Note that E/V is the percentage of the firm’s 
financing (in market value terms) that is equity, and D/V is the percentage that is debt.

FINANCE MATTERS
The Cost of Capital, Texas Style
W
e have seen how the WACC is used in the corporate 
world. It is also used by state governments to value 
property for tax purposes. Property valuation can be 
tricky. The value of a home depends on what it could be 
sold for, which is not too hard to estimate, but how do you 
value an oil or gas field? For the Texas Comptroller of 
Public Accounts, the answer is to estimate the present 
value of the future cash flows of the property. As you 
know by now, the cost of capital depends on the use of 
funds, not the source of funds. So, Texas calculates the 
WACC for companies in the oil industry and adjusts the 
industry average WACC for company-specific factors. The 
table below shows the state’s calculations for integrated 
oil companies.
	
As you can see, the 2014 WACC numbers for the com-
panies are similar. Newfield has the lowest WACC at 11.83 
percent and Pioneer has the highest at 18.65 percent, but 
most other companies are in the 14 to 16 percent range. The 
average WACC for a company in this industry is 15.09 per-
cent, with a standard deviation of 1.54 percent. When Texas 
uses this calculation, a 2 percent adjustment factor is added, 
plus any property-specific risk adjustment.
	
Notice that the Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts 
calculated these numbers on a pretax, rather than aftertax, 
basis. In other words, the state did not account for the tax 
deductibility of interest payments in this calculation. The rea-
son is that the state adjusts the cost of capital for taxes on a 
company-by-company basis.
401

402	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
Eastman’s Cost of Equity 
Our first stop is the stock price for Eastman, avail-
able at finance.yahoo.com (ticker: “EMN”). As of early 2015, here’s what the screen 
looked like:
We next looked under the “Key Statistics” link. Here is what we found:
According to this screen, Eastman has 148.65 million shares of stock outstanding. The 
book value per share is $23.61, but the stock sells for $69.20. Total equity is therefore 
about $3.510 billion on a book value basis, but it is closer to $10.287 billion on a market 
value basis.

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
403
To estimate Eastman’s cost of equity, we will assume a market risk premium of 7 per-
cent, similar to what we saw in Chapter 10. Eastman’s beta on Yahoo! is 1.44, which is 
about one and one-half times the beta of the average stock. This value seems high for this 
type of company, so we looked at the beta reported in Value Line. The beta reported there 
was a more reasonable 1.30, so we will use the average of 1.37 in our calculations. Accord-
ing to the bond section of finance.yahoo.com, T-bills were paying about .05 percent. Using 
the CAPM to estimate the cost of equity, we find:
RE = .0005 + 1.37(.07) = .0964, or 9.64%
Eastman has only paid dividends for a few years, so calculating the future growth rate for 
the dividend discount model is problematic. However, under the “Analysts Estimates” link 
at finance.yahoo.com, we found the following:
Analysts estimate the growth in earnings per share for the company will be 7.68 per-
cent for the next five years. For now, we will use this growth rate in the dividend discount 
model to estimate the cost of equity; the link between earnings growth and dividends is 
discussed in a later chapter. The estimated cost of equity using the dividend discount model 
is thus:
RE = a $1.60
69.20b + .0768 = .0999, or 9.99%
Notice that the estimates for the cost of equity are similar in this case. In broader terms, 
remember that each method of estimating the cost of equity relies on different assumptions, 
so different estimates should not surprise us. If the estimates are different, there are two 
simple solutions. First, we could ignore one of the estimates. We would look at each esti-
mate to see if one of them seemed too high or too low to be reasonable. Second, we could 
average the two estimates. Averaging the two estimates for Eastman’s cost of equity gives 
us a cost of equity of 9.84 percent. Because this seems like a reasonable number, we will 
use it in calculating the cost of capital.
Eastman’s Cost of Debt 
Eastman has 12 long-term bond issues that account for 
essentially all of its long-term debt. To calculate the cost of debt, we will have to combine 
these 12 issues. What we will do is compute a weighted average. We went to finra-markets 
.morningstar.com/BondCenter/ to find quotes on the bonds. We should note here that find-
ing the yield to maturity for all of a company’s outstanding bond issues on a single day is 
unusual. If you remember our previous discussion on bonds, the bond market is not as liq-
uid as the stock market, and, on many days, individual bond issues may not trade. To find 
the book value of the bonds, we went to www.sec.gov and found the 10K report dated 

404	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
December 31, 2014, and filed with the SEC on February 27, 2015. The basic information 
is as follows:
Coupon 
Rate
Book Value 
(face value, 
in millions)
Percentage 
of Total
Market Value 
(in millions)
Percentage 
of Total
Yield to 
Maturity
Book Values
Market 
Values
2.40% 
   $998
  .16
$1,019.02
  .15
1.41%
.22%
.21%
6.30    
     169
  .03
     193.03
  .03
2.99   
.08   
.08   
5.50    
     250
  .04
     282.38
  .04
2.53   
.10   
.10   
2.70    
     798
  .12
     808.39
  .12
2.41   
.30   
.28   
4.50    
     250
  .04
     272.24
  .04
2.76   
.11   
.11   
3.60    
     903
  .14
     941.12
  .14
2.94   
.41   
.40   
7.25    
     244
  .04
     307.11
  .04
4.03   
.15   
.18   
7.625   
       54
  .01
       68.68
  .01
3.74   
.03   
.04   
3.80    
     796
  .12
     825.96
  .12
3.34   
.41   
.40   
7.60    
     222
  .03
     295.46
  .04
4.08   
.14   
.18   
4.80    
     497
  .08
     532.34
  .08
4.35   
.34   
.34   
4.65    
  1,235
  .19 
   1,307.77
  .19 
4.29   
  .83   
  .82   
$6,416
1.00
$6,853.48
1.00
3.12%
3.15%
As these calculations show, Eastman’s cost of debt is 3.12 percent on a book value 
basis and 3.15 percent on a market value basis. Thus, for Eastman, whether market values 
or book values are used makes little difference. The reason is simply that the market values 
and book values are similar. This will often be the case and explains why companies fre-
quently use book values for debt in WACC calculations. Also, Eastman has no preferred 
stock, so we don’t need to consider the cost of preferred.
Coupon 
Rate
Maturity
Book Value  
(face value, in  
$ millions)
Price  
(% of par)
Yield to 
Maturity
2.40%  
2017
    $998
 102.106%
 1.414%
6.30     
2018
      169
114.216  
2.994  
5.50     
2019
      250
112.952  
2.526  
2.70     
2020
      798
101.302  
2.405  
4.50     
2021
      250
108.895  
2.758  
3.60     
2022
      903
104.222  
2.939  
7.25     
2024
      244
125.864  
4.030  
7.625       
2024
        54
127.179  
3.738  
3.80      
2025
      796
103.764  
3.343  
7.60    
2027
      222
133.089  
4.076  
4.80    
2042
      497
107.110  
4.349  
4.65    
2044
   1,235
105.892  
4.293  
  
$6,416
  
 
To calculate the weighted average cost of debt, we take the percentage of the total debt 
represented by each issue and multiply by the yield on the issue. We then add to get the 
overall weighted average debt cost. We use both book values and market values here for 
comparison. The results of the calculations are as follows:

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
405
S
o how does our estimate of the WACC for Eastman compare to others? One place to find esti-
mates for WACC is www.valuepro.net. We went there and found the following information for 
Eastman.
As you can see, ValuePro estimates the WACC for Eastman as 7.62 percent, which is about one 
percent higher than our estimate of 6.72 percent. The methods used by this site are not identical 
to ours, but they are similar in the most important regards. However, notice that several important 
estimates differ. For example, ValuePro uses a market risk premium of 3 percent, while our esti-
mate was 7 percent. Using our estimate of the market risk premium in the ValuePro website results 
in a WACC estimate of 11.56 percent, which is higher than our estimate. Visit the site to learn more 
if you are so inclined.
W
RK TH E W E B
Eastman’s WACC 
We now have the various pieces necessary to estimate Eastman’s 
WACC. First, we need to calculate the capital structure weights. On a book value basis, 
Eastman’s equity and debt are worth $3.510 billion and $6.416 billion, respectively. 
The total value is $9.926 billion, so the equity and debt percentages are $3.510 billion/ 
9.926 billion = .35 and $6.416 billion/9.926 billion = .65. Assuming a tax rate of 35 per-
cent, Eastman’s WACC is:
	WACC = .35 × 9.84% + .65 × 3.12% × (1 − .35)
	
= 4.79%

406	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
Thus, using book value capital structure weights, we get about 4.79 percent for Eastman’s 
WACC.
If we use market value weights, however, the WACC will be higher. To see why, notice 
that on a market value basis, Eastman’s equity and debt are worth $10.287 billion and 
$6.853 billion, respectively. The capital structure weights are therefore $10.287 billion/ 
17.140 billion = .60 and $6.853 billion/17.140 billion = .40, so the equity percentage is 
much higher. With these weights, Eastman’s WACC is:
	WACC = .60 × 9.84% + .40 × 3.15% × (1 − .35)
	
= 6.72%
Thus, using market value weights, we get 6.72 percent for Eastman’s WACC, which is no-
ticeably higher than the 4.79 percent WACC we got using book value weights.
As this example illustrates, using book values can lead to trouble, particularly if 
equity book values are used. Going back to Chapter 3, recall that we discussed the 
market-to-book ratio (the ratio of market value per share to book value per share). This 
ratio is often substantially bigger than 1. For Eastman, for example, verify that it’s 
about 2.93, so book values significantly overstate the percentage of Eastman’s financ-
ing that comes from debt. In addition, if we were computing a WACC for a company 
that did not have publicly traded stock, we would try to come up with a suitable market-
to-book ratio by looking at publicly traded companies, and we would then use this ratio 
to adjust the book value of the company under consideration. As we have seen, failure 
to do so can lead to significant underestimation of the WACC. See our nearby Work the 
Web box for more on the WACC.
concept questions
12.4a	 How is the WACC calculated?
12.4b	 Why do we multiply the cost of debt by (1 − TC) when we compute the WACC?
12.4c	 Under what conditions is it correct to use the WACC to determine NPV?
DIVISIONAL AND PROJECT  
COSTS OF CAPITAL
As we have seen, using the WACC as the discount rate for future cash flows is only ap-
propriate when the proposed investment is similar to the firm’s existing activities. This 
is not as restrictive as it sounds. If we were in the pizza business, for example, and we 
were thinking of opening a new location, then the WACC would be the discount rate to 
use. The same would be true of a retailer thinking of a new store, a manufacturer think-
ing of expanding production, or a consumer products company thinking of expanding 
its markets.
Nonetheless, despite the usefulness of the WACC as a benchmark, there will clearly be 
situations where the cash flows under consideration have risks distinctly different from 
those of the overall firm. We consider how to cope with this problem next.
12.5

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
407
The SML and the WACC
When we are evaluating investments with risks that are substantially different from those of 
the overall firm, the use of the WACC will potentially lead to poor decisions. Figure 12.1 
illustrates why.
In Figure 12.1, we have plotted an SML corresponding to a risk-free rate of 7 percent 
and a market risk premium of 8 percent. To keep things simple, we consider an all-equity 
company with a beta of 1. As we have indicated, the WACC and the cost of equity are ex-
actly equal to 15 percent for this company because there is no debt.
Suppose our firm uses its WACC to evaluate all investments. This means that any 
investment with a return of greater than 15 percent will be accepted and any invest-
ment with a return of less than 15 percent will be rejected. We know from our study of 
risk and return, however, that a desirable investment is one that plots above the SML. 
As Figure 12.1 illustrates, using the WACC for all types of projects can result in the 
firm’s incorrectly accepting relatively risky projects and incorrectly rejecting rela-
tively safe ones.
For example, consider Point A. This project has a beta of βA = .60 compared to the 
firm’s beta of 1.0. It has an expected return of 14 percent. Is this a desirable investment? 
The answer is yes because its required return is only:
Required return = Rf + βA × (RM − Rf)
	
= 7% + .60 × 8%
	
= 11.8%
However, if we use the WACC as a cutoff, then this project will be rejected be-
cause its return is less than 15 percent. This example illustrates that a firm that uses its 
f i g u r e  12.1
The security market 
line, SML, and the 
weighted average 
cost of capital, WACC
Expected
return
16%
15%
14%
Rf 5 7%
Incorrect
rejection
A
B
Incorrect
acceptance
WACC 5 15%
5 8%
SML
bA5 .60
bﬁrm5 1.0
bB5 1.2
Beta
If a ﬁrm uses its WACC to make accept-reject decisions for all types of projects, it will
have a tendency toward incorrectly accepting risky projects and incorrectly rejecting
less risky projects.

408	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
WACC as a cutoff will tend to reject profitable projects with risks less than those of 
the overall firm.
At the other extreme, consider Point B. This project has a beta of βB = 1.2. It offers a 
16 percent return, which exceeds the firm’s cost of capital. This is not a good investment, 
however, because, given its level of systematic risk, its return is inadequate. Nonetheless, if 
we use the WACC to evaluate it, it will appear to be attractive. So the second error that will 
arise if we use the WACC as a cutoff is that we will tend to make unprofitable investments 
with risks greater than those of the overall firm. As a consequence, through time, a firm 
that uses its WACC to evaluate all projects will have a tendency to both accept unprofitable 
investments and become increasingly risky.
Divisional Cost of Capital
The same type of problem with the WACC can arise in a corporation with more than one 
line of business. Imagine, for example, a corporation that has two divisions, a regulated 
telephone company and an electronics manufacturing operation. The first of these (the 
phone operation) has relatively low risk; the second has relatively high risk.
In this case, the firm’s overall cost of capital is really a mixture of two different costs 
of capital, one for each division. If the two divisions were competing for resources, and the 
firm used a single WACC as a cutoff, which division would tend to be awarded greater 
funds for investment?
The answer is that the riskier division would tend to have greater returns (ignoring the 
greater risk), so it would tend to be the “winner.” The less glamorous operation might have 
great profit potential that would end up being ignored. Large corporations in the United 
States are aware of this problem, and many work to develop separate divisional costs of 
capital.
The Pure Play Approach
We’ve seen that using the firm’s WACC inappropriately can lead to problems. How can we 
come up with the appropriate discount rates in such circumstances? Because we cannot 
observe the returns on these investments, there generally is no direct way of coming up 
with a beta, for example. Instead, what we must do is examine other investments outside 
the firm that are in the same risk class as the one we are considering and use the market-
required returns on these investments as the discount rate. In other words, we will try to 
determine what the cost of capital is for such investments by trying to locate some similar 
investments in the marketplace.
For example, going back to our telephone division, suppose we want to come up with 
a discount rate to use for that division. What we can do is identify several other phone 
companies that have publicly traded securities. We might find that a typical phone com-
pany has a beta of .80, AA-rated debt, and a capital structure that is about 50 percent debt 
and 50 percent equity. Using this information, we could develop a WACC for a typical 
phone company and use this as our discount rate.
Alternatively, if we were thinking of entering a new line of business, we would try 
to develop the appropriate cost of capital by looking at the market-required returns on 
companies already in that business. In the language of Wall Street, a company that fo-
cuses only on a single line of business is called a pure play. For example, if you wanted 
to bet on the price of crude oil by purchasing common stocks, you would try to identify 
companies that dealt exclusively with this product since they would be the most affected 
by changes in the price of crude oil. Such companies would be called pure plays on the 
price of crude oil.

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
409
What we try to do here is to find companies that focus as exclusively as possible on the 
type of project in which we are interested. Our approach, therefore, is called the pure play 
approach to estimating the required return on an investment. To illustrate, suppose 
McDonald’s decides to enter the hotel business with a line of hotels called McRooms. The 
risks involved are quite different from those in the fast-food business. As a result, 
McDonald’s would need to look at companies already in the hotel business to compute a 
cost of capital for the new division. An obvious “pure play” candidate would be La Quinta, 
which is predominately in this line of business. Marriott may not be as good a choice as it 
operates high-end motels and resorts, residential properties, and timeshares.
In Chapter 3, we discussed the subject of identifying similar companies for com-
parison purposes. The same problems we described there come up here. The most ob-
vious one is that we may not be able to find any suitable companies. In this case, how 
to objectively determine a discount rate becomes a very difficult question. Even so, the 
important thing is to be aware of the issue so that we at least reduce the possibility of 
the kinds of mistakes that can arise when the WACC is used as a cutoff on all 
investments.
The Subjective Approach
Because of the difficulties that exist in objectively establishing discount rates for individ-
ual projects, firms often adopt an approach that involves making subjective adjustments to 
the overall WACC. To illustrate, suppose a firm has an overall WACC of 14 percent. It 
places all proposed projects into four categories as follows:
Category
Examples 
Adjustment Factor
Discount Rate
High risk
New products
   +6%
   20%
Moderate risk
Cost savings, expansion of 
existing lines
+0  
14  
Low risk
Replacement of existing 
equipment
−4  
10  
Mandatory
Pollution control equipment
n/a  
n/a 
n/a = Not applicable.
The effect of this crude partitioning is to assume that all projects either fall into one of 
three risk classes or else are mandatory. In this last case, the cost of capital is irrelevant 
since the project must be taken. Of course, the firm’s WACC may change through time as 
economic conditions change. As this happens, the discount rates for the different types of 
projects will also change.
Within each risk class, some projects will presumably have more risk than others, and 
the danger of incorrect decisions will still exist. Figure 12.2 illustrates this point. Compar-
ing Figures 12.1 and 12.2, we see that similar problems exist, but the magnitude of the 
potential error is less with the subjective approach. For example, the project labeled “A” 
would be accepted if the WACC were used, but it is rejected once it is classified as a high 
risk investment. What this illustrates is that some risk adjustment, even if it is subjective, is 
probably better than no risk adjustment.
It would be better, in principle, to objectively determine the required return for each 
project separately. However, as a practical matter, it may not be possible to go much be-
yond subjective adjustments because either the necessary information is unavailable or else 
the cost and effort required are simply not worthwhile.
pure play approach
Use of a weighted 
average cost of capital 
that is unique to a 
particular project, based 
on companies in similar 
lines of business.

410	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
COMPANY VALUATION WITH THE WACC
When valuing a company, our approach is the same as the one we used for individual 
capital projects like the warehouse renovation, but there is one issue we have to deal 
with. When we look at an entire company, we will often see an interest deduction be-
cause the company has borrowed money. But as we have consistently emphasized, inter-
est paid is a financing cost, not an operating cost. However, because interest paid is a 
tax deductible expense, a company’s tax bill is lower than it would have been had the 
company not used debt financing. We will have much more to say about this in a later 
chapter.
For now, to calculate cash flow from assets, we need to first calculate what the 
firm’s tax bill would have been if it had not used debt financing. To do that, we just take 
earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) and multiply it by the firm’s tax rate (TC) to 
get the firm’s “would-have-been” tax bill, which we will call the “adjusted” taxes and 
label Taxes*:
Taxes* = EBIT × TC	
[12.8]
12.6
f i g u r e  12.2
The security market 
line, SML, and the 
subjective approach
Expected
return
Beta
20%
WACC 5 14% 
10%
Rf 5 7%
Low risk
(24%)
Moderate risk
(10%) 
5 8%
A
With the subjective approach, the ﬁrm places projects into one of several risk classes.
The discount rate used to value the project is then determined by adding (for high risk) or
subtracting (for low risk) an adjustment factor to or from the ﬁrm’s WACC. This results in
fewer incorrect decisions than if the ﬁrm simply used the WACC to make the decisions. 
High risk
(16%)
SML
concept questions
12.5a	 What are the likely consequences if a firm uses its WACC to evaluate all proposed 
investments?
12.5b	 What is the pure play approach to determining the appropriate discount rate? When 
might it be used?

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
411
Next, we will calculate cash flow from assets the usual way, except we will use the 
adjusted taxes. We will call this the “adjusted” cash flow from assets, CFA*, which we 
calculate as:
	CFA* = EBIT + Depreciation − Taxes* − Change in NWC − Capital spending	
[12.9]
	
= EBIT + Depreciation − EBIT × TC − Change in NWC − Capital spending  
Our adjusted cash flow, CFA*, is often called “free cash flow,” but as we mentioned much 
earlier in our book, that phrase means different things to different people, so we will stick 
with CFA* to avoid confusion.
Notice that we could simplify our CFA* calculation a bit by writing it as:
CFA* = EBIT × (1 − TC) + Depreciation − Change in NWC − Capital spending     	
[12.10]
The term EBIT × (1 − TC) is just what net income would have been if the firm had used no 
debt, and the sum of the first two terms is our bottom-up definition of operating cash flow 
from Chapter 9.
At this point, if the firm is growing steadily, we can value it using our growing perpe-
tuity formula (as we did earlier in this chapter to value shares of stock when dividends 
grow steadily). For example, suppose you project CFA* for the coming year as CFA*
1 = 
$120 million. You think this amount will grow indefinitely at g = 5 percent per year. 
You’ve estimated the firm’s WACC to be 9 percent, so the value of the firm today (V0) is:
Firm value today = V0 = 
CFA*
1
WACC −g = 
$120
.09 −.05 = $3 billion
In sum, valuing a firm is no different from valuing a project, except for the fact that we 
have to adjust the taxes to remove the effect of any debt financing.
We can also consider the impact of nonconstant growth (as we did in an earlier chap-
ter on stock valuation using the dividend growth model). In this case, we assume that 
constant growth begins at Time t in the future. In that case, we can write the value of the 
firm today as:
V0 =
CFA*
1
1 + WACC +
CFA*
2
(1 + WACC)2 +
CFA*
3
(1 + WACC)3 + . . . +
CFA*
t + Vt
1 + WACC	
[12.11]
Here, Vt is value of the firm at Time t, which we again calculate using the growing 
perpetuity formula:
Vt =
CFA*
t+1
WACC −g	
[12.12]
As always, notice that the tricky part is that to get the value at Time t, we have to use the 
cash flow that occurs at the end of that period at Time t + 1. Also, the value of the firm in 
the future, Vt, is often referred to as the “terminal value.”
EXAMPLE
12.5  Valuing Feline Fancy
A guest on the popular show Great White Tank is attempting to raise money for her new company, 
Feline Fancy, which makes cat toys. The potential investor wants to value the company, which is 
privately held. Because of this, he uses the pure play approach to determine that the appropriate 
WACC for the company is 8 percent. The relevant tax rate is 35 percent.
	
Feline Fancy currently has $40 million in debt and 3.5 million shares outstanding. Sales this 
coming year are expected to be $30 million, and that amount is expected to grow at 15 percent per 
(continued)

412	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
year for the following four years. After that, sales are expected grow at 2 percent indefinitely. EBIT 
this coming year will be $10 million. EBIT, depreciation, capital spending, and the change in net 
working capital will grow at the same rate as sales. What value would you assign to Feline Fancy as 
a whole? What price per share would you assign?
	
To value the company, we begin by estimating the adjusted cash flow from assets (CFA*) for 
the next five years. The Year 1 values are the projections in millions for next year:
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
EBIT
$10.00
$11.50
$13.23
$15.21
$17.49
Depreciation
    1.50
    1.73
    1.98
   2.28
    2.62
Taxes*
    3.50
    4.03
    4.63
   5.32
    6.12
Change in NWC
      .80
      .92
    1.06
   1.22
    1.40
Capital spending
    2.40
    2.76
    3.17
   3.65
    4.20
CFA*
  $4.80
  $5.52
  $6.35
 $7.30
  $8.40
Because the CFA* will grow at 2 percent after Year 5, the terminal value of the company in Year 5 
will be:
V5 = 
$8.40(1 + .02)
.08 −.02
 = $142.72 million
We can now find the value of the company today by discounting the first five CFA* values and the 
terminal value back to the present using the WACC. Doing so, we find:
V0 = $4.80
1 + .08 +
$5.52
(1 + .08)2 +
$6.35
(1 + .08)3 +
$7.30
(1 + .08)4 + $8.40 + 142.72
(1 + .08)5
 = $122.43 million
To find the value of equity, we subtract the $40 million in debt, resulting in a total equity value of 
$82.43 million. To find the share price, we divide this by the number of shares (3.5 million), which 
gives us a share price of:
Price per share = $82.43/3.5 = $23.55
	
Another common way to calculate the terminal value is to use a target ratio, similar to the way 
we used the PE and price−sales ratios in Chapter 7. For example, suppose the potential investor 
believes the appropriate price−sales ratio when the company’s growth rate slows is 3 times. Sales 
in Year 5 are projected at $30 million × 1.154 = $52.47 million (notice that we compounded the 
$30 million forward just four years because $30 million is sales by the end of Year 1, not sales from 
last year). So, the new estimated terminal value is:
V5 = 3 × $52.47 million = $157.41 million
So, with this new terminal value, the value of the company today will be:
V0 = $4.80
1 + .08 +
$5.52
(1 + .08)2 +
$6.35
(1 + .08)3 +
$7.30
(1 + .08)4 + $8.40 + 157.41
(1 + .08)5
 = $132.43 million
See for yourself if you don’t agree that using this terminal value will result in an estimated per share 
value of $26.41.
concept questions
12.6a	 Why do we adjust a firm’s taxes when we do a firm valuation?
12.6b	 Why do you think we might prefer to use a ratio when calculating the terminal value 
when we do a firm valuation?

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
413
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has discussed cost of capital. The most important concept is the weighted 
average cost of capital, or WACC, which we interpreted as the required rate of return on the 
overall firm. It is also the discount rate appropriate for cash flows that are similar in risk to 
the overall firm. We described how the WACC can be calculated, and we illustrated how it 
can be used in certain types of analysis.
We also pointed out situations in which it is inappropriate to use the WACC as the 
discount rate. To handle such cases, we described some alternative approaches to develop-
ing discount rates, such as the pure play approach.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 12.1 What are the components used to construct the WACC?
Section 12.2 What is the required return on a stock, according to the constant divi-
dend growth model, if the growth rate is zero?
Section 12.3 What is the equation for finding the cost of preferred stock?
Section 12.4 A company has a borrowing rate of 15 percent and a tax rate of  
30 percent. What is its aftertax cost of debt?
Section 12.5 True or False: Projects should always be discounted at the firm’s over-
all cost of capital.
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
12.1	 Calculating the Cost of Equity.  Suppose stock in Boone Corporation has a beta 
of .90. The market risk premium is 7 percent, and the risk-free rate is 8 percent. 
Boone’s last dividend was $1.80 per share, and the dividend is expected to grow at 
7 percent indefinitely. The stock currently sells for $25. What is Boone’s cost of 
equity capital? (See Problem 1.)
12.2	 Calculating the WACC.  In addition to the information in the previous problem, 
suppose Boone has a target debt–equity ratio of 50 percent. Its cost of debt is  
8 percent, before taxes. If the tax rate is 34 percent, what is the WACC?  
(See Problem 10.)
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
12.1	
We start off with the SML approach. Based on the information given, the expected 
return on Boone’s common stock is:
RE = Rf + βE × (RM − Rf)
	 = 8% + .9 × 7%
	 = 14.3%

414	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
	
We now use the dividend growth model. The projected dividend is D0 × (1 + g) = 
$1.80 × 1.07 = $1.926, so the expected return using this approach is:
RE = D1/P0 + g
	
= $1.926/25 + .07
	
= 14.704%
	
Because these two estimates, 14.3 percent and 14.7 percent, are fairly close, we will 
average them. Boone’s cost of equity is approximately 14.5 percent.
12.2	 Because the target debt−equity ratio is .50, Boone uses $.50 in debt for every $1.00 
in equity. In other words, Boone’s target capital structure is 1∕3 debt and 2∕3 equity. 
The WACC is thus:
WACC = (E/V) × RE + (D/V) × RD × (1 − TC)
	
= 2∕3 × 14.5% + 1∕3 × 8% × (1 − .34)
	
= 11.427%
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 3 	 12.1	
WACC.  On the most basic level, if a firm’s WACC is 12 percent, what 
does this mean?
LO 3 	 12.2	
Book Values versus Market Values.  In calculating the WACC, if you had 
to use book values for either debt or equity, which would you choose? Why?
LO 4 	 12.3	
Project Risk.  If you can borrow all the money you need for a project at  
6 percent, doesn’t it follow that 6 percent is your cost of capital for the project?
LO 4 	 12.4	
WACC and Taxes.  Why do we use an aftertax figure for cost of debt but 
not for cost of equity?
LO 1 	 12.5	
DGM Cost of Equity Estimation.  What are the advantages of using the 
dividend growth model (DGM) for determining the cost of equity 
capital? What are the disadvantages? What specific piece of information 
do you need to find the cost of equity using this model? What are some 
of the ways in which you could get an estimate of this number?
LO 1 	 12.6	
SML Cost of Equity Estimation.  What are the advantages of using the SML 
approach to finding the cost of equity capital? What are the disadvantages? 
What are the specific pieces of information needed to use this method? Are 
all of these variables observable, or do they need to be estimated? What are 
some of the ways in which you could get these estimates?
LO 2 	 12.7	
Cost of Debt Estimation.  How do you determine the appropriate cost of 
debt for a company? Does it make a difference if the company’s debt is 
privately placed as opposed to being publicly traded? How would you 
estimate the cost of debt for a firm whose only debt issues are privately 
held by institutional investors?
LO 4 	 12.8	
Cost of Capital.  Suppose Tom O’Bedlam, president of Bedlam Products, 
Inc., has hired you to determine the firm’s cost of debt and cost of equity 
capital.
a.	
The stock currently sells for $50 per share, and the dividend per share 
will probably be about $5. Tom argues, “It will cost us $5 per share 
to use the stockholders’ money this year, so the cost of equity is equal 
to 10 percent (=$5/50).” What’s wrong with this conclusion?

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
415
b.	 Based on the most recent financial statements, Bedlam Products’ 
total liabilities are $8 million. Total interest expense for the coming 
year will be about $1 million. Tom therefore reasons, “We owe  
$8 million, and we will pay $1 million interest. Therefore, our cost 
of debt is obviously $1 million/8 million = 12.5%.” What’s wrong 
with this conclusion?
c.	
Based on his own analysis, Tom is recommending that the company 
increase its use of equity financing, because “Debt costs 12.5 percent, 
but equity only costs 10 percent; thus equity is cheaper.” Ignoring all 
the other issues, what do you think about the conclusion that the cost 
of equity is less than the cost of debt?
LO 4 	 12.9	
Company Risk versus Project Risk.  Both Dow Chemical Company, a 
large natural gas user, and Superior Oil, a major natural gas producer, 
are thinking of investing in natural gas wells near Houston. Both are 
all-equity–financed companies. Dow and Superior are looking at 
identical projects. They’ve analyzed their respective investments, which 
would involve a negative cash flow now and positive expected cash 
flows in the future. These cash flows would be the same for both firms. 
No debt would be used to finance the projects. Both companies 
estimate that their project would have a net present value of $1 million 
at an 18 percent discount rate and a −$1.1 million NPV at a 22 percent 
discount rate. Dow has a beta of 1.25, whereas Superior has a beta of 
.75. The expected risk premium on the market is 8 percent, and risk-
free bonds are yielding 12 percent. Should either company proceed? 
Should both? Explain.
LO 4 	 12.10	 Divisional Cost of Capital.  Under what circumstances would it be 
appropriate for a firm to use different costs of capital for its different 
operating divisions? If the overall firm WACC were used as the hurdle 
rate for all divisions, would the riskier divisions or the more 
conservative divisions tend to get most of the investment projects? 
Why? If you were to try to estimate the appropriate cost of capital for 
different divisions, what problems might you encounter? What are two 
techniques you could use to develop a rough estimate for each 
division’s cost of capital?
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–20)
LO 1 	 1.	 Calculating Cost of Equity.  The Giuntoli Co. just issued a dividend of 
$2.55 per share on its common stock. The company is expected to maintain 
a constant 5 percent growth rate in its dividends indefinitely. If the stock 
sells for $43 a share, what is the company’s cost of equity?
LO 1 	 2.	 Calculating Cost of Equity.  Halestorm Corporation’s common stock has a 
beta of 1.15. If the risk-free rate is 3.6 percent and the expected return on 
the market is 11 percent, what is the company’s cost of equity capital?

416	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
LO 1 	 3.	 Calculating Cost of Equity.  Stock in CDB Industries has a beta of 1.10. The 
market risk premium is 7.8 percent, and T-bills are currently yielding 3.5 percent. 
CDB’s most recent dividend was $2.35 per share, and dividends are expected 
to grow at an annual rate of 5 percent indefinitely. If the stock sells for $45 per 
share, what is your best estimate of the company’s cost of equity?
LO 1 	 4. 	 Estimating the DCF Growth Rate.  Suppose Hornsby Ltd. just issued 
a dividend of $1.65 per share on its common stock. The company paid 
dividends of $1.24, $1.33, $1.44, and $1.53 per share in the last four years. If 
the stock currently sells for $55, what is your best estimate of the company’s 
cost of equity capital using arithmetic and geometric growth rates?
LO 1 	 5.	 Calculating Cost of Preferred Stock.  Sixth Fourth Bank has an issue of 
preferred stock with a $4.20 stated dividend that just sold for $93 per share. 
What is the bank’s cost of preferred stock?
LO 2 	 6.	 Calculating Cost of Debt.  ICU Window, Inc., is trying to determine its cost 
of debt. The firm has a debt issue outstanding with seven years to maturity that 
is quoted at 96 percent of face value. The issue makes semiannual payments and 
has an embedded cost of 4.9 percent annually. What is the company’s pretax 
cost of debt? If the tax rate is 38 percent, what is the aftertax cost of debt?
LO 2 	 7.	 Calculating Cost of Debt.  Jiminy’s Cricket Farm issued a 30-year, 
6.3 percent semiannual bond 8 years ago. The bond currently sells for 
107 percent of its face value. The company’s tax rate is 35 percent.
a.	
What is the pretax cost of debt?
b.	 What is the aftertax cost of debt?
c.	
Which is more relevant, the pretax or the aftertax cost of debt? Why?
LO 2 	 8. 	 Calculating Cost of Debt.  For the firm in Problem 7, suppose the book value 
of the debt issue is $145 million. In addition, the company has a second debt 
issue, a zero coupon bond with 9 years left to maturity; the book value of this 
issue is $75 million, and it sells for 67.4 percent of par. What is the total book 
value of debt? The total market value? What is the aftertax cost of debt now?
LO 3 	 9.	 Calculating WACC.  Bargeron Corporation has a target capital structure of 
75 percent common stock, 5 percent preferred stock, and 20 percent debt. Its 
cost of equity is 10.9 percent, the cost of preferred stock is 5.1 percent, and 
the pretax cost of debt is 5.8 percent. The relevant tax rate is 35 percent.
a.	
What is the company’s WACC?
b.	 The company president has approached you about the company’s 
capital structure. He wants to know why the company doesn’t use more 
preferred stock financing, since it costs less than debt. What would you 
tell the president?
LO 3 	 10.	Taxes and WACC.  Tulloch Manufacturing has a target debt–equity ratio  
of .45. Its cost of equity is 10.3 percent, and its pretax cost of debt is  
6.4 percent. If the tax rate is 35 percent, what is the company’s WACC?
LO 3 	 11.	 Finding the Target Capital Structure.  Fama’s Llamas has a WACC of  
8.65 percent. The company’s cost of equity is 10.4 percent, and its pretax 
cost of debt is 5.3 percent. The tax rate is 35 percent. What is the company’s 
target debt–equity ratio?
LO 4 	 12.	Book Value versus Market Value.  Bonaime, Inc., has 3.9 million shares 
of common stock outstanding. The current share price is $84, and the book 
value per share is $11. The company also has two bond issues outstanding. 

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
417
The first bond issue has a face value of $65 million, a coupon rate of 
6.3 percent, and sells for 98 percent of par. The second issue has a face 
value of $50 million, a coupon rate of 5.8 percent, and sells for 97 percent 
of par. The first issue matures in 20 years, the second in 12 years.
a.	
What are the company’s capital structure weights on a book value basis?
b.	 What are the company’s capital structure weights on a market value basis?
c.	
Which are more relevant, the book or market value weights? Why?
LO 3 	 13.	 Calculating the WACC.  In Problem 12, suppose the most recent dividend 
was $3.85 and the dividend growth rate is 5 percent. Assume that the overall 
cost of debt is the weighted average of that implied by the two outstanding 
debt issues. Both bonds make semiannual payments. The tax rate is 
35 percent. What is the company’s WACC?
LO 3 	 14.	WACC.  Clifford, Inc., has a target debt–equity ratio of .85. Its WACC is 
8.1 percent, and the tax rate is 35 percent.
a.	
If the company’s cost of equity is 11 percent, what is its pretax cost of debt?
b.	 If the aftertax cost of debt is 3.8 percent, what is the cost of equity?
LO 3 	 15. 	Finding the WACC.  Given the following information for Gerken Power 
Co., find the WACC. Assume the company’s tax rate is 35 percent.
Debt:	
15,500 6.4 percent coupon bonds outstanding, $1,000 
par value, 25 years to maturity, selling for 108 percent 
of par; the bonds make semiannual payments.
Common stock:	
495,000 shares outstanding, selling for $81 per share; 
beta is 1.20.
Preferred stock:	
20,000 shares of 4.2 percent preferred stock 
outstanding, currently selling for $92 per share.
Market:	
7 percent market risk premium and 3.1 percent risk-
free rate.
LO 3 	 16.	Finding the WACC.  Hankins Corporation has 5.4 million shares of 
common stock outstanding, 290,000 shares of 5.6 percent preferred stock 
outstanding, and 125,000 of 6.7 percent semiannual bonds outstanding, par 
value $1,000 each. The common stock currently sells for $64 per share and 
has a beta of 1.13, the preferred stock currently sells for $103 per share, 
and the bonds have 20 years to maturity and sell for 109 percent of par. The 
market risk premium is 6.8 percent, T-bills are yielding 4.3 percent, and the 
firm’s tax rate is 34 percent.
a.	
What is the firm’s market value capital structure?
b.	 If the firm is evaluating a new investment project that has the same risk 
as the firm’s typical project, what rate should the firm use to discount 
the project’s cash flows?
LO 4 	 17.	 SML and WACC.  An all-equity firm is considering the following projects:
Project
Beta
IRR
W
    .80
   9.3%
X
    .90
10.6  
Y
1.10
11.4  
Z
1.35
14.1 

418	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
	
  	 The T-bill rate is 4 percent, and the expected return on the market is 
11 percent.
a.	
Which projects have a higher expected return than the firm’s 11 percent 
cost of capital?
b.	 Which projects should be accepted?
c.	
Which projects will be incorrectly accepted or rejected if the firm’s 
overall cost of capital were used as a hurdle rate?
LO 3 	 18.	Calculating the WACC.  You are given the following information 
concerning Parrothead Enterprises:
Debt:	
13,000 6.2 percent coupon bonds outstanding, with 
15 years to maturity and a quoted price of 107. These 
bonds pay interest semiannually.
Common stock:	
345,000 shares of common stock selling for $73.50 
per share. The stock has a beta of .90 and will pay a 
dividend of $3.35 next year. The dividend is expected 
to grow by 5 percent per year indefinitely.
Preferred stock:	
10,000 shares of 4.1 percent preferred stock selling at 
$86 per share.
Market:	
12 percent expected return, risk-free rate of 
3.5 percent, and a 35 percent tax rate.
  	
	
Calculate the WACC for Parrothead Enterprises.
LO 3 	 19. 	Calculating Capital Structure Weights.  Liu Industrial Machines issued 
175,000 zero coupon bonds four years ago. The bonds originally had 
30 years to maturity with a yield to maturity of 6.1 percent. Interest 
rates have recently decreased, and the bonds now have a yield to 
maturity of 5.9 percent. If the company has a $68 million market value 
of equity, what weight should it use for debt when calculating the cost 
of capital?
LO 3 	 20.	Calculating the WACC.  Gnomes R Us is considering a new project. The 
company has a debt–equity ratio of .48. The company’s cost of equity is 
11.8 percent, and the aftertax cost of debt is 5.6 percent. The firm feels that 
the project is riskier than the company as a whole and that it should use an 
adjustment factor of +3 percent. What is the WACC it should use for the 
project?
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 21–26)
LO 4 	 21.	WACC and NPV.  Hankins, Inc., is considering a project that will result in 
initial aftertax cash savings of $4.2 million at the end of the first year, and 
these savings will grow at a rate of 1.9 percent per year indefinitely. The 
firm has a target debt–equity ratio of .25, a cost of equity of 10.4 percent, 
and an aftertax cost of debt of 3.2 percent. The cost-saving proposal is 
somewhat riskier than the usual project the firm undertakes; management 
uses the subjective approach and applies an adjustment factor of +2 percent 
to the cost of capital for such risky projects. Under what circumstances 
should the company take on the project?
LO 2 	 22.	Calculating the Cost of Debt.  Ying Import has several bond issues 
outstanding, each making semiannual interest payments. The bonds are 

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
419
listed in the table below. If the corporate tax rate is 34 percent, what is the 
aftertax cost of the company’s debt?
Bond
Coupon Rate
Price Quote
Maturity
Face Value
1
   6.5%
105.0
      5 years
$30,000,000
2
5.3  
    95.4
       8 years 
  50,000,000
3
6.9  
103.8
15½ years
  65,000,000
4
7.3  
105.7
      25 years  
  85,000,000
LO 1 	 23.	Calculating the Cost of Equity.  Pierce Industries stock has a beta of 1.08. 
The company just paid a dividend of $1.05, and the dividends are expected 
to grow at 4 percent. The expected return on the market is 10.9 percent, and 
Treasury bills are yielding 3.8 percent. The most recent stock price is $83.
a.	
Calculate the cost of equity using the dividend growth model method.
b.	 Calculate the cost of equity using the SML method.
c.	
Why do you think your estimates in (a) and (b) are so different?
LO 3 	 24.	Adjusted Cash Flow from Assets.  Ward Corp. is expected to have an 
EBIT of $1.9 million next year. Depreciation, the increase in net working 
capital, and capital spending are expected to be $165,000, $85,000, and 
$115,000, respectively. All are expected to grow at 18 percent per year for 
four years. The company currently has $13 million in debt and 800,000 
shares outstanding. After Year 5, the adjusted cash flow from assets is 
expected to grow at 3 percent indefinitely. The company’s WACC is  
8.5 percent and the tax rate is 35 percent. What is the price per share of 
the company’s stock?
LO 3 	 25.	Adjusted Cash Flow from Assets.  In the previous problem, instead of 
a perpetual growth rate in adjusted cash flow from assets, you decide to 
calculate the terminal value of the company with the price–sales ratio. You 
believe that Year 5 sales will be $9.5 million and the appropriate price–sales 
ratio is 3.5. What is your new estimate of the current share price?
LO 3 	 26.	Adjusted Cash Flow from Assets.  You have looked at the current financial 
statements for Reigle Homes, Co. The company has an EBIT of $2.95 million 
this year. Depreciation, the increase in net working capital, and capital 
spending were $235,000, $105,000, and $475,000, respectively. You 
expect that over the next five years, EBIT will grow at 15 percent per year, 
depreciation and capital spending will grow at 20 percent per year, and 
NWC will grow at 10 percent per year. The company has $19.5 million in 
debt and 400,000 shares outstanding. After Year 5, the adjusted cash flow 
from assets is expected to grow at 3.5 percent indefinitely. The company’s 
WACC is 9.25 percent, and the tax rate is 35 percent. What is the price per 
share of the company’s stock?
CHALLENGE (Questions 27–28)
LO 3 	 27.	WACC and NPV.  Photochronograph Corporation (PC) manufactures time 
series photographic equipment. It is currently at its target debt–equity ratio 
of .45. It’s considering building a new $37 million manufacturing facility. 
This new plant is expected to generate aftertax cash flows of $5.1 million in 
perpetuity. There are three financing options:

420	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
a.	
A new issue of common stock: The required return on the company’s 
new equity is 15 percent.
b.	 A new issue of 20-year bonds: If the company issues these new bonds 
at an annual coupon rate of 7 percent, they will sell at par.
c.	
Increased use of accounts payable financing: Because this financing is 
part of the company’s ongoing daily business, the company assigns it a 
cost that is the same as the overall firm WACC. Management has a 
target ratio of accounts payable to long-term debt of .15. (Assume there 
is no difference between the pretax and aftertax accounts payable cost.)
  	
	
What is the NPV of the new plant? Assume that the company has a 35 percent 
tax rate.
LO 3 	 28.	Project Evaluation.  This is a comprehensive project evaluation problem 
bringing together much of what you have learned in this and previous 
chapters. Suppose you have been hired as a financial consultant to Defense 
Electronics, Inc. (DEI), a large, publicly traded firm that is the market 
share leader in radar detection systems (RDSs). The company is looking at 
setting up a manufacturing plant overseas to produce a new line of RDSs. 
This will be a five-year project. The company bought some land three 
years ago for $4.5 million in anticipation of using it as a toxic dump site for 
waste chemicals, but it built a piping system to safely discard the chemicals 
instead. If the land were sold today, the net proceeds would be $5 million 
after taxes. In five years, the land will be worth $5.3 million after taxes. 
The company wants to build its new manufacturing plant on this land; the 
plant will cost $19.5 million to build. The following market data on DEI’s 
securities are current:
Debt:	
60,000 6.2 percent coupon bonds outstanding,  
25 years to maturity, selling for 95 percent of par; the 
bonds have a $1,000 par value each and make 
semiannual payments.
Common stock:	
1,250,000 shares outstanding, selling for $97 per 
share; the beta is 1.15.
Preferred stock:	
90,000 shares of 5.8 percent preferred stock 
outstanding, selling for $95 per share.
Market:	
7 percent expected market risk premium; 3.8 percent 
risk-free rate.
  	
	
DEI’s tax rate is 34 percent. The project requires $825,000 in initial net 
working capital investment to get operational.
a.	
Calculate the project’s Time 0 cash flow, taking into account all side 
effects.
b.	 The new RDS project is somewhat riskier than a typical project for 
DEI, primarily because the plant is being located overseas. 
Management has told you to use an adjustment factor of +2 percent to 
account for this increased riskiness. Calculate the appropriate discount 
rate to use when evaluating DEI’s project.
c.	
The manufacturing plant has an eight-year tax life, and DEI uses 
straight-line depreciation. At the end of the project (i.e., the end of 
Year 5), the plant can be scrapped for $2.1 million. What is the aftertax 
salvage value of this manufacturing plant?

	
c h a p t e r  1 2
Cost of Capital	
421
d.	 The company will incur $3,500,000 in annual fixed costs. The plan is to 
manufacture 13,000 RDSs per year and sell them at $10,800 per 
machine; the variable production costs are $9,900 per RDS. What is the 
annual operating cash flow, OCF, from this project?
e.	
Finally, DEI’s president wants you to throw all your calculations, all 
your assumptions, and everything else into a report for the chief 
financial officer; all he wants to know is what the RDS project’s 
internal rate of return, IRR, and net present value, NPV, are. What will 
you report?
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
12.1 Cost of Equity.  Go to finance.yahoo.com and look up the information for Allegheny 
Technologies (ATI), a metal manufacturing company in the S&P 500. You want to 
estimate the cost of equity for the company. First, find the current Treasury bill rate. 
Next, find the beta for Allegheny Technologies. Using the historical market risk 
premium, what is the estimated cost of equity for ATI using the CAPM? Now find the 
analysts’ growth rate estimates for the next five years for the company. Using this 
growth rate in the dividend growth model, what is the estimated cost of equity? Now 
find the dividends paid by the company over the past five years and calculate the 
arithmetic and geometric growth rates in dividends. Using these growth rates, what is 
the estimated cost of equity? Looking at these four estimates, what cost of equity would 
you use for the company?
12.2 Cost of Debt.  Go to finra-markets.morningstar.com/BondCenter/ and look up the 
outstanding bonds for Nike. Record the most recent price and YTM of each bond issue. 
Now go to www.sec.gov and find the most recent 10Q or 10K report filed by the 
company and find the book value of each bond issue. Assuming Nike’s tax rate is 
38 percent, what is the cost of debt using book value weights? What is the cost of debt 
using market value weights? Which of these numbers is more relevant?
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
You want to calculate the WACC for auto parts retailer AutoZone (AZO). Complete the 
following steps to construct a spreadsheet that can be updated.
a.	
Using an input for the ticker symbol, create hyperlinks to the web pages that you will 
need to find all of the information necessary to calculate the cost of equity. Use a 
market risk premium of seven percent when using CAPM.
b.	 Create hyperlinks to go to the FINRA bond quote website and the SEC EDGAR 
database and find the information for the company’s bonds. Create a table that 
calculates the cost of debt for the company. Assume the tax rate is 35 percent.
c.	
Finally, calculate the market value weights for debt and equity. What is the WACC 
for AutoZone?

422	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
CHAPTER CASE
Cost of Capital for Layton Motors
Y
ou have recently been hired by Layton Motors, Inc. 
(LMI), in its relatively new treasury management de-
partment. LMI was founded eight years ago by Rachel 
Layton. Rachel found a method to manufacture a 
cheaper battery that will hold a larger charge, giving a 
car powered by the battery a range of 700 miles before 
requiring a recharge. The cars manufactured by LMI are 
midsized and carry a price that allows the company to 
compete with other mainstream auto manufacturers. 
The company is privately owned by Rachel and her fam-
ily, and it had sales of $197 million last year.
	
LMI primarily sells to customers who buy the cars on-
line, although it does have a limited number of company-
owned dealerships. The customer selects any 
customization and makes a deposit of 20 percent of the 
purchase price. After the order is taken, the car is made 
to order, typically within 45 days. LMI’s growth to date has 
come from its profits. When the company had sufficient 
capital, it would expand production. Relatively little formal 
analysis has been used in its capital budgeting process. 
Rachel has just read about capital budgeting techniques 
and has come to you for help. For starters, the company 
has never attempted to determine its cost of capital, and 
Rachel would like you to perform the analysis. Because 
the company is privately owned, it is difficult to determine 
the cost of equity for the company. Rachel wants you to 
use the pure play approach to estimate the cost of capital 
for LMI, and she has chosen Tesla Motors as a represen-
tative company. The following questions will lead you 
through the steps to calculate this estimate.
Q U E ST I ONS
1.	
Most publicly traded corporations are required to 
submit quarterly (10Q) and annual reports (10K) to 
the SEC detailing the financial operations of the 
company over the past quarter or year, respec-
tively. These corporate filings are available on the 
SEC website at www.sec.gov. Go to the SEC web-
site, follow the “Search EDGAR for Company Fil-
ings” link, and search for SEC filings made by 
Tesla Motors (TSLA). Find the most recent 10Q or 
10K, and download the form. Look on the balance 
sheet to find the book value of debt and the book 
value of equity.
2.	
To estimate the cost of equity for TSLA, go to  
finance.yahoo.com and enter the ticker symbol 
TSLA. Follow the links to answer the following 
questions: What is the most recent stock price 
listed for TSLA? What is the market value of equity, 
or market capitalization? How many shares of 
stock does TSLA have outstanding? What is the 
most recent annual dividend? Can you use the divi-
dend discount model in this case? What is the beta 
for TSLA? Now go back to finance.yahoo.com and 
follow the “Bonds” link. What is the yield on 
three-month Treasury bills? Using the historical 
market risk premium, what is the cost of equity for 
TSLA using CAPM?
3.	
You now need to calculate the cost of debt for 
TSLA. Go to finra-markets.morningstar.com 
/BondCenter/, enter TSLA as the company, and 
find the yield to maturity for each of TSLA’s bonds. 
What is the weighted average cost of debt for 
TSLA using the book value weights and using the 
market value weights? Does it make a difference 
in this case if you use book value weights or mar-
ket value weights?
4.	
You now have all the necessary information to cal-
culate the weighted average cost of capital for 
TSLA. Calculate this using book value weights 
and market value weights, assuming TSLA has a 
35 percent marginal tax rate. Which number is 
more relevant?
5.	
You used TSLA as a pure play company to esti-
mate the cost of capital for LMI. Are there any po-
tential problems with this approach in this 
situation?

423
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
M
arch 2014 was a tough month for fast food. First, on March 10, 
mall and airport pizza company Sbarro announced that it was 
filing for bankruptcy. The company stated that foot traffic in malls 
had dropped in recent years. Actually, this filing was Sbarro’s sec-
ond bankruptcy in three years. It had previously filed in April 2011 
and emerged from that bankruptcy in November 2011. Also in March 
2014, sub chain Quiznos announced that it would be toast without a 
bankruptcy filing. At one point, the company had more than 5,000 
restaurants, but as rival Subway grew, the number of Quiznos stores 
dropped to 2,100. Women’s clothing retailers also faced problems in 
2014 as both Coldwater Creek and Dots were forced to file for 
bankruptcy.
A firm’s choice of how much debt it should have relative to equity is known as a capital 
structure decision. Such a choice has many implications for a firm and is far from being a 
settled issue in either theory or practice. In this chapter, we discuss the basic ideas underly-
ing capital structures and how firms choose them.
A firm’s capital structure is really just a reflection of its borrowing policy. Should we bor-
row a lot of money or just a little? At first glance, it probably seems that debt is something to 
be avoided. After all, the more debt a firm has, the greater is the risk of bankruptcy. What we 
learn is that debt is really a double-edged sword, and, properly used, debt can be enor-
mously beneficial to the firm.
A good understanding of the effects of debt financing is important simply because the 
role of debt is so misunderstood, and many firms (and individuals) are far too conservative in 
their use of debt. Having said this, we can also say that firms sometimes err in the opposite 
direction, becoming much too heavily indebted, with bankruptcy as the unfortunate conse-
quence. Striking the right balance is what the capital structure issue is all about.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Discuss the effect of financial 
leverage.
LO 2 	 Analyze the impact of taxes and 
bankruptcy on capital structure 
choice.
LO 3 	 Identify the essentials of the 
bankruptcy process.
Leverage and  
Capital Structure
13

424	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
T
hus far, we have taken the firm’s capital structure as given. Debt–equity ratios don’t 
just drop on firms from the sky, of course, so now it’s time to wonder where they do 
come from. Going back to Chapter 1, we call decisions about a firm’s debt–equity ratio 
capital structure decisions.1
For the most part, a firm can choose any capital structure that it wants. If management 
so desired, a firm could issue some bonds and use the proceeds to buy back some stock, 
thereby increasing the debt–equity ratio. Alternatively, it could issue stock and use the 
money to pay off some debt, thereby reducing the debt–equity ratio. Activities such as 
these that alter the firm’s existing capital structure are called capital restructurings. In 
general, such restructurings take place whenever the firm substitutes one capital structure 
for another while leaving the firm’s assets unchanged.
Because the assets of a firm are not directly affected by a capital restructuring, we can 
examine the firm’s capital structure decision separately from its other activities. This 
means that a firm can consider capital restructuring decisions in isolation from its invest-
ment decisions. In this chapter, then, we will ignore investment decisions and focus on the 
long-term financing, or capital structure, question.
What we will see in this chapter is that capital structure decisions can have important 
implications for the value of the firm and its cost of capital. We will also find that impor-
tant elements of the capital structure decision are easy to identify, but precise measures of 
these elements are generally not obtainable. As a result, we are only able to give an incom-
plete answer to the question of what the best capital structure might be for a particular firm 
at a particular time.
THE CAPITAL STRUCTURE QUESTION
How should a firm go about choosing its debt–equity ratio? Here, as always, we assume 
that the guiding principle is to choose the course of action that maximizes the value of a 
share of stock. However, when it comes to capital structure decisions, this is essentially the 
same thing as maximizing the value of the whole firm, and, for convenience, we will tend 
to frame our discussion in terms of firm value.
In Chapter 12, we discussed the concept of the firm’s weighted average cost of capi-
tal, or WACC. You may recall that the WACC tells us that the firm’s overall cost of capi-
tal is a weighted average of the costs of the various components of the firm’s capital 
structure. When we described the WACC, we took the firm’s capital structure as given. 
Thus, one important issue that we will want to explore in this chapter is what happens to 
the cost of capital when we vary the amount of debt financing, or the debt–equity ratio.
A primary reason for studying the WACC is that the value of the firm is maximized 
when the WACC is minimized. To see this, recall that the WACC is the discount rate ap-
propriate for the firm’s overall cash flows. Because values and discount rates move in op-
posite directions, minimizing the WACC will maximize the value of the firm’s cash flows.
Thus, we will want to choose the firm’s capital structure so that the WACC is mini-
mized. For this reason, we will say that one capital structure is better than another if it results 
in a lower weighted average cost of capital. Further, we say that a particular debt–equity ratio 
represents the optimal capital structure if it results in the lowest possible WACC. This opti-
mal capital structure is sometimes called the firm’s target capital structure as well.
13.1
1 It is conventional to refer to decisions regarding debt and equity as capital structure decisions. However, the 
term financial structure would be more accurate, and we use the terms interchangeably.

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
425
THE EFFECT OF FINANCIAL LEVERAGE
In this section, we examine the impact of financial leverage on the payoffs to stockholders. 
As you may recall, financial leverage refers to the extent to which a firm relies on debt. The 
more debt financing a firm uses in its capital structure, the more financial leverage it 
employs. 
As we describe, financial leverage can dramatically alter the payoffs to shareholders in 
the firm. Remarkably, however, financial leverage may not affect the overall cost of capital. 
If this is true, then a firm’s capital structure is irrelevant because changes in capital struc-
ture won’t affect the value of the firm. We return to this issue a little later.
The Impact of Financial Leverage
We start by illustrating how financial leverage works. For now, we ignore the impact of 
taxes. Also, for ease of presentation, we describe the impact of leverage in terms of its ef-
fects on earnings per share, EPS, and return on equity, ROE. These are, of course, account-
ing numbers and, as such, are not our primary concern. Using cash flows instead of these 
accounting numbers would lead to precisely the same conclusions, but a little more work 
would be needed. We discuss the impact of leverage on market values in a subsequent 
section.
Financial Leverage, EPS, and ROE: An Example 
The Trans Am Corporation 
currently has no debt in its capital structure. The CFO, Ms. Morris, is considering a re-
structuring that would involve issuing debt and using the proceeds to buy back some of the 
outstanding equity. Table 13.1 presents both the current and proposed capital structures. As 
shown, the firm’s assets have a market value of $8 million, and there are 400,000 shares 
outstanding. Because Trans Am is an all-equity firm, the price per share is $20.
The proposed debt issue would raise $4 million; the interest rate would be 10 percent. 
The stock sells for $20 per share, so the $4 million in new debt would be used to purchase 
$4 million/20 = 200,000 shares, leaving 200,000 outstanding. After the restructuring, 
Trans Am would have a capital structure that was 50 percent debt, so the debt–equity ratio 
would be 1. Notice that, for now, we assume that the stock price will remain at $20.
13.2
coverage online
Excel 
Master
concept questions
13.1a	
What is the relationship between the WACC and the value of the firm?
13.1b	
What is an optimal capital structure?
ta b l e  13.1
Current and 
proposed capital 
structures for the 
Trans Am 
Corporation
Current
Proposed
Assets
 $8,000,000   
$8,000,000  
Debt
 $                   0   
$4,000,000  
Equity
$8,000,000   
$4,000,000  
Debt–equity ratio
                 0   
                1  
Share price
$20  
$20  
Shares outstanding
       400,000   
      200,000  
Interest rate
                10%
               10%

426	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
To investigate the impact of the proposed restructuring, Ms. Morris has prepared 
Table 13.2, which compares the firm’s current capital structure to the proposed capital 
structure under three scenarios. The scenarios reflect different assumptions about the 
firm’s EBIT. Under the expected scenario, EBIT is $1 million. In the recession scenario, 
EBIT falls to $500,000. In the expansion scenario, it rises to $1.5 million.
To illustrate some of the calculations in Table 13.2, consider the expansion case. EBIT 
is $1.5 million. With no debt (the current capital structure) and no taxes, net income is also 
$1.5 million. In this case, there are 400,000 shares worth $8 million total. EPS is therefore 
$1.5 million/400,000 = $3.75 per share. Also, because accounting return on equity, ROE, 
is net income divided by total equity, ROE is $1.5 million/8 million = 18.75 percent.2
With $4 million in debt (the proposed capital structure), things are somewhat dif-
ferent. Because the interest rate is 10 percent, the interest bill is $400,000. With EBIT of 
$1.5 million, interest of $400,000, and no taxes, net income is $1.1 million. Now there are 
only 200,000 shares worth $4 million total. EPS is therefore $1.1 million/200,000 = $5.5 
per share versus the $3.75 per share that we calculated above. Furthermore, ROE is $1.1 
million/4 million = 27.5 percent. This is well above the 18.75 percent we calculated for the 
current capital structure.
EPS versus EBIT 
The impact of leverage is evident in Table 13.2 when the effect of 
the restructuring on EPS and ROE is examined. In particular, the variability in both EPS 
and ROE is much larger under the proposed capital structure. This illustrates how financial 
leverage acts to magnify gains and losses to shareholders.
In Figure 13.1, we take a closer look at the effect of the proposed restructuring. This 
figure plots earnings per share, EPS, against earnings before interest and taxes, EBIT, for 
the current and proposed capital structures. The first line, labeled “No debt,” represents the 
case of no leverage. This line begins at the origin, indicating that EPS would be zero if 
EBIT were zero. From there, every $400,000 increase in EBIT increases EPS by $1 (be-
cause there are 400,000 shares outstanding).
ta b l e  13.2
Capital structure 
scenarios for the 
Trans Am 
Corporation
CURRENT CAPITAL STRUCTURE: NO DEBT
Recession
Expected
Expansion
EBIT
$500,000
$1,000,000
$1,500,000
Interest
               0
                0
                 0
Net income
 $500,000
  $1,000,000 
  $1,500,000   
ROE
6.25%
            12.50%
              18.75%
EPS
 $1.25
 $2.50 
  $3.75 
PROPOSED CAPITAL STRUCTURE: DEBT = $4 MILLION
Recession
Expected
Expansion
EBIT
$500,000
$1,000,000
$1,500,000
Interest
  400,000
        400,000
     400,000
Net income
$100,000
$       600,000
$1,100,000
ROE
           2.50%
            15.00%
            27.50%
EPS
$.50
$3.00
$5.50
2 ROE is discussed in some detail in Chapter 3.

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
427
The second line represents the proposed capital structure. Here, EPS is negative if 
EBIT is zero. This follows because $400,000 of interest must be paid regardless of the 
firm’s profits. Because there are 200,000 shares in this case, EPS is −$2 per share as 
shown. Similarly, if EBIT were $400,000, EPS would be exactly zero.
The important thing to notice in Figure 13.1 is that the slope of the line in this second 
case is steeper. In fact, for every $400,000 increase in EBIT, EPS rises by $2, so the line is 
twice as steep. This tells us that EPS is twice as sensitive to changes in EBIT because of 
the financial leverage employed.
Another observation to make in Figure 13.1 is that the lines intersect. At that point, 
EPS is exactly the same for both capital structures. To find this point, note that EPS is 
equal to EBIT/400,000 in the no-debt case. In the with-debt case, EPS is (EBIT − 
$400,000)/200,000. If we set these equal to each other, EBIT is:
EBIT/400,000 = (EBIT − $400,000)/200,000
	
EBIT = 2 × (EBIT − $400,000)
	
EBIT = $800,000
When EBIT is $800,000, EPS is $2 per share under either capital structure. This is 
labeled as the break-even point in Figure 13.1; we could also call it the indifference point. 
If EBIT is above this level, leverage is beneficial; if it is below this point, it is not.
There is another, more intuitive, way of seeing why the break-even point is $800,000. 
Notice that, if the firm has no debt and its EBIT is $800,000, its net income is also 
$800,000. In this case, the ROE is $800,000/8,000,000 = 10%. This is precisely the same 
as the interest rate on the debt, so the firm earns a return that is just sufficient to pay the 
interest.
f i g u r e  13.1
Financial leverage: 
EPS and EBIT for the 
Trans Am 
Corporation
Earnings before
interest and
taxes ($)
Advantage
to debt
Disadvantage
to debt
Break-even point
1,200,000
400,000
800,000
With debt
4
3
2
1
0
21
22
No debt
Earnings per
share ($)

428	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
Corporate Borrowing and Homemade Leverage
Based on Tables 13.1 and 13.2 and Figure 13.1, Ms. Morris draws the following 
conclusions:
  1.	 The effect of financial leverage depends on the company’s EBIT. When EBIT is 
relatively high, leverage is beneficial.
  2.	 Under the expected scenario, leverage increases the returns to shareholders, as 
measured by both ROE and EPS.
  3.	 Shareholders are exposed to more risk under the proposed capital structure because 
the EPS and ROE are much more sensitive to changes in EBIT in this case.
  4.	 Because of the impact that financial leverage has on both the expected return to 
stockholders and the riskiness of the stock, capital structure is an important 
consideration.
The first three of these conclusions are clearly correct. Does the last conclusion nec-
essarily follow? Surprisingly, the answer is no. As we discuss next, the reason is that 
shareholders can adjust the amount of financial leverage by borrowing and lending on 
their own. This use of personal borrowing to alter the degree of financial leverage is 
called homemade leverage.
We will now illustrate that it actually makes no difference whether or not Trans Am 
adopts the proposed capital structure because any stockholder who prefers the proposed 
capital structure can simply create it using homemade leverage. To begin, the first part 
of Table 13.3 shows what will happen to an investor who buys $2,000 worth of Trans 
Am stock if the proposed capital structure is adopted. This investor purchases 100 
shares of stock. From Table 13.2, EPS will either be $.50, $3, or $5.50, so the total 
earnings for 100 shares will either be $50, $300, or $550 under the proposed capital 
structure.
Now, suppose Trans Am does not adopt the proposed capital structure. In this case, 
EPS will be $1.25, $2.50, or $3.75. The second part of Table 13.3 demonstrates how a 
stockholder who prefers the payoffs under the proposed structure can create them using 
homemade leverage
The use of personal 
borrowing to change the 
overall amount of financial 
leverage to which an 
individual is exposed.
EXAMPLE
13.1  Break-Even EBIT
The MPD Corporation has decided in favor of a capital restructuring. Currently, MPD uses no debt 
financing. Following the restructuring, however, debt will be $1 million. The interest rate on the debt 
will be 9 percent. MPD currently has 200,000 shares outstanding, and the price per share is $20. If 
the restructuring is expected to increase EPS, what is the minimum level for EBIT that MPD’s man-
agement must be expecting? Ignore taxes in answering.
	
To answer, we calculate the break-even EBIT. At any EBIT above this, the increased financial lever-
age will increase EPS, so this will tell us the minimum level for EBIT. Under the old capital structure, EPS 
is simply EBIT/200,000. Under the new capital structure, the interest expense will be $1 million × .09 = 
$90,000. Furthermore, with the $1 million proceeds, MPD will repurchase $1 million/20 = 50,000 shares 
of stock, leaving 150,000 outstanding. EPS is thus (EBIT – $90,000)/150,000.
	
Now that we know how to calculate EPS under both scenarios, we set the two expressions for 
EPS equal to each other and solve for the break-even EBIT:
EBIT/200,000 = (EBIT − $90,000)/150,000
	
EBIT = (⁴/₃) × (EBIT − $90,000)
	
EBIT = $360,000
Verify that, in either case, EPS is $1.80 when EBIT is $360,000. Management at MPD is apparently of 
the opinion that EPS will exceed $1.80.

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
429
personal borrowing. To do this, the stockholder borrows $2,000 at 10 percent on his or her 
own. Our investor uses this amount, along with the original $2,000, to buy 200 shares of 
stock. As shown, the net payoffs are exactly the same as those for the proposed capital 
structure.
How did we know to borrow $2,000 to create the right payoffs? We are trying to rep-
licate Trans Am’s proposed capital structure at the personal level. The proposed capital 
structure results in a debt–equity ratio of 1. To replicate this capital structure at the per-
sonal level, the stockholder must borrow enough to create this same debt–equity ratio. 
Because the stockholder has $2,000 in equity invested, borrowing another $2,000 will cre-
ate a personal debt–equity ratio of 1.
This example demonstrates that investors can always increase financial leverage them-
selves to create a different pattern of payoffs. It thus makes no difference whether or not 
Trans Am chooses the proposed capital structure.
ta b l e  13.3
Proposed capital 
structure versus 
original capital 
structure with 
homemade leverage
PROPOSED CAPITAL STRUCTURE
Recession
Expected
Expansion
EPS
$       .50
 $      3.00
$       5.50
Earnings for 100 shares
   50.00
   300.00
  550.00
Net cost = 100 shares at $20 = $2,000
ORIGINAL CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND HOMEMADE LEVERAGE
Recession
Expected
Expansion
EPS
$     1.25
 $    2.50
$     3.75
Earnings for 200 shares
250.00
   500.00
  750.00
Less: Interest on $2,000 at 10%
  200.00
    200.00
  200.00
Net earnings
$  50.00
 $300.00
$550.00
Net cost = 200 shares at $20 − Amount borrowed = $4,000 − 2,000 = $2,000
EXAMPLE
13.2  Unlevering the Stock
In our Trans Am example, suppose management adopted the proposed capital structure. Further, 
suppose that an investor who owned 100 shares preferred the original capital structure. Show how 
this investor could “unlever” the stock to recreate the original payoffs.
	
To create leverage, investors borrow on their own. To undo leverage, investors must loan out 
money. For Trans Am, the corporation borrowed an amount equal to half its value. The investor can 
unlever the stock by simply loaning out money in the same proportion. In this case, the investor 
sells 50 shares for $1,000 total and then loans out the $1,000 at 10 percent. The payoffs are calcu-
lated in the following table.
Recession
Expected
Expansion
EPS (proposed structure)
$           .50
$    3.00
$       5.50
Earnings for 50 shares
    25.00
  150.00
  275.00
Plus: Interest on $1,000 @ 10%
  100.00
  100.00
   100.00
Total payoff
$125.00
$250.00
$375.00
These are precisely the payoffs the investor would have experienced under the original capital 
structure.

430	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND THE COST  
OF EQUITY CAPITAL
We have seen that there is nothing special about corporate borrowing because investors can 
borrow or lend on their own. As a result, whichever capital structure Trans Am chooses, 
the stock price will be the same. Trans Am’s capital structure is thus irrelevant, at least in 
the simple world we have examined.
Our Trans Am example is based on a famous argument advanced by two Nobel laure-
ates, Franco Modigliani and Merton Miller, whom we will henceforth call M&M. What we 
illustrated for the Trans Am Corporation is a special case of M&M Proposition I. M&M 
Proposition I states that it is completely irrelevant how a firm chooses to arrange its 
finances.
M&M Proposition I: The Pie Model
One way to illustrate M&M Proposition I is to imagine two firms that are identical on the 
left-hand side of the balance sheet. Their assets and operations are exactly the same. The 
right-hand sides are different because the two firms finance their operations differently. In 
this case, we can view the capital structure question in terms of a “pie” model. Why we 
choose this name is apparent in Figure 13.2. Figure 13.2 gives two possible ways of cutting 
up this pie between the equity slice, E, and the debt slice, D: 40%–60% and 60%–40%. 
However, the size of the pie in Figure 13.2 is the same for both firms because the value of 
the assets is the same. This is precisely what M&M Proposition I states: The size of the pie 
doesn’t depend on how it is sliced.
The Cost of Equity and Financial Leverage:  
M&M Proposition II
Although changing the capital structure of the firm may not change the firm’s total value, 
it does cause important changes in the firm’s debt and equity. We now examine what 
13.3
coverage online
Excel 
Master
M&M Proposition I
The value of a firm is 
independent of its capital 
structure.
concept questions
13.2a	 What is the impact of financial leverage on stockholders?
13.2b	 What is homemade leverage?
13.2c	 Why is Trans Am’s capital structure irrelevant?
f i g u r e  13.2
Two pie models of 
capital structure
Value of firm
Stocks
40%
Bonds
60%
Stocks
60%
Bonds
40%
Value of firm

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
431
happens to a firm financed with debt and equity when the debt–equity ratio is changed. To 
simplify our analysis, we will continue to ignore taxes.
Based on our discussion in Chapter 12, if we ignore taxes, the weighted average cost 
of capital, WACC, is:
WACC = (E/V) × RE + (D/V) × RD
where V = E + D. We also saw that one way of interpreting the WACC is as the required 
return on the firm’s overall assets. To remind us of this, we use the symbol RA to stand for 
the WACC and write:
RA = (E/V) × RE + (D/V) × RD
If we rearrange this to solve for the cost of equity capital, we see that:
RE = RA + (RA − RD) × (D/E)	
[13.1]
This is the famous M&M Proposition II, which tells us that the cost of equity depends on 
three things: the required rate of return on the firm’s assets, RA; the firm’s cost of debt, RD; 
and the firm’s debt–equity ratio, D/E.
Figure 13.3 summarizes our discussion thus far by plotting the cost of equity capital, 
RE, against the debt–equity ratio. As shown, M&M Proposition II indicates that the cost of 
equity, RE, is given by a straight line with a slope of (RA − RD). The y-intercept corresponds 
to a firm with a debt–equity ratio of zero, so RA = RE in that case. Figure 13.3 shows that, 
as the firm raises its debt–equity ratio, the increase in leverage raises the risk of the equity 
and therefore the required return, or cost of equity (RE).
Notice in Figure 13.3 that the WACC doesn’t depend on the debt–equity ratio; it’s the 
same no matter what the debt–equity ratio is. This is another way of stating M&M Proposi-
tion I: The firm’s overall cost of capital is unaffected by its capital structure. As illustrated, 
the fact that the cost of debt is lower than the cost of equity is exactly offset by the increase 
in the cost of equity from borrowing. In other words, the change in the capital structure 
weights (E/V and D/V) is exactly offset by the change in the cost of equity (RE), so the 
WACC stays the same.
M&M Proposition II
A firm’s cost of equity 
capital is a positive linear 
function of its capital 
structure.
Cost of capital
(%)
RE
WACC 5 RA
RD
Debt–equity ratio
(D/E)
RE 5 RA 1 (RA 2 RD) 3 (D/E ) by M&M Proposition II
where V 5 D 1 E
RA 5 WACC 5 (E/V ) 3 RE  1 (D/V) 3 RD  
f i g u r e  13.3
The cost of equity 
and the WACC: M&M 
Propositions I and II 
with no taxes

432	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
Business and Financial Risk
M&M Proposition II shows that the firm’s cost of equity can be broken down into two 
components. The first component, RA, is the required return on the firm’s overall assets, 
and it depends on the nature of the firm’s operating activities. The risk inherent in a firm’s 
operations is called the business risk of the firm’s equity. Referring back to Chapter 11, we 
see that this business risk depends on the systematic risk of the firm’s assets. The greater a 
firm’s business risk, the greater RA will be, and, all other things being the same, the greater 
will be the firm’s cost of equity.
The second component in the cost of equity, (RA − RD) × (D/E), is determined by the 
firm’s financial structure. For an all-equity firm, this component is zero. As the firm be-
gins to rely on debt financing, the required return on equity rises. This occurs because the 
debt financing increases the risks borne by the stockholders. This extra risk that arises 
from the use of debt financing is called the financial risk of the firm’s equity.
The total systematic risk of the firm’s equity thus has two parts: business risk and 
financial risk. The first part (the business risk) depends on the firm’s assets and opera-
tions and is not affected by capital structure. Given the firm’s business risk (and its cost 
of debt), the second part (the financial risk) is completely determined by financial policy. 
As we have illustrated, the firm’s cost of equity rises when it increases its use of financial 
leverage because the financial risk of the equity increases while the business risk remains 
the same.
business risk
The equity risk that comes 
from the nature of the 
firm’s operating activities.
financial risk
The equity risk that comes 
from the financial policy 
(i.e., capital structure) of 
the firm.
EXAMPLE
13.3  The Cost of Equity Capital
The Ricardo Corporation has a weighted average cost of capital (ignoring taxes) of 12 percent. It 
can borrow at 8 percent. Assuming that Ricardo has a target capital structure of 80 percent equity 
and 20 percent debt, what is its cost of equity? What is the cost of equity if the target capital struc-
ture is 50 percent equity? Calculate the WACC, using your answers to verify that it is the same in 
both cases.
	
According to M&M Proposition II, the cost of equity, RE, is:
RE =  RA + (RA − RD) × (D/E)
In the first case, the debt–equity ratio is .2/.8 = .25, so the cost of the equity is:
RE = 12% + (12% − 8%) × .25
   = 13%
In the second case, verify that the debt–equity ratio is 1.0, so the cost of equity is 16 percent.
	
We can now calculate the WACC assuming that the percentage of equity financing is 80 per-
cent, the cost of equity is 13 percent, and the tax rate is zero:
WACC = (E/V) × RE + (D/V) × RD
      = .80 × 13% + .20 × 8%
      = 12%
In the second case, the percentage of equity financing is 50 percent and the cost of equity is  
16 percent. The WACC is:
WACC = (E/V) × RE + (D/V) × RD
      = .50 × 16% + .50 × 8%
      = 12%
As we calculated, the WACC is 12 percent in both cases.

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
433
CORPORATE TAXES AND  
CAPITAL STRUCTURE
Debt has two distinguishing features that we have not taken into proper account. First, as 
we have mentioned in a number of places, interest paid on debt is tax deductible. This is 
good for the firm, and it may be an added benefit to debt financing. Second, failure to meet 
debt obligations can result in bankruptcy. This is not good for the firm, and it may be an 
added cost of debt financing. Because we haven’t explicitly considered either of these two 
features of debt, we may get a different answer about capital structure once we do. Accord-
ingly, we consider taxes in this section and bankruptcy in the next one.
We can start by considering what happens when we consider the effect of corporate 
taxes. To do this, we will examine two firms, Firm U (unlevered) and Firm L (levered). 
These two firms are identical on the left-hand side of the balance sheet, so their assets and 
operations are the same.
We assume that EBIT is expected to be $1,000 every year forever for both firms. The 
difference between the two firms is that Firm L has issued $1,000 worth of perpetual bonds 
on which it pays 8 percent interest each year. The interest bill is thus .08 × $1,000 = $80 
every year forever. Also, we assume that the corporate tax rate is 30 percent.
For our two firms, U and L, we can now calculate the following:
13.4
concept questions
13.3a	 What does M&M Proposition I state?
13.3b	 What are the three determinants of a firm’s cost of equity?
13.3c	 The total systematic risk of a firm’s equity has two parts. What are they?
	
Firm U	
Firm L
EBIT	
$1,000	
$1,000
Interest	
          0	
      80
Taxable income	
$1,000	
$   920
Taxes (30%)	
 
 300	
    276
Net income	
$   700	
$   644
The Interest Tax Shield
To simplify things, we will assume that depreciation is zero. We will also assume that capi-
tal spending is zero and that there are no additions to NWC. In this case, cash flow from 
assets is simply equal to EBIT − Taxes. For Firms U and L, we thus have:
Cash Flow from Assets	
Firm U	
Firm L
   EBIT	
$1,000	
$1,000
−Taxes	
 
 300	
 
 276
   Total	
$   700	
$   724
We immediately see that capital structure is now having some effect because the cash 
flows from U and L are not the same even though the two firms have identical assets.

434	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
What we are seeing is that the total cash flow to L is $24 more. This occurs because L’s tax 
bill (which is a cash outflow) is $24 less. The fact that interest is deductible for tax purposes 
has generated a tax saving equal to the interest payment ($80) multiplied by the corporate 
tax rate (30 percent): $80 × .30 = $24. We call this tax saving the interest tax shield.
Taxes and M&M Proposition I
Because the debt is perpetual, the same $24 shield will be generated every year forever. 
The aftertax cash flow to L will thus be the same $700 that U earns plus the $24 tax shield. 
Because L’s cash flow is always $24 greater, Firm L is worth more than Firm U by the 
value of this $24 perpetuity.
Because the tax shield is generated by paying interest, it has the same risk as the debt, 
and 8 percent (the cost of debt) is, therefore, the appropriate discount rate. The value of the 
tax shield is thus:
PV = $24
.08  = .30 × $1,000 × .08
.08
 = .30 × $1,000 = $300
As our example illustrates, the present value of the interest tax shield can be written as:
Present value of the interest tax shield = (TC × D × RD)/RD	
	
= TC × D	
[13.2]
We have now come up with another famous result, M&M Proposition I with corporate 
taxes. We have seen that the value of Firm L, VL, exceeds the value of Firm U, VU, by the 
present value of the interest tax shield, TC × D. M&M Proposition I with taxes therefore 
states that:
VL = VU + TC × D	
[13.3]
The effect of borrowing in this case is illustrated in Figure 13.4. We have plotted the value 
of the levered firm, VL, against the amount of debt, D. M&M Proposition I with corporate 
taxes implies that the relationship is given by a straight line with a slope of TC.
In Figure 13.4, we have also drawn a horizontal line representing VU. As is shown, the 
distance between the two lines is TC × D, the present value of the tax shield.
As Figure 13.4 indicates, the value of the firm goes up by $.30 for every $1 in debt. In 
other words, the NPV per dollar of debt is $.30. It is difficult to imagine why any corpora-
tion would not borrow to the absolute maximum under these circumstances.
Conclusion
The result of our analysis in this section is that, once we include taxes, capital structure 
definitely matters. However, we immediately reach the illogical conclusion that the optimal 
capital structure is 100 percent debt. Of course, we have not yet considered the impact of 
bankruptcy, so our story may change. For future reference, Table 13.4 contains a summary 
of the various M&M calculations and conclusions.
interest tax shield
The tax saving attained  
by a firm from the tax 
deductibility of interest 
expense.
Cash Flow	
Firm U	
Firm L
To stockholders	
$700	
$644
To bondholders	
    0	
 
80
Total	
$700	
$724
To see what’s going on, we can compute the cash flow to stockholders and bondholders.

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
435
f i g u r e  13.4
M&M Proposition I 
with taxes
Total debt
(D)
Value of
the firm
(VL)
VU
VU
VU 5 Value of firm
 
with no debt
VL 5 VU 1 TC  3 D
     5 Value of firm
 
    with debt
TC 3 D  5 Present
 
value of
 
tax shield
 
on debt
5 TC
The value of the firm increases as total debt increases because of the interest
tax shield. This is the basis of M&M Proposition I with taxes.
ta b l e  13.4
Modigliani and Miller 
summary
I.	
The no-tax case
	
A.	 Proposition I: The value of the leveraged firm (VL) is equal to the value of the 
unleveraged firm (VU):
	
	
	
	
VL = VU
	
B.	 Implications of Proposition I:
	
	
1.	 A firm’s capital structure is irrelevant.
	
	
2.	 A firm’s weighted average cost of capital, WACC, is the same no matter what 
mixture of debt and equity is used to finance the firm.
	
C.	 Proposition II: The cost of equity, RE, is:
	
	
	
	
RE = RA + (RA − RD) × D/E
	
	
where RA is the WACC, RD is the cost of debt, and D/E is the debt–equity ratio.
	
D.	 Implications of Proposition II:
	
	
1.	 The cost of equity rises as the firm increases its use of debt financing.
	
	
2.	 The risk of the equity depends on two things: the riskiness of the firm’s operations 
(business risk) and the degree of financial leverage (financial risk). Business risk 
determines RA; financial risk is determined by D/E.
II.	 The tax case
	
A.	 Proposition I with taxes: The value of the leveraged firm (VL) is equal to the value of the 
unleveraged firm (VU) plus the present value of the interest tax shield:
	
	
	
	
VL = VU + TC × D
	
	
where TC is the corporate tax rate and D is the amount of debt.
	
B.	 Implications of Proposition I with taxes:
	
	
1.	 Debt financing is highly advantageous, and, in the extreme, a firm’s optimal capital 
structure is 100 percent debt.
	
	
2.	 A firm’s weighted average cost of capital, WACC, decreases as the firm relies more 
heavily on debt financing.

436	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
BANKRUPTCY COSTS
One limit to the amount of debt a firm might use comes in the form of bankruptcy costs. 
As the debt–equity ratio rises, so too does the probability that the firm will be unable to 
pay its bondholders what was promised to them. When this happens, ownership of the 
firm’s assets is ultimately transferred from the stockholders to the bondholders.
In principle, a firm becomes bankrupt when the value of its assets equals the value of 
its debt. When this occurs, the value of equity is zero, and the stockholders turn over con-
trol of the firm to the bondholders. At this point, the bondholders hold assets whose value 
is exactly equal to what is owed on the debt. In a perfect world, there are no costs associ-
ated with this transfer of ownership, and the bondholders don’t lose anything.
This idealized view of bankruptcy is not, of course, what happens in the real world. 
Ironically, it is expensive to go bankrupt. As we discuss, the costs associated with bank-
ruptcy may eventually offset the tax-related gains from leverage.
Direct Bankruptcy Costs
When the value of a firm’s assets equals the value of its debt, then the firm is economically 
bankrupt in the sense that the equity has no value. However, the formal turning over of the 
assets to the bondholders is a legal process, not an economic one. There are legal and ad-
ministrative costs to bankruptcy, and it has been remarked that bankruptcies are to lawyers 
what blood is to sharks.
Because of the expenses associated with bankruptcy, bondholders won’t get all that 
they are owed. Some fraction of the firm’s assets will “disappear” in the legal process of 
going bankrupt. These are the legal and administrative expenses associated with the bank-
ruptcy proceeding. We call these costs direct bankruptcy costs.
Indirect Bankruptcy Costs
Because it is expensive to go bankrupt, a firm will spend resources to avoid doing so. 
When a firm is having significant problems in meeting its debt obligations, we say that it is 
experiencing financial distress. Some financially distressed firms ultimately file for bank-
ruptcy, but most do not because they are able to recover or otherwise survive.
The costs of avoiding a bankruptcy filing incurred by a financially distressed firm are 
called indirect bankruptcy costs. We use the term financial distress costs to refer generi-
cally to the direct and indirect costs associated with going bankrupt and/or avoiding a 
bankruptcy filing.
The problems that come up in financial distress are particularly severe, and the finan-
cial distress costs are thus larger, when the stockholders and the bondholders are different 
groups. Until the firm is legally bankrupt, the stockholders control it. They, of course, will 
take actions in their own economic interests. Because the stockholders can be wiped out in 
a legal bankruptcy, they have a very strong incentive to avoid a bankruptcy filing.
The bondholders, on the other hand, are primarily concerned with protecting the value 
of the firm’s assets and will try to take control away from the stockholders. They have a 
13.5
direct bankruptcy 
costs
The costs that are directly 
associated with bankruptcy, 
such as legal and 
administrative expenses.
indirect bankruptcy 
costs
The costs of avoiding a 
bankruptcy filing incurred 
by a financially distressed 
firm.
financial distress 
costs
The direct and indirect costs 
associated with going 
bankrupt or experiencing 
financial distress.
concept questions
13.4a	 What is the relationship between the value of an unlevered firm and the value of a 
levered firm once we consider the effect of corporate taxes?
13.4b	 If we only consider the effect of taxes, what is the optimum capital structure?

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
437
strong incentive to seek bankruptcy to protect their interests and keep stockholders from 
further dissipating the assets of the firm. The net effect of all this fighting is that a long, 
drawn-out, and potentially quite expensive legal battle gets started.
Meanwhile, as the wheels of justice turn in their ponderous way, the assets of the firm 
lose value because management is busy trying to avoid bankruptcy instead of running the 
business. Normal operations are disrupted, and sales are lost. Valuable employees leave, 
potentially fruitful programs are dropped to preserve cash, and otherwise profitable invest-
ments are not taken.
These are all indirect bankruptcy costs, or costs of financial distress. Whether or not 
the firm ultimately goes bankrupt, the net effect is a loss of value because the firm chose to 
use debt in its capital structure. It is this possibility of loss that limits the amount of debt 
that a firm will choose to use.
concept questions
13.5a	 What are direct bankruptcy costs?
13.5b	 What are indirect bankruptcy costs?
OPTIMAL CAPITAL STRUCTURE
Our previous two sections have established the basis for an optimal capital structure. A 
firm will borrow because the interest tax shield is valuable. At relatively low debt levels, 
the probability of bankruptcy and financial distress is low, and the benefit from debt out-
weighs the cost. At very high debt levels, the possibility of financial distress is a chronic, 
ongoing problem for the firm, so the benefit from debt financing may be more than offset 
by the financial distress costs. Based on our discussion, it would appear that an optimal 
capital structure exists somewhere in between these extremes.
The Static Theory of Capital Structure
The theory of capital structure that we have outlined is called the static theory of capital 
structure. It says that firms borrow up to the point where the tax benefit from an extra dol-
lar in debt is exactly equal to the cost that comes from the increased probability of financial 
distress. We call this the static theory because it assumes that the firm is fixed in terms of 
its assets and operations, and it only considers possible changes in the debt–equity ratio.
The static theory is illustrated in Figure 13.5, which plots the value of the firm, VL, 
against the amount of debt, D. In Figure 13.5, we have drawn lines corresponding to three 
different stories. The first is M&M Proposition I with no taxes. This is the horizontal line 
extending from VU, and it indicates that the value of the firm is unaffected by its capital 
structure. The second case, M&M Proposition I with corporate taxes, is given by the up-
ward-sloping straight line. These two cases are exactly the same as the ones we previously 
illustrated in Figure 13.4.
The third case in Figure 13.5 illustrates our current discussion: The value of the firm 
rises to a maximum and then declines beyond that point. This is the picture that we get 
from our static theory. The maximum value of the firm, VL*, is reached at a debt level of 
D*, so this is the optimal amount of borrowing. Put another way, the firm’s optimal capital 
structure is composed of D*/VL* in debt and (1 − D*/VL*) in equity.
The final thing to notice in Figure 13.5 is that the difference between the value of 
the firm in our static theory and the M&M value of the firm with taxes is the loss in 
13.6
static theory of 
capital structure
Theory that a firm borrows 
up to the point where the 
tax benefit from an extra 
dollar in debt is exactly 
equal to the cost that 
comes from the increased 
probability of financial 
distress.

438	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
value from the possibility of financial distress. Also, the difference between the static 
theory value of the firm and the M&M value with no taxes is the gain from leverage, net 
of distress costs.
Optimal Capital Structure and the Cost of Capital
As we discussed earlier, the capital structure that maximizes the value of the firm is also 
the one that minimizes the cost of capital. With the help of Figure 13.6, we can illustrate 
this point and tie together our discussion of capital structure and cost of capital. As we 
have seen, there are essentially three cases. We will use the simplest of the three cases as a 
starting point and then build up to the static theory of capital structure. Along the way, we 
will pay particular attention to the connection between capital structure, firm value, and 
cost of capital.
Figure 13.6 illustrates the original Modigliani and Miller, M&M, no-tax, no-
bankruptcy argument in Case I. This is the most basic case. In the top part, we have 
plotted the value of the firm, VL, against total debt, D. When there are no taxes, bank-
ruptcy costs, or other real-world imperfections, we know that the total value of the 
firm is not affected by its debt policy, so VL is simply constant. The bottom part of 
Figure 13.6 tells the same story in terms of the cost of capital. Here, the weighted aver-
age cost of capital, WACC, is plotted against the debt-to-equity ratio, D/E. As with 
total firm value, the overall cost of capital is not affected by debt policy in this basic 
case, so the WACC is constant.
Next, we consider what happens to the original M&M arguments once taxes are intro-
duced. As Case II illustrates, the firm’s value now critically depends on its debt policy. The 
more the firm borrows, the more it is worth. From our earlier discussion, we know that this 
f i g u r e  13.5
The static theory of 
capital structure: The 
optimal capital 
structure and the 
value of the firm
Value of
the firm
(VL)
Total debt
(D)
Present value of tax
shield on debt
Financial distress
costs
Actual firm value
D*
Optimal amount
of debt
Maximum
firm value VL*
VU 5 Value of firm
 
with no debt
VL 5 VU 1 TC 3 D
 
5 Value of firm
 
 
with debt
VU
According to the static theory, the gain from the tax shield on debt is offset by financial
distress costs. An optimal capital structure exists that just balances the additional gain from
leverage against the added financial distress costs.

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
439
f i g u r e  13.6
The capital structure 
question
Value
of the
firm
(VL)
Weighted
average
cost of
capital
(%)
Case II
M&M (with taxes)
Case II
M&M (with taxes)
Case III
Static theory
Case III
Static theory
Case I
M&M (no taxes)
Case I
M&M (no taxes)
Total
debt (D)
Debt–equity ratio
(D/E)
Financial distress
costs
Net gain from leverage
VL*
WACC*
D*
D*/E*
VU
Case II
With corporate taxes and no bankruptcy costs, the value of the firm increases and the
weighted average cost of capital decreases as the amount of debt goes up.
Case III
With corporate taxes and bankruptcy costs, the value of the firm, VL, reaches a maximum
at D*, the optimal amount of borrowing. At the same time, the weighted average cost of
capital, WACC, is minimized at D*/ E*.
Case I
With no taxes or bankruptcy costs, the value of the firm and its weighted average cost of
capital are not affected by capital structures.

440	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
happens because interest payments are tax deductible, and the gain in firm value is just 
equal to the present value of the interest tax shield.
In the bottom part of Figure 13.6, notice how the WACC declines as the firm uses 
more and more debt financing. As the firm increases its financial leverage, the cost of eq-
uity does increase, but this increase is more than offset by the tax break associated with 
debt financing. As a result, the firm’s overall cost of capital declines.
To finish our story, we include the impact of bankruptcy, or financial distress, costs 
to get Case III. As is shown in the top part of Figure 13.6, the value of the firm will not 
be as large as we previously indicated. The reason is that the firm’s value is reduced by 
the present value of the potential future bankruptcy costs. These costs grow as the firm 
borrows more and more, and they eventually overwhelm the tax advantage of debt fi-
nancing. The optimal capital structure occurs at D*, the point at which the tax saving 
from an additional dollar in debt financing is exactly balanced by the increased bank-
ruptcy costs associated with the additional borrowing. This is the essence of the static 
theory of capital structure.
The bottom part of Figure 13.6 presents the optimal capital structure in terms of the 
cost of capital. Corresponding to D*, the optimal debt level, is the optimal debt-to-equity 
ratio, D*/E*. At this level of debt financing, the lowest possible weighted average cost of 
capital, WACC*, occurs.
Capital Structure: Some Managerial Recommendations
The static model that we have described is not capable of identifying a precise optimal 
capital structure, but it does point out two of the more relevant factors: taxes and financial 
distress. We can draw some limited conclusions concerning these.
Taxes 
First of all, the tax benefit from leverage is obviously only important to firms that 
are in a tax-paying position. Firms with substantial accumulated losses will get little value 
from the interest tax shield. Furthermore, firms that have substantial tax shields from other 
sources, such as depreciation, will get less benefit from leverage.
Also, not all firms have the same tax rate. The higher the tax rate, the greater the in-
centive to borrow.
Financial Distress 
Firms with a greater risk of experiencing financial distress will 
borrow less than firms with a lower risk of financial distress. For example, all other things 
being equal, the greater the volatility in EBIT, the less a firm should borrow.
In addition, financial distress is more costly for some firms than for others. The 
costs of financial distress depend primarily on the firm’s assets. In particular, financial 
distress costs will be determined by how easily ownership of those assets can be 
transferred.
For example, a firm with mostly tangible assets that can be sold without great loss in 
value will have an incentive to borrow more. For firms that rely heavily on intangibles, 
such as employee talent or growth opportunities, debt will be less attractive since these as-
sets effectively cannot be sold.
concept questions
13.6a 	 Can you describe the trade-off that defines the static theory of capital structure?
13.6b 	 What are the important factors in making capital structure decisions?

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
441
OBSERVED CAPITAL STRUCTURES
No two firms have identical capital structures. Nonetheless, there are some regular ele-
ments that we see when we start looking at actual capital structures. We discuss a few of 
these next.
The most striking thing we observe about capital structures, particularly in the 
United States, is that most corporations seem to have relatively low debt–equity ratios. In 
fact, most corporations use much less debt financing than equity financing. To illustrate, 
Table 13.5 presents median debt ratios and debt–equity ratios for various U.S. industries 
classified by SIC code (we discussed such codes in Chapter 3).
In Table 13.5, what is most striking is the wide variation across industries, ranging 
from essentially no debt for drug and computer companies to relatively heavy debt us-
age in the airline and cable television industries. Notice that these last two industries 
are the only ones for which more debt is used than equity, and most of the other indus-
tries rely far more heavily on equity than debt. This is true even though many of the 
companies in these industries pay substantial taxes. Table 13.5 makes it clear that 
corporations have not, in general, issued debt up to the point that tax shelters have 
been completely used up, and we conclude that there must be limits to the amount of 
debt corporations can use. Take a look at our nearby Work the Web box for more on 
actual capital structures.
Different industries have different operating characteristics in terms of, for ex-
ample, EBIT volatility and asset types, and there does appear to be some connection 
between these characteristics and capital structure. Our story involving tax savings 
and financial distress costs undoubtedly supplies part of the reason, but, to date, 
there is no fully satisfactory theory that explains these regularities in capital 
structures.
13.7
ta b l e  13.5
Capital structures for 
U.S. industries
Industry
Ratio of 
Debt to 
Total 
Capital(%)*
Ratio of 
Debt to 
Equity(%)
Number of 
Companies
SIC 
Code
Representative 
Companies
Electric utilities
48.54
  94.31
33
   491
American Electric  
  Power, Southern Co.
Computer equipment
  9.09
  10.02
48
  357
Apple, Cisco
Paper
27.75
  38.40
24
    26
Avery Dennison,  
  Weyerhaeuser
Petroleum refining
32.27
  47.65
18
      29
Chevron, Sunoco
Airlines
63.92
177.19
10
4512 
Delta, Southwest
Pay television
63.56
193.88
  5
  484
Dish Network, TiVo
Motor vehicles
17.77
  21.60
25
   371
Ford, Winnebago
Fabric apparel
15.86
  18.84
14
    23
Guess, Jones Apparel
Department stores
27.40
  37.73
  8
   531
JCPenney, Macy’s
Eating places
23.40
  30.54
42
5812
McDonald’s, Papa  
  John’s
Drugs
  7.80
    8.46
194  
  283
Merck, Pfizer
Steel works
19.96
  24.95
  9
   331
Nucor, U.S. Steel
*Debt is the book value of preferred stock and long-term debt, including amounts due in one year. Equity is 
the market value of outstanding shares. Total capital is the sum of debt and equity. Median values are 
shown.
Source: Cost of Capital, 2010 Yearbook (Chicago: Morningstar, 2010).

442	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
W
hen it comes to capital structure, all companies (and industries) are not created equal. To 
illustrate, we looked up some capital structure information on American Electric Power (AEP) 
and Abbott Laboratories (ABT) using the “Financials” area of www.reuters.com. American Electric 
Power’s capital structure looks like this (note that leverage ratios are expressed as percentages on 
this site):
Company
Industry
Sector
Quick Ratio (MRQ)
.40
1.12
1.45
Current Ratio (MRQ)
.56
1.22
1.56
LT Debt to Equity (MRQ)
96.20
126.86
80.42
Total Debt to Equity (MRQ)
119.08
142.28
87.23
Interest Coverage (TTM)
3.98
11.56
6.53
For every dollar of equity, American Electric Power has long-term debt of $.9620 and total debt of 
$1.1908. Compare this result to Abbott Laboratories:
Company
Industry
Sector
Quick Ratio (MRQ)
1.20
1.84
1.91
Current Ratio (MRQ)
1.45
2.67
2.77
LT Debt to Equity (MRQ)
15.83
4.88
6.98
Total Debt to Equity (MRQ)
34.38
9.65
11.90
Interest Coverage (TTM)
16.80
115.46
107.06
For every dollar of equity, Abbott has only $.1583 of long-term debt and total debt of $.3438. 
When we examine the industry and sector averages, the differences are again apparent. The 
electric utility industry on average has $1.2686 of long-term debt and $1.4228 of total debt for 
every dollar of equity. By comparison, the pharmaceutical industry on average has only $.0488 
of long-term debt and $.0965 of total debt for every dollar of equity. Thus, we see that choice of 
capital structure is a management decision, but it is also clearly influenced by industry 
characteristics.
W
RK THE  WE B
QUESTIONS
	
1.	 The ratios shown for these companies are based on March 2015 figures. Go to 
www.reuters.com and find the current long-term debt-to-equity and total debt-to-
equity ­ratios for both American Electric Power (AEP) and Abbott Laboratories (ABT). 
How have these ratios changed over this time?
	
2.	 Go to www.reuters.com and find the long-term debt-to-equity and total debt-to-equity 
ratios for Bank of America (BAC), Tesla (TSLA), and Chevron (CVX). Why do you think 
these three companies use such differing amounts of debt?

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
443
concept questions
13.7a 	 Do U.S. corporations rely heavily on debt financing?
13.7b 	 What regularities do we observe in capital structures?
A QUICK LOOK AT THE BANKRUPTCY PROCESS
As we have discussed, one of the consequences of using debt is the possibility of financial 
distress, which can be defined in several ways:
  1.	 Business failure. This term is usually used to refer to a situation in which a business 
has terminated with a loss to creditors, but even an all-equity firm can fail.
  2.	 Legal bankruptcy. Firms or creditors bring petitions to a federal court for bankruptcy. 
Bankruptcy is a legal proceeding for liquidating or reorganizing a business.
  3.	 Technical insolvency. Technical insolvency occurs when a firm is unable to meet its 
financial obligations.
  4.	 Accounting insolvency. Firms with negative net worth are insolvent on the books. 
This happens when the total book liabilities exceed the book value of the total assets.
We now very briefly discuss some of the terms and more relevant issues associated 
with bankruptcy and financial distress.
Liquidation and Reorganization
Firms that cannot or choose not to make contractually required payments to creditors have 
two basic options: liquidation or reorganization. Liquidation means termination of the firm 
as a going concern, and it involves selling off the assets of the firm. The proceeds, net of 
selling costs, are distributed to creditors in order of established priority. Reorganization is 
the option of keeping the firm a going concern; it often involves issuing new securities to 
replace old securities. Liquidation or reorganization is the result of a bankruptcy proceed-
ing. Which occurs depends on whether the firm is worth more “dead or alive.”
Bankruptcy Liquidation 
Chapter 7 of the Federal Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978 
deals with “straight” liquidation. The following sequence of events is typical:
  1.	 A petition is filed in a federal court. A corporation may file a voluntary petition, or 
involuntary petitions may be filed against the corporation by several of its creditors.
  2.	 A trustee-in-bankruptcy is elected by the creditors to take over the assets of the 
debtor corporation. The trustee will attempt to liquidate the assets.
  3.	 When the assets are liquidated, after payment of the bankruptcy administration costs, 
the proceeds are distributed among the creditors.
  4.	 If any proceeds remain, after expenses and payments to creditors, they are distributed 
to the shareholders.
The distribution of the proceeds of the liquidation occurs according to the following 
priority list:
  1.	 Administrative expenses associated with the bankruptcy.
  2.	 Other expenses arising after the filing of an involuntary bankruptcy petition but 
before the appointment of a trustee.
13.8
bankruptcy
A legal proceeding for 
liquidating or reorganizing a 
business. Also, the transfer 
of some or all of a firm’s 
assets to its creditors.
The SEC has a good 
overview of the 
bankruptcy process in 
its “Investor Reports/
Publications” link of 
www.sec.gov.
liquidation
Termination of the firm as 
a going concern.
reorganization
Financial restructuring of a 
failing firm to attempt to 
continue operations as a 
going concern.

444	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
  3.	 Wages, salaries, and commissions.
  4.	 Contributions to employee benefit plans.
  5.	 Consumer claims.
  6.	 Government tax claims.
  7.	 Payment to unsecured creditors.
  8.	 Payment to preferred stockholders.
  9.	 Payment to common stockholders.
This priority list for liquidation is a reflection of the absolute priority rule (APR). The 
higher a claim is on this list, the more likely it is to be paid. In many of these categories, 
there are various limitations and qualifications that we omit for the sake of brevity.
Two qualifications to this list are in order. The first concerns secured creditors. Such 
creditors are entitled to the proceeds from the sale of the security and are outside this 
ordering. However, if the secured property is liquidated and provides cash insufficient to 
cover the amount owed, the secured creditors join with unsecured creditors in dividing the 
remaining liquidated value. In contrast, if the secured property is liquidated for proceeds 
greater than the secured claim, the net proceeds are used to pay unsecured creditors and 
others. The second qualification to the APR is that, in reality, what happens, and who gets 
what in the event of bankruptcy, is subject to much negotiation, and, as a result, the APR is 
frequently not followed.
Bankruptcy Reorganization 
Corporate reorganization takes place under Chapter 
11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978. The general objective of a proceeding 
under Chapter 11 is to plan to restructure the corporation with some provision for repay-
ment of creditors. A typical sequence of events follows:
  1.	 A voluntary petition can be filed by the corporation, or an involuntary petition can be 
filed by creditors.
  2.	 A federal judge either approves or denies the petition. If the petition is approved, a 
time for filing proofs of claims is set.
  3.	 In most cases, the corporation (the “debtor in possession”) continues to run the 
business.
  4.	 The corporation (and, in certain cases, the creditors) submits a reorganization plan.
  5.	 Creditors and shareholders are divided into classes. A class of creditors accepts the 
plan if a majority of the class agrees to the plan.
  6.	 After its acceptance by creditors, the plan is confirmed by the court.
  7.	 Payments in cash, property, and securities are made to creditors and shareholders. 
The plan may provide for the issuance of new securities.
  8.	 For some fixed length of time, the firm operates according to the provisions of the 
reorganization plan.
The corporation may wish to allow the old stockholders to retain some participation in the 
firm. Needless to say, this may involve some protest by the holders of unsecured debt.
To give you some idea of the costs associated with a bankruptcy, consider the case of 
Lehman Brothers, which filed for bankruptcy in September 2008. The company wanted to 
reorganize through the bankruptcy process, but complications arose almost from the bank-
ruptcy filing date. Because of the complexity of many of Lehman’s assets, unwinding and 
selling them was difficult and time-consuming. Eventually, Lehman exited bankruptcy 
about three and a half years later in March 2012. Some of the firms that were involved in 
absolute priority 
rule (APR)
The rule establishing 
priority of claims in 
liquidation.
The American Bankruptcy 
Institute provides 
extensive information. 
See www.abi.org.

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
445
the Lehman bankruptcy were Alvarez & Marsal, which billed about $512 million in fees; 
Weil, Gotshal & Manges, which billed $383 million; and Milbank, Tweed, Hadley, & 
­McCloy, which billed $133 million. In all, Lehman’s bankruptcy costs were $2.2 billion in 
fees. The next largest bankruptcy fees appear to have been paid to those involved in energy 
giant Enron’s bankruptcy. The fees in that case reached a mere $1 billion.
So-called prepackaged bankruptcies are a relatively new phenomenon. What happens 
is that the corporation secures the necessary approval of a bankruptcy plan from a majority 
of its creditors first, and then it files for bankruptcy. As a result, the company enters bank-
ruptcy and reemerges almost immediately.
For example, in November 2004, Trump Hotels and Casinos filed for Chapter 11 
bankruptcy. This was the second bankruptcy proceeding for the company. Fortunately for 
“The Donald,” creditors didn’t say “You’re fired!” Under the terms of the deal, Trump’s 
stake in the company was cut, but he stayed on as chairman of the board and CEO. He also 
received, among other things, a 25 percent stake in the Miss USA Pageant and four acres 
of land in Atlantic City. The then-current bondholders agreed to exchange their bonds for a 
combination of new bonds with a lower coupon rate, along with cash and stock. Unfortu-
nately for The Donald, this was not his last experience with the bankruptcy process. In 
early 2009, Trump Hotels filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy for the third time, making it a 
“Chapter 33” bankruptcy.
In some cases, the bankruptcy procedure is needed to invoke the “cram-down” power 
of the bankruptcy court. Under certain circumstances, a class of creditors can be forced to 
accept a bankruptcy plan even if they vote not to approve it, hence the remarkably apt de-
scription “cram down.”
In 2005, Congress passed the most significant overhaul of U.S. bankruptcy laws in the 
last 25 years, the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005 
(BAPCPA). Most of the changes were aimed at individual debtors, but corporations were 
also affected. Before BAPCPA, a bankrupt company had the exclusive right to submit re-
organization plans to the bankruptcy court. It has been argued that this exclusivity is one 
reason some companies have remained in bankruptcy for so long. Under the new law, after 
18 months, creditors can submit their own plan for the court’s consideration. This change 
is likely to speed up bankruptcies and also lead to more “prepacks” (to learn about pre-
packs, see our nearby Finance Matters box).
One controversial change made by BAPCPA has to do with so-called key employee 
retention plans, or KERPs. Strange as it may sound, bankrupt companies routinely give 
bonus payments to executives, even though the executives may be the same ones who led 
the company into bankruptcy in the first place. Such bonuses are intended to keep valuable 
employees from moving to more successful firms, but critics have argued they are often 
abused. The new law permits KERPs only if the employee in question actually has a job 
offer from another company.
Recently, Section 363 of the bankruptcy code has been in the news. In a traditional 
Chapter 11 filing, the bankruptcy plan is described to creditors and shareholders in a pro-
spectus-like disclosure. The plan must then be approved by a vote involving the interested 
parties. A Section 363 bankruptcy is more like an auction. An initial bidder, known as a 
stalking horse, bids on all or part of the bankrupt company’s assets. Other bidders are then 
invited into the process to determine the highest bid for the company’s assets. The main 
advantage of a Section 363 bankruptcy is speed. Because a traditional bankruptcy requires 
the approval of interested parties, it is not uncommon for the process to take several years, 
while a Section 363 bankruptcy is generally much quicker. For example, in the middle of 
2009, both General Motors and Chrysler sped through the bankruptcy process in less than 
45 days with the help of Section 363 sales.

446
Bankruptcy, “Prepack” Style
O
n February 18, 2015, Allen Systems Group and its two 
subsidiaries, ASG Federal and Viasoft International, 
which provide enterprise software, filed for Chapter 11 reor-
ganization under the U.S. bankruptcy code. At the time of 
filing, the company had about $550 million in debt. A firm in 
this situation could reasonably be expected to spend a year 
or more in bankruptcy. Not so with Allen Systems. The com-
pany exited bankruptcy in April 2015. In this case, the com-
pany’s debt was reduced to $240 million, and creditors were 
given an equity stake in the company. Even though Allen 
Systems had a brief stay in bankruptcy, the all-time record 
belongs to Blue Bird, maker of the iconic yellow school 
buses. Blue Bird’s stay in bankruptcy was one day!
	
Firms typically file for bankruptcy to seek protection 
from their creditors, essentially admitting that they cannot 
meet their financial obligations as they are then structured. 
Once in bankruptcy, the firm attempts to reorganize its op-
erations and finances so that it can survive. A key to this 
process is that most of the creditors must ultimately give 
their approval to the restructuring plan. The time a firm 
spends in Chapter 11 depends on many things, but it usually 
depends most on the time it takes to get creditors to agree 
to a plan of reorganization.
	
Blue Bird was able to expedite its bankruptcy by filing 
a presolicited, or prepackaged, bankruptcy, often called a 
prepack. The idea is simple. Before filing for bankruptcy, 
the firm approaches its creditors with a plan for reorganiza-
tion. The two sides negotiate a settlement and agree on 
the details of how the firm’s finances will be restructured. 
Then, the firm puts together the necessary paperwork for 
the bankruptcy court before filing for bankruptcy. A filing is 
a prepack if the firm essentially walks into court and, at the 
same time, files a reorganization plan complete with the 
documentation of its creditors’ approval, which is exactly 
what Blue Bird did.
	
The key to the prepackaged reorganization process is 
that both sides have something to gain and something to 
lose. If bankruptcy is imminent, it may make sense for the 
creditors to expedite the process even though they are 
likely to take a financial loss in the restructuring. Blue Bird’s 
bankruptcy was relatively painless for most of its creditors. 
Several different classes of creditors were involved. Bank 
loans were converted into senior secured notes, and 
senior bondholders exchanged their bonds for new bonds 
with the same face value and terms. Of course, the old 
stockholders received nothing, and, in fact, had their 
shares canceled.
	
For a firm, operating in bankruptcy can be a difficult 
process. The bankruptcy court typically has a great deal of 
oversight over the firm’s day-to-day operations, and putting 
together a reorganization plan to emerge from bankruptcy 
can be a tremendous drain on management time, time that 
would be better spent making the firm profitable again. Also, 
news that a firm is in bankruptcy can make skittish custom-
ers turn to competitors, endangering the future health of the 
firm. A prepack can’t completely eliminate these problems, 
but by speeding up the bankruptcy process, it can reduce 
the headaches involved.
FINANCE MATTERS
Financial Management and the Bankruptcy Process
It may seem a little odd, but the right to go bankrupt is very valuable. There are several 
reasons this is true. First of all, from an operational standpoint, when a firm files for bank-
ruptcy, there is an immediate “stay” on creditors, usually meaning that payments to credi-
tors will cease, and creditors will have to await the outcome of the bankruptcy process to 
find out if and how much they will be paid. This stay gives the firm time to evaluate its 
options, and it prevents what is usually termed a “race to the courthouse steps” by creditors 
and others.
Beyond this, some bankruptcy filings are actually strategic actions intended to im-
prove a firm’s competitive position, and firms have filed for bankruptcy even though they 
were not insolvent at the time. Probably the most famous example is Continental Airlines. 
In 1983, following deregulation of the airline industry, Continental found itself competing 
with newly established airlines that had much lower labor costs. In response, Continental 
filed for reorganization under Chapter 11 even though it was not insolvent.
Continental argued that, based on pro forma data, it would become insolvent in the future, 
and a reorganization was therefore necessary. By filing for bankruptcy, Continental was able to 
terminate its existing labor agreements, lay off large numbers of workers, and slash wages for 
Get the latest on 
bankruptcy at www 
.bankruptcydata.com.

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
447
the remaining employees. In other words, at least in the eyes of critics, Continental essentially 
used the bankruptcy process as a vehicle for reducing labor costs. Congress has subsequently 
modified bankruptcy laws to make it more difficult, though not impossible, for companies to 
abrogate a labor contract through the bankruptcy process. For example, Delta Air Lines filed 
for bankruptcy in 2005, in part to renegotiate the contracts with its union employees.
Other famous examples of strategic bankruptcies exist. For example, Manville (then 
known as Johns-Manville) and Dow Corning filed for bankruptcies because of expected 
future losses resulting from litigations associated with asbestos and silicone breast im-
plants, respectively. Similarly, in the then-largest-ever bankruptcy, Texaco filed in 1987 
after Pennzoil was awarded a $10.3 billion judgment against the company. Texaco later 
settled for $3.5 billion and emerged from bankruptcy. As of early 2015, the largest bank-
ruptcies ever in terms of assets occurred less than two weeks apart in 2008. On September 
15, 2008, the investment bank Lehman Brothers Holdings filed for bankruptcy. The com-
pany listed about $639 billion in assets. Then, on September 26, 2008, the giant savings 
bank Washington Mutual (or “WaMu” as it was better known) filed for bankruptcy with 
about $328 billion in assets. The 2003 bankruptcy filing of Italian dairy company Parmalat 
may have topped them both in terms of relative importance. This company, by itself, repre-
sented 1.5 percent of the Italian gross national product!
Agreements to Avoid Bankruptcy
When a firm defaults on an obligation, it can avoid a bankruptcy filing. Because the legal process 
of bankruptcy can be lengthy and expensive, it is often in everyone’s best interest to devise a 
“workout” that avoids a bankruptcy filing. Much of the time, creditors can work with the man-
agement of a company that has defaulted on a loan contract. Voluntary arrangements to restruc-
ture, or “reschedule,” the company’s debt can be and often are made. This may involve extension, 
which postpones the date of payment, or composition, which allows a reduced payment.
concept questions
13.8a 	 What is the APR (in connection with bankruptcy proceedings)?
13.8b 	 What is the difference between liquidation and reorganization?
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The ideal mixture of debt and equity for a firm—its optimal capital structure—is the one 
that maximizes the value of the firm and minimizes the overall cost of capital. If we ignore 
taxes, financial distress costs, and any other imperfections, we find that there is no ideal 
mixture. Under these circumstances, the firm’s capital structure is simply irrelevant.
If we consider the effect of corporate taxes, we find that capital structure matters a 
great deal. This conclusion is based on the fact that interest is tax deductible and thus gen-
erates a valuable tax shield. Unfortunately, we also find that the optimal capital structure is 
100 percent debt, which is not something we observe in healthy firms.
We next introduced costs associated with bankruptcy, or, more generally, financial 
distress. These costs reduce the attractiveness of debt financing. We concluded that an op-
timal capital structure exists when the net tax saving from an additional dollar in interest 
just equals the increase in expected financial distress costs. This is the essence of the static 
theory of capital structure.

448	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
When we examine actual capital structures, we find two regularities. First, firms in the 
United States typically do not use great amounts of debt, but they pay substantial taxes. 
This suggests that there is a limit to the use of debt financing to generate tax shields. Sec-
ond, there is wide variation in the use of debt across industries, suggesting that the nature 
of a firm’s assets and operations is an important determinant of its capital structure.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 13.3 What assumptions are necessary for M&M Proposition I to hold?
Section 13.4 Omega Corp. has $20 million in perpetual debt outstanding with a 
coupon rate of 8 percent. The tax rate is 40 percent. What is the present value of 
the tax shield?
Section 13.5 What are indirect costs of bankruptcy?
Section 13.6 The static theory of capital structure is based on the theory that firms 
use leverage up to the point where the marginal value of what two things are equal?
Section 13.7 What would generally receive the lowest priority when the assets of a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy firm are distributed?
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
13.1 	 EBIT and EPS.  Suppose the GNR Corporation has decided in favor of a capital 
restructuring that involves increasing its existing $5 million in debt to $25 million. The 
interest rate on the debt is 12 percent and is not expected to change. The firm currently 
has 1 million shares outstanding, and the price per share is $40. If the restructuring is 
expected to increase the ROE, what is the minimum level for EBIT that GNR’s 
management must be expecting? Ignore taxes in your answer. (See Problem 4.)
13.2 	 M&M Proposition II (no taxes).  The Pro Bono Corporation has a WACC of 
20 percent. Its cost of debt is 12 percent. If Pro Bono’s debt–equity ratio is 2, what 
is its cost of equity capital? Ignore taxes in your answer. (See Problem 10.)
13.3 	 M&M Proposition I (with corporate taxes).  Suppose TransGlobal Co. currently has 
no debt and its equity is worth $20,000. If the corporate tax rate is 30 percent, what 
will the value of the firm be if TransGlobal borrows $6,000 and uses the proceeds 
to buy up stock? (See Problem 14.)
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
13.1 	 To answer, we can calculate the break-even EBIT. At any EBIT above this, the 
increased financial leverage will increase EPS. Under the old capital structure, the 
interest bill is $5 million × .12 = $600,000. There are 1 million shares of stock, so, 
ignoring taxes, EPS is (EBIT − $600,000)/1 million.
	
	
Under the new capital structure, the interest expense will be $25 million × .12 = 
$3 million. Furthermore, the debt rises by $20 million. This amount is sufficient to 
repurchase $20 million/40 = 500,000 shares of stock, leaving 500,000 outstanding. 
EPS is thus (EBIT − $3 million)/500,000.

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
449
	
	
Now that we know how to calculate EPS under both scenarios, we set the two 
expressions for EPS equal to each other and solve for the break-even EBIT:
	
(EBIT − $600,000)/1 million = (EBIT − $3 million)/500,000
	
	
EBIT − $600,000 = 2 × (EBIT − $3 million) 
	
	
EBIT = $5,400,000
	
	
Verify that, in either case, EPS is $4.80 when EBIT is $5.4 million.
13.2 	 According to M&M Proposition II (no taxes), the cost of equity is:
	
	RE = RA + (RA − RD) × (D/E)
	
	
= 20% + (20% − 12%) × 2
	
	
= 36%
13.3 	 After the debt issue, TransGlobal will be worth the original $20,000 plus the 
present value of the tax shield. According to M&M Proposition I with taxes, the 
present value of the tax shield is TC × D, or .30 × $6,000 = $1,800, so the firm is 
worth $20,000 + 1,800 = $21,800.
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 1 	 13.1 	 Business Risk versus Financial Risk.  Explain what is meant by business 
and financial risk. Suppose Firm A has greater business risk than Firm B. 
Is it true that Firm A also has a higher cost of equity capital? Explain.
LO 1 	 13.2	 M&M Propositions.  How would you answer in the following debate?
  	
	
Q:	 Isn’t it true that the riskiness of a firm’s equity will rise if the firm 
increases its use of debt financing?
  	
	
A:	 Yes, that’s the essence of M&M Proposition II.
  	
	
Q:	 And isn’t it true that, as a firm increases its use of borrowing, the likelihood 
of default increases, which increases the risk of the firm’s debt?
  	
	
A:	 Yes.
  	
	
Q:	 In other words, increased borrowing increases the risk of the equity 
and the debt?
  	
	
A:	 That’s right.
  	
	
Q:	 Well, given that the firm uses only debt and equity financing, and 
given that the risk of both is increased by increased borrowing, does it 
not follow that increasing debt increases the overall risk of the firm 
and therefore decreases the value of the firm?
  	
	
A:	 ??
LO 1 	 13.3 	 Optimal Capital Structure.  Is there an easily identifiable debt–equity 
ratio that will maximize the value of a firm? Why or why not?
LO 1 	 13.4 	 Observed Capital Structures.  Refer to the observed capital structures 
given in Table 13.5 of the text. What do you notice about the types of 
industries with respect to their average debt–equity ratios? Are certain 
types of industries more likely to be highly leveraged than others? What 
are some possible reasons for this observed segmentation? Do the 
operating results and tax history of the firms play a role? How about 
their future earnings prospects? Explain.
LO 1 	 13.5 	 Financial Leverage.  Why is the use of debt financing referred to as 
using financial “leverage”?

450	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
LO 1 	 13.6 	 Homemade Leverage.  What is homemade leverage?
LO 3 	 13.7 	 Bankruptcy and Corporate Ethics.  As mentioned in the text, some 
firms have filed for bankruptcy because of actual or likely litigation-
related losses. Is this a proper use of the bankruptcy process?
LO 3 	 13.8 	 Bankruptcy and Corporate Ethics.  Firms sometimes use the threat of a 
bankruptcy filing to force creditors to renegotiate terms. Critics argue 
that in such cases, the firm is using bankruptcy laws “as a sword rather 
than a shield.” Is this an ethical tactic?
LO 3 	 13.9 	 Bankruptcy and Corporate Ethics.  As mentioned in the text, 
Continental Airlines filed for bankruptcy, at least in part, as a means of 
reducing labor costs. Whether this move was ethical, or proper, was hotly 
debated. Give both sides of the argument.
LO 1 	 13.10 	 Capital Structure Goal.  What is the basic goal of financial management 
with regard to capital structure?
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–13)
LO 1
	 1.	 EBIT and Leverage.  Kaelea, Inc., has no debt outstanding and a total market 
value of $194,775. Earnings before interest and taxes, EBIT, are projected to be 
$13,800 if economic conditions are normal. If there is strong expansion in the 
economy, then EBIT will be 20 percent higher. If there is a recession, then EBIT 
will be 35 percent lower. The company is considering a $39,750 debt issue with 
an interest rate of 6 percent. The proceeds will be used to repurchase shares of 
stock. There are currently 7,350 shares outstanding. Ignore taxes for this problem.
a.	
Calculate earnings per share, EPS, under each of the three economic 
scenarios before any debt is issued. Also, calculate the percentage 
changes in EPS when the economy expands or enters a recession.
b.	
Repeat part (a) assuming that the company goes through with recapitalization. 
What do you observe? Assume the stock price remains constant.
LO 2 	 2.	 EBIT, Taxes, and Leverage.  Repeat parts (a) and (b) in Problem 1 assuming 
the company has a tax rate of 35 percent.
LO 1
 	 3.	 ROE and Leverage.  Suppose the company in Problem 1 has a market-to-
LO 2  	   	 book ratio of 1.0.
a.	
Calculate return on equity, ROE, under each of the three economic 
scenarios before any debt is issued. Also, calculate the percentage changes 
in ROE for economic expansion and recession, assuming no taxes.
b.	 Repeat part (a) assuming the firm goes through with the proposed 
recapitalization.
c.	
Repeat parts (a) and (b) of this problem assuming the firm has a tax 
rate of 35 percent.
LO 1
 	 4.	 Break-Even EBIT.  Kyle Corporation is comparing two different capital 
structures, an all-equity plan (Plan I) and a levered plan (Plan II). Under Plan I, 
the company would have 300,000 shares of stock outstanding. Under Plan II, 
there would be 210,000 shares of stock outstanding and $2,367,000 in debt 
outstanding. The interest rate on the debt is 10 percent, and there are no taxes.

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
451
a.	
If EBIT is $600,000, which plan will result in the higher EPS?
b.	 If EBIT is $900,000, which plan will result in the higher EPS?
c.	
What is the break-even EBIT?
LO 1
 	 5.	 M&M and Stock Value.  In Problem 4, use M&M Proposition I to find the 
price per share of equity under each of the two proposed plans. What is the 
value of the firm?
LO 1
 	 6. 	 Break-Even EBIT and Leverage.  Silverton Co. is comparing two different 
LO 2  	   	 capital structures. Plan I would result in 11,500 shares of stock and 
$494,000 in debt. Plan II would result in 16,000 shares of stock and 
$260,000 in debt. The interest rate on the debt is 10 percent.
a.	
Ignoring taxes, compare both of these plans to an all-equity plan 
assuming that EBIT will be $68,000. The all-equity plan would result 
in 21,000 shares of stock outstanding. Which of the three plans has the 
highest EPS? The lowest?
b.	 In part (a), what are the break-even levels of EBIT for each plan as 
compared to that for an all-equity plan? Is one higher than the other? Why?
c.	
Ignoring taxes, when will EPS be identical for Plans I and II?
d.	 Repeat parts (a), (b), and (c) assuming that the corporate tax rate is 
35 percent. Are the break-even levels of EBIT different from before? 
Why or why not?
LO 1
 	 7. 	 Leverage and Stock Value.  Ignoring taxes in Problem 6, what is the price 
per share of equity under Plan I? Plan II? What principle is illustrated by 
your answers?
LO 1
 	 8. 	 Homemade Leverage.  FCOJ, Inc., a prominent consumer products firm, is 
debating whether or not to convert its all-equity capital structure to one that 
is 30 percent debt. Currently, there are 6,400 shares outstanding and the 
price per share is $55. EBIT is expected to remain at $19,300 per year 
forever. The interest rate on new debt is 8 percent, and there are no taxes.
a.	
Melanie, a shareholder of the firm, owns 100 shares of stock. What is 
her cash flow under the current capital structure, assuming the firm has 
a dividend payout rate of 100 percent?
b.	 What will Melanie’s cash flow be under the proposed capital structure 
of the firm? Assume that she keeps all 100 of her shares.
c.	
Suppose FCOJ does convert, but Melanie prefers the current all-equity 
capital structure. Show how she could unlever her shares of stock to 
recreate the original capital structure.
d.	 Using your answer to part (c), explain why FCOJ’s choice of capital 
structure is irrelevant.
LO 1
	 9.	 Homemade Leverage.  Lydic Enterprises is considering a change from its 
current capital structure. The company currently has an all-equity capital 
structure and is considering a capital structure with 25 percent debt. There 
are currently 6,400 shares outstanding at a price per share of $60. EBIT is 
expected to remain constant at $47,000. The interest rate on new debt is 
7 percent and there are no taxes.
a.	
Rebecca owns $18,000 worth of stock in the company. If the firm has a 
100 percent payout, what is her cash flow?
b.	 What would her cash flow be under the new capital structure assuming 
that she keeps all of her shares?

452	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
c.	
Suppose the company does convert to the new capital structure. Show 
how Rebecca can maintain her current cash flow.
d.	 Under your answer to part (c), explain why the company’s choice of 
capital structure is irrelevant.
LO 1
	 10. 	Calculating WACC.  Crosby Industries has a debt–equity ratio of 1.5. Its WACC 
is 9.1 percent, and its cost of debt is 5.5 percent. There is no corporate tax.
a.	
What is the company’s cost of equity capital?
b.	 What would the cost of equity be if the debt–equity ratio were 2.0? 
What if it were .5? What if it were zero?
LO 1
	 11. 	Calculating WACC.  Malkin Corp. has no debt but can borrow at 5.9 percent. 
The firm’s WACC is currently 9.6 percent, and there is no corporate tax.
a.	
What is the company’s cost of equity?
b.	 If the firm converts to 30 percent debt, what will its cost of equity be?
c.	
If the firm converts to 60 percent debt, what will its cost of equity be?
d.	 What is the company’s WACC in part (b)? In part (c)?
LO 2 	 12. 	M&M and Taxes.  Wolfgang can borrow at 7.1 percent. The company currently 
has no debt, and the cost of equity is 13.8 percent. The current value of the firm 
is $595,000. What will the value be if the company borrows $310,000 and uses 
the proceeds to repurchase shares? The corporate tax rate is 35 percent.
LO 2 	 13. 	Interest Tax Shield.  Incite Co. has a 38 percent tax rate. Its total interest 
payment for the year just ended was $13.8 million. What is the interest tax 
shield? How do you interpret this amount?
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 14–16)
LO 1
	 14. 	M&M.  Three Piggies Enterprises has no debt. Its current total value is 
$53 million. Ignoring taxes, what will the company’s value be if it sells 
$19.4 million in debt? Suppose now that the company’s tax rate is  
40 percent. What will its overall value be if it sells $19.4 million in  
debt? Assume debt proceeds are used to repurchase equity.
LO 1
	 15.	M&M.  In the previous question, what is the debt–equity ratio in both cases?
LO 1
	 16.	M&M.  Gamer Co. has no debt. Its cost of capital is 9.4 percent. Suppose 
the company converts to a debt–equity ratio of 1.0. The interest rate on the 
debt is 6.1 percent. Ignoring taxes, what is the company’s new cost of 
equity? What is its new WACC?
CHALLENGE (Questions 17–20)
LO 2 	 17. 	 Firm Value.  Calvert Corporation expects an EBIT of $22,300 every year 
forever. The company currently has no debt, and its cost of equity is 15 percent.
a.	
What is the current value of the company?
b.	 Suppose the company can borrow at 10 percent. If the corporate tax 
rate is 35 percent, what will the value of the firm be if the company 
takes on debt equal to 50 percent of its unlevered value? What if it 
takes on debt equal to 100 percent of its unlevered value?
c.	
What will the value of the firm be if the company takes on debt equal 
to 50 percent of its levered value? What if the company takes on debt 
equal to 100 percent of its levered value?
LO 2 	 18. 	 Firm Value.  What is the cost of capital for a firm that is 100 percent debt 
financed? What is the value of the firm?

	
c h a p t e r  1 3
Leverage and Capital Structure	
453
LO 2 	 19. 	 Cost of Equity and Leverage.  Assuming a world of corporate taxes only, 
show that the cost of equity, RE, is as follows: RE = RU + (RU − RD) × 
(D/E) × (1 − TC).
LO 2 	 20.	 Business and Financial Risk.  Assume a firm’s debt is risk-free, so that 
the cost of debt equals the risk-free rate, Rf . Define βA as the firm’s asset 
beta—that is, the systematic risk of the firm’s assets. Define βE to be the 
beta of the firm’s equity. Use the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) 
along with M&M Proposition II to show that βE = βA × (1 + D/E), where 
D/E is the debt–equity ratio. Assume the tax rate is zero.
13.1 Capital Structure.  Go to www.reuters.com and enter the ticker symbol AMGN for 
Amgen, a biotechnology company. Find the long-term debt-to-equity and total debt-to-
equity ratios. How does Amgen compare to the industry, sector, and S&P 500 in these 
areas? Now answer the same question for Edison International (EIX), the parent 
company of Southern California Edison, a utility company. How do the capital 
structures of Amgen and Edison International compare? Can you think of possible 
explanations for the difference between these two companies?
13.2 Capital Structure.  Go to finance.yahoo.com and find the stock screener. Use the 
Java stock screener to answer the following questions. How many companies have debt-
to-equity ratios greater than 2? Greater than 5? Greater than 10? What company has the 
highest debt-to-equity ratio? What is the ratio? Now find how many companies have a 
negative debt-to-equity ratio. What is the lowest debt-to-equity ratio? What does it 
mean if a company has a negative debt-to-equity ratio?
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
The TL Corporation currently has no debt outstanding. Josh Culberson, the CFO, is con-
sidering restructuring the company by issuing debt and using the proceeds to repurchase 
outstanding equity. The company’s assets are worth $40 million, the stock price is $25 per 
share, and there are 1,600,000 shares outstanding. In the expected state of the economy, 
EBIT is expected to be $3 million. If there is a recession, EBIT would fall to $1.8 million; 
in an expansion, EBIT would increase to $4.3 million. If the company issues debt, it will 
issue a combination of short-term debt and long-term debt. The ratio of short-term debt to 
long-term debt will be .20. The short-term debt will have an interest rate of 3 percent and 
the long-term debt will have an interest rate of 8 percent.
a. 	 On the applicable worksheet, fill in the values in each table. For the debt–equity 
ratio, create a spinner that changes the debt–equity ratio. The resulting debt–equity 
ratio should range from 0 to 10 at increments of .1.
b. 	 Graph the EBIT and EPS for the TL Corporation on the same graph using a scatter plot.
c. 	 What is the breakeven EBIT between the current capital structure and the new capital 
structure?
d. 	 To illustrate the new capital structure, you would like to create a pie chart. Another 
pie chart that is available is the pie-in-pie chart. Using the pie-in-pie chart, graph the 
equity and total debt in the main pie chart and the short-term debt and long-term debt 
in the secondary pie chart. Note, if you right-click on a data series in the chart and 
select Format Data Series, the Series Options will permit you to display the series by 
a customized choice. In the customization, you can select which data series you want 
displayed in the primary pie chart and the secondary pie chart.
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?

454	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
1.	
If Stephenson wishes to maximize its total market 
value, would you recommend that it issue debt or 
equity to finance the land purchase? Explain.
2.	
Construct Stephenson’s market value balance 
sheet before it announces the purchase.
3.	
Suppose Stephenson decides to issue equity to 
finance the purchase. 
	
a.	
What is the net present value of the project?
	
b.	
Construct Stephenson’s market value bal-
ance sheet after it announces that the firm 
will finance the purchase using equity. What 
would be the new price per share of the firm’s 
stock? How many shares will Stephenson 
need to issue to finance the purchase?
	
c.	
Construct Stephenson’s market value bal-
ance sheet after the equity issue but before 
the purchase has been made. How many 
shares of common stock does Stephenson 
have outstanding? What is the price per share 
of the firm’s stock?
	
d.	
Construct Stephenson’s market value bal-
ance sheet after the purchase has been 
made.
4.	
Suppose Stephenson decides to issue debt to fi-
nance the purchase. 
	
a.	
What will the market value of the Stephenson 
Company be if the purchase is financed with 
debt?
	
b.	
Construct Stephenson’s market value bal-
ance sheet after both the debt issue and the 
land purchase. What is the price per share of 
the firm’s stock?
5.	
Which method of financing maximizes the per-share 
stock price of Stephenson’s equity?
Q U E ST I ONS
CHAPTER CASE
Stephenson Real Estate Recapitalization
S
tephenson Real Estate Company was founded 
25 years ago by the current CEO, Robert Stephenson. 
The company purchases real estate, including land and 
buildings, and rents the property to tenants. The com-
pany has shown a profit every year for the past 18 years, 
and the shareholders are satisfied with the company’s 
management. Prior to founding Stephenson Real Estate, 
Robert was the founder and CEO of a failed alpaca farm-
ing operation. The resulting bankruptcy made him ex-
tremely averse to debt financing. As a result, the 
company is entirely equity financed, with 9 million 
shares of common stock outstanding. The stock cur-
rently trades at $42.50 per share.
	
Stephenson is evaluating a plan to purchase a huge 
tract of land in the southeastern United States for $50 mil-
lion. The land will subsequently be leased to tenant farm-
ers. This purchase is expected to increase Stephenson’s 
annual pretax earnings by $12 million in perpetuity. Kim 
Weyand, the company’s new CFO, has been put in charge 
of the project. Kim has determined that the company’s cur-
rent cost of capital is 12.5 percent. She feels that the com-
pany would be more valuable if it included debt in its 
capital structure, so she is evaluating whether the com-
pany should issue debt to entirely finance the project. 
Based on some conversations with investment banks, she 
thinks that the company can issue bonds at par value with 
a coupon rate of 8 percent. From her analysis, she also 
believes that a capital structure in the range of 70 percent 
equity/30 percent debt would be optimal. If the company 
goes beyond 30 percent debt, its bonds would carry a 
lower rating and a much higher coupon because the pos-
sibility of financial distress and the associated costs would 
rise sharply. Stephenson has a 40 percent corporate tax 
rate (state and federal).

455
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
O
n March 9, 2015, chip-maker Qualcomm announced a broad 
plan to reward stockholders for the recent success of the 
firm’s business. Under the plan, Qualcomm would (1) boost its 
annual dividend by 14 percent, from 42 cents per share to 48 cents 
per share, and (2) repurchase about $15 billion of its common stock, 
with $10 billion of the purchase in the next 12 months. Investors 
cheered, bidding up the stock price by about 2.5 percent on the 
announcement. Why were investors pleased? To find out, this chap-
ter explores these actions and their implications for shareholders.
This chapter is about dividend policy. In Chapter 7, we saw that 
the value of a share of stock depends on all the future dividends 
that will be paid to shareholders. In that analysis, we took the future 
stream of dividends as given. What we now examine is how corpo-
rations decide on the size and timing of dividend payments. What we would like to find out is 
how to establish an optimal dividend policy, meaning a dividend policy that maximizes the 
stock price. What we discover, among other things, is that it is not at all clear how to do this, 
or even if there is such a thing as an optimal dividend policy!
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Discuss dividend types and how 
dividends are paid.
LO 2 	 Explain the issues surrounding 
dividend policy decisions.
LO 3 	 Differentiate between cash and 
stock dividends.
LO 4 	 Explain why share repurchases are 
an alternative to dividends.
Dividends and  
Dividend Policy
14
D
ividend policy is an important subject in corporate finance, and dividends are a major 
cash outlay for many corporations. At first glance, it may seem obvious that a firm 
would always want to give as much as possible back to its shareholders by paying dividends. 
It might seem equally obvious, however, that a firm can always invest the money for its 
shareholders instead of paying it out. The heart of the dividend policy question is just this: 
Should the firm pay out money to its shareholders, or should the firm take that money and 
invest it for its shareholders?
It may seem surprising, but much research and economic logic suggest that dividend 
policy doesn’t matter. In fact, it turns out that the dividend policy issue is much like the 
capital structure question. The important elements are not difficult to identify, but the 
­interactions between those elements are complex, and no easy answer exists.

456	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
Dividend policy is controversial. Many implausible reasons are given for why divi-
dend policy might be important, and many of the claims made about dividend policy are 
economically illogical. Even so, in the real world of corporate finance, determining the 
most appropriate dividend policy is considered an important issue. It could be that finan-
cial managers who worry about dividend policy are wasting time, but it could also be true 
that we are missing something important in our discussions.
In part, all discussions of dividends are plagued by the “two-handed lawyer” problem. 
President Truman, while discussing the legal implications of a possible presidential deci-
sion, asked his staff to set up a meeting with a lawyer. Supposedly, Mr. Truman said, “But 
I don’t want one of those two-handed lawyers.” When asked what a two-handed lawyer 
was, he replied, “You know, a lawyer who says, ‘On the one hand I recommend you do so 
and so because of the following reasons, but on the other hand I recommend that you don’t 
do it because of these other reasons.’ ”
Unfortunately, any sensible treatment of dividend policy will appear to have been writ-
ten by a two-handed lawyer (or, in fairness, several two-handed financial economists). On 
the one hand, there are many good reasons for corporations to pay high dividends, but, on 
the other hand, there are also many good reasons to pay low dividends.
We cover three broad topics that relate to dividends and dividend policy in this chap-
ter. First, we describe the various kinds of dividends and how dividends are paid. Second, 
we consider an idealized case in which dividend policy doesn’t matter. We then discuss the 
limitations of this case and present some real-world arguments for both high- and low-
dividend payouts. Finally, we conclude the chapter by looking at some strategies that cor-
porations might employ to implement a dividend policy, and we discuss share repurchases 
as an alternative to dividends.
 CASH DIVIDENDS AND DIVIDEND PAYMENT
The term dividend usually refers to cash paid out of earnings. If a payment is made from 
sources other than current or accumulated retained earnings, the term distribution, rather 
than dividend, is used. However, it is acceptable to refer to a distribution from earnings as 
a dividend and a distribution from capital as a liquidating dividend. More generally, any 
direct payment by the corporation to the shareholders may be considered a dividend or a 
part of dividend policy.
Dividends come in several different forms. The basic types of cash dividends are:
  1.	 Regular cash dividends
  2.	 Extra dividends
  3.	 Special dividends
  4.	 Liquidating dividends
Later in the chapter, we discuss dividends paid in stock instead of cash, and we also con-
sider an alternative to cash dividends, a stock repurchase.
Cash Dividends
The most common type of dividend is a cash dividend. Commonly, public companies pay 
regular cash dividends four times a year. As the name suggests, these are cash payments 
made directly to shareholders, and they are made in the regular course of business. In other 
words, management sees nothing unusual about the dividend and no reason why it won’t be 
continued.
14.1
dividend
Payment made out of a 
firm’s earnings to its 
owners, in the form of 
either cash or stock.
distribution
Payment made by a firm 
to its owners from sources 
other than current or 
accumulated retained 
earnings.
regular cash 
dividend
Cash payment made by a 
firm to its owners in the 
normal course of business, 
usually quarterly.

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
457
Sometimes firms will pay a regular cash dividend and an extra cash dividend. By call-
ing part of the payment “extra,” management is indicating that that part may or may not be 
repeated in the future. A special dividend is similar, but the name usually indicates that this 
dividend is viewed as a truly unusual or one-time event and it won’t be repeated. Finally, 
the payment of a liquidating dividend usually means that some or all of the business has 
been liquidated, that is, sold off.
However it is labeled, a cash dividend payment reduces corporate cash and retained earn-
ings, except in the case of a liquidating dividend (where paid-in capital may be reduced).
Of course, there are other types of dividends. Companies listed on the Japanese Nikkei 
stock market have given shareholders alternative dividends in the form of food items, pre-
paid phone cards, and so forth. For example, McDonald’s Holdings Company (Japan) gave 
its shareholders coupon books for free hamburgers.
Standard Method of Cash Dividend Payment
The decision to pay a dividend rests in the hands of the board of directors of the corpora-
tion. When a dividend has been declared, it becomes a liability of the firm and cannot be 
rescinded easily. Sometime after it has been declared, a dividend is distributed to all share-
holders as of some specific date.
Commonly, the amount of the cash dividend is expressed in terms of dollars per share 
(dividends per share). As we have seen in other chapters, it is also expressed as a percent-
age of the market price (the dividend yield) or as a percentage of net income or earnings 
per share (the dividend payout).
Dividend Payment: A Chronology
The mechanics of a cash dividend payment can be illustrated by the example in Figure 14.1 
and the following description:
  1.	 Declaration date. On January 15, the board of directors passes a resolution to pay a 
dividend of $1 per share on February 16 to all holders of record as of January 30.
  2.	 Ex-dividend date. To make sure that dividend checks go to the right people, 
brokerage firms and stock exchanges establish an ex-dividend date. This date is two 
business days before the date of record (discussed next). If you buy the stock before 
this date, then you are entitled to the dividend. If you buy on this date or after, then 
the previous owner will get the dividend. 
declaration date
Date on which the board 
of directors passes a 
resolution to pay a 
dividend.
ex-dividend date
Date two business days 
before the date of 
record, establishing 
those individuals entitled 
to a dividend.
f i g u r e  14.1
Example of the 
procedure for 
dividend payment
Thursday,
January
15
Declaration
date
Wednesday,
January
28
Ex-dividend
date
Friday,
January
30
Record
date
Monday,
February
16
Payment
date
1. Declaration date: The board of directors declares a payment of dividends.
2. Ex-dividend date: A share of stock goes ex dividend on the date the seller
is entitled to keep the dividend; under NYSE rules, shares are traded ex
dividend on and after the second business day before the record date. 
3. Record date: The declared dividends are distributable to those who are
shareholders of record as of this specific date. 
4. Payment date: The dividend checks are mailed to shareholders of record.

458	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
	
	
In Figure 14.1, Wednesday, January 28, is the ex-dividend date. Before this date, 
the stock is said to trade “with dividend,” or “cum dividend.” Afterwards, the stock 
trades “ex dividend.” 
	
	
The ex-dividend date convention removes any ambiguity about who is entitled to 
the dividend. Because the dividend is valuable, the stock price will be affected when 
the stock goes “ex.” We examine this effect below.
  3.	 Date of record. Based on its records, the corporation prepares a list on January 30 of 
all individuals believed to be stockholders. These are the holders of record, and 
January 30 is the date of record (or record date). The word believed is important 
here. If you bought the stock just before this date, the corporation’s records might not 
reflect that fact because of mailing or other delays. Without some modification, some 
of the dividend checks would get mailed to the wrong people. This is the reason for 
the ex-dividend day convention.
  4.	 Date of payment. The dividend checks are mailed on February 16.
More on the Ex-Dividend Date
The ex-dividend date is important and is a common source of confusion. We examine what 
happens to the stock when it goes ex, meaning that the ex-dividend date arrives. To illus-
trate, suppose we have a stock that sells for $10 per share. The board of directors declares 
a dividend of $1 per share, and the record date is Tuesday, June 12. Based on our discus-
sion above, we know that the ex date will be two business (not calendar) days earlier, on 
Friday, June 8.
If you buy the stock on Thursday, June 7, right as the market closes, you’ll get the 
$1 dividend because the stock is trading cum dividend. If you wait and buy the stock right 
as the market opens on Friday, you won’t get the $1 dividend. What will happen to the 
value of the stock overnight?
If you think about it, the stock is obviously worth about $1 less on Friday morning, so 
its price will drop by this amount between close of business on Thursday and the Friday 
opening. In general, we expect that the value of a share of stock will go down by about the 
dividend amount when the stock goes ex dividend. The key word here is about. Because 
dividends are taxed, the actual price drop might be closer to some measure of the aftertax 
value of the dividend. Determining this value is complicated because of the different tax 
rates and tax rules that apply for different buyers. The series of events described here is 
illustrated in Figure 14.2.
date of record
Date by which holders 
must be on record to 
receive a dividend.
date of payment
Date that the dividend 
checks are mailed.
f i g u r e  14.2
Price behavior 
around the  
ex-dividend date for 
a $1 cash dividend
Price 5 $10 
Price 5 $9 
$1 is the ex-dividend price drop
2t               22    21    0     11     12              t
Ex date
The stock price will fall by the amount of the dividend on the ex
date (Time 0). If the dividend is $1 per share, the price will be
equal to $10 – 1 5 $9 on the ex date.
Before ex date (Time –1)
On ex date (Time 0)
Dividend 5 $0
Dividend 5 $1  
Price 5 $10
Price 5 $  9  

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
459
As an example of the price drop on the ex-dividend date, consider the enormous spe-
cial dividend Pilgrim’s Pride (PPC) paid in January 2015. PPC is a leading supplier of 
chicken in the United States. The special dividend was for about $1.5 billion, or $5.77 per 
share. At a time when the stock price was around $37, this payment represented about 
16 percent of the stock price.
The stock went ex dividend on January 28, 2015. The stock price chart here shows the 
change in PPC stock four days prior to the ex-dividend date and three days after the ex-
dividend date.
40
35
30
25
23
26
27
28
29
30
01/22/2015
2
02/02/2015
Set
1d  .  5d  .  3m  .  6m  .  1y  .  3y  .  5y
The stock closed at $37.02 on January 27 and opened at $31.48 on January 28—a drop of 
$5.54, or slightly less than the amount of the special dividend.
EXAMPLE
14.1  “Ex” Marks the Day
The board of directors of Divided Airlines has declared a dividend of $2.50 per share payable on 
Tuesday, May 30, to shareholders of record as of Tuesday, May 9. Cal Icon buys 100 shares of 
­Divided on Tuesday, May 2, for $150 per share. What is the ex date? Describe the events that will 
occur with regard to the cash dividend and the stock price.
	
The ex date is two business days before the date of record, Tuesday, May 9, so the stock will 
go ex on Friday, May 5. Cal buys the stock on Tuesday, May 2, so Cal purchases the stock cum 
­dividend. In other words, Cal will get $2.50 × 100 = $250 in dividends. The check will be mailed on 
Tuesday, May 30. When the stock does go ex on Friday, its value will drop overnight by about 
$2.50 per share.
concept questions
14.1a 	 What are the different types of cash dividends?
14.1b 	 What are the mechanics of the cash dividend payment?
14.1c 	 How should the price of a stock change when the stock goes ex dividend?

460	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
 DOES DIVIDEND POLICY MATTER?
To decide whether or not dividend policy matters, we first have to define what we mean by 
dividend policy. All other things being the same, of course dividends matter. Dividends are 
paid in cash, and cash is something that everybody likes. The question we will be discuss-
ing here is whether the firm should pay out cash now or invest the cash and pay it out later. 
Dividend policy, therefore, is the time pattern of dividend payout. In particular, should the 
firm pay out a large percentage of its earnings now or a small (or even zero) percentage? 
This is the dividend policy question.
An Illustration of the Irrelevance of Dividend Policy
A powerful argument can be made that dividend policy does not matter. We illustrate this 
by considering the simple case of Wharton Corporation. Wharton is an all-equity firm that 
has existed for 10 years. The current financial managers plan to dissolve the firm in two 
years. The total cash flows the firm will generate, including the proceeds from liquidation, 
are $10,000 in each of the next two years.
Current Policy: Dividends Set Equal to Cash Flow 
At the present time, divi-
dends at each date are set equal to the cash flow of $10,000. There are 100 shares outstand-
ing, so the dividend per share will be $100. In Chapter 7, we showed that the value of the 
stock is equal to the present value of the future dividends. Assuming a 10 percent required 
return, the value of a share of stock today, P0, is:
 P0 =
D1
(1 + R)1 +
D2
(1 + R)2
 = $100
1.10 + 100
1.102 = $173.55
The firm as a whole is thus worth: 100 × $173.55 = $17,355.
Several members of the board of Wharton have expressed dissatisfaction with the cur-
rent dividend policy and have asked you to analyze an alternative policy.
Alternative Policy: Initial Dividend Greater than Cash Flow 
Another pol-
icy is for the firm to pay a dividend of $110 per share on the first date (Date 1), which 
is, of course, a total dividend of $11,000. Because the cash flow is only $10,000, an 
extra $1,000 must somehow be raised. One way to do this is to issue $1,000 worth of 
bonds or stock at Date 1. Assume that stock is issued. The new stockholders will desire 
enough cash flow at Date 2 so that they earn the required 10 percent return on their 
Date 1 investment.
What is the value of the firm with this new dividend policy? The new stockholders 
invest $1,000. They require a 10 percent return, so they will demand $1,000 × 1.10 = 
$1,100 of the Date 2 cash flow, leaving only $8,900 to the old stockholders. The dividends 
to the old stockholders will be:
Date 1
Date 2
Aggregate dividends to old stockholders
$11,000
$8,900
Dividends per share
       110
       89
14.2

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
461
The present value of the dividends per share is therefore:
P0 = $110
1.10 + 89
1.102 = $173.55
This is the same value we had before.
The value of the stock is not affected by this switch in dividend policy even though 
we had to sell some new stock just to finance the dividend. In fact, no matter what pat-
tern of dividend payout the firm chooses, the value of the stock will always be the same 
in this example. In other words, for the Wharton Corporation, dividend policy makes no 
difference. The reason is simple: Any increase in a dividend at some point in time is ex-
actly offset by a decrease somewhere else, so the net effect, once we account for time 
value, is zero.
A Test
Our discussion to this point can be summarized by considering the following true-false test 
questions:
  1.	 True or false: Dividends are irrelevant.
  2.	 True or false: Dividend policy is irrelevant.
The first statement is surely false, and the reason follows from common sense. Clearly, 
investors prefer higher dividends to lower dividends at any single date if the dividend level 
is held constant at every other date. To be more precise regarding the first question, if the 
dividend per share at a given date is raised, while the dividend per share at every other date 
is held constant, the stock price will rise. The reason is that the present value of the future 
dividends must go up if this occurs. This action can be accomplished by management deci-
sions that improve productivity, increase tax savings, strengthen product marketing, or oth-
erwise improve cash flow.
The second statement is true, at least in the simple case we have been examining. 
Dividend policy by itself cannot raise the dividend at one date while keeping it the same 
at all other dates. Rather, dividend policy merely establishes the trade-off between divi-
dends at one date and dividends at another date. Once we allow for time value, the pres-
ent value of the dividend stream is unchanged. Thus, in this simple world, dividend 
policy does not matter, because managers choosing either to raise or to lower the current 
dividend do not affect the current value of their firm. However, we have ignored several 
real-world factors that might lead us to change our minds; we pursue some of these in 
subsequent sections.
Some Real-World Factors Favoring a Low Payout
The example we used to illustrate the irrelevance of dividend policy ignored taxes and 
flotation costs. We will now see that these factors might lead us to prefer a low-dividend 
payout.
Taxes 
U.S. tax laws are complex, and they affect dividend policy in a number of 
ways. The key tax feature has to do with the taxation of dividend income and capital 
gains. For individual shareholders, effective tax rates on dividend income are higher 
than the tax rates on capital gains. Historically, dividends received have been taxed as 
ordinary income. Capital gains have been taxed at somewhat lower rates, and the tax 
on a capital gain is deferred until the stock is sold. This second aspect of capital gains 

462	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
taxation makes the effective tax rate much lower because the present value of the tax 
is less.1
A firm that adopts a low-dividend payout will reinvest the money instead of paying it 
out. This reinvestment increases the value of the firm and of the equity. All other things 
being equal, the net effect is that the expected capital gains portion of the return will be 
higher in the future. So the fact that capital gains are taxed favorably may lead us to prefer 
this approach.
Recent tax law changes have led to a renewed interest in the effect of taxes on cor-
porate dividend policies. As we previously noted, historically dividends have been taxed 
as ordinary income (at ordinary income tax rates). In 2003, this changed dramatically. 
The maximum tax rate on dividends was lowered from the 35–39 percent range to 15 per-
cent, giving corporations a much larger tax incentive to pay dividends. In 2015, the tax 
rate on dividends was 0 percent, 15 percent, or 20 percent, depending on the individual’s 
income.
Flotation Costs 
In our example illustrating that dividend policy doesn’t matter, we 
saw that the firm could sell some new stock if necessary to pay a dividend. As we discuss 
in our next chapter, selling new stock can be very expensive. If we include the costs of sell-
ing stock (“flotation” costs) in our argument, then we will find that the value of the stock 
decreases if we sell new stock.
More generally, imagine two firms identical in every way except that one pays out a 
greater percentage of its cash flow in the form of dividends. Because the other firm plows 
back more, its equity grows faster. If these two firms are to remain identical, then the one 
with the higher payout will have to periodically sell some stock to catch up. Because this is 
expensive, a firm might be inclined to have a low payout.
Dividend Restrictions 
In some cases, a corporation may face restrictions on its abil-
ity to pay dividends. For example, as we discussed in Chapter 6, a common feature of a 
bond indenture is a covenant prohibiting dividend payments above some level. Also, a 
corporation may be prohibited by state law from paying dividends if the dividend amount 
exceeds the firm’s retained earnings.
Some Real-World Factors Favoring a High Payout
In this section, we consider reasons a firm might pay its shareholders higher dividends 
even if it means the firm must issue more shares of stock to finance the dividend 
payments.
Desire for Current Income 
It has been argued that many individuals desire current 
income. The classic example is the group of retired people and others living on a fixed in-
come, the proverbial “widows and orphans.” It is argued that this group is willing to pay a 
premium to get a higher dividend yield.
1 In fact, capital gains taxes can sometimes be avoided altogether. Although we do not recommend this 
particular tax-avoidance strategy, the capital gains tax may be avoided by dying. Your heirs are not 
considered to have a capital gain, so the tax liability dies when you do. In this instance, you can take it 
with you.

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
463
It is easy to see, however, that this argument is not relevant in our simple case. An in-
dividual preferring high current cash flow but holding low-dividend securities could easily 
sell off shares to provide the necessary funds. Similarly, an individual desiring a low cur-
rent cash flow but holding high-dividend securities could just reinvest the dividends. Thus, 
in a world of no transaction costs, a policy of high current dividends would be of no value 
to the stockholder.
The current-income argument may have relevance in the real world. Here, the sale of 
low-dividend stocks would involve brokerage fees and other transaction costs. Such a sale 
might also trigger capital gains taxes. These direct cash expenses could be avoided by an 
investment in high-dividend securities. In addition, the expenditure of the stockholder’s 
own time when selling securities and the natural (though not necessarily rational) fear of 
consuming out of principal might further lead many investors to buy high-dividend 
securities.
Tax and Legal Benefits from High Dividends 
Earlier we saw that dividends 
were taxed unfavorably for individual investors. This fact is a powerful argument for a low 
payout. However, there are a number of other investors who do not receive unfavorable tax 
treatment from holding high-dividend yield, rather than low-dividend yield, securities.
Corporate investors  A significant tax break on dividends occurs when a corporation 
owns stock in another corporation. A corporate stockholder receiving either common or 
preferred dividends is granted a 70 percent (or more) dividend exclusion. The 70 percent 
exclusion does not apply to capital gains, so this group is taxed unfavorably on capital 
gains.
As a result of the dividend exclusion, high-dividend, low-capital gains stocks may be 
more appropriate for corporations to hold. In fact, this is why corporations hold a substan-
tial percentage of the outstanding preferred stock in the economy. This tax advantage of 
dividends also leads some corporations to hold high-yielding stocks instead of long-term 
bonds because there is no similar tax exclusion of interest payments to corporate 
bondholders.
Tax-exempt investors  We have pointed out both the tax advantages and the tax disadvan-
tages of a low-dividend payout. Of course, this discussion is irrelevant to those in zero tax 
brackets. This group includes some of the largest investors in the economy, such as pension 
funds, endowment funds, and trust funds.
There are some legal reasons for large institutions to favor high-dividend yields. First, 
institutions such as pension funds and trust funds are often set up to manage money for the 
benefit of others. The managers of such institutions have a fiduciary responsibility to invest 
the money prudently. It has been considered imprudent in courts of law to buy stock in 
companies with no established dividend record.
Second, institutions such as university endowment funds and trust funds are frequently 
prohibited from spending any of the principal. Such institutions might therefore prefer 
high-dividend yield stocks so they have some ability to spend. Like widows and orphans, 
this group thus prefers current income. Unlike widows and orphans, this group is very 
large in terms of the amount of stock owned.
Overall, individual investors (for whatever reason) may have a desire for current in-
come and may thus be willing to pay the dividend tax. In addition, some very large inves-
tors such as corporations and tax-free institutions may have a very strong preference for 
high-dividend payouts.

464	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
Clientele Effects: A Resolution of Real-World Factors?
In our earlier discussion, we saw that some groups (wealthy individuals, for example) 
have an incentive to pursue low-payout (or zero payout) stocks. Other groups (corpora-
tions, for example) have an incentive to pursue high-payout stocks. Companies with 
high payouts will thus attract one group, and low-payout companies will attract 
another.
These different groups are called clienteles, and what we have described is a clientele 
effect. The clientele effect argument states that different groups of investors desire differ-
ent levels of dividends. When a firm chooses a particular dividend policy, the only effect is 
to attract a particular clientele. If a firm changes its dividend policy, then it just attracts a 
different clientele.
What we are left with is a simple supply and demand argument. Suppose 40 per-
cent of all investors prefer high dividends, but only 20 percent of the firms pay high 
dividends. Here, the high-dividend firms will be in short supply; thus, their stock 
prices will rise. Consequently, low-dividend firms will find it advantageous to switch 
policies until 40 percent of all firms have high payouts. At this point, the dividend 
market is in equilibrium. Further changes in dividend policy are pointless because all 
of the clienteles are satisfied. The dividend policy for any individual firm is now 
irrelevant.
To see if you understand the clientele effect, consider the following statement: In spite 
of the theoretical argument that dividend policy is irrelevant or that firms should not pay 
dividends, many investors like high dividends; because of this fact, a firm can boost its 
share price by having a higher dividend payout ratio. True or false?
The answer is “false” if clienteles exist. As long as enough high-dividend firms satisfy 
the dividend-loving investors, a firm won’t be able to boost its share price by paying high 
dividends. An unsatisfied clientele must exist for this to happen, and there is no evidence 
that this is the case.
concept questions
14.2a 	 Are dividends irrelevant?
14.2b 	 What are some of the reasons for a low payout?
14.2c 	 What are the implications of dividend clienteles for payout policies?
 STOCK REPURCHASES: AN ALTERNATIVE 
TO CASH DIVIDENDS
Thus far in our chapter, we have considered cash dividends. However, cash dividends are 
not the only way corporations distribute cash. Instead, a company can repurchase its own 
stock. Repurchases (or buybacks) have become an increasingly popular tool, and the 
amount spent on repurchases has become huge. For example, in 2014, $553 billion of stock 
was repurchased by S&P 500 companies, a tremendous increase from the recent low of 
$138 billion in 2009.
Another way to see how important repurchases have become is to compare them to 
cash dividends. Consider Figure 14.3, which shows aggregate real (inflation-adjusted) 
clientele effect
Argument that stocks 
attract particular groups 
based on dividend yield 
and the resulting tax 
effects.
14.3
repurchase
Refers to a firm’s purchase 
of its own stock; an 
alternative to a cash 
dividend. Also called stock 
repurchase.

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
465
dividends and stock repurchases by publicly held U.S. industrial firms for the period 
1971–2013, along with the combined total. Aggregate real dividends have grown rela-
tively steadily through time, but repurchases have exploded in the last two decades. They 
reached a peak in 2007 of $563 billion, or about 2.5 times the size of aggregate divi-
dends. Repurchases plunged in the 2008–2009 recession as firms conserved cash, but 
they rebounded in 2010. Not shown on the graph is 2014, during which repurchases re-
turned to near-2007 levels.
Share repurchases are typically accomplished in one of three ways. First, companies 
may simply purchase their own stock, just as anyone would buy shares of a particular 
stock. In these open market purchases, the firm does not reveal itself as the buyer. Thus, 
the seller does not know whether the shares were sold back to the firm or to just another 
investor.
Second, the firm could institute a tender offer. Here, the firm announces to all of its 
stockholders that it is willing to buy a fixed number of shares at a specific price. For 
example, suppose Arts and Crafts (A&C), Inc., has 1 million shares of stock outstanding, 
with a stock price of $50 per share. The firm makes a tender offer to buy back 300,000 
shares at $60 per share. A&C chooses a price above $50 to induce shareholders to sell, 
that is, tender, their shares. In fact, if the tender price is set high enough, shareholders 
may very well want to sell more than the 300,000 shares. In the extreme case where all 
Total payout
Repurchases
Dividends
$0 
$100 
$200 
$300 
$400 
$500 
$600 
$700 
$800 
$900 
1971 
1972 
1973 
1974 
1975 
1976 
1977 
1978 
1979 
1980 
1981 
1982 
1983 
1984 
1985 
1986 
1987 
1988 
1989 
1990 
1991 
1992 
1993 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
Billions of real 2012 USD 
f ig u r e  14.3
Aggregate real (2012) dividends and stock repurchases by publicly held U.S. industrial firms: 
1971–2013
Source: Redrawn by authors using Compustat data, following Farre-Mensa, Michaely, and Schmalz, “Payout Policy,” Annual Review of Financial 
Economics 6 (2014), pp. 75–134.

466	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
outstanding shares are tendered, A&C will buy back 3 out of every 10 shares that a 
shareholder has.
Finally, firms may repurchase shares from specific individual stockholders. This pro-
cedure has been called a targeted repurchase. For example, suppose the International Bio-
technology Corporation purchased approximately 10 percent of the outstanding stock of 
the Prime Robotics Company (P-R Co.) in April at around $38 per share. At that time, In-
ternational Biotechnology announced to the Securities and Exchange Commission that it 
might eventually try to take control of P-R Co. In May, P-R Co. repurchased the Interna-
tional Biotechnology holdings at $48 per share, well above the market price at that time. 
This offer was not extended to other shareholders.
Cash Dividends versus Repurchase
Imagine an all-equity company with excess cash of $300,000. The firm pays no dividends, 
and its net income for the year just ended is $49,000. The market value balance sheet at the 
end of the year is represented here:
Market Value Balance Sheet 
(before paying out excess cash)
Excess cash
  $    300,000
Debt
$               0
Other assets
               700,000
Equity
  1,000,000
  Total
  $1,000,000
  Total
$1,000,000
There are 100,000 shares outstanding. The total market value of the equity is $1 million, so 
the stock sells for $10 per share. Earnings per share (EPS) are $49,000/100,000 = $.49, and 
the price–earnings ratio (PE) is $10/.49 = 20.4.
One option the company is considering is a $300,000/100,000 = $3 per share extra 
cash dividend. Alternatively, the company is thinking of using the money to repurchase 
$300,000/10 = 30,000 shares of stock.
If commissions, taxes, and other imperfections are ignored in our example, the stock-
holders shouldn’t care which option is chosen. Does this seem surprising? It shouldn’t, re-
ally. What is happening here is that the firm is paying out $300,000 in cash. The new 
balance sheet is represented here:
Market Value Balance Sheet 
(after paying out excess cash)
Excess cash
$              0
Debt
$               0
Other assets
    700,000
Equity
    700,000
  Total
$700,000
  Total
$700,000
If the cash is paid out as a dividend, there are still 100,000 shares outstanding, so each is 
worth $7.
The fact that the per-share value fell from $10 to $7 is not a cause for concern. Con-
sider a stockholder who owns 100 shares. At $10 per share before the dividend, the total 
value is $1,000.
After the $3 dividend, this same stockholder has 100 shares worth $7 each, for a total 
of $700, plus 100 × $3 = $300 in cash, for a combined total of $1,000. This just illustrates 
what we saw early on: A cash dividend doesn’t affect a stockholder’s wealth if there are 

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
467
no imperfections. In this case, the stock price simply fell by $3 when the stock went ex 
dividend.
Also, because total earnings and the number of shares outstanding haven’t changed, 
EPS is still 49 cents. The price–earnings ratio, however, falls to $7/.49 = 14.3. Why we are 
looking at accounting earnings and PE ratios will be apparent in just a moment.
Alternatively, if the company repurchases 30,000 shares, there are 70,000 left out-
standing. The balance sheet looks the same:
Market Value Balance Sheet 
(after share repurchase)
Excess cash
$             0
Debt
$            0
Other assets
  700,000
Equity
   700,000
  Total
$700,000
  Total
$700,000
The company is worth $700,000 again, so each remaining share is worth $700,000/70,000 = 
$10. Our stockholder with 100 shares is obviously unaffected. For example, if she was so 
inclined, she could sell 30 shares and end up with $300 in cash and $700 in stock, just as she 
has if the firm pays the cash dividend. This is an example of a homemade dividend.
In this second case, EPS goes up because total earnings remain the same while the num-
ber of shares goes down. The new EPS is $49,000/70,000 = $.70. However, the important 
thing to notice is that the PE ratio is $10/.70 = 14.3, just as it was following the dividend.
This example illustrates the important point that, if there are no imperfections, a 
cash dividend and a share repurchase are essentially the same thing. This is just another 
illustration of dividend policy irrelevance when there are no taxes or other 
imperfections.
Real-World Considerations in a Repurchase
The example we have just described shows that a repurchase and a cash dividend are the 
same thing in a world without taxes and transaction costs. In the real world, there are some 
accounting differences between a share repurchase and a cash dividend, but the most im-
portant difference is in the tax treatment.
Under current tax law, a repurchase has a significant tax advantage over a cash divi-
dend. A dividend is taxed, and a shareholder has no choice about whether or not to receive 
the dividend. In a repurchase, a shareholder pays taxes only if (1) the shareholder actually 
chooses to sell and (2) the shareholder has a capital gain on the sale.
For example, suppose a dividend of $1 per share is taxed at ordinary rates. Investors in 
the 28 percent tax bracket who own 100 shares of the security pay $100 × .28 = $28 in taxes. 
Selling shareholders would pay far lower taxes if $100 worth of stock were repurchased. This 
is because taxes are paid only on the profit from a sale. Thus, the gain on a sale would be only 
$40 if shares sold at $100 were originally purchased at $60. The capital gains tax would be 
.28 × $40 = $11.20. Note that the recent reductions in dividend and capital gains tax rates do 
not change the fact that a repurchase has a potentially large tax edge.
To give a few examples of recent activity, Apple spent $56 billion on buybacks in 
2014 alone! And IBM is well-known for its aggressive buyback policies. In 2014, the com-
pany repurchased $13.7 billion of its stock. This buyback allowed the company to surpass 
the $50 billion it projected that it would spend from 2010 through 2015. However, the 
company subsequently slowed down its repurchases, announcing that it would likely spend 
$6.3 billion in 2015. So how much of its stock has IBM repurchased? In 1995, the com-
pany had about 2.2 billion shares of stock outstanding. At the end of 2014, there were only 

468
Stock Buybacks: No End in Sight
A
lthough the recent recession slowed stock buybacks, 
recently buybacks have begun to grow again. In fact, for 
the past several years, share repurchases have been so 
large that U.S. corporations bought back more shares than 
they sold. In other words, aggregate net equity raised by 
U.S. corporations has been negative. For example, during 
2014, S&P 500 companies repurchased about $553 billion 
of stock, while at the same time new equity issuance was 
only $169 billion.
	
Some companies appear to have become serial repur-
chasers. For example, ExxonMobil spent $13 billion to repur-
chase its stock in 2014. In fact, from 2004 to 2014, 
ExxonMobil repurchased more than $219 billion of its stock. 
Although Exxon has a recent history of large buybacks, it 
greatly reduced its buyback for 2015 to a mere $4 billion. 
Microsoft is another serial repurchaser. During its 2014 fiscal 
year, the company repurchased about $6.4 billion of its 
stock and had repurchased about $120 billion over the 
2004–2014 period. And Microsoft still had plans to repur-
chase at least $35.1 billion more of its stock.
	
Stock buybacks have evolved to the point where they 
are used for other purposes. For example, in January 2005, 
consumer products giant Procter & Gamble (P&G) an-
nounced that it was purchasing razor manufacturer Gillette 
for $54 billion. The purchase was paid for entirely with stock 
in P&G. This is important because if a company acquires an-
other company for cash, the shareholders of the acquired 
company may be forced to pay taxes. If shareholders 
receive stock, no taxes are due. What made the deal unique 
was that P&G announced at the same time that it would re-
purchase from $18 to $22 billion in stock. Thus, P&G essen-
tially paid about 60 percent in stock and 40 percent in cash, 
but the way the deal was structured made it look like a 
100 percent stock acquisition to Gillette’s stockholders.
	
Stock buybacks can be a large percentage of a com-
pany’s equity. For example, Las Vegas Sands repurchased 
$7.1 billion of its stock from 2012 through 2015. While this 
amount is not as large as many other buybacks, it repre-
sented about 20 percent of the company’s stock. Another 
example is Seagate Technology, which spent about $2 bil-
lion on buybacks in 2014, or about 11 percent of the compa-
ny’s value. And auto parts supplier Delphi repurchased 
$2.5 billion of its stock in 2014 and 2015, which accounted 
for about 10 percent of the company’s value.
	
We haven’t discussed what happens to the stock when 
a company does a buyback. There are actually several 
things the company can do. Many companies keep the stock 
and use the shares for employee stock option plans. When 
employee stock options are exercised by the employees, 
new shares are created, which increases the number of 
shares of stock outstanding. By using the repurchased 
shares, the company does not need to issue any new 
shares. A company can also keep the repurchased stock for 
itself as Treasury stock. Finally, the company can cancel the 
stock completely. In essence, it destroys the shares repur-
chased, which reduces the number of shares outstanding.
FINANCE MATTERS
about 988 million shares outstanding, so over a 19-year period, the company had repur-
chased more than one-half its stock!
One cautionary note is in order concerning share repurchases, or buybacks. A com-
pany announcing plans to buy back some of its stock has no legal obligation to actually do 
it, and it turns out that many announced repurchases are never completed. Our nearby 
­Finance Matters discusses some recent events in stock buybacks.
Share Repurchase and EPS
You may read in the popular financial press that a share repurchase is beneficial because it 
causes earnings per share to increase. As we have seen, this will happen. The reason is 
simply that a share repurchase reduces the number of outstanding shares, but it has no 
effect on total earnings. As a result, EPS rises.
However, the financial press may place undue emphasis on EPS figures in a repur-
chase agreement. In our preceding example, we saw that the value of the stock wasn’t af-
fected by the EPS change. In fact, the PE ratio was exactly the same when we compared a 
cash dividend to a repurchase.

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
469
concept questions
14.3a 	 Why might a stock repurchase make more sense than an extra cash dividend?
14.3b 	 What is the effect of a stock repurchase on a firm’s EPS? Its PE?
	WHAT WE KNOW AND DO NOT KNOW 
ABOUT DIVIDEND AND PAYOUT POLICIES
Dividends and Dividend Payers
As we have discussed, there are numerous good reasons favoring a dividend policy of low 
(or no) payout. Nonetheless, as we showed earlier in Figure 14.3, in the United States, ag-
gregate dividends paid are quite large. For example, in 1978, U.S. industrial firms listed on 
the major exchanges paid $32 billion in total dividends. By 2010, that number had risen to 
$199 billion (unadjusted for inflation), an increase of more than 500 percent (after adjust-
ing for inflation, the increase is smaller, 84 percent, but still substantial).
While we know dividends are large in the aggregate, we also know that the number of 
companies that pay dividends has declined. Over the same 1978–2010 period, the number 
of industrial companies paying dividends declined from more than 2,000 to 855, and the 
percentage of these firms paying dividends declined 50 percent, to just under 30 percent.2
The fact that aggregate dividends grew while the number of payers fell so sharply 
seems a bit paradoxical, but the explanation is straightforward. Dividend payments are 
heavily concentrated in a relatively small set of large firms. In 2010, for example, more 
than 80 percent of aggregate dividends were paid by just 100 firms. The top 25 payers, 
which included such well-known giants as ExxonMobil and General Electric, collectively 
paid about 54 percent of all dividends. Thus, the reason that dividends grew while dividend 
payers shrank is that the decline in dividend payers is almost entirely due to smaller firms, 
which tend to pay smaller dividends in the first place.
One important reason that the percentage of dividend-paying firms has declined is that 
the population of firms has changed. There has been a huge increase in the number of 
newly listed firms over the last 25 or so years. Newly listed firms tend to be younger and 
less profitable. Such firms need their internally generated cash to fund growth and typi-
cally do not pay dividends.
Another factor at work is that firms appear to be more likely to begin making payouts 
using share repurchases, which are flexible, rather than committing to making cash distri-
butions. Such a policy seems quite sensible. However, after controlling for the changing 
mix of firms and the increase in share repurchasing activity, there still appears to be a de-
creased propensity to pay dividends among certain types of older, better established firms, 
though further research is needed on this question.
The fact that the number of dividend-paying firms has declined so sharply is an inter-
esting phenomenon. Making matters even more interesting is evidence showing that the 
trend may have begun to reverse itself. Take a look at Figure 14.4, which shows the per-
centage of industrial firms paying dividends over the period 1971–2013, along with the 
14.4
2 These figures and those in the following two paragraphs are from H. DeAngelo, L. DeAngelo, and D. Skinner, 
“Corporate Payout Policy,” Foundations and Trends in Finance 3 (2009), as updated by the authors.

470	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
percentage of (1) firms doing repurchases and (2) firms with a positive payout of one type 
or the other (or both). As shown, there is a pronounced downward trend, but that trend ap-
pears to bottom out in 2000 and then reverse somewhat in 2002. So what’s going on?
Part of the apparent rebound in Figure 14.4 is probably an illusion. The number of 
firms listed on the major stock markets dropped sharply, from over 5,000 to under 4,000, 
during the period 2000–2005. About 2,000 firms delisted over this period, 98 percent of 
which were not dividend payers. Thus, the percentage of firms paying dividends rose be-
cause nonpayers dropped out in large numbers.3 By 2013, the number of listed firms had 
declined to below 3,000, and the percentage of dividend payers reached 36 percent.
However, once we control for the dropout problem, there is still an increase in the 
proportion of dividend payers, but it happens in 2003. As shown in Figure 14.5, the uptick 
is concentrated in the months following May 2003. What is so special about this month? 
The answer is that in May 2003, top personal tax rates on dividends were slashed from 
about 38 to 15 percent. Thus, consistent with our earlier tax arguments, a reduction in per-
sonal tax rates led to increases in dividends.
However, it is important not to read too much into Figure 14.5. It seems clear that the 
reduction in tax rates did have an effect, but, on balance, what we see is a few hundred firms 
initiating dividends. There are still thousands of firms that did not initiate dividends, even 
though the tax rate reduction was very large. Thus, the evidence suggests that tax rates 
f i g u r e  14.4
Proportion of dividend payers, repurchasers, and firms with positive total payout among all 
publicly held U.S. industrial firms: 1971–2013
Source: Redrawn by authors, using Compustat data, following Farre-Mensa, Michaely, and Schmalz, “Payout Policy,” Annual Review of Financial 
Economics 6 (2014), pp. 75–134.
Firms with positive total payout
Dividend payers
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1971 
1972 
1973 
1974 
1975 
1976 
1977 
1978 
1979 
1980 
1981 
1982 
1983 
1984 
1985 
1986 
1987 
1988 
1989 
1990 
1991 
1992 
1993 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
Fraction of all public ﬁrms
Repurchasing ﬁrms
3 These numbers and this explanation are from Chetty and Saez, “The Effects of the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut on 
Corporate Behavior: Interpreting the Evidence,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96 (2006).

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
471
matter, but they are not a primary determinant of dividend policy. This interpretation is con-
sistent with the results of a 2005 survey of financial executives, more than 2/3 of whom said 
that the tax rate cut probably or definitely would not affect their dividend policies.4
A second force that may be at work over time is the maturing of many of the (surviv-
ing) newly listed firms we mentioned earlier. As these firms have become better estab-
lished, their profitability has increased (and, potentially, their investment opportunities 
have decreased), and they have begun to pay dividends.
A third factor that may be contributing to the increase in the number of dividend payers 
is a little more subtle. The technology-heavy NASDAQ index plummeted in the spring of 
2000 (due to the “dot-com” crash), and it became clear that many newly listed companies 
were likely to fail. Shortly thereafter, major accounting scandals at companies such as Enron 
and WorldCom left investors unsure of the trustworthiness of reported earnings. In such an 
environment, companies may have chosen to initiate dividends in an attempt to signal to in-
vestors that they had the cash to make dividend payments now and in the future.
The apparent reversal in the decline of dividend payers is a recent phenomenon, so its 
significance remains to be seen. It may prove to be just a transient event in the middle of a 
long decline. We will have to wait and see.
Corporations Smooth Dividends
Dividend cuts are frequently viewed as very bad news by market participants. As a result, 
companies only cut dividends when there is no other acceptable alternative. For the same 
f i g u r e  14.5
Regular dividend initiations, 2001–2006
Source: A. Brav, J. R. Graham, C. R. Harvey, and R. Michaely, “Managerial Response to the May 2003 Dividend Tax Cut,” Financial Management 37 
(2008).
1 Q 2001
Year and quarter
Tax cut enacted
10
0
20
40
50
30
60
Number of industrial ﬁrms
initiating dividends (per quarter)
2 Q 2001
3 Q 2001
4 Q 2001
1 Q 2002
2 Q 2002
3 Q 2002
4 Q 2002
1 Q 2003
2 Q 2003
3 Q 2003
4 Q 2003
1 Q 2004
2 Q 2004
3 Q 2004
4 Q 2004
1 Q 2005
2 Q 2005
3 Q 2005
4 Q 2005
1 Q 2006
2 Q 2006
3 Q 2006
4 Q 2006
4 See Brav, Graham, Harvey, and Michaely, “Managerial Response to the May 2003 Dividend Tax Cut,” 
Financial Management 37 (2008).

472	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
reason, companies are also reluctant to increase dividends unless they are sure the new 
dividend level can be sustained.
In practice, what we observe is that dividend-paying companies tend to raise divi-
dends only after earnings have risen, and they don’t increase or cut dividends in re-
sponse to temporary earnings fluctuations. In other words, (1) dividend growth lags 
earnings growth, and (2) dividend growth will tend to be much smoother than earnings 
growth.
There are companies with extraordinarily long dividend payment histories. The S&P 
500 Dividend Aristocrat list consists of 54 companies that have increased dividends for at 
least 25 consecutive years. Two companies with long histories of dividend increases are 
tool manufacturer Stanley Works (now Stanley Black & Decker) and Procter & Gamble. At 
the end of 2014, Stanley Works had paid a dividend each year for the past 138 consecutive 
years and had increased its dividend in each of the last 47 years. Procter & Gamble had 
increased its dividend for 59 years.
Putting It All Together
Much of what we have discussed in this chapter (and much of what we know about divi-
dends from decades of research) can be pulled together and summarized in the following 
five observations:5
  1.	 Aggregate dividends and stock repurchases are massive, and they have increased 
steadily in nominal and real terms over the years.
  2.	 Dividends are heavily concentrated among a relatively small number of large, mature 
firms.
  3.	 Managers are very reluctant to cut dividends, normally doing so only due to firm-
specific problems.
  4.	 Managers smooth dividends, raising them slowly and incrementally as earnings 
grow.
  5.	 Stock prices react to unanticipated changes in dividends.
The challenge now is to fit these five pieces into a reasonably coherent picture. With 
regard to payouts in general, meaning the combination of stock repurchases and cash 
dividends, a simple life cycle theory fits points 1 and 2. The key ideas are straightfor-
ward. First, relatively young and less profitable firms generally should not make cash 
distributions. They need the cash to fund investments (and flotation costs discourage the 
raising of outside cash).
However, as a firm matures, it begins to generate free cash flow (which, you will re-
call, is internally generated cash flow beyond that needed to fund profitable investment 
activities). Significant free cash flow can lead to agency problems if it is not distributed. 
Managers may become tempted to pursue empire building or otherwise spend the excess 
cash in ways not in the shareholders’ best interests. Thus, firms come under pressure to 
make distributions rather than horde cash. And, consistent with what we observe, we 
­expect large firms with a history of profitability to make large distributions.
Thus, the life cycle theory says that firms trade off the agency costs of excess cash 
retention against the potential future costs of external equity financing. A firm should 
­begin making distributions when it generates sufficient internal cash flow to fund its 
­investment needs now and into the foreseeable future.
5 This list is distilled in part from a longer list in H. DeAngelo and L. DeAngelo, “Payout Policy Pedagogy: 
What Matters and Why,” European Financial Management 13 (2007).

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
473
The more complex issue concerns the type of distribution, cash dividends versus 
­repurchase. The tax argument in favor of repurchases is a clear and strong one. Further, 
repurchases are a much more flexible option (and managers greatly value financial flexi-
bility), so the question is: Why would firms ever choose a cash dividend?
If we are to answer this question, we have to ask a different question. What can a cash 
dividend accomplish that a share repurchase cannot? One answer is that when a firm makes a 
commitment to pay a cash dividend now and into the future, it sends a two-part signal to the 
markets. As we have already discussed, one signal is that the firm anticipates being profitable, 
with the ability to make the payments on an ongoing basis. Note that a firm cannot benefit by 
trying to fool the market in this regard because the firm would ultimately be punished when it 
couldn’t make the dividend payment (or couldn’t make it without relying on external financ-
ing). Thus, a cash dividend may let a firm distinguish itself from less profitable rivals.
A second, and more subtle, signal takes us back to the agency problem of free cash 
flow. By committing to pay cash dividends now and in the future, the firm signals that it 
won’t be hoarding cash (or at least not as much cash), thereby reducing agency costs and 
enhancing shareholder wealth.
This two-part signaling story is consistent with points 3–5 above, but an obvious ob-
jection remains. Why don’t firms just commit to a policy of setting aside whatever money 
would be used to pay dividends and use it instead to buy back shares? After all, either way, 
a firm is committing to pay out cash to shareholders.
A fixed repurchase strategy suffers from two drawbacks. The first is verifiability. A 
firm could announce an open market repurchase and then simply not do it. By suitably 
fudging its books, it would be some time before the deception was discovered. Thus, it 
would be necessary for shareholders to develop a monitoring mechanism, meaning some 
sort of way for stockholders to know for sure that the repurchase was in fact done. Such a 
mechanism wouldn’t be difficult to build (it could be a simple trustee relationship such as 
we observe in the bond markets), but it currently does not exist. Of course, a tender offer 
repurchase needs little or no verification, but such offers have expenses associated with 
them. The beauty of a cash dividend is that it needs no monitoring. A firm is forced to cut 
and mail checks four times a year, year in and year out.
A second objection to a fixed repurchase strategy is more controversial. Suppose man-
agers, as insiders, are better able than stockholders to judge whether their stock price is too 
high or too low. (Note that this idea does not conflict with semistrong market efficiency if 
inside information is the reason.) In this case, a fixed repurchase commitment forces man-
agement to buy back stock even in circumstances when the stock is overvalued. In other 
words, it forces management into making negative NPV investments.
More research on the cash dividend versus share repurchase question is needed, but 
the historical trend seems to be favoring continued growth in repurchases relative to divi-
dends. Total corporate payouts seem to be relatively stable over time at roughly 20 percent 
of aggregate earnings, but repurchases are becoming a larger portion of that total. The split 
reached about 50–50 in the latter part of the 1990s, but it looks like aggregate repurchases 
have recently passed aggregate dividends.
One aspect of aggregate cash dividends that has not received much attention is that 
there may be a strong legacy effect. Before 1982, the regulatory status of stock repurchases 
was somewhat murky, creating a significant disincentive. In 1982, the SEC, after years of 
debate, created a clear set of guidelines for firms to follow, thereby making repurchases 
much more attractive. The impact of this change is clear in Figure 14.3. Repurchases 
­immediately began growing in 1983–1984.
The legacy effect arises because many of the giant firms that pay such a large portion 
of aggregate dividends were paying dividends before (and perhaps long before) 1982. To 

474	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
the extent that these firms are unwilling to cut their dividends, aggregate cash dividends 
will be large, but only because of a “lock-in” effect for older firms. If locked-in, legacy 
payers account for much of the aggregate dividend, what we should observe is (1) a sharply 
reduced tendency for maturing firms to initiate dividends and (2) a growth in repurchases 
relative to cash dividends over time. We actually do see evidence of both of these trends; 
however, legacy effects alone can’t account for all cash dividend payers.
THE PROS AND CONS OF PAYING DIVIDENDS
Pros
Cons
1.  Cash dividends can underscore good results 
and provide support to the stock price.
1.  Dividends are taxed to recipients.
2.  Dividends may attract institutional investors 
who prefer some return in the form of 
dividends. A mix of institutional and individual 
investors may allow a firm to raise capital at 
lower cost because of the ability of the firm to 
reach a wider market.
2.  Dividends can reduce internal sources 
of financing. Dividends may force the 
firm to forgo positive NPV projects or to 
rely on costly external equity financing.
3.  Stock price usually increases with the 
announcement of a new or increased 
dividend.
3.  Once established, dividend cuts are 
hard to make without adversely 
affecting a firm’s stock price.
4.  Dividends absorb excess cash flow and may 
reduce agency costs that arise from conflicts 
between management and shareholders.
Some Survey Evidence on Dividends
A recent study surveyed a large number of financial executives regarding dividend policy. 
One of the questions asked was, “Do these statements describe factors that affect your 
company’s dividend decisions?” Table 14.1 shows some of the results.
As shown in Table 14.1, financial managers are very disinclined to cut dividends. 
Moreover, they are very conscious of their previous dividends and desire to maintain a 
relatively steady dividend. In contrast, the cost of external capital and the desire to attract 
“prudent man” investors (those with fiduciary duties) are less important.
ta b l e  14.1
Survey responses on 
dividend decisions*
 
Policy Statements
Percent Who Agree  
or Strongly Agree
1.  We try to avoid reducing dividends per share.
 93.8%
2.  We try to maintain a smooth dividend from year to year.
89.6  
3.  We consider the level of dividends per share that we have 
paid in recent quarters.
88.2  
4.  We are reluctant to make dividend changes that might have to 
be reversed in the future.
77.9  
5.  We consider the change or growth in dividends per share.
66.7  
6.  We consider the cost of raising external capital to be smaller 
than the cost of cutting dividends.
42.8  
7.  We pay dividends to attract investors subject to “prudent man” 
investment restrictions.
41.7 
*Survey respondents were asked the question, “Do these statements describe factors that affect your company’s 
dividend decisions?”
Source: Adapted from Table 4 of A. Brav, J. R. Graham, C. R. Harvey, and R. Michaely, “Payout Policy in the 21st 
Century,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2005. Elsevier. Used with permission.

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
475
Table 14.2 is drawn from the same survey, but here the responses are to the question, 
“How important are the following factors to your company’s dividend decision?” Not sur-
prisingly given the responses in Table 14.1 and our earlier discussion, the highest priority 
is maintaining a consistent dividend policy. The next several items are also consistent with 
our previous analysis. Financial managers are very concerned about earnings stability and 
future earnings levels in making dividend decisions, and they consider the availability of 
good investment opportunities. Survey respondents also believed that attracting both insti-
tutional and individual (retail) investors was relatively important.
In contrast to our discussion of taxes and flotation costs in the earlier part of this chap-
ter, the financial managers in this survey did not think that personal taxes paid on divi-
dends by shareholders are very important. And even fewer think that equity flotation costs 
are relevant.
 STOCK DIVIDENDS AND STOCK SPLITS
Another type of dividend is paid out in shares of stock. This type of dividend is called a 
stock dividend. A stock dividend is not a true dividend because it is not paid in cash. The 
effect of a stock dividend is to increase the number of shares that each owner holds. Be-
cause there are more shares outstanding, each is simply worth less.
A stock dividend is commonly expressed as a percentage; for example, a 20 percent 
stock dividend means that a shareholder receives one new share for every five currently 
owned (a 20 percent increase). Because every shareholder owns 20 percent more stock, the 
total number of shares outstanding rises by 20 percent. As we will see in a moment, the 
result is that each share of stock is worth about 20 percent less.
A stock split is essentially the same thing as a stock dividend, except that a split is 
expressed as a ratio instead of a percentage. When a split is declared, each share is split up 
to create additional shares. For example, in a three-for-one stock split, each old share is 
split into three new shares. As a result, the par value of each share would be reduced to 
one-third of the presplit value.
By convention, stock dividends of less than 20 to 25 percent are called small stock 
dividends. A stock dividend greater than this 20 to 25 percent is called a large stock 
14.5
stock dividend
Payment made by a firm 
to its owners in the form 
of stock, diluting the value 
of each share outstanding.
stock split
An increase in a firm’s 
shares outstanding 
without any change in 
owners’ equity.
ta b l e  14.2
Survey responses on 
dividend decisions*
 
Policy Statements
Percent Who Think This Is  
Important or Very Important
1.  Maintaining consistency with our historic dividend policy.
 84.1%
2.  Stability of future earnings.
71.9  
3.  A sustainable change in earnings.
67.1  
4.  Attracting institutional investors to purchase our stock.
52.5  
5.  The availability of good investment opportunities for 
our firm to pursue.
47.6  
6.  Attracting retail investors to purchase our stock.
44.5  
7.  Personal taxes our stockholders pay when receiving 
dividends.
21.1  
8.  Flotation costs to issuing new equity.
  9.3 
*Survey respondents were asked the question, “How important are the following factors to your company’s 
dividend decision?”
Source: Adapted from Table 5 of A. Brav, J. R. Graham, C. R. Harvey, and R. Michaely, “Payout Policy in the 21st 
Century,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2005. Elsevier. Used with permission.

476	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
dividend. For example, in November 2014, bioscience company Agilent Technology com-
pleted a two-for-one stock split in the form of a stock dividend. In January 2014, Google 
(now known as Alphabet) announced its 100 percent stock dividend in the form of a two-
for-one stock split that created the company’s nonvoting Class C shares. Except for some 
relatively minor accounting differences, a stock dividend has the same effect as a stock 
split. In fact, you can see the relationship between the two because both companies an-
nounced the stock dividend in the same way a stock split would be announced.
Value of Stock Splits and Stock Dividends
The laws of logic tell us that stock splits and stock dividends can (1) leave the value of the 
firm unaffected, (2) increase its value, or (3) decrease its value. Unfortunately, the issues are 
complex enough that one cannot easily determine which of the three relationships holds.
The Benchmark Case 
A strong case can be made that stock dividends and splits do 
not change either the wealth of any shareholder or the wealth of the firm as a whole. The 
reason is that they are just paper transactions and simply alter the number of shares out-
standing. For example, if a firm declares a two-for-one split, all that happens is that the 
number of shares is doubled, with the result that each share is worth half as much. The total 
value is not affected.
Although this simple conclusion is relatively obvious, there are reasons that are often 
given to suggest that there may be some benefits to these actions. The typical financial 
manager is aware of many real-world complexities, and, for that reason, the stock split or 
stock dividend decision is not treated lightly in practice.
Popular Trading Range 
Proponents of stock dividends and stock splits frequently 
argue that a security has a proper trading range. When the security is priced above this 
level, many investors do not have the funds to buy the common trading unit of 100 shares, 
called a round lot. Thus, firms will split the stock to keep the price in this trading range.
Although this argument is a popular one, its validity is questionable for a number of 
reasons. Mutual funds, pension funds, and other institutions have steadily increased their 
trading activity since World War II and now handle a sizable percentage of total trading 
volume (e.g., on the order of 80 percent of NYSE trading volume). Because these institu-
tions buy and sell in huge amounts, the individual share price is of little concern.
Furthermore, we sometimes observe share prices that are quite large without appearing 
to cause problems. For example, consider the Swiss chocolatier Lindt. In April 2015, Lindt 
shares were selling for around 61,000 Swiss francs each, or about $63,100. A round lot 
would have cost a cool $6.31 million. This is fairly expensive, but not compared to 
Berkshire Hathaway, the U.S. company run by legendary investor Warren Buffett. In April 
2015, each share of the company’s Class A stock sold for about $216,000, down from a high 
of $227,000 in December 2014 (the Class B stock was much cheaper at $143 per share).
Finally, there is evidence that stock splits may actually decrease the liquidity of the 
company’s shares. Following a two-for-one split, the number of shares traded should more 
than double if liquidity is increased by the split. This doesn’t appear to happen, and the op-
posite is sometimes observed.
Reverse Splits
A less frequently encountered financial maneuver is the reverse split. For example, in 
April 2015, Chimera Investment Corporation underwent a one-for-five reverse stock split, 
and, in March 2015, neuroscience technology company GlassesOff completed a 1-for-10 
Information on upcoming 
stock splits is available 
on the splits calendar at 
www.investmenthouse 
.com/splits and finance 
.yahoo.com.
trading range
Price range between 
highest and lowest prices 
at which a stock is 
typically traded.
reverse split
Stock split under which a 
firm’s number of shares 
outstanding is reduced.

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
477
reverse stock split. In a 1-for-10 reverse split, each investor exchanges 10 old shares for 1 
new share. The par value is increased by a factor of 10 in the process. For small companies 
reverse splits can become quite large. In December 2014, oil and gas services company 
National Automation Services completed a whopper, a 1-for-200 reverse split.
Given real-world imperfections, three related reasons are cited for reverse splits. First, 
transaction costs to shareholders may be less after the reverse split. Second, the liquidity 
and marketability of a company’s stock might be improved when its price is raised to the 
popular trading range. Third, stocks selling at prices below a certain level are not consid-
ered respectable, meaning that investors underestimate these firms’ earnings, cash flow, 
growth, and stability. Some financial analysts argue that a reverse split can help achieve 
instant respectability. As was the case with stock splits, none of these reasons is particu-
larly compelling, especially not the third one.
There are two other reasons for reverse splits. First, stock exchanges have minimum 
price per share requirements. A reverse split may bring the stock price up to such a mini-
mum. For example, NASDAQ begins the delisting process for companies whose stock 
price drops below $1 per share for 30 days. Following the collapse of the Internet boom in 
2001–2002, a large number of Internet-related companies found themselves in danger of 
being delisted and used reverse splits to boost their stock prices. Second, companies some-
times perform reverse splits and, at the same time, buy out any stockholders who end up 
with less than a certain number of shares.
For example, in January 2015, ModusLink Global Solutions completed a reverse/forward 
split. In this case, the company first did a 1-for-100 reverse stock split. The company repur-
chased all shares held by stockholders with less than one share of stock, thereby eliminating 
small shareholders (and reducing the total number of shareholders). The purpose of the re-
verse split was to allow the company to save on administrative expenses related to shareholder 
relations. What made the proposal especially imaginative was that immediately after the re-
verse split, the company did a 100-for-1 ordinary split to restore the stock to its original cost!
concept questions
14.5a	 What is the effect of a stock split on stockholder wealth?
14.5b	 What is a reverse split?
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter, we first discussed the types of dividends and how they are paid. We then 
defined dividend policy and examined whether or not dividend policy matters. Next, we 
illustrated how a firm might establish a dividend policy and described an important alter-
native to cash dividends, a share repurchase.
In covering these subjects, we saw that:
  1.	 Dividend policy is irrelevant when there are no taxes or other imperfections.
  2.	 Individual shareholder income taxes and new issue flotation costs are real-world 
considerations that favor a low-dividend payout. With taxes and new issue costs, the 
firm should pay out dividends only after all positive NPV projects have been fully 
financed.

478	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
  3.	 There are groups in the economy that may favor a high payout. These include many 
large institutions such as pension plans. Recognizing that some groups prefer a 
high payout and some prefer a low payout, the clientele effect supports the idea that 
dividend policy responds to the needs of stockholders. For example, if 40 percent of 
the stockholders prefer low dividends and 60 percent of the stockholders prefer high 
dividends, approximately 40 percent of companies will have a low-dividend payout, 
while 60 percent will have a high payout. This sharply reduces the impact of any 
individual firm’s dividend policy on its market price.
  4.	 Dividend stability is usually viewed as highly desirable. We therefore discussed 
a compromise strategy that provides for a stable dividend and appears to be quite 
similar to the dividend policies many firms follow in practice.
  5.	 A stock repurchase acts much like a cash dividend, but has a significant tax advantage. 
Stock repurchases are therefore a very useful part of overall dividend policy.
To close out our discussion of dividends, we emphasize one last time the difference 
between dividends and dividend policy. Dividends are important, because the value of a 
share of stock is ultimately determined by the dividends that will be paid. What is less clear 
is whether or not the time pattern of dividends (more now versus more later) matters. This 
is the dividend policy question, and it is not easy to give a definitive answer to it.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 14.1 What are the forms of cash dividends?
Section 14.2 According to the clientele effect, can a firm boost its share price by 
raising dividends?
Section 14.3 When a firm authorizes a trustee to repurchase shares as they be-
come available, what purchase technique are they using?
Section 14.4 What is a firm paying cash dividends signaling?
Section 14.5 Why is a stock dividend not a true dividend?
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEM
14.1	
Repurchase versus Cash Dividend.  Trantor Corporation is deciding whether to 
pay out $300 in excess cash in the form of an extra dividend or a share repurchase. 
Current earnings are $1.50 per share, and the stock sells for $15. The market value 
balance sheet before paying out the $300 is as follows:
Market Value Balance Sheet
(before paying out excess cash)
Excess cash	
$   300
Debt	
$     400
Other assets	
    1,600
Equity	
    1,500
  Total	
$1,900
  Total	
$1,900
Evaluate the two alternatives in terms of the effect on the price per share of the stock, 
the EPS, and the PE ratio. (See Problem 12.)

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
479
■ Answer to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problem
14.1	
The market value of the equity is $1,500. The price per share is $15, so there are 
100 shares outstanding. The cash dividend would amount to $300/100 = $3 per share. 
When the stock goes ex dividend, the price will drop by $3 per share to $12. Put 
another way, the total assets decrease by $300, so the equity value goes down by this 
amount to $1,200. With 100 shares, the new stock price is $12 per share. After the 
dividend, EPS will be the same, $1.50, but the PE ratio will be $12/1.50 = 8 times.
	
With a repurchase, $300/15 = 20 shares will be bought up, leaving 80. The 
equity will again be worth $1,200 total. With 80 shares, this is $1,200/80 = $15 per 
share, so the price doesn’t change. Total earnings for Trantor must be $1.50 × 100 = 
$150. After the repurchase, EPS will be higher at $150/80 = $1.875. The PE ratio, 
however, will still be $15/1.875 = 8 times.
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 2 	 14.1	
Dividend Policy Irrelevance.  How is it possible that dividends are so 
important, but, at the same time, dividend policy is irrelevant?
LO 4 	 14.2	
Stock Repurchases.  What is the impact of a stock repurchase on a 
company’s debt ratio? Does this suggest another use for excess cash?
LO 1 	 14.3	
Life Cycle Theory of Dividends.  Explain the life cycle theory of 
dividend payments. How does it explain corporate dividend payments 
that are seen in the stock market?
LO 1 	 14.4	
Dividend Chronology.  On Friday, December 8, Hometown Power 
Co.’s board of directors declares a dividend of 75 cents per share 
payable on Wednesday, January 17, to shareholders of record as of 
Wednesday, January 3. When is the ex-dividend date? If a shareholder 
buys stock before that date, who gets the dividends on those shares, the 
buyer or the seller?
LO 1 	 14.5	
Alternative Dividends.  Some corporations, like one British company 
that offers its large shareholders free crematorium use, pay dividends in 
kind (i.e., offer their services to shareholders at below-market cost). 
Should mutual funds invest in stocks that pay these dividends in kind? 
(The fundholders do not receive these services.)
LO 2 	 14.6	
Dividends and Stock Price.  If increases in dividends tend to be followed 
by (immediate) increases in share prices, how can it be said that dividend 
policy is irrelevant?
LO 2 	 14.7	
Dividends and Stock Price.  Last month, Central Virginia Power 
Company, which had been having trouble with cost overruns on a nuclear 
power plant that it had been building, announced that it was “temporarily 
suspending dividend payments due to the cash flow crunch associated with 
its investment program.” The company’s stock price dropped from $28.50 
to $25 when this announcement was made. How would you interpret this 
change in the stock price (i.e., what would you say caused it)?
LO 1 	 14.8	
Dividend Reinvestment Plans.  The DRK Corporation has recently 
developed a dividend reinvestment plan (DRIP). The plan allows 
investors to reinvest cash dividends automatically in DRK in exchange 
for new shares of stock. Over time, investors in DRK will be able to build 
their holdings by reinvesting dividends to purchase additional shares of 
the company.

480	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
  Over 1,000 companies offer dividend reinvestment plans. Most compa-
nies with DRIPs charge no brokerage or service fees. In fact, the shares 
of DRK will be purchased at a 10 percent discount from the market price.
  A consultant for DRK estimates that about 75 percent of DRK’s share-
holders will take part in this plan. This is somewhat higher than the 
average.
  Evaluate DRK’s dividend reinvestment plan. Will it increase share-
holder wealth? Discuss the advantages and disadvantages involved here.
LO 2 	 14.9	
Dividend Policy.  During 2014, 207 companies went public with 
common stock offerings, raising a combined total of $42.3 billion. 
Relatively few of these 207 companies involved paid cash dividends. 
Why do you think most chose not to pay dividends?
LO 1 	 14.10	 Investment and Dividends.  The Phew Charitable Trust pays no taxes 
on its capital gains or on its dividend income or interest income. Would 
it be irrational for it to have low-dividend, high-growth stocks in its 
portfolio? Would it be irrational for it to have municipal bonds in its 
portfolio? Explain.
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–11)
LO 2 	 1.	 Dividends and Stock Prices.  Your portfolio is 150 shares of Barden, Inc. 
The stock currently sells for $87 per share. The company has announced a 
dividend of $1.32 per share with an ex-dividend date of April 19. Assuming 
no taxes, how much will your stock be worth on April 19?
LO 2 	 2.	 Dividends and Stock Prices.  It is April 19. Using the information in the 
previous problem, what is your total portfolio value?
LO 2 	 3.	 Dividends and Taxes.  Timsang, Inc., has declared a $7.40 per share 
dividend. Suppose capital gains are not taxed, but dividends are taxed at  
15 percent. New IRS regulations require that taxes be withheld at the time the 
dividend is paid. The company’s stock sells for $92 per share, and the stock 
is about to go ex dividend. What do you think the ex-dividend price will be?
LO 3 	 4.	 Stock Dividends.  The owners’ equity accounts for Overby International are 
shown here:
Common stock ($1 par value)
$   35,000
Capital surplus
  149,000
Retained earnings
          565,000
Total owners’ equity
$749,000
a.	
If the company’s stock currently sells for $42 per share and a 10 percent 
stock dividend is declared, how many new shares will be distributed? 
Show how the equity accounts would change.
b.	 If the company declared a 25 percent stock dividend, how would the 
accounts change?

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
481
LO 3 	 5.	 Stock Splits.  For the company in Problem 4, show how the equity accounts 
will change if:
a.	
The company declares a two-for-one stock split. How many shares are 
outstanding now? What is the new par value per share?
b.	 The company declares a one-for-five reverse stock split. How  
many shares are outstanding now? What is the new par value  
per share?
LO 3 	 6.	 Stock Splits and Stock Dividends.  Bermuda Triangle Corporation (BTC) 
currently has 465,000 shares of stock outstanding that sell for $86 per share. 
Assuming no market imperfections or tax effects exist, what will the share 
price be after:
a.	
BTC has a five-for-three stock split?
b.	 BTC has a 15 percent stock dividend?
c.	
BTC has a 42.5 percent stock dividend?
d.	 BTC has a four-for-seven reverse stock split?
e.	
Determine the new number of shares outstanding in parts (a)  
through (d).
LO 1 	 7.	 Regular Dividends.  The balance sheet for Throwing Copper, Inc., is shown 
here in market value terms. There are 23,000 shares of stock outstanding.
Market Value Balance Sheet
Cash	
$160,000
Fixed assets	
    564,500
Equity	
$724,500
  Total	
$724,500
  Total	
$724,500
The company has declared a dividend of $1.35 per share. The stock goes ex 
dividend tomorrow. Ignoring any tax effects, what is the stock selling for 
today? What will it sell for tomorrow? What will the balance sheet look like 
after the dividends are paid?
LO 4 	 8.	 Share Repurchase.  In the previous problem, suppose the company has 
announced it is going to repurchase $31,050 worth of stock instead of 
paying a dividend. What effect will this transaction have on the equity of the 
firm? How many shares will be outstanding? What will the price per share 
be after the repurchase? Ignoring tax effects, show how the share repurchase 
is effectively the same as a cash dividend.
LO 3 	 9.	 Stock Dividends.  The market value balance sheet for Tidwell 
Manufacturing is shown here. The company has declared a 20 percent stock 
dividend. The stock goes ex dividend tomorrow (the chronology for a stock 
dividend is similar to that for a cash dividend). There are 24,000 shares of 
stock outstanding. What will the ex-dividend price be?
Market Value Balance Sheet
Cash	
$135,000
Debt	
$215,000
Fixed assets	
      730,000
Equity	
   650,000
  Total	
$865,000
  Total	
$865,000
LO 3 	 10.	Stock Dividends.  The company with the common equity accounts shown 
here has declared a 10 percent stock dividend at a time when the market 

482	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
value of its stock is $53 per share. What effects on the equity accounts will 
the distribution of the stock dividend have?
Common stock ($1 par value)
$   245,000
Capital surplus
  1,280,000
Retained earnings
        2,932,000
Total owners’ equity
$4,457,000
LO 3 	 11.	 Stock Splits.  In the previous problem, suppose the company instead 
decides on a two-for-one stock split. The firm’s 73-cent-per-share cash 
dividend on the new (postsplit) shares represents an increase of 10 percent 
over last year’s dividend on the presplit stock. What effect does this have on 
the equity accounts? What was last year’s dividend per share?
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 12–13)
LO 4 	 12.	Stock Repurchase.  Hodgkiss Corporation is evaluating an extra dividend 
versus a share repurchase. In either case, $9,065 would be spent. Current 
earnings are $2.65 per share, and the stock currently sells for $59 per share. 
There are 4,900 shares outstanding. Ignore taxes and other imperfections in 
answering the first two questions.
a.	
Evaluate the two alternatives in terms of the effect on the price per 
share of the stock and shareholder wealth.
b.	 What will be the effect on the company’s EPS and PE ratio under the 
two different scenarios?
c.	
In the real world, which of these actions would you recommend? Why?
LO 2 	 13.	Dividend Policy.  The Quick Buck Company is an all-equity firm that 
has been in existence for the past three years. Company management 
expects that the company will last for two more years and then be 
dissolved. The firm will generate cash flows of $550,000 next year and 
$840,000 in two years, including the proceeds from the liquidation. 
There are 20,000 shares of stock outstanding and shareholders require a 
return of 12 percent.
a.	
What is the current price per share of the stock?
b.	 The board of directors is dissatisfied with the current dividend policy 
and proposes that a dividend of $650,000 be paid next year. To raise the 
cash necessary for the increased dividend, the company will sell new 
shares of stock. How many shares of stock must be sold? What is the 
new price per share of the existing shares of stock?
CHALLENGE (Questions 14–15)
LO 2 	 14.	Expected Return, Dividends, and Taxes.  The Gecko Company and the 
Gordon Company are two firms whose business risk is the same but that 
have different dividend policies. Gecko pays no dividend, whereas Gordon 
has an expected dividend yield of 3.5 percent. Suppose the capital gains tax 
rate is zero, whereas the income tax rate is 35 percent. Gecko has an 
expected earnings growth rate of 12 percent annually, and its stock price is 
expected to grow at this same rate. If the aftertax expected returns on the 
two stocks are equal (because they are in the same risk class), what is the 
pretax required return on Gordon’s stock?

	
c h a p t e r  1 4
Dividends and Dividend Policy	
483
LO 2 	 15.	Dividends and Taxes.  As discussed in the text, in the absence of market 
imperfections and tax effects, we would expect the share price to decline by 
the amount of the dividend payment when the stock goes ex dividend. Once 
we consider the role of taxes, however, this is not necessarily true. One 
model has been proposed that incorporates tax effects into determining the 
ex-dividend price:6
    (P0 − Px)/D = (1 − TP)/(1 − TG)
	
where P0 is the price just before the stock goes ex, Px is the ex-dividend 
share price, D is the amount of the dividend per share, TP is the relevant 
marginal personal tax rate on dividends, and TG is the effective marginal tax 
rate on capital gains.
a.	
If TP = TG = 0, how much will the share price fall when the stock goes ex?
b.	 If TP = 15 percent and TG = 0, how much will the share price fall?
c.	
If TP = 15 percent and TG = 30 percent, how much will the share 
price fall?
d.	 Suppose the only owners of stock are corporations. Recall that 
corporations get at least a 70 percent exemption from taxation on the 
dividend income they receive, but they do not get such an exemption on 
capital gains. If the corporation’s income and capital gains tax rates are 
both 35 percent, what does this model predict the ex-dividend share 
price will be?
e.	
What does this problem tell you about real-world tax considerations 
and the dividend policy of the firm?
6 N. Elton and M. Gruber, “Marginal Stockholder Tax Rates and the Clientele Effect,” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 52 (February 1970).  
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
14.1 Dividend Reinvestment Plans.  Dividend reinvestment plans (DRIPs) permit 
shareholders to automatically reinvest cash dividends in the company. To find out more 
about DRIPs, go to www.fool.com and answer the following questions. What are the 
advantages Motley Fool lists for DRIPs? What are the different types of DRIPs? What 
is a direct purchase plan? How does a direct purchase plan differ from a DRIP?
14.2 Dividends.  Go to www.thestreet.com/dividends and find the list of dividends. 
How many companies went ex dividend today? What is the largest declared dividend? 
For the stocks going ex today, what is the longest time until the payable date?
14.3 Stock Splits.  Go to www.stocksplits.net and find the stock splits. How many stock 
splits are listed? How many are reverse splits? What is the largest split and the largest 
reverse split in terms of shares? Pick a company and follow the link. What type of 
information do you find?
14.4 Stock Splits.  How many times has Procter & Gamble stock split? Go to P&G’s 
webpage at www.pg.com and find the history of the company’s stock splits. When did 
Procter & Gamble stock first split? What was the split? When was the most recent stock 
split? If you owned 100 shares of Procter & Gamble on January 1, 1950, and never sold 
any shares, how many shares would you own today?

484	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
CHAPTER CASE
Electronic Timing, Inc.
E
lectronic Timing, Inc. (ETI), is a small company 
founded 15 years ago by electronics engineers Tom 
Miller and Jessica Kerr. ETl manufactures integrated cir-
cuits to capitalize on the complex mixed-signal design 
technology and has recently entered the market for fre-
quency timing generators, or silicon timing devices, 
which provide the timing signals or “clocks” necessary 
to synchronize electronic systems. Its clock products 
originally were used in PC video graphics applications, 
but the market subsequently expanded to include moth-
erboards, PC peripheral devices, and other digital con-
sumer electronics, such as digital television boxes and 
game consoles. ETI also designs and markets custom 
application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) for indus-
trial customers. The ASIC’s design combines analog and 
digital, or mixed-signal, technology. In addition to Tom 
and Jessica, Nolan Pittman, who provided capital for the 
company, is the third primary owner. Each owns 25 per-
cent of the 1 million shares outstanding. The company 
has several other individuals, including current employ-
ees, who own the remaining shares.
	
Recently, the company designed a new computer 
motherboard. The company’s design is both more effi-
cient and less expensive to manufacture, and the ETI 
design is expected to become standard in many per-
sonal computers. After investigating the possibility of 
manufacturing the new motherboard, ETI determined 
that the costs involved in building a new plant would be 
prohibitive. The owners also decided that they were un-
willing to bring in another large outside owner. Instead, 
ETI sold the design to an outside firm. The sale of the 
motherboard design was completed for an aftertax pay-
ment of $30 million.
Q U E ST I ONS
1.	
Tom believes the company should use the extra 
cash to pay a special one-time dividend. How will 
this proposal affect the stock price? How will it af-
fect the value of the company?
2.	
Jessica believes the company should use the ex-
tra cash to pay off debt and upgrade and expand 
its existing manufacturing capability. How would 
Jessica’s proposals affect the company?
3.	
Nolan favors a share repurchase. He argues that a 
repurchase will increase the company’s PE ratio, 
return on assets, and return on equity. Are his ar-
guments correct? How will a share repurchase af-
fect the value of the company?
4.	
Another option discussed by Tom, Jessica, and 
Nolan would be to begin a regular dividend pay-
ment to shareholders. How would you evaluate 
this proposal?
5.	
One way to value a share of stock is the dividend 
growth, or growing perpetuity, model. Consider 
the following: The dividend payout ratio is 1 – b, 
where b is the “retention” or “plowback” ratio. So, 
the dividend next year will be the earnings next 
year, E1, × (1 – b). The most commonly used equa-
tion to calculate the sustainable growth rate is the 
return on equity times the retention ratio. Substi-
tuting these relationships into the dividend growth 
model, we get the following equation to calculate 
the price of a share of stock today: 
	
P0 =
E1(1 −b)
Rs −ROE × b
	
What are the implications of this result in terms of 
whether the company should pay a dividend or 
upgrade and expand its manufacturing capability? 
Explain.
6.	
Does the question of whether the company 
should pay a dividend depend on whether the 
company is organized as a corporation or an LLC?

485
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
O
n January 30, 2015, hamburger joint Shake Shack went pub-
lic. Assisted by the investment banks Morgan Stanley and 
JPMorgan, along with a syndicate of five other banks, Shake Shack 
sold about 5 million shares of stock to the public at a price of $21. 
The stock price opened trading at $47 before reaching a high for 
the day of $52.50. At the end of the day, the stock closed at $45.90. 
The Shake Shack IPO raised $105 million, not an extremely large 
amount for an IPO. However, company insiders still held 56 percent 
of the company’s Class A stock, as well as all of the company’s 
Class B stock. In this chapter, we examine the process by which 
companies such as Shake Shack sell stock to the public, the costs 
of doing so, and the role of investment banks in the process.
Businesses large and small have one thing in common: They 
need long-term capital. This chapter describes how they get it. We pay particular attention to 
what is probably the most important stage in a company’s financial life cycle, the initial public 
offering. Such offerings are the process by which companies convert from being privately 
owned to being publicly owned. For many, starting a company, growing it, and taking it public 
is the ultimate entrepreneurial dream.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Explain the venture capital market 
and its role in the financing of new, 
high-risk ventures.
LO 2 	 Describe how securities are sold to 
the public and the role of 
investment banks in the process.
LO 3 	 Explain initial public offerings, and 
identify some of the costs of going 
public.
Raising Capital
15

486	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
A
ll firms must, at varying times, obtain capital. To do so, a firm must either borrow the 
money (debt financing), sell a portion of the firm (equity financing), or both. How a 
firm raises capital depends a great deal on the size of the firm, its life cycle stage, and its 
growth prospects.
In this chapter, we examine some of the ways in which firms actually raise capital. 
We begin by looking at companies in the early stages of their lives and the importance of 
venture capital for such firms. We then look at the process of going public and the role of 
investment banks. Along the way, we discuss many of the issues associated with selling 
securities to the public and their implications for all types of firms. We close the chapter 
with a discussion of sources of debt capital.1
THE FINANCING LIFE CYCLE OF A FIRM: 
EARLY-STAGE FINANCING AND VENTURE 
CAPITAL
One day, you and a friend have a great idea for a new computer software product that helps 
users communicate using the next generation Meganet. Filled with entrepreneurial zeal, 
you christen the product MegaComm and set about bringing it to market.
Working nights and weekends, you are able to create a prototype of your product. 
It doesn’t actually work, but at least you can show it around to illustrate your idea. To actu-
ally develop the product, you need to hire programmers, buy computers, rent office space, 
and so on. Unfortunately, because you are both college students, your combined assets are 
not sufficient to fund a pizza party, much less a start-up company. You need what is often 
referred to as OPM—other people’s money.
Your first thought might be to approach a bank for a loan. You would probably dis-
cover, however, that banks are generally not interested in making loans to start-up compa-
nies with no assets (other than an idea) run by fledgling entrepreneurs with no track 
record. Instead, your search for capital would very likely lead you to the venture capital 
(VC) market.
Venture Capital
The term venture capital does not have a precise meaning, but it generally refers to financ-
ing for new, often high-risk ventures. For example, before it went public, Internet auction-
eer eBay was venture capital financed. Individual venture capitalists invest their own 
money, whereas venture capital firms specialize in pooling funds from various sources and 
investing them. The underlying sources of funds for such firms include individuals, pen-
sion funds, insurance companies, large corporations, and even university endowment 
funds. The broad term private equity is often used to label the rapidly growing area of 
equity financing for nonpublic companies.2
Venture capitalists and venture capital firms recognize that many, or even most, new 
ventures will not fly, but the occasional one will. The potential profits are enormous in 
such cases. To limit their risk, venture capitalists generally provide financing in stages. 
At each stage, enough money is invested to reach the next milestone or planning stage. 
15.1
venture capital (VC)
Financing for new, often 
high-risk ventures.
1 We are indebted to Jay R. Ritter of the University of Florida for helpful comments and suggestions on this chapter.
2 So-called vulture capitalists specialize in high-risk investments in established, but financially distressed, firms.

	
c h a p t e r  1 5
Raising Capital	
487
For example, the first-stage (or first “round”) financing might be enough to get a prototype 
built and a manufacturing plan completed. Based on the results, the second-stage financing 
might be a major investment needed to actually begin manufacturing, marketing, and dis-
tribution. There might be many such stages, each of which represents a key step in the 
process of growing the company.
Venture capital firms often specialize in different stages. Some specialize in very early 
“seed money,” or ground floor, financing. In contrast, financing in the later stages might 
come from venture capitalists specializing in so-called mezzanine level financing, where 
mezzanine level refers to the level just above the ground floor.
The fact that financing is available in stages and is contingent on specified goals being 
met is a powerful motivating force for the firm’s founders. Often, the founders receive rela-
tively little in the way of salary and have substantial portions of their personal assets tied 
up in the business. At each stage of financing, the value of the founders’ stake grows and 
the probability of success rises. If goals are not met, the venture capitalist will withhold 
further financing, thereby limiting future losses.
In addition to providing financing, venture capitalists generally will actively partici-
pate in running the firm, providing the benefit of experience with previous start-ups as 
well as general business expertise. This is especially true when the firm’s founders have 
little or no hands-on experience running a company.
Some Venture Capital Realities
Although there is a large venture capital market, the truth is that access to venture capital 
is really very limited. Venture capital companies receive huge numbers of unsolicited pro-
posals, the vast majority of which end up in the circular file (the waste basket). Venture 
capitalists rely heavily on informal networks of engineers, scientists, lawyers, accountants, 
bankers, and other venture capitalists to help identify potential investments. As a result, 
personal contacts are important in gaining access to the venture capital market; it is very 
much an “introduction” market.
Another simple fact about venture capital is that it is incredibly expensive. In a 
typical deal, the venture capitalist will demand (and get) 40 percent or more of the 
equity in the company. The venture capitalist will frequently hold voting convertible 
preferred stock, which gives various priorities in the event that the company is sold or 
liquidated. The venture capitalist will typically demand (and get) several seats on the 
company’s board of directors and may even appoint one or more members of senior 
management.
Choosing a Venture Capitalist
Some start-up companies, particularly those headed by experienced, previously successful 
entrepreneurs, will be in such demand that they will have the luxury of looking beyond the 
money in choosing a venture capitalist. There are some key considerations in such a case, 
some of which can be summarized as follows:
  1.	 Financial strength is important. The venture capitalist needs to have the resources 
and financial reserves for additional financing stages should they become necessary. 
This doesn’t mean that bigger is necessarily better, however, because of our next 
consideration.
  2.	 Style is important. Some venture capitalists will wish to be very much involved 
in day-to-day operations and decision making, whereas others will be content 
with monthly reports. Which is better depends on the firm and also on the venture 

488	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
capitalists’ business skills. In addition, a large venture capital firm may be less 
flexible and more bureaucratic than a smaller “boutique” firm.
  3.	 References are important. Has the venture capitalist been successful with similar 
firms? Of equal importance, how has the venture capitalist dealt with situations that 
didn’t work out?
  4.	 Contacts are important. A venture capitalist may be able to help the business in 
ways other than helping with financing and management by providing introductions 
to potentially important customers, suppliers, and other industry contacts. Venture 
capitalist firms frequently specialize in a few particular industries, and such 
specialization could prove quite valuable.
  5.	 Exit strategy is important. Venture capitalists are generally not long-term investors. 
How and under what circumstances the venture capitalist will “cash out” of the 
business should be carefully evaluated.
Conclusion
If a start-up succeeds, the big payoff frequently comes when the company is sold to 
another company or goes public. Either way, investment bankers are often involved in the 
process.
concept questions
15.1a	
What is venture capital?
15.1b	
Why is venture capital often provided in stages?
SELLING SECURITIES TO THE PUBLIC:  
THE BASIC PROCEDURE
We discuss the process of selling securities to the public in the next several sections, pay-
ing particular attention to the process of going public.
There are many rules and regulations surrounding the process of selling securities. The 
Securities Act of 1933 is the origin of federal regulations for all new interstate securities 
issues. The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is the basis for regulating securities already 
outstanding. The Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, administers both acts.
There is a series of steps involved in issuing securities to the public. In general terms, 
the basic procedure is as follows:
  1.	 Management’s first step in issuing any securities to the public is to obtain approval 
from the board of directors. In some cases, the number of authorized shares of 
common stock must be increased. This requires a vote of the shareholders.
  2.	 The firm must prepare a registration statement and file it with the SEC. With just a 
few exceptions, the registration statement is required for all public, interstate issues 
of securities. 
	
	
Normally, a registration statement contains many pages of financial information, 
including a financial history, details of the existing business, proposed financing, and 
plans for the future.
15.2
Find out what firms are 
going public this week at 
marketwatch.com.
registration 
statement
A statement filed with the 
SEC that discloses all 
material information 
concerning the 
corporation making a 
public offering.

	
c h a p t e r  1 5
Raising Capital	
489
  3.	 The SEC examines the registration statement during a waiting period. During this 
time, the firm may distribute copies of a preliminary prospectus. The prospectus 
contains much of the information put into the registration statement, and it is 
given to potential investors by the firm. The preliminary prospectus is sometimes 
called a red herring, in part because bold red letters are printed on the cover. 
	
	
A registration statement becomes effective on the 20th day after its filing 
unless the SEC sends a letter of comment suggesting changes. In that case, after 
the changes are made, the 20-day waiting period starts again. It is important to 
note that the SEC does not consider the economic merits of the proposed sale; 
it merely makes sure that various rules and regulations are followed. Also, the 
SEC generally does not check the accuracy or truthfulness of information in the 
prospectus. 
	
	
The registration statement does not initially contain the price of the new 
issue. Usually, a price amendment is filed at or near the end of the waiting period, 
and the registration becomes effective.
  4.	 The company cannot sell the securities during the waiting period. However, oral 
offers can be made.
  5.	 On the effective date of the registration statement, a price is determined and a 
full-fledged selling effort gets under way. A final prospectus must accompany the 
delivery of securities or confirmation of sale, whichever comes first.
Tombstone advertisements (or, simply, tombstones) are used by underwriters after the 
waiting period. An example is reproduced in Figure 15.1. The tombstone contains the 
name of the issuer (the World Wrestling Federation, or WWF, in this case). It provides 
some information about the issue, and it lists the investment banks (the underwriters) that 
are involved with selling the issue. The role of the investment banks in selling securities is 
discussed more fully in the following pages.
The investment banks are divided into groups called brackets on the tombstone, based 
on their participation in the issue, and the names of the banks are listed alphabetically 
within each bracket. The brackets are often viewed as a kind of pecking order. In general, 
the higher the bracket, the greater is the underwriter’s prestige.
Crowdfunding
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. A provision of this act allowed com-
panies to raise money through crowdfunding, which is the practice of raising small amounts 
of capital from a large number of people, typically via the Internet. Crowdfunding was first 
used to underwrite the U.S. tour of British rock band Marillion, but the JOBS Act allows 
companies to sell regular equity by crowdfunding. Specifically, the JOBS Act allows a 
company to issue up to $1 million in securities in a 12-month period, and investors are 
permitted to invest up to $100,000 in crowdfunding issues per 12 months. Although crowd-
funding has been passed into law, the SEC must still set the rules and regulations for these 
new “exchanges.”
prospectus
A legal document 
describing details of the 
issuing corporation and 
the proposed offering to 
potential investors.
red herring
A preliminary prospectus 
distributed to prospective 
investors in a new issue of 
securities.
tombstone
An advertisement 
announcing a public 
offering.
Learn more about 
crowdfunding at the 
National Crowdfunding 
Association website 
www.nlcfa.org.
concept questions
15.2a	 What are the basic procedures in selling a new issue?
15.2b	 What is a registration statement?

490
f i g u r e  15.1
An example of a 
tombstone 
advertisement
World Wrestling Federation Entertainment, Inc.
Class A Common Stock
Price $17.00 Per Share
Copies of the Prospectus may be obtained in any State in which this announcement
is circulated from only such of the Underwriters, including the undersigned,
as may lawfully offer these securities in such State.
U.S. Offering
9,200,000 Shares
This portion of the underwriting is being offered in the United States and Canada.
Bear, Stearns & Co. Inc.
 
 
  Credit Suisse First Boston
 
 
 
 
          Merrill Lynch & Co.
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Wit Capital Corporation
International Offering
2,300,000 Shares
This portion of the underwriting is being offered outside of the United States and Canada.
Bear, Stearns International Limited
 
 
 
      Credit Suisse First Boston
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Merrill Lynch International
This announcement is neither an offer to sell nor a solicitation of an offer to buy any of these securities.
The offering is made only by the Prospectus.
New Issue
11,500,000 Shares
Allen & Company                       Banc of America Securities LLC                       Deutsche Banc Alex. Brown
Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette         A.G. Edwards & Sons, Inc.            Hambrecht & Quist          ING Barings
Prudential Securities                SG Cowen               Wassertein Perella Securities, Inc.                Advest, Inc.
Axiom Capital Management, Inc.                       Blackford Securities Corp.                        J.C. Bradford & Co.
Joseph Charles & Assoc., Inc.                     Chatsworth Securities LLC                     Gabelli & Company, Inc.
Gaines, Berland Inc.        Jefferies & Company, Inc.        Josephthal & Co. Inc.        Neuberger Berman, LLC
Raymond James & Associates, Inc. 
 
 
 
    Sanders Morris Mundy
Tucker Anthony Cleary Gull 
 
 
 
                   Wachovia Securities, Inc.
Incorporated

491
ALTERNATIVE ISSUE METHODS
When a company decides to issue a new security, it can sell it as a public issue or a private 
issue. In the case of a public issue, the firm is required to register the issue with the SEC. 
However, if the issue is to be sold to fewer than 35 investors, the sale can be carried out 
privately. In this case, a registration statement is not required.3
For equity sales, there are two kinds of public issues: a general cash offer and a rights 
offer (or rights offering). With a cash offer, securities are offered to the general public on a “first 
come, first served” basis. With a rights offer, securities are initially offered only to existing 
owners. Rights offers are fairly common in other countries, but they are relatively rare in the 
United States, particularly in recent years. We therefore focus on cash offers in this chapter.
The first public equity issue that is made by a company is referred to as an initial public 
offering, an IPO, or an unseasoned new issue. This issue occurs when a company decides to go 
public. Obviously, all initial public offerings are cash offers. If the firm’s existing shareholders 
wanted to buy the shares, the firm wouldn’t have to sell them publicly in the first place.
A seasoned equity offering (SEO) is a new issue for a company with securities that 
have been previously issued. The terms secondary and follow-on offering are also com-
monly used. A seasoned equity offering of common stock can be made by using a cash 
offer or a rights offer.
These methods of issuing new securities are shown in Table 15.1. They are discussed 
beginning in Section 15.4.
15.3
general cash offer
An issue of securities 
offered for sale to the 
general public on a cash 
basis.
rights offer
A public issue of securities 
in which securities are first 
offered to existing 
shareholders. Also known 
as rights offering.
initial public 
offering (IPO)
A company’s first equity 
issue made available to 
the public. Also 
unseasoned new issue.
seasoned equity 
offering (SEO)
A new equity issue of 
securities by a company 
that has previously issued 
securities to the public.
3 A variety of different arrangements can be made for private equity issues. Selling unregistered securities avoids the 
costs of complying with the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Regulation significantly restricts the resale of 
unregistered equity securities. For example, the purchaser may be required to hold the securities for at least two 
years. Many of the restrictions were significantly eased in 1990 for very large institutional investors, however.  
The private placement of bonds is discussed in a later section.
ta b l e  15.1
The methods of 
issuing new 
securities
Method
Type
Definition
Public 
  Traditional 
negotiated 
cash offer
 
Firm commitment 
cash offer
 
Company negotiates an agreement with an 
investment banker to underwrite and distribute the 
new shares. A specified number of shares are bought 
by underwriters and sold at a higher price.
Best efforts cash 
offer
Company has investment bankers sell as many of the 
new shares as possible at the agreed-upon price. 
There is no guarantee concerning how much cash 
will be raised. Some best efforts offerings do not use 
an underwriter.
Dutch auction 
cash offer
Company has investment bankers auction shares to 
determine the highest offer price obtainable for a 
given number of shares to be sold.
  Privileged 
subscription
Direct rights offer
Company offers the new stock directly to its existing 
shareholders.
Standby rights 
offer
Like the direct rights offer, this contains a privileged 
subscription arrangement with existing shareholders. 
The net proceeds are guaranteed by the underwriters.
  Nontraditional 
cash offer
Shelf cash offer
Qualifying companies can authorize all the shares 
they expect to sell over a two-year period and sell 
them when needed.
Competitive firm 
cash offer
Company can elect to award the underwriting contract 
through a public auction instead of negotiation.
Private
Direct placement
Securities are sold directly to the purchaser, who, at 
least until recently, generally could not resell the 
securities for at least two years.

492	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
concept questions
15.3a 	 Why is an initial public offering necessarily a cash offer?
15.3b 	 What is the difference between a rights offer and a cash offer?
UNDERWRITERS
If the public issue of securities is a cash offer, underwriters are usually involved. Under-
writing is an important line of business for large investment firms such as Merrill Lynch. 
Underwriters perform services such as the following for corporate issuers:
  1.	 Formulating the method used to issue the securities.
  2.	 Pricing the new securities.
  3.	 Selling the new securities.
Typically, the underwriter buys the securities for less than the offering price and accepts 
the risk of not being able to sell them. The difference between the underwriter’s buying 
price and the offering price is called the spread, or discount. It is the basic compensation 
received by the underwriter. Sometimes the underwriter will get noncash compensation in 
the form of warrants and stock in addition to the spread.4
Underwriters combine to form an underwriting group called a syndicate to share the 
risk and to help sell the issue. In a syndicate, one or more managers arrange the offering. 
This manager is designated as the lead manager, or principal manager. The lead manager 
typically has the responsibility of pricing the securities. The other underwriters in the syn-
dicate serve primarily to distribute the issue.
Choosing an Underwriter
A firm can offer its securities to the highest bidding underwriter on a competitive offer 
basis, or it can negotiate directly with an underwriter. In most cases, companies usually do 
new issues of debt and equity on a negotiated offer basis.
There is evidence that competitive underwriting is cheaper to use than negotiated un-
derwriting, and the underlying reasons for the dominance of negotiated underwriting in the 
United States are the subject of ongoing debate.
Types of Underwriting
Two basic types of underwriting are involved in a cash offer: firm commitment and best efforts.
Firm Commitment Underwriting 
In firm commitment underwriting, the issuer 
sells the entire issue to the underwriters, who then attempt to resell it. This is the most 
prevalent type of underwriting in the United States. This is really just a purchase−resale 
arrangement, and the underwriter’s fee is the spread. For a new issue of seasoned equity, 
the underwriters can look at the market price to determine what the issue should sell for, 
and 95 percent of all such new issues are firm commitments.
If the underwriter cannot sell all of the issue at the agreed-upon offering price, it may 
have to lower the price on the unsold shares. Nonetheless, with firm commitment under-
writing, the issuer receives the agreed-upon amount, and all the risk associated with selling 
the issue is transferred to the underwriter.
15.4
underwriters
Investment firms that act 
as intermediaries between 
a company selling 
securities and the 
investing public.
spread
Compensation to the 
underwriter, determined 
by the difference between 
the underwriter’s buying 
price and ­offering price.
syndicate
A group of underwriters 
formed to share the risk 
and to help sell an issue.
firm commitment 
underwriting
The underwriter buys the 
entire issue, assuming full 
financial responsibility for 
any unsold shares.
4 Warrants are essentially options to buy stock at a fixed price for some fixed period of time.

	
c h a p t e r  1 5
Raising Capital	
493
Because the offering price usually isn’t set until the underwriters have investigated 
how receptive the market is to the issue, this risk is usually minimal. Also, because the of-
fering price usually is not set until just before selling commences, the issuer doesn’t know 
precisely what its net proceeds will be until that time.
To determine the offering price, the underwriter will meet with potential buyers, typi-
cally large institutional buyers such as mutual funds. Often, the underwriter and company 
management will do presentations in multiple cities, pitching the stock in what is known as 
a road show. Potential buyers provide information on the price they would be willing to 
pay and the number of shares they would purchase at a particular price. This process of 
soliciting information about buyers and the prices and quantities they would demand is 
known as book building. As we will see, despite the book building process, underwriters 
frequently get the price wrong, or so it seems.
Best Efforts Underwriting 
In best efforts underwriting, the underwriter is legally 
bound to use “best efforts” to sell the securities at the agreed-upon offering price. 
­Beyond this, the underwriter does not guarantee any particular amount of money to the 
issuer. This form of underwriting has become very uncommon; firm commitments are 
the dominant form.
Dutch Auction Underwriting 
With Dutch auction underwriting, the underwriter 
does not set a fixed price for the shares to be sold. Instead, the underwriter conducts an 
auction in which investors bid for shares. The offer price is determined based on the sub-
mitted bids. A Dutch auction is also known by the more descriptive name uniform price 
auction. This approach to selling securities to the public is relatively new in the IPO market 
and has not been widely used there, but it is very common in the bond markets. For exam-
ple, it is the sole procedure used by the U.S. Treasury to sell enormous quantities of notes, 
bonds, and bills to the public.
Dutch auction underwriting was much in the news in 2004 because web search com-
pany Google elected to use this approach. The best way to understand a Dutch or uniform 
price auction is to consider a simple example. Suppose the Rial Company wants to sell 
400 shares to the public. The company receives five bids as follows:
Bidder
Quantity
Price
A
100 shares
$16
B
100 shares
  14
C
200 shares
  12
D
100 shares
  12
E
200 shares
  10
Thus, bidder A is willing to buy 100 shares at $16 each, bidder B is willing to buy 100 
shares at $14, and so on. The Rial Company examines the bids to determine the highest 
price that will result in all 400 shares being sold. So, for example, at $14, A and B would 
buy only 200 shares, so that price is too high. Working our way down, all 400 shares won’t 
be sold until we hit a price of $12, so $12 will be the offer price in the IPO. Bidders A 
through D will receive shares; bidder E will not.
There are two additional important points to observe in our example: First, all the win-
ning bidders will pay $12, even bidders A and B, who actually bid a higher price. The fact 
that all successful bidders pay the same price is the reason for the name “uniform price 
auction.” The idea in such an auction is to encourage bidders to bid aggressively by provid-
ing some protection against bidding a price that is too high.
best efforts 
underwriting
The underwriter sells as 
much of the issue as 
possible, but can return 
any unsold shares to the 
issuer without financial 
responsibility.
Dutch auction 
underwriting
The type of underwriting 
in which the offer price is 
set based on competitive 
bidding by investors. Also 
known as a uniform price 
auction.
Learn all about Dutch 
auction IPOs at  
www.wrhambrecht.com.

494	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
Second, notice that at the $12 offer price, there are actually bids for 500 shares, 
which exceeds the 400 shares Rial wants to sell. Thus, there has to be some sort of allo-
cation. How this is done varies a bit, but, in the IPO market, the approach has been to 
simply compute the ratio of shares offered to shares bid at the offer price or better, 
which, in our example, is 400/500 = .8, and allocate bidders that percentage of their bids. 
In other words, bidders A through D would each receive 80 percent of the shares they bid 
at a price of $12 per share.
The Green Shoe Provision
Many underwriting contracts contain a Green Shoe provision (sometimes called the over-
allotment option), which gives the members of the underwriting group the option to pur-
chase additional shares from the issuer at the offering price.5 Essentially, all IPOs and 
SEOs include this provision, but ordinary debt offerings generally do not. The stated rea-
son for the Green Shoe option is to cover excess demand and oversubscriptions. Green 
Shoe options usually last for about 30 days and involve no more than 15 percent of the 
newly issued shares.
The Aftermarket
The period after a new issue is initially sold to the public is referred to as the aftermarket. 
The lead underwriter frequently will “stabilize,” or support, the market price for a rela-
tively short time following the offering. This is done by actually selling 115 percent of 
the issue. If the price rises in the aftermarket, the underwriter will exercise the Green 
Shoe option to purchase the extra 15 percent needed. If the price declines, however, the 
underwriter will step in and buy the stock in the open market, thereby supporting the 
price. In this second case, the underwriter allows the Green Shoe option to expire.6 
This happened in the May 2012 IPO of Facebook when lead underwriter Morgan Stan-
ley was forced to step in and stabilize the stock price. Even though the stock opened at 
$42.05, it quickly fell to $38 less than an hour after trading on the stock began. At that 
point, Morgan Stanley stepped in and began buying shares of the stock to create a floor 
of $38 per share.
Lockup Agreements
Although they are not required by law, almost all underwriting contracts contain so-called 
lockup agreements. Such agreements specify how long insiders must wait after an IPO 
before they can sell some or all of their stock. Lockup periods have become fairly standard-
ized in recent years at 180 days. Thus, following an IPO, insiders can’t cash out until six 
months have gone by, which ensures that they maintain a significant economic interest in 
the company going public.
Lockup periods are also important because it is not unusual for the number of locked-
up shares to exceed the number of shares held by the public, sometimes by a substantial 
multiple. On the day the lockup period expires, there is the possibility that a large number 
Green Shoe 
provision
A contract provision giving 
the underwriter the option 
to purchase additional 
shares from the issuer at 
the offering price. Also 
overallotment option.
lockup agreement
The part of the underwriting 
contract that specifies 
how long insiders must 
wait after an IPO before 
they can sell stock.
5 The term Green Shoe provision sounds quite exotic, but the origin is relatively mundane. The term comes 
from the name of the Green Shoe Manufacturing Company, which, in 1963, was the first issuer to grant such 
an option.
6 Occasionally, the price of a security falls dramatically when the underwriter ceases to stabilize the price. In 
such cases, Wall Street humorists (the ones who didn’t buy any of the stock) have referred to the period 
following the aftermarket as the aftermath.

	
c h a p t e r  1 5
Raising Capital	
495
of shares will hit the market on the same day and thereby depress values. The evidence 
suggests that, on average, venture capital–backed companies are particularly likely to expe-
rience a loss in value on the lockup expiration day.
The Quiet Period
From the time a company begins to seriously consider an IPO until 40 calendar days fol-
lowing an IPO, the SEC requires that a firm and its managing underwriters observe a 
“quiet period.” This means that all communications with the public must be limited to 
ordinary announcements and other purely factual matters. The SEC’s logic is that all 
relevant information should be contained in the prospectus. An important result of this 
requirement is that the underwriters’ analysts are prohibited from making recommenda-
tions to investors. As soon as the quiet period ends, however, the managing underwriters 
typically publish research reports, usually accompanied by a favorable “buy” 
recommendation.
Firms that don’t stay quiet can have their IPOs delayed. For example, just before 
Google’s IPO, an interview with cofounders Sergey Brin and Larry Page appeared in 
Playboy. The interview almost caused a postponement of the IPO, but Google was able to 
amend its prospectus in time (by including the article!). However, in May 2004, Salesforce 
.com’s IPO was delayed because an interview with CEO Marc Benioff appeared in 
The New York Times. Salesforce.com finally went public two months later.
concept questions
15.4a 	 What do underwriters do?
15.4b 	 What is the Green Shoe provision?
IPOS AND UNDERPRICING
Determining the correct offering price is the most difficult thing an underwriter must do 
for an initial public offering. The issuing firm faces a potential cost if the offering price is 
set too high or too low. If the issue is priced too high, it may be unsuccessful and have to 
be withdrawn. If the issue is priced below the true market value, the issuer’s existing share-
holders will experience an opportunity loss when they sell their shares for less than they 
are worth.
Underpricing is fairly common. It obviously helps new shareholders earn a higher 
return on the shares they buy. However, the existing shareholders of the issuing firm are 
not helped by underpricing. To them, it is an indirect cost of issuing new securities. For 
example, consider Chinese online retailer Alibaba’s IPO in September 2014. The stock 
was priced at $68 in the IPO and rose to a first-day high of $99.70 before closing at 
$93.89, a gain of about 38.1 percent. Based on these numbers, Alibaba was underpriced 
by about $25.89 per share. Because Alibaba sold 320.1 million shares, the company 
missed out on an additional $8.3 billion, a record amount “left on the table.” The previous 
record of $5.1 billion was held by Visa, set in its 2008 IPO.
Dutch auctions are supposed to eliminate this kind of “pop” in first day prices. As we 
previously discussed, Google sold 19.6 million shares at a price of $85 in a Dutch auction 
15.5
Learn more about 
investment banks at 
Merrill Lynch’s website: 
www.ml.com.

496	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
IPO. However, the stock closed at $100.34 on the first day, an increase of 18 percent, so 
Google missed out on an additional $300 million.
One of the biggest dollar amounts “left on the table” occurred in 1999 when eToys went 
public, offering 8.2 million shares. The stock jumped $57 above the offer price on the first 
day, which meant eToys left about half a billion dollars on the table! eToys could have used 
the money; it filed for bankruptcy less than two years later. In May 2002, the company sued 
its lead underwriter, claiming the offer price was deliberately set too low.
Of course, not all IPOs increase in price on the first day. For example, biotech 
company Macrocure, Inc., went public on July 31, 2014, at a price of $10. The com-
pany’s stock opened at $9.00, the high price of the day. The stock dropped to $7.01, 
before closing at $7.25 by the end of the day, a drop of about 20 percent from the open-
ing price.
A worse fate awaited BATS Global Markets. BATS, which stands for Better Alterna-
tive Trading System, is an electronic stock market that handles about 11 percent of the 
trading on the U.S. markets. On March 23, 2012, the company went public, selling 
6.3 million shares at a price of $16 each. The IPO was the first IPO to take place on the 
BATS market, an important step toward attracting other new IPOs. However, shortly after 
trading on BATS stock began, things turned sour. Trades were executed at $15.25, below 
the initial offering price. Less than nine seconds later, the stock price dropped to .0002 cents! 
Less than 30 seconds later, trading on BATS stock was halted, all trades in the stock were 
canceled, and the IPO was withdrawn.
Evidence on Underpricing
Figure 15.2 provides a more general illustration of the underpricing phenomenon. What is 
shown is the month-by-month history of underpricing for SEC-registered IPOs.7 The 
IPO information is 
ubiquitous on the  
World Wide Web. Two 
sites of interest are  
www.ipohome.com  
and IPO Monitor at  
www.ipomonitor.com.
7 The discussion in this section draws on Jay R. Ritter, “Initial Public Offerings,” Contemporary Finance Digest 2 
(Spring 1998).
Source: R. G. Ibbotson, J. L. Sindelar, and J. R. Ritter, “The Market’s Problems with the Pricing of Initial Public Offerings,” Journal of Applied 
Corporate Finance 7 (Spring 1994), as updated by the authors.
1960
0
220
240
20
40
60
80
100
140
120
Average ﬁrst-day return
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
Year
2010
2015
f i g u r e  15.2
Average initial returns by month for SEC-registered initial public offerings: 1960–2014

	
c h a p t e r  1 5
Raising Capital	
497
Source: R. G. Ibbotson, J. L. Sindelar, and J. R. Ritter, “The Market’s Problems with the Pricing of Initial Public Offerings,” Journal of Applied 
Corporate Finance 7 (Spring 1994), as updated by the authors.
f i g u r e  15.3
Number of offerings by month for SEC-registered initial public offerings: 1960–2014
0
20
40
60
80
100
140
120
Number of IPOs
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Year
2015
period covered is 1960 through 2014. Figure 15.3 presents the number of offerings in each 
month for the same period.
Figure 15.2 shows that underpricing can be quite dramatic, exceeding 100 percent in 
some months. In such months, the average IPO more than doubled in value, sometimes in 
a matter of hours. Also, the degree of underpricing varies through time, and periods of 
severe underpricing (“hot issue” markets) are followed by periods of little underpricing 
(“cold issue” markets). For example, in the 1960s, the average IPO was underpriced by 
21.2 percent. In the 1970s, the average underpricing was much smaller (7.2 percent), and 
the amount of underpricing was actually very small or even negative for much of that time. 
For 1990–1999, IPOs were underpriced by 21.4 percent on average, and for 2000–2014, 
the average underpricing was 22.0 percent.
From Figure 15.3, it is apparent that the number of IPOs is also highly variable through 
time. Further, there are pronounced cycles in both the degree of underpricing and the num-
ber of IPOs. Comparing Figures 15.2 and 15.3, we see that increases in the number of new 
offerings tend to follow periods of significant underpricing by roughly 6 to 12 months. 
This probably occurs because companies decide to go public when they perceive that the 
market is highly receptive to new issues.
Table 15.2 contains a year-by-year summary of underpricing for the years 1960 to 
2014. As is indicated, a grand total of 12,259 companies were included in this analysis. 
The degree of underpricing averaged 17.3 percent overall for the 55 years examined. Se-
curities were overpriced on average in only 5 of the 55 years; in 1973, the average de-
crease in value was −17.8 percent. At the other extreme, in 1999, the 477 issues were 
underpriced, on average, by a remarkable 71.1 percent. The nearby Finance Matters box 
shows that IPO underpricing is not just confined to the United States; instead, it seems to 
be a global phenomenon.
IPO Underpricing: The 1999–2000 Experience
Table 15.2, along with Figures 15.2 and 15.3, show that 1999 and 2000 were extraordinary 
years in the IPO market. During these two years, 858 companies went public, and the 

498	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
ta b l e  15.2
Number of offerings, average first-day returns, and gross proceeds of initial public 
offerings: 1960–2014
Year
Number of 
Offerings*
Average First-
Day Return, %†
Gross 
Proceeds,  
$ Millions‡
1960
     269
  17.8
       553
1961
     435
  34.1
    1,243
1962
     298
  −1.6
       431
1963
       83
    3.9
       246
1964
       97
    5.3
       380
1965
     146
  12.7
       409
1966
       85
    7.1
       275
1967
     100
  37.7
       641
1968
     368
  55.9
    1,205
1969
     780
  12.5
    2,605
1970
     358
   −.7
       780
1971
     391
  21.2
    1,655
1972
     562
    7.5
    2,724
1973
     105
−17.8
       330
1974
         9
     −7.0   
         51
1975
       12
    −.2
       261
1976
       26
    1.9
       214
1977
       15
    3.6
       128
1978
       19
  12.6
       207
1979
       39
    8.5
       313
1980
       71
  14.3
         91
1981
     192
    5.9
    2,310
1982
       77
  11.0
    1,000
1983
     451
       9.9   
    8,890
1984
     173
    3.6
    2,070
1985
     187
    6.4
    4,310
1986
     393
      6.1  
  13,400
1987
     285
    5.6
  11,680
1988
     102
    5.7
    3,720
1989
     113
    8.2
    5,200
1990
     110
  10.8
    4,270
1991
     286
  11.9
  15,350
1992
     412
  10.3
  22,690
1993
     509
  12.7
  31,350
1994
     403
    9.8
  17,250
Year
Number of 
Offerings*
Average First-
Day Return, %†
Gross 
Proceeds,  
$ Millions‡
1995
     461
  21.2
  27,950
1996
     677
  17.2
  42,050
1997
     474
     14.0   
  31,760
1998
     281
  21.9
  33,650
1999
     477
  71.1
  64,950
2000
     381
  56.3
  64,860
2001
       79
  14.2
  34,240
2002
       66
    9.1
  22,030
2003
       63
  11.7
  9,540
2004
     173
  12.3
  31,190
2005
     159
  10.3
  28,230
2006
     157
  12.1
  30,480
2007
     159
  14.0
  35,660
2008
       21
    6.4
  22,760
2009
       41
    9.8
  13,170
2010
       91
       9.4   
  29,820
2011
       81
  13.3
  26,970
2012
       93
  17.9
  31,110
2013
     157
  21.1
  38,750
2014
     207
  15.5
  42,300
1960–1969
  2,661
  21.2
    7,988
1970–1979
  1,536
    7.2
    6,663
1980–1989
  2,044
    7.2
  52,671
1990–1999
  4,090
     21.4  
291,270
2000–2009
  1,299
  24.9
291,980
2010–2014
     629
  16.1
168,950
1960–2014
12,259
  17.3
819,522
*The number of offerings excludes IPOs with an offer price of less than $5.00, ADRs, best efforts, units, Regulation A offers (small issues, raising 
less than $1.5 million during the 1980s), real estate investment trusts (REITs), partnerships, and closed-end funds. Banks and S&Ls and non-CRSP–
listed IPOs are included.
†First-day returns are computed as the percentage return from the offering price to the first closing market price.
‡Gross proceeds exclude overallotment options but include the international tranche, if any. No adjustments for inflation have been made.
Source: Data from 1960–1974 is taken from Table 1 of Roger Ibbotson, Jody Sindelar, and Jay R. Ritter’s 1994 Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 
article, “The Market’s Problems with the Pricing of Initial Public Offerings,” vol. 7, no. 1 (Spring 1994), pp. 66–74. Data from 1975–2014 is compiled 
by Jay R. Ritter using Thomson Financial, Dealogic, and other sources. The 1975–1992 numbers are different from those reported in the JACF 
article because the published article included IPOs that did not qualify for listing on Nasdaq, the Amex, or NYSE (mainly penny stocks).

499
IPO Underpricing around the World
T
he United States is not the only country in which initial 
public offerings (IPOs) of common stock are underpriced. 
The phenomenon exists in every country with a stock mar-
ket, although the extent of underpricing varies from country 
to country.
	
In general, countries with developed capital markets have 
more moderate underpricing than in emerging markets. During 
the Internet bubble of 1999–2000, however, underpricing in 
the developed capital markets increased dramatically. In the 
United States, for example, the average first-day return during 
1999–2000 was 65 percent. At the same time that underpricing 
in the developed capital markets increased, the underpricing of 
IPOs sold to residents of China moderated. The Chinese aver-
age has come down to a mere 118 percent, which is lower than 
it had been in the early and mid-1990s. After the bursting of the 
Internet bubble in mid-2000, the level of underpricing in the 
United States, Germany, and other developed capital markets 
has returned to more traditional levels.
	
The accompanying table gives a summary of the aver-
age first-day returns on IPOs in a number of countries 
around the world, with the figures collected from a number 
of studies by various authors.
FINANCE MATTERS
Country
Sample 
Size
Time 
Period
Average Initial 
Return (%)
Country
Sample 
Size
Time 
Period
Average Initial 
Return (%)
Argentina
     26
1991–2013
       4.2%
Malaysia
     474
1980–2013
     56.2%
Australia
1,562
1976–2011
  21.8
Mauritius
       40
1989–2005
  15.2
Austria
   103
1971–2013
    6.4
Mexico
       88
1987–1994
  15.9
Belgium
   114
1984–2006
  13.5
Morocco
       19
2004–2007
  47.2
Brazil
   275
1979–2011
   33.1
Netherlands
     181
1982–2006
  10.2
Bulgaria
       9
2004–2007
  36.5
New Zealand
     214
1979–2006
  20.3
Canada
   720
1971–2013
    6.5
Nigeria
     114
1989–2006
  12.7
Chile
     81
1982–2013
    7.4
Norway
     153
1984–2006
    9.6
China
2,512
1990–2013
118.4
Pakistan
       57
2000–2010
  32.0
Cyprus
     73
1997–2012
  20.3
Philippines
     123
1987–2006
  21.2
Denmark
   164
1984–2011
    7.4
Poland
     309
1991–2012
  13.3
Egypt
     62
1990–2010
  10.4
Portugal
       28
1992–2006
  11.6
Finland
   168
1971–2013
  16.9
Russia
       40
1999–2006
    4.2
France
   697
1983–2010
  10.5
Saudi Arabia
       76
2003–2010
264.5
Germany
   736
1978–2011
  24.2
Singapore
     591
1973–2011
  26.1
Greece
   373
1976–2013
  50.8
South Africa
     285
1980–2007
  18.0
Hong Kong
1,486
1980–2013
  15.8
Spain
     128
1986–2006
  10.9
India
2,964
1990–2011
  88.5
Sri Lanka
     105
1987–2008
  33.5
Indonesia
   441
1990–2013
  25.0
Sweden
     374
1980–2011
  27.2
Iran
   279
1991–2004
  22.4
Switzerland
     159
1983–2008
  28.0
Ireland
     38
1991–2013
  21.6
Taiwan
  1,620
1980–2013
  38.1
Israel
   348
1990–2006
  13.8
Thailand
     459
1987–2007
  36.6
Italy
   312
1985–2013
  15.2
Turkey
     355
1990–2011
  10.3
Japan
3,236
1970–2013
  41.7
United Kingdom
  4,932
1959–2012
  16.0
Jordan
     53
1999–2008
149.0
United States
12,496 
1960–2013
  16.9
Korea
1,720
1980–2013
  59.3
Source: Professor Jay R. Ritter, the Joseph B. Cordell Professor of Finance at the University of Florida. An outstanding scholar, he is well known for 
his insightful analyses of new issues and going public.
average first-day return across the two years was about 65 percent. During this time, 
194 IPOs doubled, or more than doubled, in value on the first day. In contrast, only 39 did 
so in the preceding 24 years combined. One company, VA Linux, shot up 698 percent!
The dollar amount raised in 1999, $64.9 billion, was a record, followed closely by 
2000. The underpricing was so severe in 1999 that companies left another $36 billion “on 
the table,” which was substantially more than in 1990 through 1998 combined, and, in 

500	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
2000, the amount was at least $27 billion. In other words, over the two-year period, com-
panies missed out on $63 billion because of underpricing.
October 19, 1999, was one of the more memorable days during this time. The World 
Wrestling Federation (WWF) (now known as World Wrestling Entertainment, or WWE) 
and Martha Stewart Omnimedia both went public, so it was Martha Stewart versus “Stone 
Cold” Steve Austin in a Wall Street version of MTV’s Celebrity Deathmatch. When the 
closing bell rang, it was a clear smackdown as Martha Stewart gained 98 percent on the 
first day compared to 48 percent for the WWF. If you’re interested in finding out how IPOs 
have done recently, check out our nearby Work the Web box.
The IPO market cooled off considerably in 2001. Many observers now refer to the 
1999–2000 period as the Internet “bubble” period. The word bubble in this context refers 
to a situation in which prices are bid up to irrational, and unsustainable, levels. During 
1999, for example, 323 of the companies that went public were considered Internet IPOs, 
S
o, do the high returns IPOs sometimes earn have you excited? Do you wonder how recent 
IPOs have performed? You can find out at www.ipomonitor.com. We went to the website and 
looked in the Best-Worst Performers area. Here is part of what we found:
As you can see, Spark Therapeutics and Shake Shack had the largest first-day returns.
W
RK THE  WE B
QUESTIONS
	
1.	 Go to www.ipomonitor.com and find the companies that have had the biggest first-day 
gains in the most recent quarter. How do the most recent gains compare with the gains 
shown above? Which companies had the biggest first-day drops?
	
2.	 Go to www.ipomonitor.com and find out which companies have filed for an IPO but 
have yet to start trading.

501
meaning companies that did most (or all) of their business on the Internet, or companies 
whose products were used for computers or networks. By April 2001, of the 1999 Internet 
IPOs, only 12, or 4 percent, were trading above their offer price, and only 4, or 1 percent, 
were trading above their first-day close. Was it really a bubble? Let us say that, at a mini-
mum, there were instances of valuations that are very hard to reconcile with economic real-
ity. A nearby Finance Matters box discusses one of the most notorious, the case of Palm, 
Inc., maker of handheld computers.
The Partial Adjustment Phenomenon
When a company files its registration statement with the SEC, it will at some point in the 
process indicate a range of stock prices within which it expects to offer shares. This range 
is called the “file price range” or words to that effect. A file price range of $10–$12 is com-
mon, but many others exist. For example, when the hamburger restaurant Shake Shack 
filed on January 20, 2015, it indicated an anticipated price in the $14 to $16 range.
Just before a company’s shares are sold to investors, the final IPO offer price is deter-
mined. As shown in Panel A of Table 15.3, that price can be above, within, or below the 
price range originally indicated by the company. Over the period 1980–2013, 49 percent of 
IPOs were within the file range, with 28 percent below and 23 percent above.
Panel B of Table 15.3 illustrates an interesting and very clear pattern. IPO underpric-
ing is much more severe when an offer is priced above the file range. Again over the 
1980–2013 period, IPOs that priced above the file range were underpriced by 50 percent, 
on average, compared to only 3 percent for firms priced below it. The 1999–2000 period 
The (Mis)pricing of Palm, Inc.
A
t one time, Palm was entirely owned by 3Com, Inc., a 
profitable provider of computer networking products 
and services. On March 2, 2000, 3Com sold 5 percent of its 
stake in Palm to the public via an IPO. This type of IPO, in 
which a company sells a part of its stock (usually a minority 
share) in a subsidiary, is called an equity “carve-out,” and 
such carve-outs are not uncommon events.
	
At some point following a carve-out, the parent 
company will often distribute the remaining shares in the 
subsidiary to its stockholders. This transaction is called a 
spin-off. In Palm’s case, 3Com planned to spin off its re-
maining shares to 3Com’s shareholders before the end 
of the year. Under the plan, 3Com shareholders would 
receive about 1.5 shares of Palm for every share of 3Com 
that they owned. Thus, after the IPO, investors could buy 
shares in Palm directly, or they could buy shares indi-
rectly by purchasing stock in 3Com and waiting a little 
while.
	
Here is where it gets interesting. Because the owner of 
a share of 3Com will ultimately get 1.5 shares of Palm, each 
share of 3Com has to be worth at least as much as 1.5 shares 
of Palm, right? In fact, given that 3Com’s other businesses 
were profitable, 3Com’s stock price should be well above 
1.5 times that of Palm.
	
It didn’t happen that way. The day before the Palm IPO, 
3Com closed at $104.13 per share. After the first day of trad-
ing, Palm closed at $95.06 per share, implying that the price 
of 3Com should have jumped to at least $145. Instead, 3Com 
fell to $81.81. The next day, the wacky pricing was prominently 
discussed in The Wall Street Journal and elsewhere, so it 
wasn’t a secret. It was easy to see, yet it persisted for months.
	
Based on these prices, the stock market was placing a 
negative value on 3Com’s non-Palm businesses. Since the 
stock sold for about $82 per share when it should have sold 
for at least $145, the market was valuing all of 3Com’s non-
Palm operations at $82 − 145 = −$63 per share, or about 
−$22 billion in all! Of course, stock prices can’t be negative, 
so a reasonable interpretation would be that Palm’s stock 
price was far too high relative to 3Com’s.
	
Episodes like that of Palm are rare, but there were at 
least five other cases of clear negative valuations in roughly 
the same time period as Palm’s IPO. In all cases, the nega-
tive values gradually disappeared, so the misvaluations 
were corrected, but it took time in each case.
FINANCE MATTERS

502	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
again stands out. Issues that “went off” above the file range were underpriced, on average 
by, 121 percent!
This pattern is known as the “partial adjustment” phenomenon. The name refers to the 
fact that when firms raise their IPO offer prices, they only do so partially, meaning that 
they don’t move the price high enough. In Shake Shack’s case for example, the final offer 
price was $21, much higher than the original file range, but not high enough: The stock 
more than doubled on the first day of trading on January 30, 2015, when it closed at 
$45.90.
Why does the partial adjustment phenomenon exist? The answer is not known. The 
question is related to the broader question of why IPO underpricing exists, which we con-
sider next.
Why Does Underpricing Exist?
Based on the evidence we’ve examined, an obvious question is why does underpricing 
continue to exist? As we discuss, there are various explanations, but, to date, there is a lack 
of complete agreement among researchers as to which is correct.
We present some pieces of the underpricing puzzle by stressing two important caveats 
to our preceding discussion. First, the average figures we have examined tend to obscure 
the fact that much of the apparent underpricing is attributable to the smaller, more highly 
speculative issues. This point is illustrated in Table 15.4, which shows the extent of under-
pricing for over 8,000 firms over the period from 1980 through 2014. Here, the firms are 
grouped based on their total sales in the 12 months prior to the IPO.
As illustrated in Table 15.4, there is a tendency for underpricing to be more pro-
nounced for firms with relatively small pre-IPO sales. These firms tend to be young firms, 
and such young firms can be very risky investments. Arguably, they must be significantly 
underpriced, on average, just to attract investors, and this is one explanation for the under-
pricing phenomenon.
The second caveat is that relatively few IPO buyers will actually get the initial high 
average returns observed in IPOs, and many will actually lose money. Although it is true 
that, on average, IPOs have positive initial returns, a significant fraction of them have price 
drops. Furthermore, when the price is too low, the issue is often “oversubscribed.” This 
A. Percentage of IPOs Relative to File Price Range
Below
Within
Above
1980–1989
   30%
   57%
   13%
1990–1998
27
49
24
1999–2000
18
38
44
2001–2013
35
42
23
1980–2013
28
49
23
B. Average First-Day Returns Relative to File Price Range
Below
Within
Above
1980–1989
     0%
     6%
    20%
1990–1998
  4
11
         31
1999–2000
  8
26
121 
2001–2013
  3
11
   33
1980–2013
  3
11
 50
Source: Professor Jay R. Ritter, University of Florida.
ta b l e  15.3
IPO underpricing and 
file price range

	
c h a p t e r  1 5
Raising Capital	
503
means investors will not be able to buy all of the shares they want, and the underwriters 
will allocate the shares among investors.
The average investor will find it difficult to get shares in a “successful” offering (one 
in which the price increases) because there will not be enough shares to go around. On the 
other hand, an investor blindly submitting orders for IPOs tends to get more shares in 
issues that go down in price.
To illustrate, consider this tale of two investors. Smith knows very accurately what the 
Bonanza Corporation is worth when its shares are offered. She is confident that the shares 
are underpriced. Jones knows only that IPOs are usually underpriced. Armed with this in-
formation, Jones decides to buy 1,000 shares of every IPO. Does he actually earn an abnor-
mally high return on the initial offering?
The answer is no, and at least one reason is Smith. Knowing about the Bonanza 
Corporation, Smith invests all her money in its IPO. When the issue is oversubscribed, 
the underwriters have to somehow allocate the shares between Smith and Jones. The 
net result is that when an issue is underpriced, Jones doesn’t get to buy as much of it as 
he wanted.
Smith also knows that the Blue Sky Corporation IPO is overpriced. In this case, she 
avoids its IPO altogether, and Jones ends up with a full 1,000 shares. To summarize this 
tale, Jones gets fewer shares when more knowledgeable investors swarm to buy an un-
derpriced issue and gets all he wants when the smart money avoids the issue.
This is an example of a “winner’s curse,” and it is thought to be another reason 
why IPOs have such a large average return. When the average investor “wins” and 
gets the entire allocation, it may be because those who knew better avoided the issue. 
The only way underwriters can counteract the winner’s curse and attract the average 
investor is to underprice new issues (on average) so that the average investor still 
makes a profit.
A final reason for underpricing is that the underpricing is a kind of insurance for the 
investment banks. Conceivably, an investment bank could be sued successfully by angry 
customers if it consistently overpriced securities. Underpricing guarantees that, at least on 
average, customers will come out ahead.
Average first-day returns, categorized by sales, for IPOs: 1980–2014*
1980–1989
1990–1998
1999–2000
2001–2014
Annual Sales  
of Issuing Firms
Number 
of Firms
First-Day 
Average 
Return
Number 
of Firms
First-Day 
Average 
Return
Number 
of Firms
First-Day 
Average 
Return
Number 
of Firms
First-Day 
Average 
Return
$0 ≤ sales ≤ $10m
   421
10.3%
   741
17.2%
       331
68.9%
   268
  9.0%
$10m ≤ sales ≤ $20m
   243
 8.7   
   393
18.7   
138
81.4   
        67
12.4   
$20m ≤ sales ≤ $50m
   500
 7.8   
   791
18.8   
155
75.0   
     191
14.5   
$50m ≤ sales ≤ $100m
   356
 6.3   
   589
12.9   
   87
61.8   
     251
20.3   
$100m ≤ sales ≤ $200m
   234
 5.1   
   454
11.8   
     56
35.8   
   215
17.1   
$200m ≤ sales
   290
 3.4   
   645
  8.7   
      91
 25.0   
   555
11.3   
All
2,044
 7.2   
3,613
14.8   
858
64.5  
1,547
13.6   
*Sales, measured in millions, are for the last 12 months prior to going public. All sales have been converted into dollars of 2003 purchasing power, 
using the Consumer Price Index. There are 8,060 IPOs, after excluding IPOs with an offer price of less than $5.00 per share. The average first-day 
return is 18.0 percent.
Source: Professor Jay R. Ritter, University of Florida.
ta b l e  15.4

504	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
concept questions
15.5a 	 Why is underpricing a cost to the issuing firm?
15.5b 	 Suppose a stockbroker calls you up out of the blue and offers to sell you “all the 
shares you want” of a new issue. Do you think the issue will be more or less 
underpriced than average?
NEW EQUITY SALES AND  
THE VALUE OF THE FIRM
We now turn to a consideration of seasoned equity offerings (SEOs), which, as we discussed 
earlier, are offerings by firms that already have outstanding securities. It seems reasonable to 
believe that new long-term financing is arranged by firms after positive net present value 
projects are put together. As a consequence, when the announcement of external financing is 
made, the firm’s market value should go up. Interestingly, this is not what happens. Stock 
prices tend to decline following the announcement of a new equity issue, although they tend 
to not change much following a debt announcement. A number of researchers have studied 
this issue. Plausible reasons for this strange result include the following:
  1.	 Managerial information. If management has superior information about the market 
value of the firm, it may know when the firm is overvalued. If it does, it will attempt 
to issue new shares of stock when the market value exceeds the correct value. This 
will benefit existing shareholders. However, the potential new shareholders are not 
stupid, and they will anticipate this superior information and discount it in lower 
market prices at the new issue date.
  2.	 Debt usage. A company’s issuing new equity may reveal that the company has too 
much debt or too little liquidity. One version of this argument says that the equity 
issue is a bad signal to the market. After all, if the new projects are favorable ones, 
why should the firm let new shareholders in on them? It could just issue debt and let 
the existing shareholders have all the gain.
  3.	 Issue costs. As we discuss next, there are substantial costs associated with selling 
securities.
The drop in value of the existing stock following the announcement of a new issue is 
an example of an indirect cost of selling securities. This drop might typically be on the 
order of 3 percent for an industrial corporation (and somewhat smaller for a public utility), 
so, for a large company, it can represent a substantial amount of money. We label this drop 
the abnormal return in our discussion of the costs of new issues that follows.
concept questions
15.6a 	 What are some possible reasons the price of a stock drops on the announcement of a 
new equity issue?
15.6b 	 Explain why we might expect a firm with a positive NPV investment to finance it with 
debt instead of equity.
15.6

	
c h a p t e r  1 5
Raising Capital	
505
THE COST OF ISSUING SECURITIES
Issuing securities to the public isn’t free, and the costs of different methods are important 
determinants of which is used. These costs associated with floating a new issue are generi-
cally called flotation costs. In this section, we take a closer look at the flotation costs as-
sociated with equity sales to the public.
The costs of selling stock are classified in the following table and fall into six catego-
ries: (1) the spread, (2) other direct expenses, (3) indirect expenses, (4) abnormal returns 
(discussed previously), (5) underpricing, and (6) the Green Shoe option.
The Costs of Issuing Securities
1.  Spread
The spread consists of direct fees paid by the issuer to the 
underwriting syndicate—the difference between the price the 
issuer receives and the offer price.
2.  Other direct expenses
These are direct costs incurred by the issuer that are not part of 
the compensation to underwriters. These costs include filing fees, 
legal fees, and taxes—all reported on the prospectus.
3.  Indirect expenses
These costs are not reported on the prospectus and include the 
cost of management time spent working on the new issue.
4.  Abnormal returns
In a seasoned issue of stock, the price of the existing stock drops 
on average by 3 percent upon the announcement of the issue. 
This drop is called the abnormal return.
5.  Underpricing
For initial public offerings, losses arise from selling the stock 
below the true value.
6.  Green Shoe option
The Green Shoe option gives the underwriters the right to buy 
additional shares at the offer price to cover overallotments.
Table 15.5 reports direct costs as a percentage of the gross amount raised for IPOs, 
SEOs, straight (ordinary) bonds, and convertible bonds sold by U.S. companies over the 
19-year period from 1990 through 2008. These are direct costs only. Not included are indi-
rect expenses, the cost of the Green Shoe provision, underpricing (for IPOs), and abnormal 
returns (for SEOs).
As Table 15.5 shows, the direct costs alone can be very large, particularly for smaller 
issues (less than $10 million). On a smaller IPO, for example, the total direct costs amount 
to 25.22 percent of the amount raised. This means that if a company sells $10 million in 
stock, it will only net about $7.5 million; the other $2.5 million goes to cover the under-
writer spread and other direct expenses. Typical underwriter spreads on an IPO range from 
about 5 percent for large offerings to 10 percent for small offerings, but, for about half of 
the IPOs in Table 15.5, the spread is exactly 7 percent, so this is, by far, the most common 
spread. The nearby Finance Matters box provides a detailed example for a particular 
company.
Overall, four clear patterns emerge from Table 15.5. First of all, with the possible ex-
ception of straight debt offerings (about which we will have more to say later), there are 
substantial economies of scale. The underwriter spreads are smaller on larger issues, and 
the other direct costs fall sharply as a percentage of the amount raised, a reflection of the 
mostly fixed nature of such costs. Second, the costs associated with selling debt are sub-
stantially less than the costs of selling equity. Third, IPOs have higher expenses than SEOs, 
but the difference is not as great as might originally be guessed. Finally, straight bonds are 
cheaper to float than convertible bonds.
15.7

506
IPOs
SEOs
Proceeds ($ 
millions)
Number of 
Issues
Gross 
Spread
Other Direct 
Expense
Total Direct 
Cost
Number of 
Issues
Gross 
Spread
Other Direct 
Expense
Total Direct 
Cost
2.00–9.99
  1,007
   9.40%
    15.82%
   25.22%
   515
   8.11%
 26.99%
    35.11%
10.00–19.99
     810
7.39
  7.30
14.69
   726
6.11
  7.76
 13.86
20.00–39.99
  1,422
6.96
  7.06
14.03
1,393
5.44
  4.10
   9.54
40.00–59.99
     880
6.89
  2.87
  9.77
1,129
5.03
  8.93
 13.96
60.00–79.99
     522
6.79
  2.16
  8.94
   841
4.88
  1.98
   6.85
80.00–99.99
     327
6.71
  1.84
  8.55
   536
4.67
  2.05
   6.72
100.00–199.99
     702
6.39
  1.57
  7.96
1,372
4.34
    .89
   5.23
200.00–499.99
     440
5.81
  1.03
  6.84
   811
3.72
  1.22
   4.94
500.00 and up
        155
5.01
    .49
  5.50
   264
3.10
    .27
   3.37
Total/Average
  6,265
7.19
  3.18
10.37
7,587
5.02
  2.68
   7.69
Straight Bonds
Convertible Bonds
2.00–9.99
  3,962
1.64
  2.40
  4.03
     14
6.39
  3.43
   9.82
10.00–19.99
  3,400
1.50
  1.71
  3.20
     23
5.52
  3.09
   8.61
20.00–39.99
  2,690
1.25
    .92
  2.17
     30
4.63
  1.67
   6.30
40.00–59.99
  3,345
  .81
    .79
  1.59
     35
3.49
  1.04
   4.54
60.00–79.99
      891
1.65
    .80
  2.44
     60
2.79
    .62
   3.41
80.00–99.99
     465
1.41
    .57
  1.98
     16
2.30
    .62
   2.92
100.00–199.99
  4,949
1.61
    .52
  2.14
     82
2.66
    .42
   3.08
200.00–499.99
  3,305
1.38
    .33
  1.71
     46
2.65
    .33
   2.99
500.00 and up
     1,261
  .61
    .15
    .76
        7
2.16
    .13
   2.29
Total/Average
24,268
1.38
    .61
  2.00
   313
3.07
    .85
   3.92
Source: Inmoo Lee, Scott Lochhead, Jay Ritter, and Quanshui Zhao, “The Costs of Raising Capital,” Journal of Financial Research 1 (Spring 1996), calculations and updates by the authors.
ta b l e 15.5
Direct costs as a percentage of gross proceeds for equity (IPOs and SEOs) and straight and convertible bonds offered by 
domestic operating companies: 1990–2008

507
As we have discussed, the underpricing of IPOs is an additional cost to the issuer. To 
give a better idea of the total cost of going public, Table 15.6 combines the information in 
Table 15.5 for IPOs with data on the underpricing experienced by these firms. Comparing 
the total direct costs (in the fifth column) to the underpricing (in the sixth column), we see 
that they tend to be similar in size, so the direct costs are only about half of the total for 
small issues. Overall, across all size groups, the total direct costs amount to 10 percent of 
the amount raised and the underpricing amounts to 19 percent.
Finally, with regard to debt offerings, there is a general pattern in issue costs that is 
somewhat obscured in Table 15.5. Recall from Chapter 6 that bonds carry different credit 
ratings. Higher-rated bonds are said to be investment grade, whereas lower-rated bonds are 
noninvestment grade. Table 15.7 contains a breakdown of direct costs for bond issues after 
the investment and noninvestment grades have been separated.
Table 15.7 clarifies three things regarding debt issues. First, there are substantial econ-
omies of scale here as well. Second, investment-grade issues have much lower direct costs, 
particularly for straight bonds. Finally, there are relatively few noninvestment-grade issues 
in the smaller size categories, reflecting the fact that such issues are more commonly han-
dled as private placements, which we discuss in our next section.
FINANCE MATTERS
Anatomy of an IPO
O
n April 10, 2014, Adamas Pharmaceuticals, the Emeryville, 
California–based pharmaceutical company, went public 
via an IPO. Adamas issued 3 million shares of stock at a price of 
$16 each. The lead underwriters on the IPO were Credit Suisse 
and Piper Jaffray, assisted by a syndicate of other investment 
banks. Even though the IPO raised a gross sum of $48 million, 
Adamas got to keep only $41.54 million after expenses. The 
biggest expense was the 7 percent underwriter spread, which 
is ordinary for an offering of this size. Adamas sold each of the 
3 million shares to the underwriters for $14.88, and the under-
writers in turn sold the shares to the public for $16.00 each.
	
But wait—there’s more. Adamas spent $7,999 in SEC 
registration fees, $9,815 in other filing fees, and $125,000 to 
be listed on the NASDAQ Global Market. The company also 
spent $1.5 million in legal fees, $600,000 on accounting to 
obtain the necessary audits, $5,000 for a transfer agent to 
physically transfer the shares and maintain a list of share-
holders, $260,000 for printing and engraving expenses, and 
finally, $592,816 in miscellaneous expenses.
	
As Adamas’s outlays show, an IPO can be a costly 
undertaking! In the end, Adamas’s expenses totaled 
$6.46 million, of which $3.36 went to the underwriters 
and $3.1 million went to other parties. All told, the total 
cost to Adamas was 15.6 percent of the issue proceeds 
raised by the company.
ta b l e  15.6
Direct and indirect 
costs, in 
percentages, of 
equity IPOs: 
1990–2008
Proceeds  
($ in millions)
Number of 
Issues
Gross  
Spread
Other Direct 
Expense
Total  
Direct Cost
Underpricing
2.00–9.99
1,007
   9.40%
 15.82%
   25.22%
   20.42%
10.00–19.99
  810
7.39
7.30
14.69
10.33
20.00–39.99
1,422
6.96
7.06
14.03
17.03
40.00–59.99
  880
6.89
2.87
  9.77
28.26
60.00–79.99
  522
6.79
2.16
  8.94
28.36
80.00–99.99
  327
6.71
1.84
  8.55
32.92
100.00–199.99
  702
6.39
1.57
  7.96
21.55
200.00–499.99
  440
5.81
1.03
  6.84
  6.19
  500.00 and up
    155
5.01
    .49
  5.50
  6.64
Total/Average
6,265 
7.19
3.18
10.37
19.34
Source: Inmoo Lee, Scott Lochhead, Jay Ritter, and Quanshui Zhao, “The Costs of Raising Capital,” Journal of 
Financial Research 1 (Spring 1996), calculations and updates by the authors.

508
Convertible Bonds
Investment Grade
Junk or Not Rated
Proceeds  
($ millions)
Number of 
Issues
Gross 
Spread
Other Direct 
Expense
Total  
Direct Cost
Number of 
Issues
Gross 
Spread
Other Direct 
Expense
Total Direct 
Cost
2.00–9.99
     —
—
 —
—
     14
 6.39%
   3.43%
   9.82%
10.00–19.99
          1
 14.12%
 1.87%
 15.98%
     23
5.52  
3.09
8.61
20.00–39.99
     —
—
 —
—
     30
4.63  
1.67
6.30
40.00–59.99
         3
1.92
.51
2.43
     35
3.49  
1.04
4.54
60.00–79.99
         6
1.65
.44
2.09
     60
2.79  
  .62
3.41
80.00–99.99
         4
  .89
.27
1.16
     16
2.30  
  .62
2.92
100.00–199.99
       27
2.22
.33
2.55
     82
2.66  
  .42
3.08
200.00–499.99
       27
2.03
.19
2.22
     46
2.65  
  .33
2.99
500.00 and up
    11
  1.94
 .13
  2.06
       7
2.16 
  .13
2.29
Total/Average
       79
2.15
.29
2.44
   313
3.31  
  .98
4.29
Straight Bonds
Investment Grade
Junk or Not Rated
2.00–9.99
  2,709
     .62%
 1.28%
   1.90%
1,253
 2.77%
   2.50%
  5.27%
10.00–19.99
  2,564
    .59  
1.17  
  1.76  
   836
3.15  
  1.97  
5.12 
20.00–39.99
  2,400
    .63  
  .74  
  1.37  
   290
3.07  
  1.13  
4.20 
40.00–59.99
  3,146
    .40  
  .52  
    .92  
   199
2.93  
  1.20  
4.14 
60.00–79.99
     792
    .58  
  .38  
    .96  
     99
3.12  
  1.16  
4.28 
80.00–99.99
     385
    .66  
  .29  
    .96  
     80
2.73  
    .93  
3.66 
100.00–199.99
  4,427
    .54  
  .25  
    .79  
   522
2.73  
    .68  
3.41 
200.00–499.99
  3,031
    .52  
  .25  
   .76  
   274
2.59  
    .39  
2.98 
500.00 and up
  1,207
  .31  
    .08
      .39  
        54
2.38  
     .25  
2.63 
Total/Average
20,661
    .52  
  .35  
    .87  
3,607
2.76  
    .81
3.57 
Source: Inmoo Lee, Scott Lochhead, Jay Ritter, and Quanshui Zhao, “The Costs of Raising Capital” Journal of Financial Research 1 (Spring 1996), calculations and updates by the authors.
ta b l e  15.7
Average gross spreads and total direct costs for domestic debt issues: 1990–2008

	
c h a p t e r  1 5
Raising Capital	
509
ISSUING LONG-TERM DEBT
The general procedures followed in a public issue of bonds are the same as those for 
stocks. The issue must be registered with the SEC, there must be a prospectus, and so 
on. The registration statement for a public issue of bonds, however, is different from 
the one for common stock. For bonds, the registration statement must indicate an 
indenture.
Another important difference is that more than 50 percent of all debt is issued pri-
vately. There are two basic forms of direct private long-term financing: term loans and 
private placement.
15.8
EXAMPLE
15.1  How Much Does That IPO Cost?
The Faulk Co. has just gone public under a firm commitment agreement. Faulk received $32 for 
each of the 4.1 million shares sold. The initial offering price was $34.40 per share, and the stock 
rose to $41 per share in the first few minutes of trading. Faulk paid $905,000 in legal and other di-
rect costs and $250,000 in indirect costs. What was the flotation cost as a percentage of funds 
raised?
	
The net amount raised is the number of shares offered times the price received by the com-
pany, minus the costs associated with the offer, so:
Net amount raised = (4,100,000 shares)($32) – 905,000 – 250,000
Net amount raised = $130,045,000
Next, we can calculate the direct costs. Part of the direct costs are given in the problem, but the 
company also had to pay the underwriters. The stock was offered at $34.40 per share, and the 
company received $32 per share. The difference, which is the underwriters’ spread, is also a direct 
cost. The total direct costs were:
Total direct costs = $905,000 + ($34.40 – 32)(4,100,000 shares)
Total direct costs = $10,745,000
We are given part of the indirect costs, but the underpricing is another indirect cost. The total indi-
rect costs were:
Total indirect costs = $250,000 + ($41 – 34.40)(4,100,000 shares)
Total indirect costs = $27,310,000
The total costs are:
Total costs = $10,745,000 + 27,310,000
Total costs = $38,055,000
The flotation costs as a percentage of the amount raised is the total cost divided by the amount 
raised, or:
Flotation cost percentage = $38,055,000/130,045,000
Flotation cost percentage = .2926, or 29.26%
concept questions
15.7a	 What are the different costs associated with security offerings?
15.7b	 What lessons do we learn from studying issue costs?

510	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
Term loans are direct business loans. These loans have maturities of between one year 
and five years. Most term loans are repayable during the life of the loan. The lenders in-
clude commercial banks, insurance companies, and other lenders that specialize in corpo-
rate finance. Private placements are very similar to term loans except that the maturities 
are longer.
The important differences between direct private long-term financing and public is-
sues of debt are:
  1.	 A direct long-term loan avoids the cost of Securities and Exchange Commission 
registration.
  2.	 Direct placement is likely to have more restrictive covenants.
  3.	 It is easier to renegotiate a term loan or a private placement in the event of a default. 
It is harder to renegotiate a public issue because hundreds of holders are usually 
involved.
  4.	 Life insurance companies and pension funds dominate the private-placement 
segment of the bond market. Commercial banks are significant participants in the 
term-loan market.
  5.	 The costs of distributing bonds are lower in the private market.
The interest rates on term loans and private placements are often higher than those on 
an equivalent public issue. This difference may reflect the trade-off between a higher inter-
est rate and more flexible arrangements in the event of financial distress, as well as the 
lower costs associated with private placements.
An additional, and very important, consideration is that the flotation costs associ-
ated with selling debt are much less than the comparable costs associated with selling 
equity.
term loans
Direct business loans of, 
typically, one to five years.
private placements
Loans, usually long-term 
in nature, provided 
directly by a limited 
number of investors.
concept questions
15.8a	 What is the difference between private and public bond issues?
15.8b	 A private placement is likely to have a higher interest rate than a public issue. Why?
SHELF REGISTRATION
To simplify the procedures for issuing securities, in March 1982, the SEC adopted Rule 
415 on a temporary basis, and it was made permanent in November 1983. Rule 415 allows 
shelf registration. Both debt and equity securities can be shelf registered.
Shelf registration permits a corporation to register an offering that it reasonably ex-
pects to sell within the next two years and then sell the issue whenever it wants during that 
two-year period. In July 2014, Alcoa announced a shelf registration to sell up to $5 billion 
of debt, preferred stock, common stock, and warrants. According to the registration docu-
ments filed by the company, the proceeds were to be used for future acquisitions of other 
businesses, assets, or securities.
Not all companies can use Rule 415. The primary qualifications are:
  1.	 The company must be rated investment grade.
  2.	 The firm cannot have defaulted on its debt in the past three years.
15.9
shelf registration
Registration permitted by 
SEC Rule 415, which allows 
a company to register all 
issues it expects to sell 
within two years at one 
time, with subsequent 
sales at any time within 
those two years.

	
c h a p t e r  1 5
Raising Capital	
511
  3.	 The aggregate market value of the firm’s outstanding stock must be more than  
$150 million.
  4.	 The firm must not have had a violation of the Securities Act of 1934 in the past three 
years.
The rule has been controversial. Arguments have been constructed against shelf 
registration:
  1.	 The costs of new issues might go up because underwriters might not be able to 
provide as much current information to potential investors as they would otherwise, 
so investors would pay less. The expense of selling the issue piece by piece might 
therefore be higher than that of selling it all at once.
  2.	 Some investment bankers have argued that shelf registration will cause 
a “market overhang” that will depress market prices. In other words, the 
possibility that the company could increase the supply of stock at any time will 
have a negative impact on the current stock price. There is little evidence to 
support this position, however.
In addition to shelf registrations, companies also sell stock through continuous equity 
offerings, or “dribble” programs. In a dribble program, the company registers the stock 
with the SEC through a variety of different methods and sells the shares in dribbles as it 
sees fit. In other words, the company sells the stock on the secondary market like any other 
investor would.
concept questions
15.9a	 What is shelf registration?
15.9b	 What are the arguments against shelf registration?
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has looked at how corporate securities are issued. The following are the main 
points:
  1.	 The venture capital market is a primary source of financing for new high-risk 
companies.
  2.	 The costs of issuing securities can be quite large. They are much lower (as a 
percentage) for larger issues.
  3.	 Firm commitment underwriting is far more prevalent for large issues than best 
efforts underwriting. This is probably connected to the uncertainty of smaller issues. 
For a given size offering, the direct expenses of best efforts underwriting and firm 
commitment underwriting are of the same magnitude.
  4.	 The direct and indirect costs of going public can be substantial. However, once a firm 
is public, it can raise additional capital with much greater ease.

512	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEM
15.1	
Flotation Costs.  The L5 Corporation is considering an equity issue to finance a 
new space station. A total of $10 million in new equity is needed. If the direct costs 
are estimated at 6 percent of the amount raised, how large does the issue need to 
be? What is the dollar amount of the flotation cost? (See Problem 2.)
■ Answer to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problem
15.1	
The firm needs to net $10 million after paying the 6 percent flotation costs. So, the 
amount raised is given by:
Amount raised × (1 − .06) = $10 million
Amount raised = $10/.94 = $10.638 million 
	
The total flotation cost is thus $638,000.
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 2 	 15.1	
Debt versus Equity Offering Size.  In the aggregate, debt offerings are 
much more common than equity offerings and typically much larger as 
well. Why?
LO 2 	 15.2	
Debt versus Equity Flotation Costs.  Why are the costs of selling equity 
so much larger than the costs of selling debt?
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 15.1 What are some important considerations when choosing between 
venture capitalists?
Section 15.2 When is a new issue usually priced?
Section 15.3 What are the differences between general cash offers and rights 
offers?
Section 15.4 What grants an underwriter the ability to purchase additional shares 
of stock at the offer price?
Section 15.5 What occurs if IPO shares are sold at an offering price that is too low? 
Assume the offering is a firm commitment offering.
Section 15.6 What has been presented as a reason why stock prices tend to de-
cline when a new equity issue is announced?
Section 15.7 What are the costs associated with issuing new securities?
Section 15.8 What reasons are given as potential explanations why interest rates 
on private debt are higher than the interest paid on comparable public debt?
Section 15.9 What is offered as the primary argument against shelf registration?

	
c h a p t e r  1 5
Raising Capital	
513
LO 2 	 15.3	
Bond Ratings and Flotation Costs.  Why do noninvestment-grade bonds 
have much higher direct costs than investment-grade issues?
LO 2 	 15.4	
Underpricing in Debt Offerings.  Why is underpricing not a great concern 
with bond offerings?
Use the following information to answer the next three questions. Zipcar, the 
car-sharing company, went public in April of 2011. Assisted by the ­investment 
bank Goldman, Sachs & Co., Zipcar sold 9.68 million shares at $18 each, 
thereby raising a total of $174.24 million. By the end of the first day of trading, 
the stock had zipped to $28 per share, down from a high of $31.50. On the basis 
of the end-of-day numbers, Zipcar shares were apparently underpriced by about 
$10 each, meaning that the company missed out on an additional $96.8 million.
LO 3 	 15.5	
IPO Pricing.  The Zipcar IPO was underpriced by about 56 percent. 
Should Zipcar be upset at Goldman over the underpricing?
LO 3 	 15.6	
IPO Pricing.  In the previous question, how would it affect your thinking to 
know that the company was incorporated about 10 years earlier, had only 
$186 million in revenues in 2010, and had never earned a profit? Additionally, 
the viability of the company’s business model was still unproven.
LO 3 	 15.7	
IPO Pricing.  In the previous two questions, how would it affect your 
thinking to know that in addition to the 9.68 million shares offered in the 
IPO, Zipcar had an additional 30 million shares outstanding? Of those 30 
million shares, 14.1 million shares were owned by four venture capital 
firms, and 15.5 million shares were owned by the 12 directors and 
executive officers.
LO 3 	 15.8	
IPO Underpricing.  In 1980, a certain assistant professor of finance bought 
12 initial public offerings of common stock. He held each of these for 
approximately one month and then sold. The investment rule he followed 
was to submit a purchase order for every firm commitment initial public 
offering of oil and gas exploration companies. There were 22 of these 
offerings, and he submitted a purchase order for approximately $1,000 in 
stock for each of the companies. With 10 of these, no shares were allocated 
to this assistant professor. With 5 of the 12 offerings that were purchased, 
fewer than the requested number of shares were allocated.
  The year 1980 was very good for oil and gas exploration company own-
ers: On average, for the 22 companies that went public, the stocks were 
selling for 80 percent above the offering price a month after the initial of-
fering date. The assistant professor looked at his performance record and 
found that the $8,400 invested in the 12 companies had grown to $10,000, 
representing a return of only about 20 percent (commissions were negli-
gible). Did he have bad luck, or should he have expected to do worse than 
the average initial public offering investor? Explain.
LO 1 	 15.9	
Venture Capital.  In the chapter, we mentioned that venture capital is 
very expensive. Why do you think this is true?
LO 3 	 15.10	 IPO Pricing.  The following material represents the cover page and 
summary of the prospectus for the initial public offering of the Pest 
Investigation Control Corporation (PICC), which is going public 
tomorrow with a firm commitment initial public offering managed by the 
investment banking firm of Erlanger and Ritter. Answer the following 
questions:

514	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
a.	
Assume that you know nothing about PICC other than the information 
contained in the prospectus. Based on your knowledge of finance, what 
is your prediction for the price of PICC tomorrow? Provide a short 
explanation of why you think this will occur.
b.	 Assume that you have several thousand dollars to invest. When you get 
home from class tonight, you find that your stockbroker, whom you 
have not talked to for weeks, has called. She has left a message that 
PICC is going public tomorrow and that she can get you several 
hundred shares at the offering price if you call her back first thing in 
the morning. Discuss the merits of this opportunity.
PROSPECTUS
PICC
200,000 shares
PEST INVESTIGATION CONTROL CORPORATION
Of the shares being offered hereby, all 200,000 are being sold by the Pest Investigation Control 
Corporation, Inc. (“the Company”). Before the offering there has been no public market for the shares 
of PICC, and no guarantee can be given that any such market will develop.
These securities have not been approved or disapproved by the SEC nor has the commission passed upon 
the accuracy or adequacy of this prospectus. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
Price to 
Public
Underwriting 
Discount
Proceeds to 
Company*
Per share
$11.00
$1.10
$9.90
Total
$2,200,000
$220,000
$1,980,000
*Before deducting expenses estimated at $27,000 and payable by the Company.
This is an initial public offering. The common shares are being offered, subject to prior sale, when, as, 
and if delivered to and accepted by the Underwriters and subject to approval of certain legal matters 
by their Counsel and by Counsel for the Company. The Underwriters reserve the right to withdraw, 
cancel, or modify such offer and to reject offers in whole or in part.
Erlanger and Ritter, Investment Bankers  
July 12, 2016  
Prospectus Summary
The Company
The Pest Investigation Control Corporation (PICC) breeds and markets toads 
and tree frogs as ecologically safe insect-control mechanisms.
The Offering
200,000 shares of common stock, no par value.
Listing
The Company will seek listing on NASDAQ and will trade over the counter.
Shares Outstanding
As of June 30, 2016, 400,000 shares of common stock were outstanding. After 
the offering, 600,000 shares of common stock will be outstanding.
Use of Proceeds
To finance expansion of inventory and receivables and general working capital, 
and to pay for country club memberships for certain finance professors.
Selected Financial Information 
 (amounts in thousands except per-share data)
Fiscal Year Ended June 30
2014
2015
2016
Revenues
$60.00
$120.00
$240.00
Net earnings
3.80
15.90
36.10
Earnings per share
.01
.04
.09
As of June 30, 2016
Actual
As Adjusted for  
This Offering
Working capital
$    8
$ 1,961
Total assets
511
   2,464
Stockholders’ equity
423
     2,376

	
c h a p t e r  1 5
Raising Capital	
515
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–7)
LO 3 	 1.	 IPO Underpricing.  The Woods Co. and the McIlroy Co. have both 
announced IPOs at $40 per share. One of these is undervalued by $9.50, and 
the other is overvalued by $5.25, but you have no way of knowing which is 
which. You plan on buying 1,000 shares of each issue. If an issue is 
underpriced, it will be rationed, and only half your order will be filled. If 
you could get 1,000 shares in Woods and 1,000 shares in McIlroy, what 
would your profit be? What profit do you actually expect? What principle 
have you illustrated?
LO 3 	 2.	 Calculating Flotation Costs.  The Zuri Co. needs to raise $87 million to 
finance its expansion into new markets. The company will sell new shares 
of equity via a general cash offering to raise the needed funds. If the offer 
price is $48 per share and the company’s underwriters charge a spread of 
7 percent, how many shares need to be sold?
LO 3 	 3.	 Calculating Flotation Costs.  In the previous problem, if the SEC filing fee 
and associated administrative expenses of the offering are $1,425,000, how 
many shares need to be sold now?
LO 3 	 4.	 Calculating Flotation Costs.  The Collins Co. has just gone public. 
Under a firm commitment agreement, the company received $22.32 for 
each of the 9.5 million shares sold. The initial offering price was $24 per 
share, and the stock rose to $27.50 per share in the first few minutes of 
trading. The company paid $1,475,000 in legal and other direct costs and 
$350,000 in indirect costs. What was the flotation cost as a percentage 
of funds raised?
LO 3 	 5.	 Calculating Flotation Costs.  The Elkmont Corporation needs to raise 
$52.5 million to finance its expansion into new markets. The company 
will sell new shares of equity via a general cash offering to raise the 
needed funds. If the offer price is $21 per share and the company’s 
underwriters charge a spread of 7.5 percent, how many shares need to 
be sold?
LO 3 	 6.	 Calculating Flotation Costs.  In the previous problem, if the SEC filing fee 
and associated administrative expenses of the offering are $1,450,000, how 
many shares need to be sold now?
LO 3 	 7.	 Calculating Flotation Costs.  The Wiley Oakley Co. has just gone 
public. Under a firm commitment agreement, Wiley received $31.75  
for each of the 7.75 million shares sold. The initial offering price was 
$34 per share, and the stock rose to $43.85 per share in the first few 
minutes of trading. Wiley paid $1,350,000 in legal and other direct costs 
and $210,000 in indirect costs. What was the flotation cost as a 
percentage of funds raised?

516	
p a r t  7
Long-Term Financing
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
15.1 IPO Filings.  Go to www.ipomonitor.com and find the most recent IPO. Now go to 
the SEC website at www.sec.gov and look up the company’s filings with the SEC. 
What is the name of the filing the company made to sell stock to the public? Look at 
the filing. What does this company do? How does the company propose to use the 
funds raised by the IPO?
15.2 Secondary Offerings.  Go to www.ipomonitor.com and find the most recent 
secondary stock offering. At what price was the stock offered for sale to the public? 
How does this offer price compare to the market price of the stock on the same day?
15.3 Initial Public Offerings.  What was the largest IPO? Go to www.ipomonitor.com and 
find out. In what country was the company located? What was the largest IPO in the 
United States?

	
c h a p t e r  1 5
Raising Capital	
517
CHAPTER CASE
S&S Air Goes Public
M
ark Sexton and Todd Story have been discussing 
the future of S&S Air. The company has been expe-
riencing fast growth, and the two see only clear skies in 
the company’s future. However, the fast growth can no 
longer be funded by internal sources, so Mark and Todd 
have decided the time is right to take the company pub-
lic. To this end, they have entered into discussions with 
the investment bank of Crowe & Mallard. The company 
has a working relationship with Renata Harper, the un-
derwriter who assisted with the company’s previous 
bond offering. Crowe & Mallard have assisted numerous 
small companies in the IPO process, so Mark and Todd 
feel confident with this choice.
	
Renata begins by telling Mark and Todd about the 
process. Although Crowe & Mallard charged an under-
writer fee of 4 percent on the bond offering, the under-
writer fee is 7 percent on all initial stock offerings of the 
size of S&S Air’s offering. Renata tells Mark and Todd 
that the company can expect to pay about $1,800,000 in 
legal fees and expenses, $13,500 in SEC registration 
fees, and $15,000 in other filing fees. Additionally, to be 
listed on the NASDAQ, the company must pay $125,000. 
There are also transfer agent fees of $6,500 and en-
graving expenses of $450,000. The company should 
also expect to pay $75,000 for other expenses associ-
ated with the IPO.
	
Finally, Renata tells Mark and Todd that to file with 
the SEC, the company must provide three years’ audited 
financial statements. She is unsure about the costs of 
the audit. Mark tells Renata that the company provides 
audited financial statements as part of the bond cove-
nant, and the company pays $300,000 per year for the 
outside auditor.
QU E ST I O N S
1.	
At the end of the discussion, Mark asks Renata 
about the Dutch auction IPO process. What are 
the differences in the expenses to S&S Air if it 
uses a Dutch auction IPO versus a traditional IPO? 
Should the company go public through a Dutch 
auction or use a traditional underwritten offering?
2.	
During the discussion of the potential IPO and S&S 
Air’s future, Mark states that he feels the company 
should raise $110 million. However, Renata points 
out that if the company needs more cash in the 
near future, a secondary offering close to the IPO 
would be problematic. Instead, she suggests that 
the company should raise $150 million in the IPO. 
How can we calculate the optimal size of the IPO? 
What are the advantages and disadvantages of in-
creasing the size of the IPO to $150 million?
3.	
After deliberation, Mark and Todd have decided 
that the company should use a firm commitment 
offering with Crowe & Mallard as the lead under-
writer. The IPO will be for $125 million. Ignoring 
underpricing, how much will the IPO cost the com-
pany as a percentage of the funds received?
4.	
Many employees of S&S Air have shares of stock 
in the company because of an existing employee 
stock purchase plan. To sell the stock, the employ-
ees can tender their shares to be sold in the IPO 
at the offering price, or the employees can retain 
their stock and sell it in the secondary market af-
ter S&S Air goes public. Todd asks you to advise 
the employees about which option is best. What 
would you suggest to the employees?

518
16
W
ith gasoline approaching $2 per gallon in December 2014, 
sales of the Chevy Volt short-circuited. With the sales slump, a 
Volt sat on a dealer’s lot for an average of 40 days. This wait was in 
sharp contrast to the inventory levels when gas prices reached $4 a 
gallon. At that time, there were only 100 Volts in inventory in the entire 
country. Of course, other automobile models had higher inventory lev-
els. Several months earlier, the Cadillac ELR, GM’s Tesla competitor, 
had a 725-day supply of inventory, or almost two years’ of sales!
Short-term financial planning is one activity that concerns every-
one in business. As this chapter illustrates, such planning requires, 
among other things, sales projections from marketing, cost numbers 
from accounting, and inventory requirements from operations. Perhaps a particularly good 
reason to study this chapter for many is that short-term planning and management are fre-
quently where new hires start out in a corporation, especially in finance and accounting. 
Also, such planning is especially important for small businesses, and a lack of adequate 
short-term financial resources is a frequently cited reason for small business failure.
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Discuss operating and cash cycles 
and why they are important.
LO 2 	 Differentiate between the types of 
short-term financial policy.
LO 3 	 Identify the essentials of short-
term financial planning.
Short-Term Financial 
Planning
PART EIGHT 
Short-Term Financial Management
T
o this point, we have described many of the decisions of long-term finance, for exam-
ple, capital budgeting, dividend policy, and financial structure. In this chapter, we 
begin to discuss short-term finance. Short-term finance is primarily concerned with 
the analysis of decisions that affect current assets and current liabilities.
Frequently, the term net working capital is associated with short-term financial 
decision making. As we describe in Chapter 2 and elsewhere, net working capital is the 
difference between current assets and current liabilities. Often, short-term financial 
management is called working capital management. These mean the same thing. Work-
ing capital management can be critical for a company. According to a recent survey, if 
an average company with $10 billion in sales could match the best working capital 
management company, it could reduce working capital by $1.4 billion, or 14 percent  
of sales.

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
519
There is no universally accepted definition of short-term finance. The most important 
difference between short-term and long-term finance is the timing of cash flows. Short-
term financial decisions typically involve cash inflows and outflows that occur within a 
year or less. For example, short-term financial decisions are involved when a firm orders 
raw materials, pays in cash, and anticipates selling finished goods in one year for cash. 
In contrast, long-term financial decisions are involved when a firm purchases a special 
machine that will reduce operating costs over, say, the next five years.
What types of questions fall under the general heading of short-term finance? To name 
just a very few:
  1.	 What is a reasonable level of cash to keep on hand (in a bank) to pay bills?
  2.	 How much should the firm borrow in the short term?
  3.	 How much credit should be extended to customers?
This chapter introduces the basic elements of short-term financial decisions. First, we 
discuss the short-term operating activities of the firm. We then identify some alternative 
short-term financial policies. Finally, we outline the basic elements in a short-term finan-
cial plan and describe short-term financing instruments.
TRACING CASH AND NET WORKING CAPITAL
In this section, we examine the components of cash and net working capital as they change 
from one year to the next. We have already discussed various aspects of this subject in 
Chapters 2 and 3. We briefly review some of that discussion as it relates to short-term fi-
nancing decisions. Our goal is to describe the short-term operating activities of the firm 
and their impact on cash and working capital.
To begin, recall that current assets are cash and other assets that are expected to con-
vert to cash within the year. Current assets are presented on the balance sheet in order of 
their liquidity—the ease with which they can be converted to cash and the time it takes to 
convert them. Four of the most important items found in the current asset section of a bal-
ance sheet are cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities, accounts receivable, and 
inventories.
Analogous to their investment in current assets, firms use several kinds of short-term 
debt, called current liabilities. Current liabilities are obligations that are expected to require 
cash payment within one year. Three major items found as current liabilities are accounts 
payable; expenses payable, including accrued wages and taxes; and notes payable.
Because we want to focus on changes in cash, we start off by defining cash in terms of 
the other elements of the balance sheet. This lets us isolate the cash account and explore 
the impact on cash from the firm’s operating and financing decisions. The basic balance 
sheet identity can be written as:
Net working capital + Fixed assets = Long-term debt + Equity	
[16.1]
Net working capital is cash plus other current assets, less current liabilities; that is,
Net working capital = (Cash + Other current assets) − Current liabilities	
[16.2]
If we substitute this for net working capital in the basic balance sheet identity and rear-
range things a bit, we see that cash is:
Cash = Long-term debt + Equity + Current liabilities
        − Current assets other than cash − Fixed assets	
[16.3]
Interested in a career  
in short-term finance?  
Visit the Association for 
Financial Professionals 
website at  
www.afponline.org.
16.1

520	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
This tells us in general terms that some activities naturally increase cash and some activi-
ties decrease it. We can list these along with an example of each as follows:
Activities That Increase Cash
Increasing long-term debt (borrowing over the long term).
Increasing equity (selling some stock).
Increasing current liabilities (getting a 90-day loan).
Decreasing current assets other than cash (selling some inventory for cash).
Decreasing fixed assets (selling some property).
Activities That Decrease Cash
Decreasing long-term debt (paying off a long-term debt).
Decreasing equity (repurchasing some stock).
Decreasing current liabilities (paying off a 90-day loan).
Increasing current assets other than cash (buying some inventory for cash).
Increasing fixed assets (buying some property).
Notice that our two lists are exact opposites. For example, floating a long-term bond issue 
increases cash (at least until the money is spent). Paying off a long-term bond issue 
decreases cash.
Activities that increase cash are called sources of cash. Those activities that decrease 
cash are called uses of cash. Looking back at our list, we see that sources of cash always 
involve increasing a liability (or equity) account or decreasing an asset account. This makes 
sense because increasing a liability means we have raised money by borrowing it or by 
selling an ownership interest in the firm. A decrease in an asset means that we have sold or 
otherwise liquidated an asset. In either case, there is a cash inflow.
Uses of cash are just the reverse. A use of cash involves decreasing a liability by pay-
ing it off, perhaps, or increasing assets by purchasing something. Both of these activities 
require that the firm spend some cash.
EXAMPLE
16.1  Sources and Uses
Here is a quick check of your understanding of sources and uses: If accounts payable go up by 
$100, is this a source or a use? If accounts receivable go up by $100, is this a source or a use?
	
Accounts payable are what we owe our suppliers. This is a short-term debt. If it rises by $100, 
we have effectively borrowed the money, so this is a source of cash. Receivables are what our cus-
tomers owe to us, so an increase of $100 in accounts receivable means that we have loaned the 
money; this is a use of cash.
concept questions
16.1a	
What is the difference between net working capital and cash?
16.1b	
Will net working capital always increase when cash increases?
16.1c	
List five potential uses of cash.
16.1d	
List five potential sources of cash.

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
521
THE OPERATING CYCLE AND  
THE CASH CYCLE
The primary concerns in short-term finance are the firm’s short-run operating and financ-
ing activities. For a typical manufacturing firm, these short-run activities might consist of 
the following sequence of events and decisions:
16.2
Events
Decisions
1.  Buying raw materials
1.  How much inventory to order
2.  Paying cash
2.  Whether to borrow or draw down cash balances
3.  Manufacturing the product
3.  What choice of production technology to use
4.  Selling the product
4.  Whether credit should be extended to a particular customer
5.  Collecting cash
5.  How to collect
These activities create patterns of cash inflows and cash outflows. These cash flows are 
both unsynchronized and uncertain. They are unsynchronized because, for example, the 
payment of cash for raw materials does not happen at the same time as the receipt of cash 
from selling the product. They are uncertain because future sales and costs cannot be pre-
cisely predicted.
Defining the Operating and Cash Cycles
We can start with a simple case. One day, call it Day 0, you purchase $1,000 worth of in-
ventory on credit. You pay the bill 30 days later, and, after 30 more days, someone buys the 
$1,000 in inventory for $1,400. Your buyer does not actually pay for another 45 days. We 
can summarize these events chronologically as follows:
Day
Activity
Cash Effect
0
Acquire inventory on credit
 None
30
Pay for inventory
−$1,000
60
Sell inventory on credit
 None
105
Collect on sale
+$1,400
The Operating Cycle 
There are several things to notice in our example. First, the 
entire cycle, from the time we acquire some inventory to the time we collect the cash, takes 
105 days. This is called the operating cycle.
As we illustrate, the operating cycle is the length of time it takes to acquire inventory, 
sell it, and collect for it. This cycle has two distinct components. The first part is the time 
it takes to acquire and sell the inventory. This period, a 60-day span in our example, is 
called the inventory period. The second part is the time it takes to collect on the sale, 
45 days in our example. This is called the accounts receivable period, or, simply, the 
receivables period.
Based on our definitions, the operating cycle is obviously just the sum of the inventory 
and receivables periods:
Operating cycle = Inventory period + Accounts receivable period	
[16.4]
	
105 days	
= 60 days + 45 days	
operating cycle
The time period between 
the acquisition of inventory 
and the collection of cash 
from receivables.
inventory period
The time it takes to acquire 
and sell inventory.
accounts receivable 
period
The time between sale of 
inventory and collection of 
the receivable.

522	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
What the operating cycle describes is how a product moves through the current asset ac-
counts. It begins life as inventory, it is converted to a receivable when it is sold, and it is 
finally converted to cash when we collect from the sale. Notice that, at each step, the asset 
is moving closer to cash.
The Cash Cycle 
The second thing to notice is that the cash flows and other events 
that occur are not synchronized. For example, we don’t actually pay for the inventory until 
30 days after we acquire it. The intervening 30-day period is called the accounts payable 
period. Next, we spend cash on Day 30, but we don’t collect until Day 105. Somehow, we 
have to arrange to finance the $1,000 for 105 − 30 = 75 days. This period is called the 
cash cycle.
The cash cycle, therefore, is the number of days that pass until we collect the cash 
from a sale, measured from when we actually pay for the inventory. Notice that, based on 
our definitions, the cash cycle is the difference between the operating cycle and the accounts 
payable period:
Cash cycle = Operating cycle − Accounts payable period
	 75 days	 = 105 days − 30 days	
[16.5]
Figure 16.1 depicts the short-term operating activities and cash flows for a typical manu-
facturing firm by looking at the cash flow time line. As is shown, the cash flow time line is 
made up of the operating cycle and the cash cycle. In Figure 16.1, the need for short-term 
financial management is suggested by the gap between the cash inflows and the cash out-
flows. This is related to the length of the operating cycle and the accounts payable period.
The gap between short-term inflows and outflows can be filled either by borrowing or 
by holding a liquidity reserve in the form of cash or marketable securities. Alternatively, 
the gap can be shortened by changing the inventory, receivable, and payable periods. These 
are all managerial options that we discuss later and in a subsequent chapter.
The Operating Cycle and the Firm’s Organizational Chart
Before we examine the operating and cash cycles in greater detail, it is useful to take a look 
at the people involved in managing a firm’s current assets and liabilities. As Table 16.1 
illustrates, short-term financial management in a large corporation involves a number of 
different financial and nonfinancial managers. Examining Table 16.1, we see that selling 
accounts payable 
period
The time between receipt 
of inventory and payment 
for it.
cash cycle
The time between cash 
disbursement and cash 
collection.
cash flow time line
Graphical representation 
of the operating cycle and 
the cash cycle.
f i g u r e  16.1
Cash flow time  
line and the short-
term operating 
activities of a typical 
manufacturing firm
Inventory
purchased
Inventory
sold
Inventory period
Accounts receivable period
Accounts payable
period
Cash paid
for inventory
Cash cycle
Cash
received
Operating cycle
The operating cycle is the time period from inventory purchase until the receipt of
cash. The cash cycle is the time period from when cash is paid out to when cash
is received.

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
523
on credit involves at least three different individuals: the credit manager, the marketing 
manager, and the controller. Of these three, only two are responsible to the vice president 
of finance (the marketing function is usually associated with the vice president of market-
ing). Thus, there is the potential for conflict, particularly if different managers only con-
centrate on part of the picture. For example, if marketing is trying to land a new account, it 
may seek more liberal credit terms as an inducement. However, this may increase the 
firm’s investment in receivables or its exposure to bad-debt risk, and conflict can result.
Calculating the Operating and Cash Cycles
In our example, the lengths of time that made up the different periods were obvious. If all 
we have is financial statement information, we will have to do a little more work. We 
illustrate these calculations next.
To begin, we need to determine various things such as how long it takes, on average, 
to sell inventory and how long it takes, on average, to collect. We start by gathering some 
balance sheet information such as the following (in thousands):
ta b l e  16.1
Managers who deal 
with short-term 
financial problems
Title of Manager
Duties Related to Short-Term  
Financial Management
Assets/Liabilities Influenced
Cash manager
Collection, concentration, disbursement; 
short-term investments; short-term 
borrowing; banking relations
Cash, marketable securities, 
short-term loans
Credit manager
Monitoring and control of accounts 
receivable; credit policy decisions
Accounts receivable
Marketing manager
Credit policy decisions
Accounts receivable
Purchasing manager
Decisions on purchases, suppliers; may 
negotiate payment terms
Inventory, accounts payable
Production manager
Setting of production schedules and 
materials requirements
Inventory, accounts payable
Payables manager
Decisions on payment policies and on 
whether to take discounts
Accounts payable
Controller
Accounting information on cash flows; 
reconciliation of accounts payable; 
application of payments to accounts 
receivable
Accounts receivable, 
accounts payable
Item
Beginning
Ending
Average
Inventory
$2,000
$3,000
$2,500
Accounts receivable
  1,600
  2,000
  1,800
Accounts payable
     750
  1,000
     875
Also, from the most recent income statement, we might have the following figures (in 
thousands):
Net sales
$11,500
Cost of goods sold
       8,200
We now need to calculate some financial ratios. We discussed these in some detail in 
Chapter 3; here we just define them and use them as needed.

524	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
The Operating Cycle 
First of all, we need the inventory period. We spent $8.2 million 
on inventory (our cost of goods sold). Our average inventory was $2.5 million. We thus 
turned our inventory over $8.2/2.5 times during the year:1
 Inventory turnover = Cost of goods sold
Average inventory
 = $8.2 million
2.5 million = 3.28 times
Loosely speaking, this tells us that we bought and sold off our inventory 3.28 times during 
the year. This means that, on average, we held our inventory for:
 Inventory period =
365 days
Inventory turnover
 = 365
3.28 = 111.3 days
So, the inventory period is about 111 days. On average, in other words, inventory sat for 
about 111 days before it was sold.2
Similarly, receivables averaged $1.8 million, and sales were $11.5 million. Assuming 
that all sales were credit sales, the receivables turnover is:3
 Receivables turnover =
Credit sales
Average accounts receivable
 = $11.5 million
1.8 million
= 6.4 times
If we turn over our receivables 6.4 times, then the receivables period is:
 Receivables period =
365 days
Receivables turnover
 = 365
6.4 = 57 days
The receivables period is also called the days’ sales in receivables or the average collection 
period. Whatever it is called, it tells us that our customers took an average of 57 days to pay.
The operating cycle is the sum of the inventory and receivables periods:
Operating cycle = Inventory period + Accounts receivable period
               = 111 days + 57 days = 168 days
This tells us that, on average, 168 days elapse between the time we acquire inventory and, 
having sold it, collect for the sale.
The Cash Cycle 
We now need the payables period. From the information given 
above, average payables were $875,000, and cost of goods sold was again $8.2 million. 
Our payables turnover is:
 Payables turnover = Cost of goods sold
Average payables
 = $8.2 million
.875 million = 9.4 times
1 Notice that in calculating inventory turnover here, we used the average inventory instead of using the ending 
inventory as we did in Chapter 3. Both approaches are used in the real world. To gain some practice using 
average figures, we will stick with this approach in calculating various ratios throughout this chapter.
2 This measure is conceptually identical to the days’ sales in inventory we discussed in Chapter 3.
3 If less than 100 percent of our sales are credit sales, then we just need a little more information, namely, credit 
sales for the year. See Chapter 3 for more discussion of this measure.

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
525
The payables period is:
 Payables period =
365 days
Payables turnover
 = 365
9.4 = 39 days
Thus, we took an average of 39 days to pay our bills.
Finally, the cash cycle is the difference between the operating cycle and the payables 
period:
Cash cycle = Operating cycle − Accounts payable period
         
= 168 days − 39 days = 129 days
So, on average, there is a 129-day delay from the time we pay for merchandise to the time 
we collect on the sale.
EXAMPLE
16.2  The Operating and Cash Cycles
You have collected the following information for the Slowpay Company:
Item
Beginning
Ending
Inventory
$5,000
$7,000
Accounts receivable
  1,600
  2,400
Accounts payable
   2,700
  4,800
Credit sales for the year just ended were $50,000, and cost of goods sold was $30,000. How long 
does it take Slowpay to collect on its receivables? How long does merchandise stay around before 
it is sold? How long does Slowpay take to pay its bills?
	
We can first calculate the three turnover ratios:
	
Inventory turnover = $30,000/6,000 = 5 times
	Receivables turnover = $50,000/2,000 = 25 times
	
Payables turnover = $30,000/3,750 = 8 times
We use these to get the various periods:
	
Inventory period = 365/5 = 73 days
Receivables period = 365/25 = 14.6 days
	
Payables period = 365/8 = 45.6 days
All told, Slowpay collects on a sale in 14.6 days, inventory sits around for 73 days, and bills get paid 
after about 46 days. The operating cycle here is the sum of the inventory and receivables periods: 
73 + 14.6 = 87.6 days. The cash cycle is the difference between the operating cycle and the pay-
ables period: 87.6 – 45.6 = 42 days.
Interpreting the Cash Cycle
Our examples show that the cash cycle depends on the inventory, receivables, and payables peri-
ods. The cash cycle increases as the inventory and receivables periods get longer. It decreases 
if the company is able to defer payment of payables and thereby lengthen the payables period.
Most firms have a positive cash cycle, and they thus require financing for inventories 
and receivables. The longer the cash cycle, the more financing is required. Also, changes 
in the firm’s cash cycle are often monitored as an early-warning measure. A lengthening 
cycle can indicate that the firm is having trouble moving inventory or collecting on its re-
ceivables. Such problems can be masked, at least partially, by an increased payables cycle, 
so both should be monitored.

526
Cash Cycle Comparison
I
n 2014, CFO magazine published its annual survey of working capital for various industries. The results of this survey high-
light the differences in cash and operating cycles across industries. The table below shows four different industries and the 
operating and cash cycles for each. Of these, the food products industry has the shortest operating cycle, and the auto 
components industry has the shortest cash cycle. Biotechnology companies have the shortest inventory period.
	
Compared to the food products companies, the multiline retailers have a slightly longer operating cycle. However, 
we can see that there is a major difference since the retail industry has a short receivables period and a much longer 
inventory period. The inventory period is necessary in the retail industry so that the shelves are kept stocked, but since 
customers tend to pay in cash or use credit cards, firms in this industry have little or no receivables.
	
We’ve seen that operating and cash cycles can vary quite a bit across industries, but these cycles also can be different 
for companies within the same industry. Below you will find the operating and cash cycles for selected computer and con-
sumer electronics companies. As you can see, there are differences. Apple and Dell have the best operating and cash cycles 
in the industry. In fact, Dell has long been known as a leader in current asset management. Both NCR and Diebold have 
much longer inventory periods.
	
By examining all parts of the cash and conversion cycles, you can see when a company is performing well, or poorly, as 
the case may be. Looking at the cash cycles for NCR and Diebold, they appear fairly similar. However, NCR has a longer receiv-
ables period and also a longer payables period.
	
When you look at the operating and cash cycles, consider that each is really a financial ratio. As with any financial ratio, firm 
and industry characteristics will have an effect, so take care in your interpretation. For example, in looking at NCR and Diebold, 
we note both companies’ seemingly long inventory period. Is that a bad thing? Maybe not. These companies have a different 
business model compared to Apple and Dell, and, as a result, aren’t really comparable when it comes to inventory levels.
FINANCE MATTERS
Receivables 
Period 
(days)
Inventory 
Period 
(days)
Operating 
Cycle 
(days)
Payables 
Period 
(days)
Cash 
Cycle 
(days)
Auto components
52
30
82
46
36
Biotechnology
58
27
85
13
72
Food products
24
38
62
24
38
Multiline retail
  6
67
73
25
48
Receivables 
Period 
(days)
Inventory 
Period 
(days)
Operating 
Cycle 
(days)
Payables 
Period 
(days)
Cash 
Cycle 
(days)
Dell
42
  9
  51
74
–23
Apple
28
  4
  32
48
–16
Diebold
57
48
105
27
  78
NCR
77
47
124
40
  84
We can easily see the link between the firm’s cash cycle and its profitability by recall-
ing that one of the basic determinants of profitability and growth for a firm is its total asset 
turnover, which is defined as Sales/Total assets. In Chapter 3, we saw that the higher this 
ratio is, the greater are the firm’s accounting return on assets, ROA, and return on equity, 
ROE. Thus, all other things being the same, the shorter the cash cycle is, the lower is the 
firm’s investment in inventories and receivables. As a result, the firm’s total assets are 
lower, and total turnover is higher.

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
527
To see how important the cash cycle is, consider the consequences of the U.S. Postal 
Service’s decision to increase the standard delivery time from two days to three days. A 
working capital expert estimated that as a result of this decision, a company with $10 billion 
in revenue could see an increase in net working capital of $100 million. The nearby Finance 
Matters box discusses the cash cycles and operating cycles for several industries, as well as 
for some specific companies.
concept questions
16.2a	 What does it mean to say that a firm has an inventory turnover ratio of 4?
16.2b	 Describe the operating cycle and cash cycle. What are the differences?
16.2c	 Explain the connection between a firm’s accounting-based profitability and its  
cash cycle.
SOME ASPECTS OF SHORT-TERM 
FINANCIAL POLICY
The short-term financial policy that a firm adopts will be reflected in at least two ways:
  1.	 The size of the firm’s investment in current assets. This is usually measured relative to 
the firm’s level of total operating revenues. A flexible, or accommodative, short-term 
financial policy would maintain a relatively high ratio of current assets to sales. A 
restrictive short-term financial policy would entail a low ratio of current assets to sales.4
  2.	 The financing of current assets. This is measured as the proportion of short-term  
debt (that is, current liabilities) and long-term debt used to finance current assets.  
A restrictive short-term financial policy means a high proportion of short-term debt 
relative to long-term financing, and a flexible policy means less short-term debt and 
more long-term debt.
If we take these two areas together, we see that a firm with a flexible policy would 
have a relatively large investment in current assets. It would finance this investment with 
relatively less in short-term debt. The net effect of a flexible policy is thus a relatively high 
level of net working capital. Put another way, with a flexible policy, the firm maintains a 
larger overall level of liquidity.
The Size of the Firm’s Investment in Current Assets
Flexible short-term financial policies with regard to current assets include such actions as:
  1.	 Keeping large balances of cash and marketable securities.
  2.	 Making large investments in inventory.
  3.	 Granting liberal credit terms, which results in a high level of accounts receivable.
Restrictive short-term financial policies would be just the opposite of the ones above:
  1.	 Keeping low cash balances and little investment in marketable securities.
  2.	 Making small investments in inventory.
  3.	 Allowing few or no credit sales, thereby minimizing accounts receivable.
16.3
4 Some people use the term conservative in place of flexible and the term aggressive in place of restrictive.

528	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
Determining the optimal level of investment in short-term assets requires an identifi-
cation of the different costs of alternative short-term financing policies. The objective is to 
trade off the cost of a restrictive policy against the cost of a flexible one to arrive at the best 
compromise.
Current asset holdings are highest with a flexible short-term financial policy and 
lowest with a restrictive policy. So, flexible short-term financial policies are costly in 
that they require a greater investment in cash and marketable securities, inventory, and 
accounts receivable. However, we expect that future cash inflows will be higher with a 
flexible policy. For example, sales are stimulated by the use of a credit policy that 
provides liberal financing to customers. A large amount of finished inventory on hand 
(“on the shelf”) provides a quick delivery service to customers and may increase sales. 
Similarly, a large inventory of raw materials may result in fewer production stoppages 
because of inventory shortages.
A more restrictive short-term financial policy probably reduces future sales levels be-
low those that would be achieved under flexible policies. It is also possible that higher 
prices can be charged to customers under flexible working capital policies. Customers may 
be willing to pay higher prices for the quick delivery service and more liberal credit terms 
implicit in flexible policies.
Managing current assets can be thought of as involving a trade-off between costs that 
rise and costs that fall with the level of investment. Costs that rise with increases in the 
level of investment in current assets are called carrying costs. The larger the investment a 
firm makes in its current assets, the higher its carrying costs will be. Costs that fall with 
increases in the level of investment in current assets are called shortage costs.
In a general sense, carrying costs are the opportunity costs associated with current 
assets. The rate of return on current assets is very low when compared to that on other 
assets. For example, the rate of return on U.S. Treasury bills is usually well below 
5 percent. This is very low compared to the rate of return firms would like to achieve 
overall. (U.S. Treasury bills are an important component of cash and marketable 
securities.)
Shortage costs are incurred when the investment in current assets is low. If a firm runs 
out of cash, it will be forced to sell marketable securities. Of course, if a firm runs out of 
cash and cannot readily sell marketable securities, it may have to borrow or default on an 
obligation. This situation is called a cash-out. A firm may lose customers if it runs out of 
inventory (a stock-out) or if it cannot extend credit to customers.
More generally, there are two kinds of shortage costs:
  1.	 Trading, or order, costs. Order costs are the costs of placing an order for more cash 
(brokerage costs, for example) or more inventory (production setup costs, for example).
  2.	 Costs related to lack of safety reserves. These are costs of lost sales, lost customer 
goodwill, and disruption of production schedules.
The top part of Figure 16.2 illustrates the basic trade-off between carrying costs and short-
age costs. On the vertical axis, we have costs measured in dollars, and, on the horizontal 
axis, we have the amount of current assets. Carrying costs start out at zero when current 
assets are zero and then climb steadily as current assets grow. Shortage costs start out very 
high and then decline as we add current assets. The total cost of holding current assets is 
the sum of the two. Notice how the combined costs reach a minimum at CA*. This is the 
optimal level of current assets.
Optimal current asset holdings are highest under a flexible policy. This policy is one 
in which the carrying costs are perceived to be low relative to shortage costs. This is Case 
A in Figure 16.2. In comparison, under restrictive current asset policies, carrying costs are 
carrying costs
Costs that rise with 
increases in the level of 
investment in current 
assets.
shortage costs
Costs that fall with 
increases in the level of 
investment in current 
assets.

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
529
Carrying costs increase with the level of investment in current assets. They include
the costs of maintaining economic value and opportunity costs. Shortage costs
decrease with increases in the level of investment in current assets. They include
trading costs and the costs related to being short of the current asset (for example,
being short of cash). The firm’s policy can be characterized as flexible or restrictive.
Minimum point
Minimum point
Shortage costs
Carrying costs
Shortage costs
Carrying costs
Amount of
current assets (CA)
Dollars
Amount of
current assets (CA)
Dollars
Total cost
Total cost
A flexible policy is most appropriate when carrying costs
are low relative to shortage costs.
A restrictive policy is most appropriate when carrying costs
are high relative to shortage costs.
A. Flexible policy
B. Restrictive policy
CA*
CA*
CA*
Shortage costs
Carrying costs
Total cost of
holding current assets
Minimum point
Amount of
current assets (CA)
Dollars
Short-term financial policy: the optimal investment in current assets
CA* represents the optimal amount of current assets.
Holding this amount minimizes total costs.
perceived to be high relative to shortage costs, resulting in lower current asset holdings. 
This is Case B in Figure 16.2.
Alternative Financing Policies for Current Assets
In previous sections, we looked at the basic determinants of the level of investment in cur-
rent assets, and we thus focused on the asset side of the balance sheet. Now we turn to the 
financing side of the question. Here we are concerned with the relative amounts of short-
term and long-term debt, assuming the investment in current assets is constant.
A growing firm can be thought of as having a total asset requirement consisting of the cur-
rent assets and long-term assets needed to run the business efficiently. The total asset require-
ment may exhibit change over time for many reasons, including (1) a general growth trend, 
(2) seasonal variation around the trend, and (3) unpredictable day-to-day and month-to-month 
f i g u r e  16.2
Carrying costs and 
shortage costs

530	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
fluctuations. This situation is depicted in Figure 16.3. (We have not tried to show the 
unpredictable day-to-day and month-to-month variations in the total asset requirement.)
The peaks and valleys in Figure 16.3 represent the firm’s total asset needs through time. 
For example, for a lawn and garden supply firm, the peaks might represent inventory build-
ups prior to the spring selling season. The valleys come about because of lower off-season 
inventories. There are two strategies such a firm might consider to meet its cyclical needs. 
First, the firm could keep a relatively large pool of marketable securities. As the need for 
inventory and other current assets begins to rise, the firm sells off marketable securities 
and uses the cash to purchase whatever is needed. Once the inventory is sold and inventory 
holdings begin to decline, the firm reinvests in marketable securities. This approach is the 
flexible policy illustrated in Figure 16.4 as Policy F. Notice that the firm essentially uses a 
pool of marketable securities as a buffer against changing current asset needs.
At the other extreme, the firm could keep relatively little in marketable securities. As 
the need for inventory and other assets begins to rise, the firm simply borrows the needed 
cash on a short-term basis. The firm repays the loans as the need for assets cycles back 
down. This approach is the restrictive policy illustrated in Figure 16.4 as Policy R.
f i g u r e  16.3
The total asset 
requirement over 
time
Seasonal
variation
General growth in
fixed assets
and permanent
current assets
Total asset
requirement
Time
Dollars
Marketable
securities
Long-term
financing
Time
Dollars
Policy F
Policy F always implies a short-term cash surplus
and a large investment in cash and marketable
securities.
Short-term
financing
Total asset
requirement
Long-term
financing
Time
Dollars
Policy R
Policy R uses long-term financing for permanent
asset requirements only and short-term borrowing
for seasonal variations.
Total asset
requirement
f i g u r e  16.4
Alternative asset financing policies

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
531
In comparing the two strategies illustrated in Figure 16.4, notice that the chief differ-
ence is the way in which the seasonal variation in asset needs is financed. In the flexible 
case, the firm finances internally, using its own cash and marketable securities. In the re-
strictive case, the firm finances externally, borrowing the needed funds on a short-term 
basis. As we discussed earlier, all else being the same, a firm with a flexible policy will 
have a greater investment in net working capital.
Which Financing Policy Is Best?
What is the most appropriate amount of short-term borrowing? There is no definitive 
answer. Several considerations must be included in a proper analysis:
  1.	 Cash reserves. The flexible financing policy implies surplus cash and little short-
term borrowing. This policy reduces the probability that a firm will experience 
financial distress. Firms may not have to worry as much about meeting recurring 
short-run obligations. However, investments in cash and marketable securities are 
zero net present value investments at best.
  2.	 Maturity hedging. Most firms attempt to match the maturities of assets and liabilities. 
They finance inventories with short-term bank loans and fixed assets with long-term 
financing. Firms tend to avoid financing long-lived assets with short-term borrowing. 
This type of maturity mismatching would necessitate frequent refinancing and is 
inherently risky because short-term interest rates are more volatile than longer- 
term rates.
  3.	 Relative interest rates. Short-term interest rates are usually lower than long-term 
rates. This implies that it is, on average, more costly to rely on long-term borrowing 
as compared to short-term borrowing.
The two policies, F and R, that we discuss above are, of course, extreme cases. With F, the 
firm never does any short-term borrowing, and, with R, the firm never has a cash reserve 
(an investment in marketable securities). Figure 16.5 illustrates these two policies along 
with a compromise, Policy C.
f i g u r e  16.5
A compromise 
financing policy
Total seasonal
variation
Short-term
financing
Flexible policy (F)
Compromise policy (C)
Restrictive policy (R)
Marketable
securities
General growth in
fixed assets
and permanent
current assets
With a compromise policy, the firm keeps a reserve of liquidity that
it uses to initially finance seasonal variations in current asset needs.
Short-term borrowing is used when the reserve is exhausted.
Dollars
Time

532	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
With this compromise approach, the firm borrows in the short term to cover peak fi-
nancing needs, but it maintains a cash reserve in the form of marketable securities during 
slow periods. As current assets build up, the firm draws down this reserve before doing any 
short-term borrowing. This allows for some run-up in current assets before the firm has to 
resort to short-term borrowing.
Current Assets and Liabilities in Practice
Short-term assets represent a significant portion of a typical firm’s overall assets. For U.S. 
manufacturing, mining, and trade corporations, current assets were about 50 percent of 
total assets in the 1960s. Today, this figure is closer to 40 percent. Most of the decline is 
due to more efficient cash and inventory management. Over this same period, current lia-
bilities rose from about 20 percent of total liabilities and equity to almost 30 percent. The 
result is that liquidity (as measured by the ratio of net working capital to total assets) has 
declined, signaling a move to more restrictive short-term policies.
The cash cycle is longer in some industries than in others because of different prod-
ucts and industry practices. Table 16.2 illustrates this point by comparing the current 
asset and liability percentages for four different companies. Of the four, Boeing has the 
highest level of inventories. Does this mean Boeing is less efficient? Probably not; in-
stead, the relatively high inventory levels are consistent with the industry. Boeing manu-
factures airplanes, and manufacturing a jetliner can take one to two years. During this 
time, the partially completed plane is on Boeing’s balance sheet as inventory. Walmart 
also needs a higher level of inventory on hand to satisfy customers who walk into its 
stores. In contrast, Cisco is mostly software and information technology, so its inventory 
levels are lower. Notice also that Walmart has the lowest levels of current assets to total 
assets, implying that fixed assets are large, as you would expect from such a capital-
intensive company. Walmart does have a somewhat unique feature in its working capital. 
If you notice, current liabilities exceed current assets, which means Walmart has a nega-
tive net working capital.
concept questions
16.3a 	 What considerations determine the optimal size of the firm’s investment in current 
assets?
16.3b 	 What considerations determine the optimal compromise between flexible and 
restrictive net working capital policies?
ta b l e  16.2
Current assets and 
current liabilities as a 
percentage of total 
assets for selected 
companies: 2015
Amazon
Boeing
Cisco
Walmart
Cash and near cash
	
 26.71% 
	  11.83%
	  4.57%
	  3.23%
Marketable securities
	
  5.25   
	
  1.37   
	 45.96   
	   .00 
Accounts receivable
	
10.30   
	
  8.00   
	 10.87   
	 2.93 
Inventories
	
15.23   
	
47.13   
	
1.80 
	24.77   
Other current assets
	
      .00
	
    .00
	   1.48
    .74
Total current assets
	    57.48%
	
68.33%
	 64.69%
31.67%
Accounts payable
	
48.19%
	
56.24%
	   3.51%
	29.04%
Short-term borrowings
	
  .00 
	
  .94 
	
  .81 
	 5.39 
Other short-term liabilities
	
    3.34
	      .00
	 14.77
     .00
Total current liabilities
	
51.53%
	
57.18% 
	 19.09%
	34.42%

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
533
THE CASH BUDGET
The cash budget is a primary tool in short-run financial planning. It allows the financial 
manager to identify short-term financial needs and opportunities. Importantly, the cash 
budget will help the manager explore the need for short-term borrowing. The idea of the 
cash budget is simple: It records estimates of cash receipts (cash in) and disbursements 
(cash out). The result is an estimate of the cash surplus or deficit.
Sales and Cash Collections
We start with an example for the Fun Toys Corporation. We will prepare a quarterly cash 
budget. We could just as well use a monthly, weekly, or even daily basis. We choose quar-
ters for convenience and also because a quarter is a common short-term business planning 
period.
All of Fun Toys’s cash inflows come from the sale of toys. Cash budgeting for Fun 
Toys must therefore start with a sales forecast for the coming year, by quarter:
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Sales (in millions)
$200
$300
$250
$400
Note that these are predicted sales, so there is forecasting risk here; actual sales could 
be more or less. Also, Fun Toys started the year with accounts receivable equal 
to $120.
Fun Toys has a 45-day receivables, or average collection, period. This means that half 
of the sales in a given quarter will be collected the following quarter. This happens be-
cause sales made during the first 45 days of a quarter will be collected in that quarter. 
Sales made in the second 45 days will be collected in the next quarter. Note that we are 
assuming that each quarter has 90 days, so the 45-day collection period is the same as a 
half-quarter collection period.
Based on the sales forecasts, we now need to estimate Fun Toys’s projected cash col-
lections. First, any receivables that we have at the beginning of a quarter will be collected 
within 45 days, so all of them will be collected sometime during the quarter. Second, as we 
discussed, any sales made in the first half of the quarter will be collected, so total cash col-
lections are:
Cash collections = Beginning accounts receivable + ½ × Sales	
[16.6]
For example, in the first quarter, cash collections would be the beginning receivables of 
$120 plus half of sales, ½ × $200 = $100, for a total of $220.
Because beginning receivables are all collected along with half of sales, ending receiv-
ables for a particular quarter would be the other half of sales. First-quarter sales are pro-
jected at $200, so ending receivables will be $100. This will be the beginning receivables 
in the second quarter. Cash collections in the second quarter will thus be $100 plus half of 
the projected $300 in sales, or $250 total.
Continuing this process, we can summarize Fun Toys’s projected cash collections as 
shown in Table 16.3.
In Table 16.3, collections are shown as the only source of cash. Of course, this might 
not be the case. Other sources of cash could include asset sales, investment income, and 
receipts from planned long-term financing.
16.4
coverage online
Excel 
Master
cash budget
A forecast of cash receipts 
and disbursements for the 
next planning period.

534	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
Cash Outflows
Next, we consider the cash disbursements, or payments. These come in four basic 
categories:
  1.	 Payments of accounts payable. These are payments for goods or services rendered by 
suppliers, such as raw materials. Generally, these payments will be made sometime 
after purchases.
  2.	 Wages, taxes, and other expenses. This category includes all other regular costs of 
doing business that require actual expenditures. Depreciation, for example, is often 
thought of as a regular cost of business, but it requires no cash outflow and is not 
included.
  3.	 Capital expenditures. These are payments of cash for long-lived assets.
  4.	 Long-term financing expenses. This category, for example, includes interest 
payments on long-term debt outstanding and dividend payments to shareholders.
Fun Toys’s purchases from suppliers (in dollars) in a quarter are equal to 60 percent of the 
next quarter’s predicted sales. Fun Toys’s payments to suppliers are equal to the previous 
quarter’s purchases, so the accounts payable period is 90 days. For example, in the quarter 
just ended, Fun Toys ordered .60 × $200 = $120 in supplies. This will actually be paid in 
the first quarter (Q1) of the coming year.
Wages, taxes, and other expenses are routinely 20 percent of sales; interest and divi-
dends are currently $20 per quarter. In addition, Fun Toys plans a major plant expansion 
(a capital expenditure) of $100 in the second quarter. If we put all this information together, 
the cash outflows are as shown in Table 16.4.
The Cash Balance
The predicted net cash inflow is the difference between cash collections and cash disburse-
ments. The net cash inflow for Fun Toys is shown in Table 16.5. What we see immediately 
is that there is a net cash inflow in the first and third quarters and a net outflow in the sec-
ond and fourth.
ta b l e  16.3
Cash collections for 
Fun Toys (in millions)
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Beginning receivables
$120
$100
$150
$  125
Sales
  200
  300
  250
400
Cash collections
  220
  250
  275
325
Ending receivables
  100
  150
  125
200
	
Collections = Beginning receivables + ½ × Sales
	Ending receivables = Beginning receivables + Sales − Collections
	
= ½ × Sales
ta b l e  16.4
Cash disbursements 
for Fun Toys  
(in millions)
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Payment of accounts (60% of sales)
$120
$180
$150
$240
Wages, taxes, other expenses
      40
    60
      50
    80
Capital expenditures
         0
  100
           0
      0
Long-term financing expenses  
  (interest and dividends)
     20
      20
       20
    20
    Total cash disbursements
$180
$360
$220
$340

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
535
We will assume that Fun Toys starts the year with a $20 cash balance. Further-
more, Fun Toys maintains a $10 minimum cash balance to guard against unforeseen 
contingencies and forecasting errors. So, we start the first quarter with $20 in cash. 
This rises by $40 during the quarter, and the ending balance is $60. Of this, $10 is 
reserved as a minimum, so we subtract it out and find that the first-quarter surplus is 
$60 − 10 = $50.
Fun Toys starts the second quarter with $60 in cash (the ending balance from the pre-
vious quarter). There is a net cash inflow of −$110, so the ending balance is $60 − 110 = 
−$50. We need another $10 as a buffer, so the total deficit is −$60. These calculations and 
those for the last two quarters are summarized in Table 16.6.
Beginning in the second quarter, Fun Toys has a cash shortfall of $60. This occurs 
because of the seasonal pattern of sales (higher towards the end of the second quarter), the 
delay in collections, and the planned capital expenditure.
The cash situation at Fun Toys is projected to improve to a $5 deficit in the third 
quarter, but, by year’s end, Fun Toys is showing a $20 deficit. Without some sort of 
financing, this deficit will carry over into the next year. We explore this subject in the 
next section.
For now, we can make the following general comments on Fun Toys’s cash needs:
  1.	 Fun Toys’s large outflow in the second quarter is not necessarily a sign of trouble. 
It results from delayed collections on sales and a planned capital expenditure 
(presumably a worthwhile one).
  2.	 The figures in our example are based on a forecast. Sales could be much worse (or 
better) than the forecast figures.
concept questions
16.4a 	 How would you do a sensitivity analysis (discussed in Chapter 9) for Fun Toys’s net 
cash balance?
16.4b 	 What could you learn from such an analysis?
ta b l e  16.5
Net cash inflow for 
Fun Toys (in millions)
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Total cash collections
$220
$250
 $275
$325
Total cash disbursements
  180
     360
  220
     340
    Net cash inflow
$  40
−$110  
 $  55
−$  15 
ta b l e  16.6
Cash balance for  
Fun Toys (in millions)
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Beginning cash balance
$20
$60
−$50
$  5
Net cash inflow
40
−110
55
−  15
Ending cash balance
$60
−$50
$  5
−$10
Minimum cash balance
−  10
−    10
−   10
−    10
    Cumulative surplus (deficit)
$50
−$60
−$   5
−$20

536	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
SHORT-TERM BORROWING
Fun Toys has a short-term financing problem. It cannot meet the forecast cash outflows in 
the second quarter from internal sources. How it will finance the shortfall depends on its 
financial policy. With a very flexible policy, Fun Toys might seek up to $60 million in 
long-term debt financing.
In addition, note that much of the cash deficit comes from the large capital expendi-
ture. Arguably, this is a candidate for long-term financing. Nonetheless, because we have 
discussed long-term financing elsewhere, we will concentrate here on two short-term bor-
rowing options: (1) unsecured borrowing and (2) secured borrowing.
Unsecured Loans
The most common way to finance a temporary cash deficit is to arrange a short-term, un-
secured bank loan. Firms that use short-term bank loans often arrange a line of credit. A 
line of credit is an agreement under which a firm is authorized to borrow up to a specified 
amount. To ensure that the line is used for short-term purposes, the borrower will some-
times be required to pay the line down to zero and keep it there for some period during the 
year, typically 60 days (called a cleanup period).
Short-term lines of credit are classified as either committed or noncommitted. The lat-
ter is an informal arrangement that allows firms to borrow up to a previously specified 
limit without going through the normal paperwork (much as you would with a credit card). 
A revolving credit arrangement (or just revolver) is similar to a line of credit, but it is usu-
ally open for two or more years, whereas a line of credit would usually be evaluated on an 
annual basis.
Committed lines of credit are more formal legal arrangements and often involve a 
commitment fee paid by the firm to the bank. The interest rate on the line of credit will 
usually float. A firm that pays a commitment fee for a committed line of credit is essen-
tially buying insurance to guarantee that the bank can’t back out of the agreement (absent 
some material change in the borrower’s status).
Secured Loans
Banks and other finance companies often require security for a short-term loan just as they 
do for a long-term loan. Security for short-term loans usually consists of accounts receiv-
able, inventories, or both.
Accounts Receivable Financing 
Accounts receivable financing involves either 
assigning receivables or factoring receivables. Under assignment, the lender has the re-
ceivables as security, but the borrower is still responsible if a receivable can’t be collected. 
With conventional factoring, the receivable is discounted and sold to the lender (the fac-
tor). Once it is sold, collection is the factor’s problem, and the factor assumes the full risk 
of default on bad accounts. With maturity factoring, the factor forwards the money on an 
agreed-upon future date.
16.5
line of credit
A formal (committed) or 
informal (noncommitted) 
prearranged, short-term 
bank loan.
accounts receivable 
financing
A secured short-term loan 
that involves either the 
assignment or factoring 
of receivables.
EXAMPLE
16.3  Cost of Factoring
For the year just ended, LuLu’s Pies had an average of $50,000 in accounts receivable. Credit sales were 
$500,000. LuLu’s factors its receivables by discounting them 3 percent, in other words, by selling them 
for 97 cents on the dollar. What is the effective interest rate on this source of short-term financing?
(continued)

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
537
Inventory Loans 
Inventory loans, short-term loans to purchase inventory, come in 
three basic forms: blanket inventory liens, trust receipts, and field warehouse 
financing:
  1.	 Blanket inventory lien. A blanket lien gives the lender a lien against all the borrower’s 
inventories (the blanket “covers” everything).
  2.	 Trust receipt. A trust receipt is a device by which the borrower holds specific inventory 
in “trust” for the lender. Automobile dealer financing, for example, is done by use of 
trust receipts. This type of secured financing is also called floor planning, in reference 
to inventory on the showroom floor. However, it is somewhat cumbersome to use trust 
receipts for, say, wheat grain.
  3.	 Field warehouse financing. In field warehouse financing, a public warehouse company 
(an independent company that specializes in inventory management) acts as a control 
agent to supervise the inventory for the lender.
Other Sources
There are a variety of other sources of short-term funds employed by corporations. Two of 
the most important are commercial paper and trade credit.
Commercial paper consists of short-term notes issued by large and highly rated firms. 
Typically, these notes are of short maturity, ranging up to 270 days (beyond that limit, the 
firm must file a registration statement with the SEC). Because the firm issues these di-
rectly, the interest rate the borrowing firm obtains can be significantly below the rate a 
bank would charge for a direct loan.
Another option available to a firm is to increase the accounts payable period; in other 
words, it may take longer to pay its bills. This amounts to borrowing from suppliers in the 
form of trade credit. This is an extremely important form of financing for smaller busi-
nesses in particular. As we discuss in Chapter 17, a firm using trade credit may end up 
paying a much higher price for what it purchases, so this can be a very expensive source of 
financing.
concept questions
16.5a 	 What are the two basic forms of short-term financing?
16.5b 	 Describe two types of secured loans.
inventory loan
A secured short-term loan 
to purchase inventory.
	
To determine the interest rate, we first have to know the accounts receivable, or average col-
lection, period. During the year, LuLu’s turned over its receivables $500,000/50,000 = 10 times. 
The average collection period is therefore 365/10 = 36.5 days.
	
The interest paid here is a form of “discount interest.” In this case, LuLu’s is paying 3 cents in 
interest on every 97 cents of financing. The interest rate per 36.5 days is thus .03/.97 = 3.09%. The 
APR is 10 × 3.09% = 30.9%, but the effective annual rate is:
	
EAR = 1.030910 − 1 = 35.6%
The factoring is a relatively expensive source of money in this case.
	
We should note that if the factor takes on the risk of default by a buyer, then the factor is pro-
viding insurance as well as immediate cash. More generally, the factor essentially takes over the 
firm’s credit operations. This can result in a significant saving. The interest rate we calculated is 
therefore overstated, particularly if default is a significant possibility.

538	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
A SHORT-TERM FINANCIAL PLAN
To illustrate a completed short-term financial plan, we will assume that Fun Toys arranges 
to borrow any needed funds on a short-term basis. The interest rate is 20 percent APR, and 
it is calculated on a quarterly basis. From Chapter 5, we know that the rate is 20%/4 = 5% 
per quarter. We will assume that Fun Toys starts the year with no short-term debt.
From Table 16.6, we see that Fun Toys has a second-quarter deficit of $60 million. We 
will have to borrow this amount. Net cash inflow in the following quarter is $55 million. 
We now have to pay $60 × .05 = $3 million in interest out of that, leaving $52 million to 
reduce the borrowing.
We still owe $60 − 52 = $8 million at the end of the third quarter. Interest in the last 
quarter will thus be $8 × .05 = $.4 million. In addition, net inflows in the last quarter are 
−$15 million, so we have to borrow a total of $15.4 million, bringing our total borrowing up 
to $15.4 + 8 = $23.4 million. Table 16.7 extends Table 16.6 to include these calculations.
Notice that the ending short-term debt is just equal to the cumulative deficit for the 
entire year, $20 million, plus the interest paid during the year, $3 + .4 = $3.4 million, for a 
total of $23.4 million.
Our plan is very simple. For example, we ignored the fact that the interest paid on the 
short-term debt is tax deductible. We also ignored the fact that the cash surplus in the first quar-
ter would earn some interest (which would be taxable). We could add on a number of refine-
ments. Even so, our plan highlights the fact that in about 90 days Fun Toys will need to borrow 
$60 million or so on a short-term basis. It’s time to start lining up the source of the funds.
Our plan also illustrates that financing the firm’s short-term needs will cost about $3.4 mil-
lion in interest (before taxes) for the year. This is a starting point for Fun Toys to begin evaluat-
ing alternatives to reduce this expense. For example, can the $100 million planned expenditure 
be postponed or spread out? At 5 percent per quarter, short-term credit is expensive.
Also, if Fun Toys’s sales are expected to keep growing, then the $20 million plus defi-
cit will probably also keep growing, and the need for additional financing is permanent. 
Fun Toys may wish to think about raising money on a long-term basis to cover this need.
concept questions
16.6a 	 In Table 16.7, does Fun Toys have a projected deficit or surplus?
16.6b 	 In Table 16.7, what would happen to Fun Toys’s deficit or surplus if the minimum 
cash balance was reduced to $5?
16.6
ta b l e  16.7
Short-term financial 
plan for Fun Toys  
(in millions)
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Beginning cash balance
$20
$60
$10
$10.0
Net cash inflow
40
−110
55
−  15.0
New short-term borrowing
—
60
—
15.4
Interest on short-term borrowing
—
—
−    3
−       .4
Short-term borrowing repaid
      —
      —
−  52
         —
Ending cash balance
$60
$10
$10
$10.0
Minimum cash balance
−  10
−  10
−  10
−  10.0
Cumulative surplus (deficit)
$50
$  0
$  0
$    .0
Beginning short-term borrowing
0
0
60
8.0
Change in short-term debt
       0
     60
−  52
    15.4
  Ending short-term debt
$  0
$60
$  8
$23.4

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
539
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
16.1 	 The Operating and Cash Cycles.  Consider the following financial statement 
information for the Glory Road Company:
Item
Beginning
Ending
Inventory
$1,543  
$1,669  
Accounts receivable
4,418
3,952
Accounts payable
2,551
2,673
  Net sales
$11,500   
  Cost of goods sold
 8,200
  	
Calculate the operating and cash cycles. (See Problem 6.)
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
  1.	 This chapter has introduced the management of short-term finance. Short-term 
finance involves short-lived assets and liabilities. We traced and examined the short-
term sources and uses of cash as they appear on the firm’s financial statements. We 
saw how current assets and current liabilities arise in the short-term operating 
activities and the cash cycle of the firm.
  2.	 Managing short-term cash flows involves the minimizing of costs. The two major 
costs are carrying costs, the returns foregone by keeping too much invested in 
short-term assets such as cash, and shortage costs, the costs of running out of 
short-term assets. The objective of managing short-term finance and doing short-
term financial planning is to find the optimal trade-off between these two costs.
  3.	 In an “ideal” economy, the firm could perfectly predict its short-term uses and sources 
of cash, and net working capital could be kept at zero. In the real world we live in, cash 
and net working capital provide a buffer that lets the firm meet its ongoing obligations. 
The financial manager seeks the optimal level of each of the current assets.
  4.	 The financial manager can use the cash budget to identify short-term financial needs. 
The cash budget tells the manager what borrowing is required or what lending will 
be possible in the short run. The firm has available to it a number of possible ways of 
acquiring funds to meet short-term shortfalls, including the use of unsecured and 
secured loans.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 16.1 Will decreasing accounts payable decrease cash?
Section 16.2 If the inventory period is 40 days and the accounts receivables period 
is 60 days, then how long is the operating cycle?
Section 16.3 What are the opportunity costs of holding current assets called?
Section 16.5 Under what type of loan does the lender have a lien against all of the 
borrower’s inventory?

540	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
16.2 	 Cash Balance for Masson Corporation.  The Masson Corporation has a 60-day 
average collection period and wishes to maintain a $5 million minimum cash 
balance. Based on this and the information below, complete the following cash 
budget. What conclusions do you draw? (See Problem 16.)
MASSON CORPORATION 
Cash Budget 
(in millions)
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Beginning receivables
$120
Sales
    90
$120
$150
$120
Cash collections
Ending receivables
Total cash collections
Total cash disbursements
    80
  160
  180
  160
Net cash inflow
Beginning cash balance
$    5
Net cash inflow
Ending cash balance
Minimum cash balance
Cumulative surplus (deficit)
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
16.1 	 We first need the turnover ratios. Note that we use the average values for all balance 
sheet items and that we base the inventory and payables turnover measures on cost 
of goods sold.
	
Inventory turnover = $8,200/[(1,543 + 1,669)/2]
	
= 5.11 times
	Receivables turnover = $11,500/[(4,418 + 3,952)/2]     
	
= 2.75 times
	
Payables turnover = $8,200/[(2,551 + 2,673)/2]          
	
= 3.14 times
	
We can now calculate the various periods: 
	
Inventory period = 365 days/5.11 times = 71.49 days   
	Receivables period = 365 days/2.75 times = 132.83 days
	
Payables period = 365 days/3.14 times = 116.27 days
	
So, the time it takes to acquire inventory and sell it is about 71 days. Collection 
takes another 133 days, so the operating cycle is thus 71 + 133 = 204 days. The 
cash cycle is this 204 days less the payables period, 204 − 116 = 88 days.
16.2 	 Since Masson has a 60-day collection period, only those sales made in the  
first 30 days of the quarter will be collected in the same quarter. Total cash 
collections in the first quarter will thus equal 30/90 = 1⁄3 of sales plus 
beginning receivables, or $120 + 1⁄3 × 90 = $150. Ending receivables for the 
first quarter (and the second-quarter beginning receivables) are the other 2⁄3 of 
sales, or 2⁄3 × $90 = $60. The remaining calculations are straightforward, and 
the completed budget follows.

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
541
MASSON CORPORATION 
Cash Budget 
(in millions)
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Beginning receivables
  $120
 $  60
   $  80
  $100
Sales
      90
     120
      150
    120
Cash collections
     150
     100 
     130
    140 
Ending receivables
   $  60
    $  80 
   $100
  $   80 
Total cash collections
  $150
 $100
   $130
  $140
Total cash disbursements
        80
     160 
     180
    160
Net cash inflow
    $   70
−$     60  
−$   50
−$   20 
Beginning cash balance
  $     5
 $  75
   $  15
−$  35
Net cash inflow
        70
−    60 
−    50
−    20
Ending cash balance
   $   75
  $   15 
−$  35
−$   55
Minimum cash balance
−$     5
 −$     5  
−$    5
−$     5
Cumulative surplus (deficit)
   $   70
  $   10 
−$  40
−$   60
	
The primary conclusion from this schedule is that, beginning in the third quarter, 
Masson’s cash surplus becomes a cash deficit. By the end of the year, Masson will 
need to arrange for $60 million in cash beyond what will be available.
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 1 	 16.1 	
Operating Cycle.  What are some of the characteristics of a firm with a 
long operating cycle?
LO 1 	 16.2 	 Cash Cycle.  What are some of the characteristics of a firm with a long 
cash cycle?
LO 3 	 16.3 	 Sources and Uses.  For the year just ended, you have gathered the 
following information on the Holly Corporation:
a.	
A $200 dividend was paid.
b.	 Accounts payable increased by $500.
c.	
Fixed asset purchases were $900.
d.	 Inventories increased by $625.
e.	
Long-term debt decreased by $1,200.
  	
	
Label each item as a source or use of cash and describe its effect on the 
firm’s cash balance.
LO 2 	 16.4	
Cost of Current Assets.  Kane Manufacturing, Inc., has recently installed 
a just-in-time (JIT) inventory system. Describe the effect this is likely to 
have on the company’s carrying costs, shortage costs, and operating cycle.
LO 1 	 16.5  	 Cycles.  Is it possible for a firm’s cash cycle to be longer than its 
operating cycle? Explain why or why not.
Use the following information to answer Questions 16.6–16.10. Last month, 
BlueSky Airline announced that it would stretch out its bill payments to 45 
days from 30 days. The reason given was that the company wanted to “control 
costs and optimize cash flow.” The increased payables period will be in effect 
for all of the company’s 4,000 suppliers.

542	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
LO 1 	 16.6 	 Operating and Cash Cycles.  What impact did this change in payables 
policy have on BlueSky’s operating cycle? Its cash cycle?
LO 1 	 16.7 	 Operating and Cash Cycles.  What impact did the announcement have 
on BlueSky’s suppliers?
LO 1 	 16.8 	 Corporate Ethics.  Is it ethical for large firms to unilaterally lengthen 
their payables periods, particularly when dealing with smaller suppliers?
LO 1 	 16.9 	 Payables Period.  Why don’t all firms simply increase their payables 
periods to shorten their cash cycles?
LO 1 	 16.10 	 Payables Period.  BlueSky lengthened its payables period to “control 
costs and optimize cash flow.” Exactly what is the cash benefit to 
BlueSky from this change?
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–12)
LO 3 	 1. 	 Changes in the Cash Account.  Indicate the impact of the following 
corporate actions on cash, using the letter I for an increase, D for a decrease, 
or N when no change occurs.
a.	
A dividend is paid with funds received from a sale of debt.
b.	 Real estate is purchased and paid for with short-term debt.
c.	
Inventory is bought on credit.
d.	 A short-term bank loan is repaid.
e.	
Next year’s taxes are prepaid.
f.	
Preferred stock is repurchased.
g.	
Sales are made on credit.
h.	 Interest on long-term debt is paid.
i.	
Payments for previous sales are collected.
j.	
The accounts payable balance is reduced.
k.	 A dividend is paid.
l.	
Production supplies are purchased and paid for with a short-term note.
m.	 Utility bills are paid.
n.	 Cash is paid for raw materials purchased for inventory.
o.	
Marketable securities are purchased.
LO 3 	 2. 	 Cash Equation.  Sunset, Inc., has a book value of equity of $13,465. 
Long-term debt is $8,200. Net working capital, other than cash, is $2,275. 
Fixed assets are $18,380. How much cash does the company have? If 
current liabilities are $1,630, what are current assets?
LO 1 	 3. 	 Changes in the Operating Cycle.  Indicate the effect that the following will 
have on the operating cycle. Use the letter I to indicate an increase, the letter 
D for a decrease, and the letter N for no change.
a.	
Average receivables go up.
b.	 Credit payment times for customers are increased.

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
543
c.	
Inventory turnover goes from 3 times to 7 times.
d.	 Payables turnover goes from 6 times to 11 times.
e.	
Receivables turnover goes from 7 times to 9 times.
f.	
Payments to suppliers are accelerated.
LO 1 	 4. 	 Changes in Cycles.  Indicate the impact of the following on the cash and 
operating cycles, respectively. Use the letter I to indicate an increase, the 
letter D for a decrease, and the letter N for no change.
a.	
The terms of cash discounts offered to customers are made less 
favorable.
b.	 The cash discounts offered by suppliers are increased; thus, payments 
are made earlier.
c.	
An increased number of customers begin to pay in cash instead of with 
credit.
d.	 Fewer raw materials than usual are purchased.
e.	
A greater percentage of raw material purchases are paid for  
with credit.
f.	
More finished goods are produced for inventory instead of for order.
LO 3 	 5.	 Calculating Cash Collections.  The Jallouk Company has projected the 
following quarterly sales amounts for the coming year:
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Sales
$585
$675
$630
$895
a.	
Accounts receivable at the beginning of the year are $330. The 
company has a 45-day collection period. Calculate cash collections in 
each of the four quarters by completing the following:
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Beginning receivables
Sales
Cash collections
Ending receivables
b.	 Rework part (a) assuming a collection period of 60 days.
c.	
Rework part (a) assuming a collection period of 30 days.
LO 1 	 6.	 Calculating Cycles.  Consider the following financial statement information 
for the Amaryliss Corporation:
Item
Beginning
Ending
Inventory
$9,605
$11,302
Accounts receivable
  4,093
    4,994
Accounts payable
  4,822
    5,749
  Net sales
$124,652
  Cost of goods sold
    77,681
Assume all sales are on credit. Calculate the operating and cash cycles. How 
do you interpret your answer?

544	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
LO 3 	 7.	 Factoring Receivables.  Your firm has an average collection period of 38 days. 
Current practice is to factor all receivables immediately at a 2 percent 
discount. What is the effective cost of borrowing in this case? Assume that 
default is extremely unlikely.
LO 3 	 8.	 Calculating Payments.  Brunell Products has projected the following sales 
for the coming year:
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Sales
$680
$765
$915
$840
Sales in the year following this one are projected to be 15 percent greater in 
each quarter.
a.	
Calculate payments to suppliers assuming that the company places 
orders during each quarter equal to 30 percent of projected sales for the 
next quarter. Assume that the company pays immediately. What is the 
payables period in this case?
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Payment of accounts
b.	 Rework part (a) assuming a 90-day payables period.
c.	
Rework part (a) assuming a 60-day payables period.
LO 3 	 9.	 Calculating Payments.  The Sepulcro Corporation’s purchases from 
suppliers in a quarter are equal to 75 percent of the next quarter’s forecast 
sales. The payables period is 60 days. Wages, taxes, and other expenses are 
30 percent of sales, and interest and dividends are $120 per quarter. No 
capital expenditures are planned. Projected quarterly sales are:
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Sales
$1,825
$2,130
$2,460
$2,615
Sales for the first quarter of the following year are projected at $2,230. 
­Calculate the company’s cash outlays by completing the following:
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Payment of accounts
Wages, taxes, other expenses
Long-term financing expenses  
  (interest and dividends)
    Total
LO 3 	 10.	Calculating Cash Collections.  The following is the sales budget for Tesoro 
Azul, Inc., for the first quarter of 2016.
January
February
March
Sales budget
$153,000
$169,000
$181,000

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
545
Credit sales are collected as follows:
65 percent in the month of the sale
20 percent in the month after the sale
15 percent in the second month after the sale
The accounts receivable balance at the end of the previous quarter was 
$97,000 ($71,000 of which was uncollected December sales).
a.	
Compute the sales for November.
b.	 Compute the sales for December.
c.	
Compute the cash collections from sales for each month from January 
through March.
LO 3 	 11.	 Calculating the Cash Budget.  Here are some important figures from the 
budget of Marston, Inc., for the second quarter of 2016.
April
May
June
Credit sales
$574,000
$499,000
$626,000
Credit purchases
  252,000
  235,000
  282,000
Cash disbursements
  Wages, taxes, and expenses
  114,000
  107,800
  149,000
  Interest
    13,000
    13,000
    13,000
  Equipment purchases
    44,600
      5,500
  207,000
The company predicts that 5 percent of its credit sales will never be col-
lected, 35 percent of its sales will be collected in the month of the sale, and 
the remaining 60 percent will be collected in the following month. Credit 
purchases will be paid in the month following the purchase.
	
In March 2016, credit sales were $468,000. Using this information, 
complete the following cash budget:
	
April	
May	
June
Beginning cash balance	
$152,000
Cash receipts
  Cash collections from credit sales
    Total cash available
Cash disbursements
  Purchases	
  241,000
  Wages, taxes, and expenses
  Interest
  Equipment purchases
    Total cash disbursements
Ending cash balance
LO 3 	 12.	Calculating Cash Collections.  The MacFarlane Company has projected the 
following quarterly sales amounts for the coming year:
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Sales
$4,300
$5,200
$4,800
$4,000

546	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
a.	
Accounts receivable at the beginning of the year are $1,900. The 
company has a 45-day collection period. Calculate cash collections in 
each of the four quarters by completing the following:
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Beginning receivables
Sales
Cash collections
Ending receivables
b.	 Rework part (a) assuming a collection period of 60 days.
c.	
Rework part (a) assuming a collection period of 30 days.
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 13–16)
LO 3 	 13.	 Costs of Borrowing.  You’ve worked out a line of credit arrangement that 
allows you to borrow up to $40 million at any time. The interest rate is  
.485 percent per month. In addition, 5 percent of the amount that you 
borrow must be deposited in a noninterest-bearing account. Assume that 
your bank uses compound interest on its line-of-credit loans.
a.	
What is the effective annual interest rate on this lending arrangement?
b.	 Suppose you need $15 million today and you repay it in six months. 
How much interest will you pay?
LO 3 	 14.	Costs of Borrowing.  A bank offers your firm a revolving credit 
arrangement for up to $75 million at an interest rate of 1.65 percent per 
quarter. The bank also requires you to maintain a compensating balance 
of 4 percent against the unused portion of the credit line, to be deposited 
in a noninterest-bearing account. Assume you have a short-term 
investment account at the bank that pays .49 percent per quarter,  
and assume that the bank uses compound interest on its revolving  
credit loans.
a.	
What is your effective annual interest rate (an opportunity cost) on the 
revolving credit arrangement if your firm does not use it during the 
year?
b.	 What is your effective annual interest rate on the lending 
arrangement if you borrow $40 million immediately and repay  
it in one year?
c.	
What is your effective annual interest rate if you borrow $75 million 
immediately and repay it in one year?
LO 3 	 15.	Cash and Operating Cycles.  Calvani, Inc., has a cash cycle of 36.5 days, 
an operating cycle of 59.4 days, and an inventory period of 23.2 days. The 
company reported cost of goods sold in the amount of $445,000, and credit 
sales were $724,000. What is the company’s average balance in accounts 
payable and accounts receivable?
LO 3 	 16.	Cash Budget.  Piano Man, Inc., has a 32-day average collection period 
and wants to maintain a minimum cash balance of $20 million, which is 
what the company currently has on hand. The company currently has a 

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
547
receivables balance of $218 million and has developed the following sales 
and cash disbursement budgets in millions:
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Sales
$378
$468
$570
$522
Total cash disbursement
  318
  408
  726
  450
Complete the following cash budget for the company. What conclusions do 
you draw?
PIANO MAN, INC.
Cash Budget
(in millions)
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Beginning receivables
Sales
Cash collections
Ending receivables
Total cash collections
Total cash disbursements
Net cash inflow
Beginning cash balance
Net cash inflow
Ending cash balance
Minimum cash balance
Cumulative surplus (deficit)
CHALLENGE (Questions 17–18)
LO 3 	 17.	 Costs of Borrowing.  In exchange for a $400 million fixed commitment line 
of credit, your firm has agreed to do the following:
1.	
Pay 1.73 percent per quarter on any funds actually borrowed.
2.	
Maintain a 5 percent compensating balance on any funds actually 
borrowed.
3.	
Pay an up-front commitment fee of .25 percent of the amount of the line.
Based on this information, answer the following:
a.	
Ignoring the commitment fee, what is the effective annual interest rate 
on this line of credit?
b.	 Suppose your firm immediately uses $210 million of the line and pays 
it off in one year. What is the effective annual interest rate on this 
$210 million loan?
LO 3 	 18.	Costs of Borrowing.  Come and Go Bank offers your firm a discount 
interest loan with an interest rate of 6.5 percent for up to $20 million, and in 
addition requires you to maintain a 4 percent compensating balance against 
the face amount borrowed. What is the effective annual interest rate on this 
lending arrangement?

548	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
Heidi Pedersen, the treasurer for Wood Products, Inc., has just been asked by Justin Wood, 
the company’s president, to prepare a memo detailing the company’s ending cash balance 
for the next three months. Following, you will see the relevant estimates for this period.
July
August
September
Credit sales
$1,275,800
$1,483,500
$1,096,300
Credit purchases
     765,480
     890,160
     657,780
Cash disbursements
  Wages, taxes, and expenses
     348,600
     395,620
     337,150
  Interest
       29,900
       29,900
       29,900
  Equipment
0
     158,900
       96,300
Credit sales collections:
  Collected in month of sale:
35%
  Collected month after sale:
60%
  Never collected:
5%
June credit sales:
$1,135,020
June credit purchases:
$   681,012
Beginning cash balance:
$   425,000
All credit purchases are paid in the month after the purchase.
a.	
Complete the cash budget for Wood Products for the next three months.
b.	 Heidi knows that the cash budget will become a standard report completed before 
each quarter. To help reduce the time preparing the report each quarter, she would 
like a memo with the appropriate information in Excel linked to the memo. Prepare a 
memo to Justin that will automatically update when the values are changed in Excel.
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
16.1 Cash Cycle.  Go to www.reuters.com. You will need to find the most recent annual 
income statement and the two most recent balance sheets for McKesson (MCK) and 
Newmont Mining (NEM). McKesson is involved in pharmaceuticals and consumer 
health care, while Newmont Mining is a leading gold mining company. Calculate the 
cash cycle for each company and comment on any similarities or differences.
16.2 Operating Cycle.  Using the information you gathered in the previous problem, 
calculate the operating cycle for each company. What are the similarities or differences? 
Is this what you would expect from companies in each of these industries?
16.3 Sources and Uses of Cash.  Find the two most recent balance sheets for 3M at the 
“Investor Relations” link on the website www.3m.com. For each account in the balance 
sheet, show the change during the most recent year and note whether this was a source 
or use of cash. Do your numbers add up and make sense? Explain your answer for total 
assets as compared to your answer for total liabilities and owners’ equity.

	
c h a p t e r  1 6
Short-Term Financial Planning	
549
CHAPTER CASE
Piepkorn Manufacturing Working Capital Management, Part 1
Y
ou have recently been hired by Piepkorn Manufac-
turing to work in its newly established treasury de-
partment. Piepkorn Manufacturing is a small company 
that produces cardboard boxes in a variety of sizes. 
Gary Piepkorn, the owner of the company, works primar-
ily in the sales and production areas. Currently, the com-
pany puts all receivables in one shoe box and all 
payables in another. Because of the disorganized sys-
tem, the finance area needs work, and that’s what 
you’ve been brought in to do.
	
The company currently has a cash balance of 
$154,000 and plans to purchase new box folding ma-
chinery in the fourth quarter at a cost of $325,000. The 
purchase of the machinery will be made with cash be-
cause of the discount offered. The company’s policy is 
to maintain a target cash balance of $100,000. All sales 
are in cash and all purchases are made on credit.
	
Gary Piepkorn has projected the following gross 
sales for each of the next four quarters:
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Gross sales
$863,500 $918,500 $996,000 $924,000
	
Gross sales for the first quarter of next year are pro-
jected at $908,000.
	
Piepkorn typically orders 50 percent of next quarter’s 
projected gross sales in the current quarter, and suppliers 
are typically paid in 53 days. Wages, taxes, and other costs 
run about 30 percent of gross sales. The company has a 
quarterly interest payment of $115,000 on its long-term debt.
	
The company uses a local bank for its short-term fi-
nancial needs. It pays 1.5 percent per quarter on all short-
term borrowing and maintains a money market account 
that pays 1 percent per quarter on all short-term deposits.
	
Gary has asked you to prepare a cash budget and 
short-term financial plan for the company under the cur-
rent policies. He has also asked you to prepare addi-
tional plans based on changes in several inputs.
QU E ST I O N S
1.	
Use the numbers given to complete the cash bud-
get and short-term financial plan.
2.	
Rework the cash budget and short-term financial 
plan assuming Piepkorn changes to a target bal-
ance of $80,000.
PIEPKORN MANUFACTURING
Cash Budget
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Beginning cash balance
Net cash inflow
Ending cash balance
Minimum cash balance
Cumulative surplus  
  (deficit)
PIEPKORN MANUFACTURING
Short-Term Financial Plan
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Target cash balance
Net cash inflow
New short-term investments
Income from short-term  
  investments
Short-term investments sold
New short-term borrowing
Interest on short-term borrowing
Short-term borrowing repaid
Ending cash balance
Minimum cash balance
Cumulative surplus (deficit)
Beginning short-term  
  investments
Ending short-term investments
Beginning short-term debt
Ending short-term debt

550
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
M
ost often, when news breaks about a firm’s bank accounts, it’s 
because the company is running low on cash. However, that 
wasn’t the case for many companies in early 2015. For example, Apple 
had a cash balance of about $142 billion, or $25 per share! Other com-
panies also had large cash balances. For example, Microsoft had a 
cash hoard of about $89 billion, while General Electric had about 
$138 billion. Why would firms such as these hold such large quantities 
of cash? We examine cash management in this chapter to find out.
This chapter considers various aspects of working capital man-
agement. Commonly, responsibility for working capital is spread 
across several different disciplines. Accounting is frequently respon-
sible for payables and receivables, operations is in charge of inven-
tory, and finance handles cash management. Marketing also plays a 
key role because sales forecasts are a key determinant of working 
capital needs. So, an understanding of working capital management is 
important for just about everyone in the firm.
17
Working Capital 
Management
T
his chapter examines working capital management. Recall from Chapter 1 that working 
capital management deals with a firm’s short-term, or current, assets and liabilities. A 
firm’s current liabilities consist largely of short-term borrowing. We discussed short-term 
borrowing in our previous chapter, so this chapter mainly focuses on current assets, in par-
ticular, cash, accounts receivable, and inventory.
FLOAT AND CASH MANAGEMENT
We begin our analysis of working capital management by looking at how firms manage 
cash. The basic objective in cash management is to keep the investment in cash as low as 
possible while still operating the firm’s activities efficiently and effectively. This goal 
17.1
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should  
be able to:
LO 1 	 Explain how firms manage their 
cash, and identify some of the 
collection, concentration, and 
disbursement techniques used.
LO 2 	 Analyze how firms manage  
their receivables and the basic 
components of a firm’s credit 
policies.
LO 3 	 Differentiate between the types  
of inventory and inventory 
management systems used by  
firms, and explain what determines 
the optimal inventory level.

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
551
usually reduces to the dictum “Collect early and pay late.” Accordingly, we discuss ways of 
accelerating collections and managing disbursements.
In addition, firms must invest temporarily idle cash in short-term marketable securi-
ties. As we discuss in various places, these securities can be bought and sold in the finan-
cial markets. As a group, they have very little default risk, and most are highly liquid. 
There are different types of these so-called money market securities, and we discuss a few 
of the most important ones a bit later.
Reasons for Holding Cash
John Maynard Keynes, in his great work The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and 
Money, identified three reasons why liquidity is important: the speculative motive, the 
precautionary motive, and the transaction motive. We discuss these next.
The Speculative and Precautionary Motives 
The speculative motive is the 
need to hold cash in order to be able to take advantage of, for example, bargain purchase 
opportunities that might arise, attractive interest rates, and (in the case of international 
firms) favorable exchange rate fluctuations.
For most firms, reserve borrowing ability and marketable securities can be used to 
satisfy speculative motives. Thus, for a modern firm, there might be a speculative motive 
for liquidity, but not necessarily for cash per se. Think of it this way: If you have a credit 
card with a very large credit limit, then you can probably take advantage of any unusual 
bargains that come along without carrying any cash.
This is also true, to a lesser extent, for precautionary motives. The precautionary motive 
is the need for a safety supply to act as a financial reserve. Once again, there probably is a 
precautionary motive for liquidity. However, given that the value of money market instru-
ments is relatively certain and that instruments such as T-bills are extremely liquid, there is 
no real need to hold substantial amounts of cash for precautionary purposes.
The Transaction Motive 
Cash is needed to satisfy the transaction motive, the need 
to have cash on hand to pay bills. Transaction-related needs come from the normal dis-
bursement and collection activities of the firm. The disbursement of cash includes the pay-
ment of wages and salaries, trade debts, taxes, and dividends.
Cash is collected from sales, the selling of assets, and new financing. The cash inflows 
(collections) and outflows (disbursements) are not perfectly synchronized, and some level 
of cash holdings is necessary to serve as a buffer. Perfect liquidity is the characteristic of 
cash that allows it to satisfy the transaction motive.
As electronic funds transfers and other high-speed, “paperless” payment mecha-
nisms continue to develop, even the transaction demand for cash may all but disappear. 
Even if it does, however, there will still be a demand for liquidity and a need to manage 
it efficiently.
Benefits of Holding Cash 
When a firm holds cash in excess of some necessary 
minimum, it incurs an opportunity cost. The opportunity cost of excess cash (held in cur-
rency or bank deposits) is the interest income that could be earned in the next best use, 
such as investing in marketable securities.
Given the opportunity cost of holding cash, why would a firm hold excess cash? The 
answer is that a cash balance must be maintained to provide the liquidity necessary for 
speculative motive
The need to hold cash to 
take advantage of 
additional investment 
opportunities, such as 
bargain purchases.
precautionary 
motive
The need to hold cash as 
a safety margin to act as a 
financial reserve.
transaction motive
The need to hold cash to 
satisfy normal 
disbursement and 
collection activities 
associated with a firm’s 
ongoing operations.

552	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
transaction needs—paying bills. If the firm maintains too small a cash balance, it may run 
out of cash. If this happens, the firm may have to raise cash on a short-term basis. This 
could involve, for example, selling marketable securities or borrowing.
Activities such as selling marketable securities and borrowing involve various costs. 
As we’ve discussed, holding cash has an opportunity cost. To determine the appropriate 
cash balance, the firm must weigh the benefits of holding cash against these costs. We 
discuss this subject in more detail in the sections that follow.
Understanding Float
As you no doubt know, the amount of money you have according to your checkbook can be 
very different from the amount of money that your bank thinks you have. The reason is that 
some of the checks you have written haven’t yet been presented to the bank for payment. 
The same thing is true for a business. The cash balance that a firm shows on its books is 
called the firm’s book, or ledger, balance. The balance shown in its bank account as avail-
able to spend is called its available, or collected, balance. The difference between the 
available balance and the ledger balance is called the float, and it represents the net effect 
of checks in the process of clearing (moving through the banking system).
Disbursement Float 
Checks written by a firm generate disbursement float, causing 
a decrease in the firm’s book balance but no change in its available balance. For example, 
suppose General Mechanics, Inc. (GMI), currently has $100,000 on deposit with its bank. 
On June 8, it buys some raw materials and pays with a check for $100,000. The company’s 
book balance is immediately reduced by $100,000 as a result.
GMI’s bank, however, will not find out about this check until it is presented to GMI’s 
bank for payment on, say, June 14. Until the check is presented, the firm’s available bal-
ance is greater than its book balance by $100,000. In other words, before June 8, GMI has 
a zero float:
Float = Firm’s available balance − Firm’s book balance 
	
= $100,000	
− 100,000
	
= $0
GMI’s position from June 8 to June 14 is:
Disbursement float = Firm’s available balance − Firm’s book balance 
	
= $100,000	
− 0 
	
= $100,000 
During this period of time while the check is clearing, GMI has a balance with the bank of 
$100,000. It can obtain the benefit of this cash while the check is clearing. For example, 
the available balance could be temporarily invested in marketable securities and thus earn 
some interest. We will return to this subject a little later.
Collection Float and Net Float 
Checks received by the firm create collection 
float. Collection float increases book balances but does not immediately change available 
balances. For example, suppose GMI receives a check from a customer for $100,000 on 
October 8. Assume, as before, that the company has $100,000 deposited at its bank and a 
zero float. It deposits the check and increases its book balance by $100,000, to $200,000. 
However, the additional cash is not available to GMI until its bank has presented the check 
to the customer’s bank and received $100,000. This will occur on, say, October 14. In the 
float
The difference between 
book cash and bank cash, 
representing the net effect 
of checks in the process of 
clearing.

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
553
meantime, the cash position at GMI will reflect a collection float of $100,000. We can 
summarize these events. Before October 8, GMI’s position is:
Float = Firm’s available balance − Firm’s book balance 
	
= $100,000	
− 100,000 
	
= $0 
GMI’s position from October 8 to October 14 is:
Collection float = Firm’s available balance − Firm’s book balance 
	
= $100,000 	
− 200,000 
	
= −$100,000 
In general, a firm’s payment (disbursement) activities generate disbursement float, and its 
collection activities generate collection float. The net effect—that is, the sum of the total 
collection and disbursement floats—is the net float. The net float at any point in time is 
simply the overall difference between the firm’s available balance and its book balance. If 
the net float is positive, then the firm’s disbursement float exceeds its collection float and 
its available balance exceeds its book balance. If the available balance is less than the book 
balance, then the firm has a negative net float.
A firm should be concerned with its net float and available balance more than its book 
balance. If a financial manager knows that a check written by the company will not clear 
for several days, that manager will be able to keep a lower cash balance at the bank than 
might be true otherwise. This can generate a great deal of money.
For example, take the case of petroleum giant ExxonMobil. The average daily sales for 
ExxonMobil were about $1.08 billion in 2014. If ExxonMobil’s collections could have 
been speeded up by a single day, then the company could have freed up $1.08 billion for 
investing. At a relatively modest .01 percent daily rate, the interest earned would have been 
on the order of $108,000 per day.
EXAMPLE
17.1  Staying Afloat
Suppose you have $5,000 on deposit. One day you write a check for $1,000 to pay for books, and 
you deposit $2,000. What are your disbursement, collection, and net floats?
	
After you write the $1,000 check, you show a balance of $4,000 on your books, but the bank 
shows $5,000 while the check is clearing. This means you have a disbursement float of $1,000.
	
After you deposit the $2,000 check, you show a balance of $6,000. Your available balance 
doesn’t rise until the check clears. This means you have a collection float of −$2,000. Your net float 
is the sum of the collection and disbursement floats, or −$1,000.
	
Overall, you show $6,000 on your books. The bank shows a $7,000 balance, but only 
$5,000 is available because your deposit has not cleared. The discrepancy between your avail-
able balance and your book balance is the net float (−$1,000), and it is bad for you. If you write 
another check for $5,500, there may not be sufficient available funds to cover it, and it might 
bounce. This is the reason the financial manager has to be more concerned with available bal-
ances than book balances.
Float Management 
Float management involves controlling the collection and dis-
bursement of cash. The objective in cash collection is to speed up collections and reduce 
the lag between the time customers pay their bills and the time the cash becomes available. 
The objective in cash disbursement is to control payments and minimize the firm’s costs 
associated with making payments.

554	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
Total collection or disbursement times can be broken down into three parts: mailing 
time, processing delay, and availability delay:
  1.	 Mailing time is the part of the collection and disbursement process during which 
checks are trapped in the postal system.
  2.	 Processing delay is the time it takes the receiver of a check to process the payment 
and deposit it in a bank for collection.
  3.	 Availability delay refers to the time required to clear a check through the banking system.
Speeding up collections involves reducing one or more of these components. Slowing up 
disbursements involves increasing one or more of them. We describe some procedures for 
managing collection and disbursement times below.
Ethical and Legal Questions 
The cash manager must work with collected bank 
cash balances and not the firm’s book balance (which reflects checks that have been depos-
ited but not collected). If this is not done, a cash manager could be drawing on uncollected 
cash as a source of funds for short-term investing. Most banks charge a penalty rate for the 
use of uncollected funds. However, banks may not have good enough accounting and con-
trol procedures to be fully aware of the use of uncollected funds. This raises some ethical 
and legal questions for the firm.
For example, in May 1985,  E. F. Hutton (a large investment bank), pleaded guilty to 
2,000 charges of mail and wire fraud in connection with a scheme the firm had operated 
from 1980 to 1982. E. F. Hutton employees wrote checks totaling hundreds of millions of 
dollars against uncollected cash. The proceeds were then invested in short-term money 
market assets. This type of systematic overdrafting of accounts (or check kiting, as it is 
sometimes called) is neither legal nor ethical and is apparently not a widespread practice 
among corporations. Also, the particular inefficiencies in the banking system that Hutton 
was exploiting have been largely eliminated.
For its part, E. F. Hutton paid a $2 million fine, reimbursed the government (the U.S. 
Department of Justice) $750,000, and reserved an additional $8 million for restitution to 
defrauded banks. We should note that the key issue in the case against Hutton was not its 
float management per se, but, rather, its practice of writing checks for no economic reason 
other than to exploit float. Unfortunately, check kiting is still not dead. In March 2015, a 
Topeka, Kansas, business owner pleaded guilty to a check kiting scheme that involved 
more than 5,000 insufficient fund checks, creating $78 million in fictitious deposits. He 
was sentenced to 37 months in prison and ordered to pay $538,000 in restitution.
Electronic Data Interchange and Check 21: The End of Float? 
Electronic 
data interchange (EDI) is a general term that refers to the growing practice of direct, elec-
tronic information exchange between all types of businesses. One important use of EDI, 
often called financial EDI, or FEDI, is to electronically transfer financial information and 
funds between parties, thereby eliminating paper invoices, paper checks, mailing, and han-
dling. For example, it is possible to arrange to have your checking account directly debited 
each month to pay many types of bills, and corporations now routinely directly deposit 
paychecks into employee accounts. More generally, EDI allows a seller to send a bill elec-
tronically to a buyer, thereby avoiding the mail. The buyer can then authorize payment, 
which also occurs electronically. Its bank then transfers the funds to the seller’s account at 
a different bank. The net effect is that the length of time required to initiate and complete a 
business transaction is shortened considerably, and much of what we normally think of as 
float is sharply reduced or eliminated. As the use of FEDI increases (which it will), float 
Visit www.carreker.com  
for examples of the 
extensive electronic 
resources available for 
managing float.

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
555
management will evolve to focus much more on issues surrounding computerized informa-
tion exchange and funds transfers.
On October 29, 2004, the Check Clearing Act for the 21st Century, also known as 
Check 21, took effect. Before Check 21, a bank receiving a check was required to send the 
physical check to the customer’s bank before payment could be made. Now a bank can 
transmit an electronic image of the check to the customer’s bank and receive payment im-
mediately. Previously, an out-of-state check might take three days to clear, but with Check 
21, the clearing time is typically one day, and often, a check can clear the same day it is 
written. Thus, Check 21 has significantly reduced float.
concept questions
17.1a	
What is the transaction motive for holding cash?
17.1b	
What is the cost to the firm of holding excess cash?
17.1c	
Which of these would a firm be more interested in reducing: collection float or 
disbursement float? Why?
17.1d	
What is the benefit from reducing or eliminating float?
CASH MANAGEMENT: COLLECTION, 
DISBURSEMENT, AND INVESTMENT
As a part of managing its cash, a firm must make arrangements to collect from its custom-
ers, pay its suppliers, and invest any excess cash on hand. We begin by examining how 
firms collect and concentrate cash.
Cash Collection and Concentration
From our previous discussion, we know that collection delays work against the firm. All 
other things being the same, then, a firm will adopt procedures to speed up collections and 
thereby decrease collection times. In addition, even after cash is collected, firms need pro-
cedures to funnel, or concentrate, that cash where it can be best used. We discuss some 
common collection and concentration procedures next.
Components of Collection Time 
Based on our discussion above, we can depict 
the basic parts of the cash collection process as follows: The total time in this process is 
made up of mailing time, check-processing delay, and the bank’s availability delay.
Customer
mails
payment
Company
receives
payment
Company
deposits
payment
Cash
becomes
available
Availability
delay
Processing
delay
Mailing
time
Collection time
Time
  17.2

556	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
The amount of time that cash spends in each part of the cash collection process de-
pends on where the firm’s customers and banks are located and how efficient the firm is at 
collecting cash.
Cash Collection 
How a firm collects from its customers depends in large part on the 
nature of the business. The simplest case would be a business such as a restaurant chain. 
Most of its customers will pay with cash, check, or credit card at the point of sale (this is 
called over-the-counter collection), so there is no problem with mailing delay. Normally, 
the funds would be deposited in a local bank, and the firm would have some means (dis-
cussed next) of gaining access to the funds.
When some or all of the payments a company receives are checks that arrive through 
the mail, all three components of collection time become relevant. The firm may choose to 
have all the checks mailed to one location, or, more commonly, the firm might have a num-
ber of different mail collection points to reduce mailing times. Also, the firm may run its 
collection operation itself or might hire an outside firm that specializes in cash collection. 
We discuss these issues in more detail later.
Other approaches to cash collection exist. One that is becoming more common is the 
preauthorized payment system. With this arrangement, the payment amounts and payment 
dates are fixed in advance. When the agreed-upon date arrives, the amount is automatically 
transferred from the customer’s bank account to the firm’s bank account, sharply reducing 
or even eliminating collection delays. The same approach is used by firms that have online 
terminals, meaning that when a sale is rung up, the money is immediately transferred to the 
firm’s accounts.
Lockboxes 
When a firm receives its payments by mail, it must decide where the 
checks will be mailed and how the checks will be picked up and deposited. Careful selec-
tion of the number and locations of collection points can greatly reduce collection times. 
Many firms use special post office boxes called lockboxes to intercept payments and speed 
cash collection.
Figure 17.1 illustrates a lockbox system. The collection process is started by custom-
ers mailing their checks to a post office box instead of sending them to the firm. The lock-
box is maintained by a local bank. A large corporation may actually have more than 
20 lockboxes around the country.
In the typical lockbox system, the local bank collects the lockbox checks from the post 
office several times a day. The bank deposits the checks directly to the firm’s account. 
Details of the operation are recorded (in some computer-usable form) and sent to the firm.
A lockbox system reduces mailing time because checks are received at a nearby post 
office instead of at corporate headquarters. Lockboxes also reduce the processing time 
because the corporation doesn’t have to open the envelopes and deposit checks for collec-
tion. In all, a bank lockbox should enable a firm to get its receipts processed, deposited, 
and cleared faster than if it were to receive checks at its headquarters and deliver them it-
self to the bank for deposit and clearing.
Cash Concentration 
As we discussed earlier, a firm will typically have a number of 
cash collection points, and, as a result, cash collections may end up in many different banks 
and bank accounts. From here, the firm needs procedures to move the cash into its main 
accounts. This is called cash concentration. By routinely pooling its cash, the firm greatly 
simplifies its cash management by reducing the number of accounts that must be tracked. 
Also, by having a larger pool of funds available, a firm may be able to negotiate a better 
rate on any short-term investments.
lockboxes
Special post office boxes 
set up to intercept and 
speed up accounts 
receivable collections.
cash concentration
The practice of and 
procedures for moving cash 
from multiple banks into the 
firm’s main accounts.

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
557
The flow starts when a customer mails remittances to a post office box instead of to the
corporation. Several times a day the bank collects the lockbox receipts from the post
office. The checks are then put into the company bank accounts.
Local bank
collects funds from
post office boxes
Envelopes opened;
separation of
checks and receipts
Bank check-
clearing process
Details of receivables
go to firm
Firm processes
receivables
Deposit of checks
into bank accounts
Customer
payments
Customer
payments
Customer
payments
Customer
payments
Post office
box 1
Post office
box 2
f i g u r e  17.1
Overview of lockbox 
processing
In setting up a concentration system, firms will typically use one or more concentra-
tion banks. A concentration bank pools the funds obtained from local banks contained 
within some geographic region. Concentration systems are often used in conjunction with 
lockbox systems. Figure 17.2 illustrates how an integrated cash collection and cash con-
centration system might look.
Cash concentration can result in significant savings. With more than 350 legal entities 
operating in 118 countries and 1,000 accounts at 100 different banks, it is safe to say that 
Microsoft’s cash was widely dispersed. Transferring money between banks cost about 
$200 per transaction to wire funds, an expensive proposition. In 2011, Microsoft helped 
develop a system that allowed for a daily sweep of its accounts by computer. As a result, 
wire transfer fees dropped by 41 percent, and the company recovered $105 million per day 
that had previously sat in the subaccounts. And within a year, the company expected the 
new system to free up $250 million per day.
Managing Cash Disbursements
From the firm’s point of view, disbursement float is desirable, so the goal in managing 
disbursement float is to slow down disbursements as much as possible. To do this, the firm 
may develop strategies to increase mail float, processing float, and availability float on the 
checks it writes. Beyond this, firms have developed procedures for minimizing cash held 
for payment purposes. We now discuss the most common of these procedures.

558	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
Increasing Disbursement Float 
As we have seen, float in terms of slowing down 
payments comes from the time involved in mail delivery, check processing, and collection of 
funds. Disbursement float can be increased by writing a check on a geographically distant 
bank. For example, a New York supplier might be paid with checks drawn on a Los Angeles 
bank. This will increase the time required for the checks to clear through the banking system. 
Mailing checks from remote post offices is another way firms slow down disbursement.
Tactics for maximizing disbursement float are debatable on both ethical and economic 
grounds. First, as we discuss later, payment terms very frequently offer a substantial discount 
for early payment. The discount is usually much larger than any possible savings from “play-
ing the float game.” In such cases, increasing mailing time will be of no benefit if the recipient 
dates payments based on the date received (as is common) as opposed to the postmark date.
Beyond this, suppliers are not likely to be fooled by attempts to slow down disburse-
ment. The negative consequences from poor relations with suppliers can be costly. In 
broader terms, intentionally delaying payments by taking advantage of mailing times or 
unsophisticated suppliers may amount to avoiding paying bills when they are due, an un-
ethical business procedure.
Controlling Disbursements 
We have seen that maximizing disbursement float 
is probably poor business practice. However, a firm will still wish to tie up as little cash 
as possible in disbursements. Firms have therefore developed systems for efficiently 
Statements are sent by mail to
firm for receivables processing
Funds are transferred
to concentration bank
Cash manager analyzes bank balance and deposit
information and makes cash allocation revision
Firm sales
office
Local bank
deposits
Post office
lockbox receipts
Customer
payments
Customer
payments
Customer
payments
Customer
payments
Concentration
bank
Firm cash
manager
Short-term
investment of cash
Maintenance of
cash reserves
Disbursements
activity
f i g u r e  17.2
Lockboxes and 
concentration  
banks in a cash 
management system

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
559
managing the disbursement process. The general idea in such systems is to have no 
more than the minimum amount necessary to pay bills on deposit in the bank. We dis-
cuss some approaches to accomplishing this goal next.
Zero-balance accounts  With a zero-balance account, the firm, in cooperation with its 
bank, maintains a master account and a set of subaccounts. When a check written on one of 
the subaccounts must be paid, the necessary funds are transferred in from the master ac-
count. Figure 17.3 illustrates how such a system might work. In this case, the firm main-
tains two disbursement accounts, one for suppliers and one for payroll. As is shown, if the 
firm does not use zero-balance accounts, then each of these accounts must have a safety 
stock of cash to meet unanticipated demands. If the firm does use zero-balance accounts, 
then it can keep one safety stock in a master account and transfer the funds to the two sub-
sidiary accounts as needed. The key is that the total amount of cash held as a buffer is 
smaller under the zero-balance arrangement, which frees up cash to be used elsewhere.
Controlled disbursement accounts  Almost all payments that must be made in a given 
day are known in the morning. With a controlled disbursement account, the bank informs 
the firm of the day’s total, and the firm transfers (usually by wire) the amount needed.
Investing Idle Cash
If a firm has a temporary cash surplus, it can invest in short-term securities. As we have men-
tioned at various times, the market for short-term financial assets is called the money market. 
The maturity of short-term financial assets that trade in the money market is one year or less.
Most large firms manage their own short-term financial assets, transacting through 
banks and dealers. Some large firms and many small firms use money market mutual 
funds. These are funds that invest in short-term financial assets for a management fee. 
The management fee is compensation for the professional expertise and diversification 
provided by the fund manager.
Among the many money market mutual funds, some specialize in corporate custom-
ers. In addition, banks offer arrangements in which the bank takes all excess available 
funds at the close of each business day and invests them for the firm.
zero-balance account
A disbursement account in 
which the firm maintains a 
zero balance, transferring 
funds in from a master 
account only as needed to 
cover checks presented 
for payment.
controlled 
disbursement 
account
A disbursement practice 
under which the firm 
transfers an amount to a 
disbursing account that is 
sufficient to cover 
demands for payment.
f i g u r e  17.3
Zero-balance accounts
Safety stock
Cash
transfers
Cash
transfers
Master account
Payroll account
Supplier account
Two zero-balance accounts
Safety stocks
Payroll account
Supplier account
No zero-balance account
Without zero-balance accounts, separate safety stocks must
be maintained, which ties up cash unnecessarily. With
zero-balance accounts, the firm keeps a single safety stock
of cash in a master account. Funds are transferred into
disbursement accounts as needed.

560	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
Temporary Cash Surpluses 
Firms have temporary cash surpluses for various rea-
sons. Two of the most important are the financing of seasonal or cyclical activities of the 
firm and the financing of planned or possible expenditures.
Seasonal or cyclical activities  Some firms have a predictable cash flow pattern. They 
have surplus cash flows during part of the year and deficit cash flows the rest of the year. 
For example, Toys “Я” Us, a retail toy firm, has a seasonal cash flow pattern influenced by 
Christmas.
A firm such as Toys “Я” Us may buy marketable securities when surplus cash flows 
occur and sell marketable securities when deficits occur. Of course, bank loans are another 
short-term financing device. The use of bank loans and marketable securities to meet tem-
porary financing needs is illustrated in Figure 17.4. In this case, the firm is following a 
compromise working capital policy in the sense we discussed in the previous chapter.
Planned or possible expenditures  Firms frequently accumulate temporary investments in 
marketable securities to provide the cash for a plant construction program, dividend pay-
ment, or other large expenditure. Thus, firms may issue bonds and stocks before the cash is 
needed, investing the proceeds in short-term marketable securities and then selling the se-
curities to finance the expenditures. Also, firms may face the possibility of having to make 
a large cash outlay. An obvious example would be the possibility of losing a large lawsuit. 
Firms may build up cash surpluses against such a contingency.
Characteristics of Short-Term Securities 
Given that a firm has some temporar-
ily idle cash, there are a variety of short-term securities available for investing. The most 
important characteristics of these short-term marketable securities are their maturity, de-
fault risk, marketability, and taxability.
Maturity  Maturity refers to the time period over which interest and principal payments 
are made. From Chapter 6, we know that for a given change in the level of interest rates, 
the prices of longer-maturity securities will change more than those of shorter-maturity 
Marketable
securities
Bank
loans
Total financing
needs
Short-term
financing
Long-term
financing
0
1
2
3
Time 1: A surplus cash position exists. Seasonal demand for current assets is low. The
surplus is invested in short-term marketable securities.
Time 2: A deficit cash position exists. Seasonal demand for current assets is high. The
financial deficit is financed by selling marketable securities and by bank
borrowing.
Dollars
Time (quarters)
f i g u r e  17.4
Seasonal cash 
demands

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
561
securities. As a consequence, firms often limit their investments in marketable securities to 
those maturing in less than 90 days to avoid the risk of losses in value from changing inter-
est rates.
Default risk  Default risk refers to the probability that interest and principal will not be 
paid in the promised amounts on the due dates (or not paid at all). Of course, some securi-
ties have negligible default risk, such as U.S. Treasury bills. Given the purposes of invest-
ing idle corporate cash, firms typically avoid investing in marketable securities with 
significant default risk.
Marketability  Marketability refers to how easy it is to convert an asset to cash; so, mar-
ketability and liquidity mean much the same thing. Some money market instruments are 
much more marketable than others. At the top of the list are U.S. Treasury bills, which can 
be bought and sold very cheaply and very quickly.
Taxability  Interest earned on money market securities that are not some kind of govern-
ment obligation (either federal or state) is taxable at the local, state, and federal levels. U.S. 
Treasury obligations such as T-bills are exempt from state taxation, but other government-
backed debt is not. Municipal securities are exempt from federal taxes, but they may be 
taxed at the state level.
Some Different Types of Money Market Securities 
Money market securities 
are generally highly marketable and short term. They usually have low risk of default. They 
are issued by the U.S. government (e.g., U.S. Treasury bills), domestic and foreign banks 
(e.g., certificates of deposit), and business corporations (e.g., commercial paper). There are 
many types in all, and we only illustrate a few of the most common here.
U.S. Treasury bills are obligations of the U.S. government that mature in 90, 180, or 
360 days. The 90-day and 180-day bills are sold by auction every week, and 360-day bills 
are sold quarterly.
Short-term tax-exempts are short-term securities issued by states, municipalities, and 
certain other agencies. Because these are all considered municipal securities, they are ex-
empt from federal taxes. Short-term tax-exempts have more default risk than U.S. Treasury 
issues and are less marketable. Because the interest is exempt from federal income tax, the 
pretax yield on tax-exempts is lower than that on comparable securities such as U.S. Trea-
sury bills. Also, corporations face some restrictions on holding tax-exempts as 
investments.
Commercial paper refers to short-term securities issued by finance companies, banks, 
and corporations. Typically, commercial paper is unsecured. Maturities range from a few 
weeks to 270 days.
There is no especially active secondary market in commercial paper. As a conse-
quence, the marketability can be low; however, firms that issue commercial paper will of-
ten repurchase it directly before maturity. The default risk of commercial paper depends on 
the financial strength of the issuer.
Certificates of deposit (CDs) are short-term loans to commercial banks. These are 
normally jumbo CDs—those in excess of $100,000. There are active markets in CDs of 
3-month, 6-month, 9-month, and 12-month maturities.
Because 70 to 80 percent of the dividends received by one corporation from another 
are exempt from taxation, the relatively high dividend yields on preferred stock provide a 
strong incentive for investment. The only problem is that the dividend is fixed with ordi-
nary preferred stock, so the price can fluctuate more than is desirable in a short-term 
Check out short-term 
rates online at  
www.bloomberg.com.

562	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
investment. So-called money market preferred stock is a recent innovation featuring a 
floating dividend. The dividend is reset fairly often (usually every 49 days), so this type of 
preferred has much less price volatility than ordinary preferred, and it has become a popu-
lar short-term investment.
CREDIT AND RECEIVABLES
When a firm sells goods and services, it can demand cash on or before the delivery date, or 
it can extend credit to customers and allow some delay in payment.
Why would firms grant credit? The obvious reason is that offering credit is a way of 
stimulating sales. The costs associated with granting credit are not trivial. First, there is the 
chance that the customer will not pay. Second, the firm has to bear the costs of carrying the 
receivables. The credit policy decision thus involves a trade-off between the benefits of 
increased sales and the costs of granting credit.
From an accounting perspective, when credit is granted, an account receivable is cre-
ated. These receivables include credit to other firms, called trade credit, and credit granted 
to consumers, called consumer credit, and they represent a major investment of financial 
resources by U.S. businesses. Furthermore, trade credit is a very important source of fi-
nancing for corporations. However we look at it, receivables and receivables management 
are very important aspects of a firm’s short-term financial policy.
Components of Credit Policy
If a firm decides to grant credit to its customers, then it must establish procedures for ex-
tending credit and collecting. In particular, the firm will have to deal with the following 
components of credit policy:
  1.	 Terms of sale. The terms of sale establish how the firm proposes to sell its goods and 
services. If the firm grants credit to a customer, the terms of sale will specify 
(perhaps implicitly) the credit period, the cash discount and discount period, and the 
type of credit instrument.
  2.	 Credit analysis. In granting credit, a firm determines how much effort to expend 
trying to distinguish between customers who will pay and customers who will not 
pay. Firms use a number of devices and procedures to determine the probability that 
customers will not pay, and, put together, these are called credit analysis.
  3.	 Collection policy. After credit has been granted, the firm has the potential problem  
of collecting the cash when it becomes due, for which it must establish a collection 
policy.
In the next several sections, we will discuss these components of credit policy that col-
lectively make up the decision to grant credit.
17.3
terms of sale
Conditions under which a 
firm sells its goods and 
services for cash or credit.
credit analysis
The process of 
determining the 
probability that customers 
will or will not pay.
collection policy
Procedures followed by a 
firm in collecting accounts 
receivable.
concept questions
17.2a	 What is a lockbox? What purpose does it serve?
17.2b	 What is a concentration bank? What purpose does it serve?
17.2c	 Is maximizing disbursement float a sound business practice?
17.2d	 What are some types of money market securities?

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
563
Terms of Sale
As we described earlier, the terms of a sale are made up of three distinct elements:
  1.	 The period for which credit is granted (the credit period).
  2.	 The cash discount and the discount period.
  3.	 The type of credit instrument.
Within a given industry, the terms of sale are usually fairly standard, but these terms vary 
quite a bit across industries. In many cases, the terms of sale are remarkably archaic and 
literally date to previous centuries. Organized systems of trade credit that resemble current 
practice can be easily traced to the great fairs of medieval Europe, and they almost surely 
existed long before then.
The Basic Form 
The easiest way to understand the terms of sale is to consider an 
example. For bulk candy, terms of 2/10, net 60 might be quoted.1 This means that custom-
ers have 60 days from the invoice date (discussed next) to pay the full amount. However, if 
payment is made within 10 days, a 2 percent cash discount can be taken.
Consider a buyer who places an order for $1,000, and assume that the terms of the sale 
are 2/10, net 60. The buyer has the option of paying $1,000 × (1 − .02) = $980 in 10 days, 
or paying the full $1,000 in 60 days. If the terms were stated as just net 30, then the cus-
tomer would have 30 days from the invoice date to pay the entire $1,000, and no discount 
would be offered for early payment.
In general, credit terms are interpreted in the following way:
(take this discount off the invoice price)/(if you pay in this many days),
(else pay the full invoice amount in this many days)
Thus, 5/10, net 45 means take a 5 percent discount from the full price if you pay within 
10 days, or else pay the full amount in 45 days.
The Credit Period 
The credit period is the basic length of time for which credit is 
granted. The credit period varies widely from industry to industry, but it is almost always 
between 30 and 120 days. If a cash discount is offered, then the credit period has two com-
ponents: the net credit period and the cash discount period.
The net credit period is the length of time the customer has to pay. The cash discount 
period, as the name suggests, is the time during which the discount is available. With 
2/10, net 30, for example, the net credit period is 30 days and the cash discount period is 
10 days.
The invoice date  The invoice date is the beginning of the credit period. An invoice is a 
written account of merchandise shipped to the buyer. For individual items, by convention, 
the invoice date is usually the shipping date or the billing date, not the date that the buyer 
receives the goods or the bill.
Length of the credit period  A number of factors influence the length of the credit pe-
riod. Two of the most important are the buyer’s inventory period and operating cycle. 
All other things being equal, the shorter these are, the shorter the credit period will 
normally be.
credit period
The length of time for 
which credit is granted.
invoice
Bill for goods or services 
provided by the seller to 
the purchaser.
1 The terms of sale cited from specific industries in this section and elsewhere are drawn from Theodore N. 
Beckman, Credits and Collections: Management and Theory (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1962).

564	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
Based on our discussion in Chapter 16, the operating cycle has two components: 
the inventory period and the receivables period. The inventory period is the time it 
takes the buyer to acquire inventory (from us), process it, and sell it. The receivables 
period is the time it then takes the buyer to collect on the sale. Note that the credit 
period that we offer is effectively the buyer’s payables period.
By extending credit, we finance a portion of our buyer’s operating cycle and thereby 
shorten the buyer’s cash cycle. If our credit period exceeds the buyer’s inventory period, 
then we are financing not only the buyer’s inventory purchases, but part of the buyer’s re-
ceivables as well.
Furthermore, if our credit period exceeds our buyer’s operating cycle, then we are ef-
fectively providing financing for aspects of our customer’s business beyond the immediate 
purchase and sale of our merchandise. The reason is that the buyer effectively has a loan 
from us even after the merchandise is resold, and the buyer can use that credit for other 
purposes. For this reason, the length of the buyer’s operating cycle is often cited as an ap-
propriate upper limit to the credit period.
There are a number of other factors that influence the credit period. Many of these 
also influence our customers’ operating cycles; so, once again, these are related subjects. 
Among the most important are:
  1.	 Perishability and collateral value. Perishable items have relatively rapid turnover and 
relatively low collateral value. Credit periods are thus shorter for such goods.
  2.	 Consumer demand. Products that are well established generally have more rapid 
turnover. Newer or slow-moving products will often have longer credit periods 
associated with them to entice buyers.
  3.	 Cost, profitability, and standardization. Relatively inexpensive goods tend to have 
shorter credit periods. The same is true for relatively standardized goods and raw 
materials. These all tend to have lower markups and higher turnover rates, both of 
which lead to shorter credit periods.
  4.	 Credit risk. The greater the credit risk of the buyer, the shorter the credit period is 
likely to be (assuming that credit is granted at all).
  5.	 The size of the account. If the account is small, the credit period may be shorter, 
because small accounts are more costly to manage, and the customers are less 
important.
  6.	 Competition. When the seller is in a highly competitive market, longer credit periods 
may be offered as a way of attracting customers.
  7.	 Customer type. A single seller might offer different credit terms to different buyers. 
A food wholesaler, for example, might supply groceries, bakeries, and restaurants. 
Each group would probably have different credit terms. More generally, sellers often 
have both wholesale and retail customers, and they frequently quote different terms 
to the two types.
Cash Discounts 
As we have seen, cash discounts are often part of the terms of sale. 
The practice of granting discounts for cash purchases in the United States dates to the Civil 
War and is widespread today. One reason discounts are offered is to speed up the collection 
of receivables. This will have the effect of reducing the amount of credit being offered, and 
the firm must trade this off against the cost of the discount.
Notice that when a cash discount is offered, the credit is essentially free during the 
discount period. The buyer only pays for the credit after the discount expires. With 2/10, 
net 30, a rational buyer either pays in 10 days to make the greatest possible use of the free 
For more on the credit 
process for small 
businesses, see  
www.newyorkfed.org 
/smallbusiness/index.html.
cash discount
A discount given to induce 
prompt payment. Also 
sales discount.

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
565
credit or pays in 30 days to get the longest possible use of the money in exchange for giving 
up the discount. So, by giving up the discount, the buyer effectively gets 30 − 10 = 20 
days’ credit.
Another reason for cash discounts is that they are a way of charging higher prices to 
customers that have had credit extended to them. In this sense, cash discounts are a conve-
nient way of charging for the credit granted to customers.
In our examples, it might seem that the discounts are rather small. With 2/10, net 30, 
for example, early payment only gets the buyer a 2 percent discount. Does this provide a 
significant incentive for early payment? The answer is yes because the implicit interest rate 
is extremely high.
To see why the discount is important, we will calculate the cost to the buyer of not 
paying early. To do this, we will find the interest rate that the buyer is effectively paying for 
the trade credit. Suppose the order is for $1,000. The buyer can pay $980 in 10 days or wait 
another 20 days and pay $1,000. It’s obvious that the buyer is effectively borrowing $980 
for 20 days and that the buyer pays $20 in interest on the “loan.” What’s the interest rate?
With $20 in interest on $980 borrowed, the rate is $20/980 = 2.0408%. This is relatively 
low, but remember that this is the rate per 20-day period. There are 365/20 = 18.25 such pe-
riods in a year, so, by not taking the discount, the buyer is paying an effective annual rate of:
EAR = 1.02040818.25 − 1 = 44.6%
From the buyer’s point of view, this is an expensive source of financing!
Given that the interest rate is so high here, it is unlikely that the seller benefits from 
early payment. Ignoring the possibility of default by the buyer, the decision by a customer 
to forgo the discount almost surely works to the seller’s advantage.
Visit the National 
Association of Credit 
Management at  
www.nacm.org.
EXAMPLE
17.2  What’s the Rate?
Ordinary tiles are often sold with terms of 3/30, net 60. What effective annual rate does a buyer pay 
by not taking the discount? What would the APR be if one were quoted?
	
Here we have 3 percent discount interest on 60 − 30 = 30 days’ credit. The rate per 30 days 
is .03/.97 = 3.093%. There are 365/30 = 12.17 such periods in a year, so the effective annual rate is:
EAR = 1.0309312.17 − 1 = 44.9%
The APR, as always, would be calculated by multiplying the rate per period by the number of periods:
APR = .03093 × 12.17 = 37.6%
An interest rate calculated like this APR is often quoted as the cost of the trade credit, and, as this 
example illustrates, this can seriously understate the true cost.
Credit Instruments 
The credit instrument is the basic evidence of indebtedness. 
Most trade credit is offered on open account. This means that the only formal instrument 
of credit is the invoice, which is sent with the shipment of goods and which the customer 
signs as evidence that the goods have been received. Afterwards, the firm and its customers 
record the exchange on their books of account.
At times, the firm may require that the customer sign a promissory note. This is a ba-
sic IOU and might be used when the order is large or when the firm anticipates a problem 
in collections. Promissory notes are not common, but they can eliminate possible contro-
versies later about the existence of debt.
One problem with promissory notes is that they are signed after delivery of the goods. 
One way to obtain a credit commitment from a customer before the goods are delivered is 
credit instrument
The evidence of 
indebtedness.

566	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
to arrange a commercial draft. Typically, the firm draws up a commercial draft calling for 
the customer to pay a specific amount by a specified date. The draft is then sent to the cus-
tomer’s bank with the shipping invoices.
If immediate payment on the draft is required, it is called a sight draft. If immediate 
payment is not required, then the draft is a time draft. When the draft is presented and the 
buyer “accepts” it, meaning that the buyer promises to pay it in the future, then it is called 
a trade acceptance and is sent back to the selling firm. The seller can then keep the accep-
tance or sell it to someone else. If a bank accepts the draft, meaning that the bank is guar-
anteeing payment, then the draft becomes a banker’s acceptance. This arrangement is 
common in international trade.
Optimal Credit Policy
In principle, the optimal amount of credit is determined by the point at which the incre-
mental cash flows from increased sales are exactly equal to the incremental costs of carry-
ing the increased investment in accounts receivable.
The Total Credit Cost Curve 
The trade-off between granting credit and not grant-
ing credit isn’t hard to identify, but it is difficult to quantify precisely. As a result, we can 
only describe an optimal credit policy.
To begin, the carrying costs associated with granting credit come in three forms:
  1.	 The required return on receivables.
  2.	 The losses from bad debts.
  3.	 The cost of managing credit and credit collections.
We have already discussed the first and second of these. The third cost, the cost of manag-
ing credit, is the expense associated with running the credit department. Firms that don’t 
grant credit have no such department and no such expense. These three costs will all in-
crease as credit policy is relaxed.
If a firm has a very restrictive credit policy, then all of the above costs will be low. In 
this case, the firm will have a “shortage” of credit, so there will be an opportunity cost. 
This opportunity cost is the extra potential profit from credit sales that is lost because 
credit is refused. This forgone benefit comes from two sources: the increase in quantity 
sold and, potentially, a higher price. These costs go down as credit policy is relaxed.
The sum of the carrying costs and the opportunity costs of a particular credit policy is 
called the total credit cost curve. We have drawn such a curve in Figure 17.5. As Figure 17.5 
illustrates, there is a point, C*, where the total credit cost is minimized. This point corresponds 
to the optimal amount of credit, or, equivalently, the optimal investment in receivables.
If the firm extends more credit than this amount, the additional net cash flow from new 
customers will not cover the carrying costs of the investment in receivables. If the level of 
receivables is below this amount, then the firm is forgoing valuable profit opportunities.
In general, the costs and benefits from extending credit will depend on characteristics 
of particular firms and industries. All other things being equal, for example, it is likely that 
firms with (1) excess capacity, (2) low variable operating costs, and (3) repeat customers 
will extend credit more liberally than other firms. See if you can explain why each of these 
contributes to a more liberal credit policy.
Organizing the Credit Function 
Firms that grant credit have the expense of run-
ning a credit department. In practice, firms often choose to contract out all or part of the 
credit function to a factor, an insurance company, or a captive finance company. Chapter 16 
credit cost curve
Graphical representation 
of the sum of the carrying 
costs and the opportunity 
costs of a credit policy.

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
567
discussed factoring, an arrangement in which the firm sells its receivables. Depending on 
the specific arrangement, the factor may have full responsibility for credit checking, autho-
rization, and collection. Smaller firms may find such an arrangement cheaper than running 
a credit department.
Firms that manage internal credit operations are self-insured against default, meaning 
that they bear all the risk of nonpayment. An alternative is to buy credit insurance through 
an insurance company. The insurance company offers coverage up to a preset dollar limit 
for accounts. As you would expect, accounts with a higher credit rating merit higher insur-
ance limits. This type of insurance is particularly important for exporters, and government 
insurance is available for certain types of exports.
Large firms often extend credit through a captive finance company, which is simply a 
partially or wholly owned subsidiary that handles the credit function for the parent com-
pany. Toyota Financial Services, or TFS, is a well-known example. Toyota sells to car 
dealers who in turn sell to customers. TFS finances the dealer’s inventory of cars and also 
finances customers who buy the cars.
Credit Analysis
Thus far, we have focused on establishing credit terms. Once a firm decides to grant credit 
to its customers, it must then establish guidelines for determining who will and who will 
not be allowed to buy on credit. Credit analysis refers to the process of deciding whether or 
not to extend credit to a particular customer. It usually involves two steps: gathering rele-
vant information and determining creditworthiness.
Credit Information 
If a firm does want credit information on customers, there are a 
number of sources. Information sources commonly used to assess creditworthiness include 
the following:
  1.	 Financial statements. A firm can ask a customer to supply financial statements such 
as balance sheets and income statements. Minimum standards and rules of thumb 
captive finance 
company
A partially or wholly 
owned subsidiary that 
handles the credit function 
for the parent company.
Optimal
amount
of credit
Total costs
Carrying costs
Opportunity costs
Cost
($)
Amount of credit
extended ($)
C*
Carrying costs are the cash flows that must be incurred when credit is granted.
They are positively related to the amount of credit extended.
Opportunity costs are the lost sales from refusing credit.These costs go down
when credit is granted.
f i g u r e  17.5
The costs of granting 
credit

568	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
based on financial ratios like the ones we discussed in Chapter 3 can then be used as 
a basis for extending or refusing credit.
  2.	 Credit reports on the customer’s payment history with other firms. Quite a few 
organizations sell information on the credit strength and credit history of business 
firms. The best-known and largest firm of this type is Dun & Bradstreet, which 
provides subscribers with a credit reference book and credit reports on individual 
firms. Experian is another well-known credit-reporting firm. Ratings and information 
are available for a huge number of firms, including very small ones. Equifax, 
TransUnion, and Experian are the major suppliers of consumer credit information.
  3.	 Banks. Banks will generally provide some assistance to their business customers in 
acquiring information on the creditworthiness of other firms.
  4.	 The customer’s payment history with the firm. The most obvious way to obtain 
information about the likelihood of a customer’s not paying is to examine whether 
they have settled past obligations and how quickly they have met these obligations.
Credit Evaluation and Scoring 
There are no magical formulas for assessing the 
probability that a customer will not pay. In very general terms, the classic five Cs of credit 
are the basic factors to be evaluated:
  1.	 Character. The customer’s willingness to meet credit obligations.
  2.	 Capacity. The customer’s ability to meet credit obligations out of operating cash flows.
  3.	 Capital. The customer’s financial reserves.
  4.	 Collateral. Assets pledged by the customer for security in case of default.
  5.	 Conditions. General economic conditions in the customer’s line of business.
Credit scoring refers to the process of calculating a numerical rating for a customer based 
on information collected; credit is then granted or refused based on the result. For example, 
a firm might rate a customer on a scale of 1 (very poor) to 10 (very good) on each of the 
five Cs of credit using all the information available about the customer. A credit score 
could then be calculated based on the total. From experience, a firm might choose to grant 
credit only to customers with a score above, say, 30.
Firms such as credit card issuers have developed elaborate statistical models for credit 
scoring. Usually, all of the legally relevant and observable characteristics of a large pool of 
customers are studied to find their historic relation to default rates. Based on the results, it 
is possible to determine the variables that best predict whether or not a customer will pay 
and then calculate a credit score based on those variables.
Because credit-scoring models and procedures determine who is and who is not credit 
worthy, it is not surprising that they have been the subject of government regulation. In 
particular, the kinds of background and demographic information that can be used in the 
credit decision are limited.
Collection Policy
Collection policy is the final element in credit policy. Collection policy involves monitor-
ing receivables to spot trouble and obtaining payment on past-due accounts.
Monitoring Receivables 
To keep track of payments by customers, most firms will 
monitor outstanding accounts. First, a firm will normally keep track of its average collec-
tion period, ACP, through time. If a firm is in a seasonal business, the ACP will fluctuate 
during the year, but unexpected increases in the ACP are a cause for concern. Either 
five Cs of credit
The five basic credit 
factors to be evaluated: 
character, capacity, 
capital, collateral, and 
conditions.
credit scoring
The process of quantifying 
the probability of default 
when granting consumer 
credit.
Web-surfing students 
should visit the Dun & 
Bradstreet home page—
this major supplier of 
credit information can be 
found at www.dnb.com.

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
569
customers in general are taking longer to pay, or some percentage of accounts receivable is 
seriously overdue.
The aging schedule is a second basic tool for monitoring receivables. To prepare one, 
the credit department classifies accounts by age.2 Suppose a firm has $100,000 in receiv-
ables. Some of these accounts are only a few days old, but others have been outstanding for 
quite some time. The following is an example of an aging schedule.
Aging Schedule
Age of Account
Amount
Percentage of Total Value  
of Accounts Receivable
0–10 days
$ 50,000
50%
11–60 days
25,000
25
61–80 days
20,000
20
Over 80 days
       5,000
    5 
$100,000
100%
If this firm has a credit period of 60 days, then 25 percent of its accounts are late. Whether 
or not this is serious depends on the nature of the firm’s collections and customers. It is 
often the case that accounts beyond a certain age are almost never collected. Monitoring 
the age of accounts is very important in such cases.
Firms with seasonal sales will find the percentages on the aging schedule changing 
during the year. For example, if sales in the current month are very high, then total receiv-
ables will also increase sharply. This means that the older accounts, as a percentage of total 
receivables, become smaller and might appear less important. Some firms have refined the 
aging schedule so that they have an idea of how it should change with peaks and valleys in 
their sales.
Collection Effort 
A firm usually goes through the following sequence of procedures 
for customers whose payments are overdue:
  1.	 It sends out a delinquency letter informing the customer of the past-due status of the 
account.
  2.	 It makes a telephone call to the customer.
  3.	 It employs a collection agency.
  4.	 It takes legal action against the customer.
At times, a firm may refuse to grant additional credit to customers until arrearages are 
cleared up. This may antagonize a normally good customer, and it points to a potential 
conflict of interest between the collections department and the sales department.
aging schedule
A compilation of accounts 
receivable by the age of 
each account.
2 Aging schedules are used elsewhere in business. For example, aging schedules are often prepared for  
inventory items.
concept questions
17.3a	 What are the basic components of credit policy?
17.3b	 Explain what terms of “3/45, net 90” mean. What is the effective interest rate?
17.3c	
What are the five Cs of credit?

570	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Like receivables, inventories represent a significant investment for many firms. For a typical 
manufacturing operation, inventories will often exceed 15 percent of assets. For a retailer, 
inventories could represent more than 25 percent of assets. From our discussion in Chapter 16, 
we know that a firm’s operating cycle is made up of its inventory period and its receivables 
period. This is one reason for considering credit and inventory policy in the same chapter. 
Beyond this, both credit policy and inventory policy are used to drive sales, and the two 
must be coordinated to ensure that the process of acquiring inventory, selling it, and collect-
ing on the sale proceeds smoothly. For example, changes in credit policy designed to stimu-
late sales must be simultaneously accompanied by planning for adequate inventory.
The Financial Manager and Inventory Policy
Despite the size of a typical firm’s investment in inventories, the financial manager of a 
firm will not normally have primary control over inventory management. Instead, other 
functional areas such as purchasing, production, and marketing will usually share decision-
making authority. Inventory management has become an increasingly important specialty 
in its own right, and financial management will often only have input into the decision. 
However, inventory policy can have dramatic financial effects. We therefore survey some 
basics of inventory and inventory policy in the sections ahead.
Inventory Types
For a manufacturer, inventory is normally classified into one of three categories. The first 
category is raw material. This is whatever the firm uses as a starting point in its production 
process. Raw materials might be something as basic as iron ore for a steel manufacturer or 
something as sophisticated as disk drives for a computer manufacturer.
The second type of inventory is work-in-progress, which is just what the name suggests—
unfinished product. How big this portion of inventory is depends in large part on the length 
of the production process. For an airframe manufacturer, for example, work-in-progress 
can be substantial. The third and final type of inventory is finished goods, that is, products 
ready to ship or sell.
There are three things to keep in mind concerning inventory types. First, the names for 
the different types can be a little misleading because one company’s raw materials could be 
another’s finished goods. For example, going back to our steel manufacturer, iron ore 
would be a raw material, and steel would be the final product. An auto body panel stamp-
ing operation will have steel as its raw material and auto body panels as its finished goods, 
and an automobile assembler will have body panels as raw materials and automobiles as 
finished products.
The second thing to keep in mind is that the various types of inventory can be quite 
different in terms of their liquidity. Raw materials that are commodity-like or relatively 
standardized can be easy to convert to cash. Work-in-progress, on the other hand, can be 
quite illiquid and have little more than scrap value. As always, the liquidity of finished 
goods depends on the nature of the product.
Finally, a very important distinction between finished goods and other types of in-
ventories is that the demand for an inventory item that becomes a part of another item is 
usually termed derived, or dependent, demand because the firm’s need for these inven-
tory types depends on its need for finished items. In contrast, the firm’s demand for fin-
ished goods is not derived from demand for other inventory items, so it is sometimes said 
to be independent.
17.4
Visit the Society for 
Inventory Management 
Benchmarking Analysis at 
www.simba.org.

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
571
Inventory Costs
As we discussed in Chapter 16, there are two basic types of costs associated with current 
assets in general and with inventory in particular. The first of these are carrying costs. 
Here, carrying costs represent all of the direct and opportunity costs of keeping inventory 
on hand. These include:
  1.	 Storage and tracking costs.
  2.	 Insurance and taxes.
  3.	 Losses due to obsolescence, deterioration, or theft.
  4.	 The opportunity cost of capital for the invested amount.
The sum of these costs can be substantial, roughly ranging from 20 to 40 percent of inven-
tory value per year.
The other types of costs associated with inventory are shortage costs. These are costs 
associated with having inadequate inventory on hand. The two components of shortage costs 
are restocking costs and costs related to safety reserves. Depending on the firm’s business, 
order, or restocking, costs are either the costs of placing an order with suppliers or the cost of 
setting up a production run. The costs related to safety reserves are opportunity losses such as 
lost sales and loss of customer goodwill that result from having inadequate inventory.
A basic trade-off in inventory management exists because carrying costs increase with 
inventory levels while shortage, or restocking, costs decline with inventory levels. The 
basic goal of inventory management is thus to minimize the sum of these two costs. We 
consider ways to reach this goal in the next section.
concept questions
17.4a	 What are the different types of inventory?
17.4b	 What are three things to remember when examining inventory types?
17.4c	
What is the basic goal of inventory management?
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES
As we described earlier, the goal of inventory management is usually framed as cost mini-
mization. Three techniques are discussed in this section, ranging from the relatively simple 
to the very complex.
The ABC Approach
The ABC approach is a simple approach to inventory management where the basic idea is to 
divide inventory into three (or more) groups. The underlying rationale is that a small portion of 
inventory in terms of quantity might represent a large portion in terms of inventory value. For 
example, this situation would exist for a manufacturer that uses some relatively expensive, high-
tech components and some relatively inexpensive basic materials in producing its products.3
Figure 17.6 illustrates an ABC comparison of items in terms of the percentage of in-
ventory value represented by each group versus the percentage of items represented. As 
Figure 17.6 shows, the A Group constitutes only 10 percent of inventory by item count, but 
it represents over half of the value of inventory. The A Group items are thus monitored 
  17.5
3 The ABC approach to inventory should not be confused with activity-based costing, a common topic in 
managerial accounting.

572	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
closely, and inventory levels are kept relatively low. At the other end, basic inventory items, 
such as nuts and bolts, will also exist, but because these are crucial and inexpensive, large 
quantities are ordered and kept on hand. These would be C Group items. The B Group is 
made up of in-between items.
The Economic Order Quantity Model
The economic order quantity (EOQ) model is the best-known approach to explicitly es-
tablishing an optimal inventory level. The basic idea is illustrated in Figure 17.7, which 
f i g u r e  17.6
ABC inventory 
analysis
100
80
60
40
20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of
inventory
value
Percentage of
inventory
items
57%
10%
27%
40%
16%
50%
A Group
B Group
C Group
f i g u r e  17.7
Costs of holding 
inventory
Total costs of holding inventory
Carrying costs
Restocking costs
Q*
Optimal size
of inventory order
Size of inventory
orders (Q)
Cost of holding
inventory ($)
Restocking costs are greatest when the firm holds a small quantity of inventory.
Carrying costs are greatest when there is a large quantity of inventory on hand.
Total costs are the sum of the carrying and restocking costs.

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
573
plots the various costs associated with holding inventory (on the vertical axis) against in-
ventory levels (on the horizontal axis). As is shown, inventory carrying costs rise and re-
stocking costs decrease as inventory levels increase. From our discussion of the total 
credit cost curve in this chapter, the general shape of the total inventory cost curve is fa-
miliar. With the EOQ model, we will attempt to specifically locate the minimum total cost 
point, Q*.
In our discussion below, an important point to keep in mind is that the actual cost of 
the inventory itself is not included. The reason is that the total amount of inventory the 
firm needs in a given year is dictated by sales. What we are analyzing here is how much the 
firm should have on hand at any particular time. More precisely, we are trying to determine 
what order size the firm should use when it restocks its inventory.
Inventory Depletion 
To develop the EOQ, we will assume that the firm’s inven-
tory is sold off at a steady rate until it hits zero. At that point, the firm restocks its in-
ventory back to some optimal level. For example, suppose the Eyssell Corporation 
starts out today with 3,600 units of a particular item in inventory. Annual sales of this 
item are 46,800 units, which is 900 per week. If Eyssell sells off 900 units in inventory 
each week, then, after four weeks, all the available inventory will be sold, and  
Eyssell will restock by ordering (or manufacturing) another 3,600 and start over. This 
selling and restocking process produces a sawtooth pattern for inventory holdings; this 
pattern is illustrated in Figure 17.8. As the figure shows, Eyssell always starts with 
3,600 units in inventory and ends up at zero. On average, then, inventory is half of 
3,600, or 1,800 units.
Carrying Costs 
As Figure 17.7 illustrates, carrying costs are normally assumed to be 
directly proportional to inventory levels. Suppose we let Q be the quantity of inventory that 
f i g u r e  17.8
Inventory holdings 
for the Eyssell 
Corporation
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Starting inventory:
Q 5 3,600
Q/2 5 1,800
Ending inventory: 0
Average inventory
Weeks
The Eyssell Corporation starts with inventory of 3,600 units. The quantity drops to zero by
the end of the fourth week. The average inventory is Q/2 5 3,600/2 5 1,800 over the period.

574	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
Eyssell orders each time (3,600 units); we will call this the restocking quantity. Average 
inventory would then just be Q/2, or 1,800 units. If we let CC be the carrying cost per unit 
per year, Eyssell’s total carrying costs will be:
Total carrying costs = Average inventory × Carrying costs per unit
	
= (Q/2) × CC	
[17.1]
In Eyssell’s case, if carrying costs were $.75 per unit per year, then total carrying costs 
would be the average inventory of 1,800 multiplied by $.75, or $1,350 per year.
Shortage Costs 
For now, we will focus only on the restocking costs. In essence, we 
will assume that the firm never actually runs short on inventory, so that costs relating to 
safety reserves are not important. We return to this issue later.
Restocking costs are normally assumed to be fixed. In other words, every time we 
place an order, there are fixed costs associated with that order (remember that the cost of 
the inventory itself is not considered here). Suppose we let T be the firm’s total unit sales 
per year. If the firm orders Q units each time, then it will need to place a total of T/Q or-
ders. For Eyssell, annual sales were 46,800, and the order size was 3,600. Eyssell thus 
places a total of 46,800/3,600 = 13 orders per year. If the fixed cost per order is F, the total 
restocking cost for the year would be:
Total restocking cost = Fixed cost per order × Number of orders
	
= F × (T/Q)	
[17.2]
For Eyssell, order costs might be $50 per order, so the total restocking cost for 13 orders 
would be $50 × 13 = $650 per year.
Total Costs 
The total costs associated with holding inventory are the sum of the carry-
ing costs and the restocking costs:
Total costs = Carrying costs + Restocking costs
	
= (Q/2) × CC + F × (T/Q)	
[17.3]
Our goal is to find the value of Q, the restocking quantity, that minimizes this cost. To see 
how we might go about this, we can calculate total costs for some different values of Q. For 
the Eyssell Corporation, we had carrying costs (CC) of $.75 per unit per year, fixed costs 
(F) of $50 per order, and total unit sales (T) of 46,800 units. With these numbers, some 
possible total costs are (check some of these for practice):
Restocking 
Quantity (Q)
Total Carrying 
Costs (Q/2 × CC)
+
Restocking 
Costs (F × T/Q)
=
Total  
Costs
  500
$  187.5
$4,680.0
$4,867.5
1,000
375.0
2,340.0
2,715.0
1,500
562.5
1,560.0
2,122.5
2,000
750.0
1,170.0
1,920.0
2,500
937.5
936.0
1,873.5
3,000
1,125.0
780.0
1,905.0
3,500
1,312.5
668.6
1,981.1

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
575
Inspecting the numbers, we see that total costs start out at almost $5,000, and they  
decline to just under $1,900. The cost-minimizing quantity appears to be approxi-
mately 2,500.
To find the precise cost-minimizing quantity, we can take a look back at Figure 17.7. 
What we notice is that the minimum point occurs right where the two lines cross. At this 
point, carrying costs and restocking costs are the same. For the particular types of costs we 
have assumed here, this will always be true, so we can find the minimum point just by set-
ting these costs equal to each other and solving for Q*:
Carrying costs = Restocking costs
	
(Q*/2) × CC = F × (T/Q*)	
[17.4]
With a little algebra, we get:
(Q*)2 = 2T × F
CC
	
[17.5]
To solve for Q*, we take the square root of both sides to find:
Q* = B
2T × F
CC
	
[17.6]
This reorder quantity, which minimizes the total inventory cost, is called the economic  
order quantity, or EOQ. For the Eyssell Corporation, the EOQ is:
Q* = B
2T × F
CC
= B
(2 × 46,800) × $50
.75
	
= 16,240,000
= 2,498 units  
Thus, for Eyssell, the economic order quantity is actually 2,498 units. At this level, verify 
that the restocking costs and carrying costs are identical (they’re both $936.75).
economic order 
quantity (EOQ)
The restocking quantity 
that minimizes the total 
inventory costs.
EXAMPLE
17.3  Carrying Costs
Thiewes Shoes begins each period with 100 pairs of hiking boots in stock. This stock is depleted 
each period and reordered. If the carrying cost per pair of boots per year is $3, what are the total 
carrying costs for the hiking boots?
	
Inventories always start at 100 items and end up at 0, so average inventory is 50 items. At an 
annual cost of $3 per item, total carrying costs are $150.
EXAMPLE
17.4  Restocking Costs
In our previous example (Example 17.3), suppose Thiewes sells a total of 600 pairs of boots in a 
year. How many times per year does Thiewes restock? Suppose the restocking cost is $20 per order. 
What are total restocking costs?
	
Thiewes orders 100 items each time. Total sales are 600 items per year, so Thiewes restocks 
six times per year, or about every two months. The restocking costs would be 6 orders × $20 per 
order = $120.

576	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
Extensions to the EOQ Model
Thus far, we have assumed that a company will let its inventory run down to zero and then 
reorder. In reality, a company will wish to reorder before its inventory goes to zero for two 
reasons. First, by always having at least some inventory on hand, the firm minimizes the 
risk of a stockout and the resulting losses of sales and customers. Second, when a firm does 
reorder, there will be some time lag before the inventory arrives. Thus, to finish our discus-
sion of the EOQ, we consider two extensions, safety stocks and reorder points.
Safety Stocks 
A safety stock is the minimum level of inventory that a firm keeps on 
hand. Inventories are reordered whenever the level of inventory falls to the safety stock 
level. Part A of Figure 17.9 illustrates how a safety stock can be incorporated into an EOQ 
model. Notice that adding a safety stock simply means that the firm does not run its inven-
tory all the way down to zero. Other than this, the situation here is identical to that consid-
ered in our earlier discussion of the EOQ.
Reorder Points 
To allow for delivery time, a firm will place orders before inventories 
reach a critical level. The reorder points are the times at which the firm will actually place 
its inventory orders. These points are illustrated in Part B of Figure 17.9. As is shown, the 
reorder points simply occur some fixed number of days (or weeks or months) before inven-
tories are projected to reach zero.
One of the reasons that a firm will keep a safety stock is to allow for uncertain delivery 
times. We can therefore combine our reorder point and safety stock discussions in Part C of 
Figure 17.9. The result is a generalized EOQ model in which the firm orders in advance of 
anticipated needs and also keeps a safety stock of inventory to guard against unforeseen 
fluctuations in demand and delivery times.
Managing Derived-Demand Inventories
A third type of inventory management technique is used to manage derived-demand invento-
ries. As we described previously, demand for some inventory types is derived from, or depen-
dent on, other inventory needs. A good example is given by the auto manufacturing industry, 
where the demand for finished products derives from consumer demand, marketing pro-
grams, and other factors related to projected unit sales. The demand for inventory items such 
as tires, batteries, headlights, and other components is then completely determined by the 
EXAMPLE
17.5  The EOQ
Based on our previous two examples, what size orders should Thiewes place to minimize costs? 
How often will Thiewes restock? What are the total carrying and restocking costs? The total costs?
	
We have that the total number of pairs of boots ordered for the year (T) is 600. The restocking cost 
(F) is $20 per order, and the carrying cost (CC) is $3. We can calculate the EOQ for Thiewes as follows:
 EOQ = B
2T × F
CC
 = B
(2 × 600) × $20
3
 = 18,000
 = 89.44 units
Because Thiewes sells 600 pairs per year, it will restock 600/89.44 = 6.71 times. The total restocking 
costs will be $20 × 6.71 = $134.16. Average inventory will be 89.44/2 = 44.72. The carrying costs will 
be $3 × 44.72 = $134.16, the same as the restocking costs. The total costs are thus $268.33.

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
577
number of autos planned. Materials requirements planning and just-in-time inventory man-
agement are two methods for managing demand-dependent inventories.
Materials Requirements Planning 
Production and inventory specialists have de-
veloped computer-based systems for ordering and/or scheduling production of demand-
dependent types of inventories. These systems fall under the general heading of materials 
requirements planning (MRP). The basic idea behind MRP is that, once finished goods 
inventory levels are set, it is possible to determine what levels of work-in-progress invento-
ries must exist to meet the need for finished goods. From there, it is possible to calculate 
the quantity of raw materials that must be on hand. This ability to schedule backwards from 
finished goods inventories stems from the dependent nature of work-in-progress and raw 
materials inventories. MRP is particularly important for complicated products for which a 
variety of components are needed to create the finished product.
materials 
requirements 
planning (MRP)
A set of procedures used to 
determine inventory levels 
for demand-­dependent 
inventory types, such as 
work-in-progress and raw 
materials.
Delivery time
Delivery time
Delivery time
Delivery time
Safety
stock
Safety
stock
Reorder
point
Minimum
inventory
level
Time
Minimum
inventory
level
Time
Reorder
point
Time
Inventory
(units)
With a safety stock, the firm reorders when inventory reaches
a minimum level.
A. Safety stocks
Inventory
(units)
B. Reorder points
Inventory
(units)
C. Combined reorder points and safety stocks
When there are lags in delivery or production times, the
firm reorders when inventory reaches the reorder point.
By combining safety stocks and reorder points, the firm
maintains a buffer against unforeseen events.
f i g u r e  17.9
Safety stocks and 
reorder points

578
concept questions
17.5a	 What does the EOQ model determine for the firm?
17.5b	 Which cost component of the EOQ model does JIT inventory minimize?
Just-in-Time Inventory 
Just-in-time, or JIT, inventory is a modern approach to man-
aging dependent inventories. The goal of JIT is essentially to minimize such inventories, 
thereby maximizing turnover. The approach began in Japan, and it is a fundamental part of 
much of Japanese manufacturing philosophy. As the name suggests, the basic goal of JIT is 
to have only enough inventory on hand to meet immediate production needs.
The result of the JIT system is that inventories are reordered and restocked frequently. 
Making such a system work and avoiding shortages requires a high degree of cooperation 
among suppliers. Japanese manufacturers often have a relatively small, tightly integrated 
group of suppliers with whom they work closely to achieve the needed coordination. These 
suppliers are a part of a large manufacturer’s (such as Toyota’s) industrial group, or kei-
retsu. Each large manufacturer tends to have its own keiretsu. It also helps to have suppliers 
located nearby, a situation that is common in Japan.
The kanban is an integral part of a JIT inventory system, and JIT systems are some-
times called kanban systems. The literal meaning of kanban is “card” or “sign,” but, 
broadly speaking, a kanban is a signal to a supplier to send more inventory. For example, a 
kanban could literally be a card attached to a bin of parts. When a worker pulls that bin, the 
card is detached and routed back to the supplier, who then supplies a replacement bin.
A JIT inventory system is an important part of a larger production planning process. A 
full discussion of it would necessarily shift our focus away from finance to production and 
operations management, so we will leave it here. The nearby Finance Matters box dis-
cusses some of the potential problems with a JIT inventory system.
just-in-time (JIT) 
inventory
A system for managing 
demand-dependent 
inventories that minimizes 
inventory holdings.
FINANCE MATTERS
Supply Chain Management
J
IT inventory has been widely adopted because of the po-
tential savings in inventory. And JIT inventory systems 
have led to the increased importance of supply chain man-
agement (SCM). SCM deals with all movement and storage 
of raw materials, work-in-process inventory, and finished 
goods from the raw material phase until the point of sale. 
Because JIT relies on little or no inventory, SCM is critical, 
especially when there is a disruption in the flow of raw mate-
rials necessary for production.
	
In March 2011, the powerful earthquake and resulting 
tsunami in Japan caused tremendous damage locally, but the 
supply chain effects were felt around the world. For example, 
less than a week after the earthquake, a GM plant in Shreveport, 
Louisiana, was forced to shut down entirely because of a 
shortage in a single part that was supplied from a Japanese 
manufacturer. GM was also forced to slow down production in 
its Tonawanda, New York, engine plant less than a week later.
	
Other companies and industries were affected as well. 
For example, Toyota shut down its 13 U.S. plants temporarily, 
and John Deere announced that it was delaying delivery of 
excavators and mining equipment. Even domestic Japanese 
companies weren’t immune from supply chain problems. 
Famed camera maker Canon was forced to halt production 
at its Japanese plants because of parts shortages, not 
­earthquake-related damages.
	
While natural catastrophes can be one cause of SCM 
problems, smaller events can also have a dramatic impact. 
For example, in March 2012, an explosion occurred at the 
Evonik Industries AG plant in Marl, Germany. This plant pro-
duced 25 percent of the world’s supply of nylon-12, a resin 
that is necessary for producing auto brake and fuel lines. 
What made the situation even worse is that Evonik provided 
the chemical building block necessary for production of 
­nylon-12 to another company that also produced 25 percent 
of the world’s supply of the resin. As a result of this potential 
shortage, 200 auto executives from different companies were 
forced to meet to avoid disruption of automobile production. 
Nylon-12 is also used in the photovoltaic industry, offshore 
pipelines, sporting goods, and household goods, so supply 
problems were expected in those industries as well.

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
579
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has covered cash, receivables, and inventory management. Along the way,  
we have touched on a large number of subjects. Some of the more important issues we  
examined are:
  1.	 Firms seek to manage their cash by keeping no more than is needed on hand. The 
reason is that holding cash has an opportunity cost, namely, the returns that could be 
earned by investing the money.
  2.	 Float is an important consideration in cash management, and firms seek to manage 
collections and disbursements in ways designed to optimize the firm’s net float.
  3.	 A firm’s credit policy includes the terms of sale, credit analysis, and collection 
policy. The terms of sale cover three related subjects: the credit period, cash 
discount, and credit instrument.
  4.	 The optimal credit policy for a firm depends on many specific factors, but generally 
involves trading off the costs of granting credit, such as the carrying costs of 
receivables and the possibility of nonpayment, against the benefits in terms of 
increased sales.
  5.	 There are different types of inventories that differ greatly in their liquidity and 
management. The basic trade-off in inventory management is the cost of carrying 
inventory versus the cost of restocking. We developed the famous EOQ model, which 
explicitly balances these costs.
  6.	 Firms use different inventory management techniques; we described a few of the 
better known, including the ABC approach and just-in-time, or JIT, inventory 
management.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 17.1 If a firm receives a check for $50,000, its collection float will change by 
what amount?
Section 17.2 What are the components of total collection time?
Section 17.3 What are the components of credit policy?
Section 17.4 What are shortage costs?
Section 17.5 If the reorder quantity Q equals 4,000 units and carrying costs are 
$2.00 per unit per year, what will the total annual carrying costs be?
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
17.1	
Calculating Float.  You have $10,000 on deposit with no outstanding checks  
or uncleared deposits. One day you write a check for $4,000 and then deposit  
a check for $3,000. What are your disbursement, collection, and net floats?  
(See Problem 3.)

580	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
17.2	 The EOQ.  Heusen Computer Manufacturing starts each period with 4,000 central 
processing units (CPUs) in stock. This stock is depleted each month and reordered. 
If the carrying cost per CPU is $1 and the fixed order cost is $10, is Heusen 
following an economically advisable strategy? (See Problem 13.)
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
17.1	
First, after you write the check for $4,000, you show a balance of $6,000. However, 
while the check is clearing, your bank shows a balance of $10,000. This is a $4,000 
disbursement float, and it is good for you. Next, when you deposit the $3,000, you 
show a balance of $9,000, but your account will not be credited for the $3,000 until 
it clears. This is a −$3,000 collection float, and it is bad for you.
The sum of the disbursement float and the collection float is your net float of 
$1,000. In other words, you show a balance of $9,000, but your bank shows a 
$10,000 balance, so, in net terms, you are benefiting from the float.
17.2	 We can answer by first calculating Heusen’s carrying and restocking costs. The 
average inventory is 2,000 CPUs, and, because the carrying costs are $1 per CPU, 
total carrying costs are $2,000. Heusen restocks every month at a fixed order cost 
of $10, so the total restocking costs are $120. What we see is that carrying costs are 
large relative to reorder costs, so Heusen is carrying too much inventory.
To determine the optimal inventory policy, we can use the EOQ model. Because 
Heusen orders 4,000 CPUs 12 times per year, total needs (T) are 48,000 CPUs. The 
fixed order cost is $10, and the carrying cost per unit (CC) is $1. The EOQ is therefore:
EOQ = B
2T × F
CC
= B
(2 × 48,000) × $10
1
= 1960,000
= 979.80 units  
	
We can check this by noting that the average inventory is about 490 CPUs, so the 
carrying cost is $490. Heusen will have to reorder 48,000/979.8 = 49 times. The 
fixed order cost is $10, so the total restocking cost is also $490.
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 1 	 17.1	
Cash Management.  Is it possible for a firm to have too much cash? Why 
would shareholders care if a firm accumulates large amounts of cash?
LO 1 	 17.2	
Cash Management.  What options are available to a firm if it believes it 
has too much cash? How about too little?
LO 1 	 17.3	
Agency Issues.  Are stockholders and creditors likely to agree on how 
much cash a firm should keep on hand?
LO 1 	 17.4	
Motivations for Holding Cash.  In the chapter opening, we discussed the cash 
positions of several companies. Automobile manufacturers also have enormous 
cash reserves. In the middle of 2015, Ford Motor Co. had about $31.9 billion 
in cash, General Motors had about $25 billion, and Toyota had about $43 
billion. Why would firms such as these hold such large quantities of cash?

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
581
LO 1 	  17.5	 Short-Term Investments.  Why is a preferred stock with a dividend tied 
to short-term interest rates an attractive short-term investment for 
corporations with excess cash?
LO 2 	  17.6	 Collection and Disbursement Floats.  Which would a firm prefer: a net 
collection float or a net disbursement float? Why?
LO 1 	  17.7	
Float.  Suppose a firm has a book balance of $2 million. At the automatic 
teller machine (ATM), the cash manager finds out that the bank balance is 
$2.5 million. What is the situation here? If this is an ongoing situation, 
what ethical dilemma arises?
LO 1 	  17.8	
Short-Term Investments.  For each of the short-term marketable 
securities given here, provide an example of the potential disadvantages 
the investment has for meeting a corporation’s cash management goals.
a.	
U.S. Treasury bills
b.	 Ordinary preferred stock
c.	
Negotiable certificates of deposit (NCDs)
d.	 Commercial paper
LO 1 	  17.9	 Agency Issues.  It is sometimes argued that excess cash held by a firm 
can aggravate agency problems (discussed in Chapter 1) and, more 
generally, reduce incentives for shareholder wealth maximization. How 
would you frame the issue here?
LO 1 	 17.10	 Use of Excess Cash.  One option a firm usually has with any excess 
cash is to pay its suppliers more quickly. What are the advantages and 
disadvantages of this use of excess cash?
LO 1 	 17.11	
Use of Excess Cash.  Another option usually available for dealing with 
excess cash is to reduce the firm’s outstanding debt. What are the 
advantages and disadvantages of this use of excess cash?
LO 1 	 17.12	 Float.  An unfortunately common practice goes like this: 
(Warning: Don’t try this at home.) Suppose you are out of money in your 
checking account; however, your local grocery store will, as a 
convenience to you as a customer, cash a check for you. So you cash a 
check for $200. Of course, this check will bounce unless you do 
something. To prevent this, you go to the grocery the next day and cash 
another check for $200. You take this $200 and deposit it. You repeat this 
process every day, and, in doing so, you make sure that no checks bounce. 
Eventually, manna from heaven arrives (perhaps in the form of money 
from home) and you are able to cover your outstanding checks.
To make it interesting, suppose you are absolutely certain that no 
checks will bounce along the way. Assuming this is true, and ignoring 
any question of legality (what we have described is probably illegal 
check kiting), is there anything unethical about this? If you say yes, then 
why? In particular, who is harmed?
LO 2 	 17.13	 Credit Instruments.  Describe each of the following:
a.	
Sight draft
b.	 Time draft
c.	
Banker’s acceptance
d.	 Promissory note
e.	
Trade acceptance

582	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
LO 2 	 17.14	 Trade Credit Forms.  In what form is trade credit most commonly 
offered? What is the credit instrument in this case?
LO 2 	 17.15	 Receivables Costs.  What are the costs associated with carrying 
receivables? What are the costs associated with not granting credit? What 
do we call the sum of the costs for different levels of receivables?
LO 2 	 17.16	 Five Cs of Credit.  What are the five Cs of credit? Explain why each is 
important.
LO 2 	 17.17	 Credit Period Length.  What are some of the factors that determine the 
length of the credit period? Why is the length of the buyer’s operating 
cycle often considered an upper bound on the length of the credit period?
LO 2 	 17.18	 Credit Period Length.  In each of the following pairings, indicate which 
firm would probably have a longer credit period and explain your 
reasoning.
a.	
Firm A sells a miracle cure for baldness; Firm B sells toupees.
b.	 Firm A specializes in products for landlords; Firm B specializes in 
products for renters.
c.	
Firm A sells to customers with an inventory turnover of 10 times; 
Firm B sells to customers with an inventory turnover of 20 times.
d.	 Firm A sells fresh fruit; Firm B sells canned fruit.
e.	
Firm A sells and installs carpeting; Firm B sells rugs.
LO 3 	 17.19	 Inventory Types.  What are the different inventory types? How do the 
types differ? Why are some types said to have dependent demand 
whereas other types are said to have independent demand?
LO 3 	 17.20	 Just-in-Time Inventory.  If a company moves to a JIT inventory 
management system, what will happen to inventory turnover? What will 
happen to total asset turnover? What will happen to return on equity, 
ROE? (Hint: Remember the DuPont equation from Chapter 3.)
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the  
packaging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–14)
LO 1 	 1.	 Calculating Float.  You have $95,000 on deposit with no outstanding 
checks or uncleared deposits. One day you write a check for $24,300. Does 
this create a disbursement float or a collection float? What is your available 
balance? Book balance?
LO 1 	 2.	 Calculating Float.  You have $12,700 on deposit with no outstanding 
checks or uncleared deposits. If you deposit a check for $2,400, does this 
create a disbursement float or a collection float? What is your available 
balance? Book balance?
LO 1 	 3.	 Calculating Float.  You have $26,500 on deposit with no outstanding 
checks or uncleared deposits. One day you write a check for $4,200 and  
then deposit a check for $5,100. What are your disbursement, collection, 
and net floats?

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
583
LO 2 	 4.	 Cash Discounts.  You place an order for 540 units of Good X at a unit 
price of $62. The supplier offers terms of 1/10, net 30.
a.	
How long do you have to pay before the account is overdue? If you take 
the full period, how much should you remit?
b.	 What is the discount being offered? How quickly must you pay to get 
the discount? If you do take the discount, how much should you remit?
c.	
If you don’t take the discount, how much interest are you paying 
implicitly? How many days’ credit are you receiving?
LO 1 	 5.	 Calculating Float.  In a typical month, the Gulley Corporation receives 100 
checks totaling $59,200. These are delayed three days on average. What is 
the average daily float? Assume 30 days in a month.
LO 1 	 6.	 Calculating Net Float.  Each business day, on average, a company writes 
checks totaling $23,400 to pay its suppliers. The usual clearing time for the 
checks is four days. Meanwhile, the company is receiving payments from its 
customers each day, in the form of checks, totaling $38,100. The cash from 
the payments is available to the firm after two days.
a.	
Calculate the company’s disbursement float, collection float, and  
net float.
b.	 How would your answer to part (a) change if the collected funds were 
available in one day instead of two?
LO 2 	 7.	 Size of Accounts Receivable.  Essence of Skunk Fragrances, Ltd., sells 
7,400 units of its perfume collection each year at a price per unit of $235. 
All sales are on credit with terms of 1/10, net 30. The discount is taken by 
40 percent of the customers. What is the amount of the company’s accounts 
receivable? In reaction to sales by its main competitor, Sewage Spray, 
Essence of Skunk is considering a change in its credit policy to terms of 
3/10, net 30 to preserve its market share. How will this change in policy 
affect accounts receivable?
LO 2 	 8.	 Size of Accounts Receivable.  The Bates Corporation has annual credit 
sales of $31.2 million. The average collection period is 33 days. What is the 
average investment in accounts receivable as shown on the balance sheet?
LO 2 	 9.	 ACP and Accounts Receivable.  Miyagi Data, Inc., sells earnings 
forecasts for Japanese securities. Its credit terms are 1/10, net 30. Based on 
experience, 55 percent of all customers will take the discount.
a.	
What is the average collection period?
b.	 If the company sells 1,250 forecasts every month at a price of $2,300 
each, what is its average balance sheet amount in accounts receivable?
LO 2 	 10.	Size of Accounts Receivable.  Two Doors Down, Inc., has weekly credit 
sales of $31,800, and the average collection period is 36 days. What is the 
company’s average accounts receivable figure?
LO 2 	 11.	 Terms of Sale.  A firm offers terms of 1/10, net 30. What effective annual 
interest rate does the firm earn when a customer does not take the discount? 
Without doing any calculations, explain what will happen to this effective rate if:
a.	
The discount is changed to 2 percent.
b.	 The credit period is increased to 40 days.
c.	
The discount period is decreased to 20 days.
d.	 What is the EAR for each scenario?

584	
p a r t  8
Short-Term Financial Management
LO 2 	 12.	ACP and Receivables Turnover.  A7X, Inc., has an average collection 
period of 33 days. Its average daily investment in receivables is $87,600. 
What are annual credit sales? What is the receivables turnover?
LO 3 	 13.	 EOQ.  Clap Off Manufacturing uses 1,150 switch assemblies per week 
and then reorders another 1,150. If the relevant carrying cost per switch 
assembly is $6.75 and the fixed order cost is $425, is the company’s 
inventory policy optimal? Why or why not?
LO 3 	 14.	EOQ.  The Trektronics store begins each month with 765 phasers in stock. 
This stock is depleted each month and reordered. If the carrying cost per 
phaser is $27 per year and the fixed order cost is $385, what is the total 
carrying cost? What is the restocking cost? Should the company increase 
or decrease its order size? Describe an optimal inventory policy for the 
company in terms of order size and order frequency.
INTERMEDIATE (Question 15)
LO 3 	 15.	EOQ Derivation.  Prove that when carrying costs and restocking costs are 
as described in the chapter, the EOQ must occur at the point where the 
carrying costs and restocking costs are equal.
CHALLENGE (Question 16)
LO 3 	 16.	Safety Stocks and Order Points.  Saché, Inc., expects to sell 700 of its 
designer suits every week. The store is open seven days a week and expects 
to sell the same number of suits every day. The company has an EOQ of 500 
suits and a safety stock of 100 suits. Once an order is placed, it takes three 
days for Saché to get the suits in. How many orders does the company place 
per year? Assume that it is Monday morning before the store opens, and a 
shipment of suits has just arrived. When will Saché place its next order?
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
17.1 Commercial Paper.  Chevron sells commercial paper to interested institutional 
investors. Go to the Chevron website at www.chevron.com to find information on 
Chevron’s commercial paper. What is the credit rating for Chevron’s commercial paper? 
What is the minimum size Chevron will sell? What size does it require for one- to four-
day commercial paper?
17.2 Commercial Paper Rates.  What were the highest and lowest historical interest rates 
for commercial paper? Go to www.stlouisfed.org, find the “FRED® data” link, then the 
“Interest Rates” link. What were the highest and lowest interest rates for one-, two-, and 
three-month AA nonfinancial commercial paper? What about for financial commercial 
paper? Did these occur at the same time? Why might the nonfinancial and financial 
commercial paper rates be different?

	
c h a p t e r  1 7
Working Capital Management	
585
CHAPTER CASE
Piepkorn Manufacturing Working 
Capital Management, Part 2
A
fter completing the short-term financial plan for next 
year (at the end of Chapter 16), Gary Piepkorn ap-
proaches you and asks about the company’s credit pol-
icy. In looking at the competition, most companies in the 
industry offer credit to customers, so Piepkorn Manufac-
turing appears to be one of the few companies that 
does not. Several customers have expressed the possi-
bility of changing to a different supplier because of the 
lack of credit. Gary is interested in knowing how imple-
menting a credit policy will affect the short-term financial 
plan for next year. Additionally, he would like you to in-
quire as to the possibility of getting improved credit 
terms for the company’s purchases.
	
To analyze the possible switch to the new credit 
terms, Gary has asked you to investigate industry stan-
dard credit terms and rework the short-term financial 
plan assuming Piepkorn Manufacturing offers credit to 
its customers. He would also like to investigate how bet-
ter credit terms from the company’s suppliers would af-
fect the short-term financial plan.
1.	
You have looked at the credit policy offered by 
your competitors and have determined that the 
industry standard credit policy is 1/10, net 45. The 
discount will begin to be offered on the first day of 
the year. You want to examine how this credit pol-
icy would affect the cash budget and short-term 
financial plan. If this credit policy is implemented, 
you believe that 60 percent of customers will take 
advantage of the credit offer and the accounts re-
ceivable period will be 24 days. Rework the cash 
budget and short-term financial plan under the 
new credit policy and a target cash balance of 
$80,000. What interest rate are you effectively  
offering customers?
2.	
You have talked to the company’s suppliers about 
the credit terms Piepkorn receives. Currently, the 
company receives terms of net 45. Your suppliers 
have stated that they would offer new credit terms 
of 2/25, net 40. The discount would begin to be 
offered on the first day of the year. What interest 
rate are the suppliers offering the company? Re-
work your cash budget and short-term financial 
plan from the previous question assuming you 
take advantage of the discount offered.
QU E ST I O N S

586
Please visit us at essentialsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com for the latest developments in the world of corporate finance.
W
orldwide, 2014 was a year with low or negative economic 
growth for most developed countries. As a result, many cen-
tral banks lowered domestic interest rates in an attempt to spur in-
vestment and spending. In fact, in early 2015, savers in Denmark 
actually were charged interest to keep deposits in a bank! Even 
though overall economic growth in the United States was weak, it was 
strong relative to many other countries. As a result, the U.S. dollar in-
creased in value. For example, the dollar gained about 10 percent 
against the euro, 13 percent against the Japanese yen, and 31 percent 
against the Argentine peso. The stronger dollar hurt U.S. exporters 
and multinational companies. For example, during the fourth quarter of 
2014, Coca-Cola estimated that it lost $393 million because of the de-
valuation of the Venezuelan bolivar alone.
As businesses of all types have increased their reliance on inter-
national operations, all areas of business have been strongly ­affected. 
Human resources, production, marketing, accounting, and strategy, 
for example, all become much more complex when nondomestic considerations come into 
play. This chapter discusses one of the most important aspects of international business: the 
impact of shifting exchange rates and what companies (and individuals) can do to protect 
themselves against adverse exchange rate movements.
18
International Aspects of 
Financial Management
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should 
be able to:
LO 1 	 Explain how exchange rates are 
quoted, assess what they mean, 
and differentiate between spot 
and forward exchange rates.
LO 2 	 Discuss purchasing power parity 
and interest rate parity, and 
analyze their implications for 
exchange rate changes.
LO 3 	 Identify the different types of 
exchange rate risk and ways firms 
manage exchange rate risk.
LO 4 	 Discuss the impact of political risk 
on international business investing.
C
ompanies with significant foreign operations are often called international corpora-
tions, or multinationals. Such companies must consider many financial factors that do 
not directly affect purely domestic firms. These include foreign exchange rates, differing 
interest rates from country to country, complex accounting methods for foreign operations, 
foreign tax rates, and foreign government intervention.
The basic principles of corporate finance still apply to international corporations; like 
domestic companies, they seek to invest in projects that create more value for the 
PART NINE 
Topics in Business Finance

	
c h a p t e r  1 8
International Aspects of Financial Management	
587
shareholders (or owners) than they cost and to arrange financing that raises cash at the 
­lowest possible cost. In other words, the net present value principle holds for both for-
eign and domestic operations, but it is usually more complicated to apply the NPV rule 
to foreign investments.
We won’t have much to say here about the role of cultural and social differences in 
international business. We also will not be discussing the implications of differing political 
and economic systems. These factors are of great importance to international businesses, 
but it would take another book to do them justice. Consequently, we will focus only on 
some purely financial considerations in international finance and some key aspects of for-
eign ­exchange markets.
TERMINOLOGY
A common buzzword for the student of business finance is globalization. The first step in 
learning about the globalization of financial markets is to conquer the new vocabulary. As 
with any specialty, international finance is rich in jargon. Accordingly, we get started on 
the subject with a highly eclectic vocabulary exercise.
The terms that follow are presented alphabetically, and they are not all of equal 
importance. We choose these particular ones because they appear frequently in the 
­financial press or because they illustrate some of the colorful language of international 
finance.
  1.	 An American Depositary Receipt, or ADR, is a security issued in the United States 
that represents shares of a foreign stock, allowing that stock to be traded in the 
United States. Foreign companies use ADRs, which are issued in U.S. dollars, 
to expand the pool of potential U.S. investors. ADRs are available in two forms: 
company sponsored, which are listed on an exchange, and unsponsored, which 
usually are held by the investment bank that deals in the ADR. Both forms are 
available to individual investors, but only company-sponsored issues are quoted 
daily in newspapers.
  2.	 The cross-rate is the implicit exchange rate between two currencies (usually non-U.S.) 
when both are quoted in some third currency, usually the U.S. dollar.
  3.	 A Eurobond is a bond issued in multiple countries, but denominated in a single 
currency, usually the issuer’s home currency. Such bonds have become an important 
way to raise capital for many international companies and governments. Eurobonds 
are issued outside the restrictions that apply to domestic offerings and are syndicated 
and traded mostly from London. Trading can and does take place anywhere there is 
a buyer and a seller.
  4.	 Eurocurrency is money deposited in a financial center outside of the country whose 
currency is involved. For instance, Eurodollars—the most widely used Eurocurrency—
are U.S. dollars deposited in banks outside the U.S. banking system.
  5.	 Foreign bonds, unlike Eurobonds, are issued in a single country and are usually 
denominated in that country’s currency. Often, the country in which these bonds 
are issued will draw distinctions between them and bonds issued by domestic 
issuers, including different tax laws, restrictions on the amount issued, and tougher 
disclosure rules. 
	
	
Foreign bonds often are nicknamed for the country where they are issued: Yankee 
bonds (United States), Samurai bonds (Japan), Rembrandt bonds (the Netherlands), 
Bulldog bonds (Britain), and dim sum bonds (Chinese yuan-denominated bonds issued 
18.1
See www.adr.com  
for more.
American Depositary 
Receipt (ADR)
A security issued in the 
United States representing 
shares of a foreign stock 
and allowing that stock 
to be traded in the 
United States.
cross-rate
The implicit exchange rate 
between two currencies 
(usually non-U.S.) quoted 
in some third currency 
(usually the U.S. dollar).
Eurobonds
International bonds issued 
in multiple countries but 
denominated in a single 
currency (usually the 
issuer’s currency).
Eurocurrency
Money deposited in a 
financial center outside 
the country whose 
currency is involved.
foreign bonds
International bonds issued 
in a single country, usually 
denominated in that 
country’s currency.

588	
p a r t  9
Topics in Business Finance
in Hong Kong). Partly because of tougher regulations and disclosure requirements, the 
foreign-bond market hasn’t grown in past years with the vigor of the Eurobond market. 
A substantial portion of all foreign bonds are issued in Switzerland.
  6.	 Gilts, technically, are British and Irish government securities, although the term also 
includes issues of local British authorities and some overseas public-sector offerings.
  7.	 The London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) is the rate that most international banks 
charge one another for loans of Eurodollars overnight in the London market. LIBOR 
is a cornerstone in the pricing of money market issues and other debt issues by both 
government and corporate borrowers. Interest rates are frequently quoted as some 
spread over LIBOR, and they then float with the LIBOR rate.
   8.	There are two basic kinds of swaps: interest rate and currency. An interest rate swap 
occurs when two parties exchange a floating-rate payment for a fixed-rate payment or 
vice versa. Currency swaps are agreements to deliver one currency in exchange for 
another. Often, both types of swaps are used in the same transaction when debt 
denominated in different currencies is swapped.
gilts
British and Irish 
government securities.
London Interbank 
Offered Rate (LIBOR)
The rate most international 
banks charge one another 
for overnight Eurodollar 
loans.
swaps
Agreements to exchange 
two securities or currencies.
For current LIBOR rates, 
see www.hsh.com.
FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS  
AND EXCHANGE RATES
The foreign exchange market is undoubtedly the world’s largest financial market. It is the 
market where one country’s currency is traded for another’s. Most of the trading takes 
place in a few currencies such as the U.S. dollar ($), the British pound sterling (£), the 
Japanese yen (¥), and the euro (€). Table 18.1 lists some of the more common currencies 
and their symbols.
The foreign exchange market is an over-the-counter market, so there is no single location 
where traders get together. Instead, market participants are located in the major commercial 
and investment banks around the world. They communicate using computer terminals, tele-
phones, and other telecommunications devices. For example, one communications network 
for foreign transactions is the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication 
(SWIFT), a Belgian not-for-profit cooperative. Using data transmission lines, a bank in 
New York can send messages to a bank in London via SWIFT regional processing centers.
The many different types of participants in the foreign exchange market include the 
following:
  1.	 Importers who pay for goods in foreign currencies.
  2.	 Exporters who receive foreign currency and may want to convert to their domestic 
currency.
  3.	 Portfolio managers who buy or sell foreign stocks and bonds.
  4.	 Foreign exchange brokers who match buy and sell orders.
  5.	 Traders who “make a market” in foreign currencies.
  6.	 Speculators who try to profit from changes in exchange rates.
18.2
coverage online
Excel 
Master
foreign exchange 
market
The market in which one 
country’s currency is traded 
for another’s.
Information on doing 
business globally can 
be found at  
www.internationalist.com.
For online currency rates, 
go to www.bloomberg 
.com/markets/currencies.
concept questions
18.1a	
What are the differences between a Eurobond and a foreign bond?
18.1b	
What are Eurodollars?
Visit SWIFT at  
www.swift.com.

	
c h a p t e r  1 8
International Aspects of Financial Management	
589
Exchange Rates
An exchange rate is simply the price of one country’s currency expressed in terms of 
­another country’s currency. In practice, almost all trading of currencies takes place in 
terms of the U.S. dollar. For example, both the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen are traded 
with their prices quoted in U.S. dollars. Exchange rates are constantly changing. Our 
nearby Work the Web box shows you how to get up-to-the-minute rates.
exchange rate
The price of one country’s 
currency expressed in 
terms of another country’s 
currency.
ta b l e  18.1
International 
currency symbols
Country
Currency
Symbol
Australia
Dollar
A$
Brazil
Real
R$
Canada
Dollar
Can$
China
Yuan (Renminbi)
π¯¯
Denmark
Kroner
DKr
EMU (Eurozone)
Euro
€
India
Rupee
Rs
Iran
Rial
RI
Japan
Yen
¥
Kuwait
Dinar
KD
Mexico
Peso
Ps
New Zealand
Dollar
NZ$
Norway
Kroner
NKr
Saudi Arabia
Riyal
SR
Singapore
Dollar
S$
South Africa
Rand
R
South Korea
Won
₩
Sweden
Krona
SKr
Switzerland
Franc
SF
Thailand
Baht
B|
Turkey
Lira
United Kingdom
Pound
£
United States
Dollar
$
Y
ou just returned from your dream vacation to Jamaica and feel rich because you have 
10,000 Jamaican dollars left over. You now need to convert this to U.S. dollars. How much 
will you have? You can look up the current exchange rate and do the conversion yourself, or 
simply work the web. We went to www.xe.com and used the currency converter on the site to 
find out. This is what we found:
Looks like you left Jamaica just before you ran out of money.
W
RK TH E W E B

590	
p a r t  9
Topics in Business Finance
Exchange Rate Quotations 
Table 18.2 reproduces exchange rate quotations as they 
appear in The Wall Street Journal. The first column (labeled “in U.S. $”) gives the number of 
dollars it takes to buy one unit of foreign currency. For example, the Australian dollar is quoted 
at .8507, which means that you can buy one Australian dollar with .8507 U.S. dollars.
The second column shows the amount of foreign currency per U.S. dollar. The 
­Australian dollar is quoted here at 1.1755, so you can get 1.1755 Australian dollars for 
one U.S. dollar. Naturally, this second exchange rate is just the reciprocal of the first one; 
1/1.1755 = .8507, allowing for a possible rounding error.
Cross-Rates and Triangle Arbitrage 
Using the U.S. dollar as the common 
­denominator in quoting exchange rates greatly reduces the number of necessary cross-
currency quotes. For example, with five major currencies, there would potentially be 
10 exchange rates instead of just 4. Also, the fact that the dollar is used throughout cuts 
down on inconsistencies in the exchange rate quotations.
Get up-to-the-minute 
exchange rates at  
www.xe.com and  
www.exchangerate.com.
Country/Currency
USD equiv
Currency 
per USD
US$ vs. 
YTD % chg
Americas
Argentina peso
.1173
8.5280
30.8
Brazil real
.3897
2.5658
8.6
Canada dollar
.8759
1.1417
7.5
Chile peso
.001642
609.1000
15.8
Colombia peso
.0004511
2217
14.9
Ecuador US dollar
1
1
unch
Mexico peso
.0718
13.9334
6.8
Peru new sol
.3424
2.9210
4.2
Uruguay peso
.04247
23.545
11.1
Venezuela b. fuerte
.15748031
6.3500
unch
Asia-Pacific
Australian dollar
.8507
1.1755
4.8
  1-mos forward
.8489
1.1780
4.6
  3-mos forward
.8452
1.1831
4.6
  6-mos forward
.8397
1.1909
4.7
China yuan
.1628
6.1431
1.4
Hong Kong dollar
.129
7.7546
unch
India rupee
.01606
62.25095
.6
Indonesia rupiah
.0000817
12246
.7
Japan yen
.00843
118.62
12.6
  1-mos forward
.00844
118.54
11.2
  3-mos forward
.00844
118.49
11.2
  6-mos forward
.00845
118.37
11.1
Malaysia ringgit
.2951
3.3887
3.2
New Zealand dollar
.7843
1.2750
4.8
Pakistan rupee
.00982
101.805
−3.4
Philippines peso
.0223
44.905
1.2
Singapore dollar
.7667
1.3043
3.3
South Korea won
.0008983
1113.2
5.4
Taiwan dollar
.03226
30.999
3.6
Thailand baht
.03045
32.843
.4
Vietnam dong
.00005
21355
1.1
Country/Currency
USD equiv
Currency 
per USD
US$ vs. 
YTD % chg
Europe
Czech Rep. koruna
.04507
22.188
11.6
Denmark krone
.1673
5.9757
10.1
Euro area euro
1.2452
.8031
10.4
Hungary forint
.00406209
246.1800
13.9
Norway krone
.1422
7.0305
15.8
Poland zloty
.2976
3.3598
11.1
Romania leu
.2808
3.5617
9.5
Russia ruble
.01989
50.274
52.7
Sweden krona
.1342
7.4518
15.8
Switzerland franc
1.0357
.9655
8.1
  1-mos forward
1.0362
 .9651
7.5
  3-mos forward
1.0369
.9644
7.5
  6-mos forward
1.0382
.9632
7.4
Turkey lira
.4505
2.2200
3.3
UK pound
1.5649
.6390
5.8
  1-mos forward
1.5646
.6391
5.5
  3-mos forward
1.5639
.6394
5.5
  6-mos forward
1.5626
.6400
5.5
Middle East/Africa
Bahrain dinar
2.6516
.3771
unch
Egypt pound
.1399
7.1471
2.8
Israel shekel
.2567
3.8950
12.3
Jordan dinar
1.4187
.7049
−.4
Kenya shilling
.01109
90.149
4.3
Kuwait dinar
3.429
.2916
3.3
Lebanon pound
.0006612
1512.45
.5
Saudi Arabia riyal
.2665
3.7529
.1
South Africa rand
.0903
11.0695
5.5
UAE dirham
.2723
3.6731
unch
Exchange Rates: New York Closing Snapshot for Friday, November 28, 2014
ta b l e  18.2

	
c h a p t e r  1 8
International Aspects of Financial Management	
591
Earlier, we defined the cross-rate as the exchange rate for a non-U.S. currency 
­expressed in terms of another non-U.S. currency. For example, suppose we observed the 
following for the Mexican peso (Ps) and the Swiss franc (SF):
Ps per $1 = 10.00
 SF per $1 = 2.00
Suppose the cross-rate is quoted as:
Ps per SF = 4.00
What do you think?
The cross-rate here is inconsistent with the exchange rates. To see this, suppose you 
have $100. If you convert this to Swiss francs, you will receive:
$100 × SF 2 per $1 = SF 200
If you convert this to pesos at the cross-rate, you will have:
SF 200 × Ps 4 per SF 1 = Ps 800
However, if you just convert your dollars to pesos without going through francs, you 
will have:
$100 × Ps 10 per $1 = Ps 1,000
What we see is that the peso has two prices, Ps 10 per $1 and Ps 8 per $1, depending on 
how we get the pesos.
To make money, we want to buy low, sell high. The important thing to note is that 
pesos are cheaper if you buy them with dollars because you get 10 pesos instead of just 8. 
You should proceed as follows:
  1.	 Buy 1,000 pesos for $100.
  2.	 Use the 1,000 pesos to buy Swiss francs at the cross-rate. Since it takes four pesos to 
buy a franc, you will receive Ps 1,000/4 = SF 250.
  3.	 Use the SF 250 to buy dollars. Because the exchange rate is SF 2 per dollar, you 
receive SF 250/2 = $125, for a round-trip profit of $25.
  4.	 Repeat Steps 1 through 3.
This particular activity is called triangle arbitrage because the arbitrage involves mov-
ing through three different exchange rates:
Ps 10/$1
SF 2/$1 5 $.50/SF 1
Ps 4/SF 1 5  SF .25/Ps 1
Current and historical 
foreign exchange data 
are available at many 
websites. A particularly 
good site is maintained 
by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis. Go to 
www.stlouisfed.org and 
find their “FRED®” link 
for up-to-date exchange 
rate data.
For international news and 
events, visit www.ft.com.
EXAMPLE
18.1  A Yen for Euros
Suppose you have $1,000. Based on the rates in Table 18.2, how many Japanese yen can you get? 
Alternatively, if a Porsche costs €200,000 (€ is the symbol for the euro), how many dollars will you 
need to buy it?
	
The exchange rate in terms of yen per dollar is 118.62. Your $1,000 will thus get you:
$1,000 × 118.62 yen per $1 = 118,620 yen
Because the exchange rate in terms of dollars per euro is 1.2452, you will need:
€200,000 × 1.2452 $ per euro = $249,040

592	
p a r t  9
Topics in Business Finance
To prevent such opportunities, it is not difficult to see that since a dollar will buy you 
either 10 pesos or two francs, the cross-rate must be:
(Ps 10/$1)/(SF 2/$1) = Ps 5/SF 1
That is, five pesos per franc. If it were anything else, there would be a triangle arbitrage 
opportunity.
EXAMPLE
18.2  Shedding Some Pounds
Suppose the exchange rates for the British pound and Swiss franc are:
Pounds per $1 = .60
   
SF per $1 = 2.00
The cross-rate is three francs per pound. Is this consistent? Explain how to go about making some 
money.
	
The cross-rate should be SF 2.00/£.60 = SF 3.33 per pound. You can buy a pound for  
SF 3 in one market, and you can sell a pound for SF 3.33 in another. So, we want to first get some 
francs, then use the francs to buy some pounds, and then sell the pounds. Assuming you had 
$100, you could:
1.	
Exchange dollars for francs: $100 × 2 = SF 200.
2.	
Exchange francs for pounds: SF 200/3 = £66.67.
3.	
Exchange pounds for dollars: £66.67/.60 = $111.12.
This would result in an $11.12 round-trip profit.
Types of Transactions
There are two basic types of trades in the foreign exchange market: spot trades and 
forward trades. A spot trade is an agreement to exchange currency “on the spot,” 
which actually means that the transaction will be completed, or settled, within two 
business days. The exchange rate on a spot trade is called the spot exchange rate. 
­Implicitly, all of the exchange rates and transactions we have discussed so far have 
­referred to the spot market.
A forward trade is an agreement to exchange currency at some time in the 
­future. The exchange rate that will be used is agreed upon today and is called the 
­forward exchange rate. A forward trade will normally be settled sometime in the next 
12 months.
If you look back at Table 18.2, you will see forward exchange rates quoted for some of 
the major currencies. For example, the spot exchange rate for the Swiss franc is SF 1 = 
$1.0357. The six-month forward exchange rate is SF 1 = $1.0382. This means that you can 
buy a Swiss franc today for $1.0357, or you can agree to take delivery of a Swiss franc in 
six months and pay $1.0382 at that time.
Notice that the Swiss franc is more expensive in the forward market ($1.0382 versus 
$1.0357). Because the Swiss franc is more expensive in the future than it is today, it is said 
to be selling at a premium relative to the dollar. For the same reason, the dollar is said to be 
selling at a discount relative to the Swiss franc.
Why does the forward market exist? One answer is that it allows businesses and indi-
viduals to lock in a future exchange rate today, thereby eliminating any risk from unfavor-
able shifts in the exchange rate.
spot trade
An agreement to trade 
currencies based on the 
exchange rate today for 
settlement within two 
business days.
spot exchange rate
The exchange rate on a 
spot trade.
forward trade
Agreement to exchange 
currency at some time 
in the future.
forward  
exchange rate
The agreed-upon 
exchange rate to be used 
in a forward trade.

	
c h a p t e r  1 8
International Aspects of Financial Management	
593
As we mentioned earlier, it is standard practice around the world (with a few excep-
tions, including the euro) to quote exchange rates in terms of the U.S. dollar. This means 
that rates are quoted as the amount of currency per U.S. dollar. For the remainder of this 
chapter, we will stick with this form. Things can get extremely confusing if you forget this. 
Thus, when we say things like “the exchange rate is expected to rise,” it is important to 
remember that we are talking about the exchange rate quoted as units of foreign currency 
per U.S. dollar.
EXAMPLE
18.3  Looking Forward
Suppose you are expecting to receive a million British pounds in six months, and you agree to a 
forward trade to exchange your pounds for dollars. Based on Table 18.2, how many dollars will you 
get in six months? Is the pound selling at a discount or a premium relative to the dollar?
	
In Table 18.2, the spot exchange rate and the six-month forward rate in terms of dollars per 
pound are $1.5649 = £1 and $1.5626 = £1, respectively. If you expect £1 million in six months, then 
you will get £1 million × $1.5626 per £ = $1.5626 million. Because it is less expensive to buy a pound 
in the forward market than in the spot market ($1.5626 versus $1.5649), the pound is selling at a 
discount relative to the dollar.
concept questions
18.2a	 What is triangle arbitrage?
18.2b	 What do we mean by the three-month forward exchange rate?
18.2c	 If we say that the exchange rate is SF 1.12, what do we mean?
PURCHASING POWER PARITY
Now that we have discussed what exchange rate quotations mean, we can address an obvi-
ous question: What determines the level of the spot exchange rate? In addition, we know 
that exchange rates change through time. A related question is thus, What determines the 
rate of change in exchange rates? At least part of the answer in both cases goes by the name 
of purchasing power parity (PPP), and it is the idea that the exchange rate adjusts to keep 
purchasing power constant among currencies. As we discuss next, there are two forms of 
PPP: absolute and relative.
Absolute Purchasing Power Parity
The basic idea behind absolute purchasing power parity is that a commodity costs the 
same regardless of what currency is used to purchase it or where it is selling. This is 
a very straightforward concept. If a beer costs £2 in London, and the exchange rate is 
£.60 per dollar, then a beer costs £2/.60 = $3.33 in New York. In other words, abso-
lute PPP says that $1 will buy you the same number of, say, cheeseburgers anywhere 
in the world.
More formally, let S0 be the spot exchange rate between the British pound and the 
U.S. dollar today (Time 0), and remember that we are quoting exchange rates as the 
18.3
purchasing power 
parity (PPP)
The idea that the exchange 
rate adjusts to keep 
purchasing power constant 
among currencies.

594	
p a r t  9
Topics in Business Finance
amount of foreign currency per dollar. Let PUS and PUK be the current U.S. and British 
prices, respectively, on a particular commodity, say, apples. Absolute PPP simply 
says that:
PUK = S0 × PUS
This tells us that the British price for something is equal to the U.S. price for that same 
something, multiplied by the exchange rate.
The rationale behind PPP is similar to that behind triangle arbitrage. If PPP did not 
hold, arbitrage would be possible (in principle) if apples were moved from one country to 
another. For example, suppose apples in New York are selling for $4 per bushel, while in 
London the price is £2.40 per bushel. Absolute PPP implies that:
	
PUK = S0 × PUS
	£2.40 = S0 × $4
	
S0 = £2.40/$4 = $.60
That is, the implied spot exchange rate is £.60 per dollar. Equivalently, a pound is worth 
$1/£.60 = $1.67.
Suppose, instead, that the actual exchange rate is £.50. Starting with $4, a trader could 
buy a bushel of apples in New York, ship it to London, and sell it there for £2.40. Our 
trader could then convert the £2.40 into dollars at the prevailing exchange rate, S0 = £.50, 
yielding a total of £2.40/.50 = $4.80. The round-trip gain is 80 cents.
Because of this profit potential, forces are set in motion to change the exchange 
rate and/or the price of apples. In our example, apples would begin moving from New 
York to London. The reduced supply of apples in New York would raise the price of 
apples there, and the increased supply in Britain would lower the price of apples in 
London.
In addition to moving apples around, apple traders would be busily converting pounds 
back into dollars to buy more apples. This activity increases the supply of pounds and si-
multaneously increases the demand for dollars. We would expect the value of a pound to 
fall. This means that the dollar is getting more valuable, so it will take more pounds to buy 
one dollar. Because the exchange rate is quoted as pounds per dollar, we would expect the 
exchange rate to rise from £.50.
For absolute PPP to hold absolutely, several things must be true:
  1.	 The transaction costs of trading apples—shipping, insurance, spoilage, and so on—
must be zero.
  2.	 There must be no barriers to trading apples, such as tariffs, taxes, or other political 
barriers such as VRAs (voluntary restraint agreements).
  3.	 Finally, an apple in New York must be identical to an apple in London. It won’t do 
for you to send red apples to London if the English eat only green apples.
Given the fact that the transaction costs are not zero and that the other conditions are rarely 
exactly met, it is not surprising that absolute PPP is really applicable only to traded goods, 
and then only to very uniform ones.
For this reason, absolute PPP does not imply that a Mercedes costs the same as a Ford 
or that a nuclear power plant in France costs the same as one in New York. In the case of 
the cars, they are not identical. In the case of the power plants, even if they were identical, 
they are expensive and very difficult to ship. On the other hand, we would be very 
surprised to see a significant violation of absolute PPP for gold. See our nearby Finance 
Matters box for an interesting example of PPP violations.

McPricing
A
s we discussed in the chapter, absolute purchasing 
power parity (PPP) does not seem to hold in practice. 
One of the more famous violations of absolute PPP is the Big 
Mac Index constructed by The Economist. To construct the 
index, prices for a Big Mac in different countries are gath-
ered from McDonald’s. We went to www.economist.com to 
find the January 2015 Big Mac index (we will leave it to you 
to find the most recent index).
	
According to the index on that day, absolute PPP does 
not seem to hold, at least for the Big Mac. In fact, in only 12 
of the 57 currencies surveyed by The Economist is the ex-
change rate within 10 percent of that predicted by absolute 
PPP. The largest disparity was in Ukraine, where the cur-
rency was apparently undervalued by 75 percent. And 15 of 
the 57 currencies were “incorrectly” priced by more than 
40 percent. Why?
	
There are several reasons. First, a Big Mac is not really 
transportable. Yes, you can load a ship with Big Macs and 
send it to a country where the currency is supposedly over-
valued. But do you really think people would buy your Big 
Macs? Probably not. Even though it is relatively easy to 
transport a Big Mac, it would be relatively expensive, and 
the hamburger would suffer in quality along the way.
	
Also, if you look in the index, the price of the Big Mac in 
the United States is the average price from five cities. The 
reason is that the Big Mac does not sell for the same price in 
different parts of the United States, where presumably they 
are all purchased with the dollar. The cost of living and com-
petition are only a few of the factors that will affect the price 
of a Big Mac in the United States. If Big Macs are not priced 
the same in the same currency, would we expect absolute 
PPP to hold across currencies?
	
Finally, differing tastes can account for the apparent 
discrepancy. In the United States, hamburgers and fast 
food have become a staple of the American diet. In other 
countries, hamburgers have not become as entrenched. 
We would expect the price of the Big Mac to be lower in 
the United States because there is more fast-food compe-
tition. In fact, when calculating PPP for the Indian rupee/
U.S. dollar, the price of the Maharaja Mac, which is made 
with chicken, is used because beef is not sold at 
­McDonald’s in India.
	
Having examined the Big Mac prices, we should say 
that absolute PPP should hold more closely for more easily 
transportable items. For instance, there are many compa-
nies with stock listed on both the NYSE and the stock ex-
change of another country. If you examine the share prices 
on the two exchanges, you will find that the price of the 
stock is almost exactly what absolute PPP would predict. 
The reason is that a share of stock in a particular company 
is (usually) the same wherever you buy it and whatever cur-
rency is used.
FINANCE MATTERS
Relative Purchasing Power Parity
As a practical matter, a relative version of purchasing power parity has evolved. 
Relative purchasing power parity does not tell us what determines the absolute level 
of the exchange rate. Instead, it tells what determines the change in the exchange rate 
over time.
The Basic Idea 
Suppose the British pound–U.S. dollar exchange rate is currently S0 = 
£.50. Further suppose that the inflation rate in Britain is predicted to be 10 percent over the 
coming year and (for the moment) the inflation rate in the United States is predicted to be 
zero. What do you think the exchange rate will be in a year?
If you think about it, a dollar currently costs .50 pound in Britain. With 10 percent 
inflation, we expect prices in Britain to generally rise by 10 percent. So we expect that 
the price of a dollar will go up by 10 percent, and the exchange rate should rise to  
£.50 × 1.1 = £.55.
If the inflation rate in the United States is not zero, then we need to worry about the 
relative inflation rates in the two countries. For example, suppose the U.S. inflation rate is 
predicted to be 4 percent. Relative to prices in the United States, prices in Britain are rising 
at a rate of 10% − 4% = 6% per year. So we expect the price of the dollar to rise by 6 percent, 
and the predicted exchange rate is £.50 × 1.06 = £.53.
595

596	
p a r t  9
Topics in Business Finance
The Result 
In general, relative PPP says that the change in the exchange rate is deter-
mined by the difference in the inflation rates of the two countries. To be more specific, we 
will use the following notation:
	
S0 = Current (Time 0) spot exchange rate (foreign currency per dollar)
	E(St) = Expected exchange rate in t periods
	 hUS = Inflation rate in the United States
	 hFC = Foreign country inflation rate
Based on our preceding discussion, relative PPP says that the expected percentage change 
in the exchange rate over the next year, [E(S1) − S0]/S0, is:
[E(S1) − S0]/S0 = hFC − hUS	
[18.1]
In words, relative PPP simply says that the expected percentage change in the exchange 
rate is equal to the difference in inflation rates. If we rearrange this slightly, we get:
E(S1) = S0[1 + (hFC − hUS)]	
[18.2]
This result makes a certain amount of sense, but care must be used in quoting the exchange 
rate.
In our example involving Britain and the United States, relative PPP tells us that the 
exchange rate will rise by hFC − hUS = 10% − 4% = 6% per year. Assuming that the differ-
ence in inflation rates doesn’t change, the expected exchange rate in two years, E(S2), will 
therefore be:
	E(S2) = E(S1) × (1 + .06)
	
= .53 × 1.06
	
= .562
Notice that we could have written this as:
	E(S2) = .53 × 1.06
	
= (.50 × 1.06) × 1.06
	
= .50 × 1.062
In general, relative PPP says that the expected exchange rate at some time in the future, 
E(St), is:
E(St) = S0 × [1 + (hFC − hUS)]t	
[18.3]
Because we don’t really expect absolute PPP to hold for most goods, we will focus on 
relative PPP in any future discussion. Henceforth, when we refer to PPP without further 
qualification, we mean relative PPP.
EXAMPLE
18.4  It’s All Relative
Suppose the Japanese exchange rate is currently 105 yen per dollar. The inflation rate in Japan 
over the next three years will run, say, 2 percent per year, while the U.S. inflation rate will be  
6 percent. Based on relative PPP, what will the exchange rate be in three years?
	
Since the U.S. inflation rate is higher, we expect that a dollar will become less valuable. The 
exchange rate change will be 2% – 6% = –4% per year. Over three years, the exchange rate will 
fall to:
	
E(S3) = S0 × [1 + (hFC − hUS)]3
	
= 105 × [1 + (−.04)]3
	
= 92.90 yen per dollar

	
c h a p t e r  1 8
International Aspects of Financial Management	
597
Currency Appreciation and Depreciation 
We frequently hear things like “the 
dollar strengthened (or weakened) in financial markets today” or “the dollar is expected to 
appreciate (or depreciate) relative to the pound.” When we say that the dollar strengthens, 
or appreciates, we mean that the value of a dollar rises, so it takes more foreign currency to 
buy a dollar.
What happens to exchange rates as currencies fluctuate in value depends on how ex-
change rates are quoted. Since we are quoting them as units of foreign currency per dollar, 
the exchange rate moves in the same direction as the value of the dollar: It rises as the dol-
lar strengthens, and it falls as the dollar weakens.
Relative PPP tells us that the exchange rate will rise if the U.S. inflation rate is lower 
than the foreign country’s. This happens because the foreign currency depreciates in value 
and therefore weakens relative to the dollar.
concept questions
18.3a 	 What does absolute PPP say? Why might it not hold for many types of goods?
18.3b 	 According to relative PPP, what determines the change in exchange rates?
EXCHANGE RATES AND INTEREST RATES
The next issue we need to address is the relationship between spot exchange rates, forward 
exchange rates, and nominal interest rates. To get started, we need some additional 
notation:
	 Ft = Forward exchange rate for settlement at Time t
	RUS = U.S. nominal risk-free interest rate 
	RFC = Foreign country nominal risk-free interest rate
As before, we will use S0 to stand for the spot exchange rate. You can take the U.S. nominal 
risk-free rate, RUS, to be the T-bill rate.
Covered Interest Arbitrage
Suppose we observe the following information about U.S. and Swiss currency in the 
market:
	 S0 = SF 2.00	
RUS = 10%
	 F1 = SF 1.90	
RS = 5%
where RS is the nominal risk-free rate in Switzerland. The period is one year, so F1 is the 
360-day forward rate.
Do you see an arbitrage opportunity here? There is one. Suppose you have $1 to in-
vest, and you want a riskless investment. One option you have is to invest the $1 in a risk-
less U.S. investment such as a 360-day T-bill. We will call this Strategy 1. If you do this, 
then, in one period, your $1 will be worth:
	$ value in 1 period = $1(1 + RUS)
	
= $1.10
Alternatively, you can invest in the Swiss risk-free investment. To do this, you need to 
convert your $1 to francs and simultaneously execute a forward trade to convert francs 
18.4

598	
p a r t  9
Topics in Business Finance
back to dollars in one year. We will call this Strategy 2. The necessary steps would be as 
follows:
  1.	 Convert your $1 to $1 × S0 = SF 2.00.
  2.	 At the same time, enter into a forward agreement to convert francs back to dollars in 
one year. Because the forward rate is SF 1.90, you get $1 for every SF 1.90 that you 
have in one year.
  3.	 Invest your SF 2.00 in Switzerland at RS. In one year, you will have: 
	
SF value in 1 year = SF 2.00 × (1 + RS)
	
= SF 2.00 × 1.05
	
= SF 2.10
  4.	 Convert your SF 2.10 back to dollars at the agreed-upon rate of SF 1.90 = $1. You 
end up with: 
	
$ value in 1 year = SF 2.10/1.90
	
= $1.1053
Notice that the value in one year from this strategy can be written as:
	 $ value in 1 year = $1 × S0 × (1 + RS)/F1
	
= $1 × 2.00 × 1.05/1.90
	
= $1.1053
The return on this investment is apparently 10.53 percent. This is higher than the 10 percent 
we get from investing in the United States. Because both investments are risk-free, there is 
an arbitrage opportunity.
To exploit the difference in interest rates, you need to borrow, say, $5 million at the 
lower U.S. rate and invest it at the higher Swiss rate. What is the round-trip profit from do-
ing this? To find out, we can work through the preceding steps:
  1.	 Convert the $5 million at SF 2.00 = $1 to get SF 10 million.
  2.	 Agree to exchange francs for dollars in one year at SF 1.90 to the dollar.
  3.	 Invest the SF 10 million for one year at RS = 5%. You end up with SF 10.5 million.
  4.	 Convert the SF 10.5 million back to dollars to fulfill the forward contract. You 
receive SF 10.5 million/1.90 = $5,526,316.
  5.	 Repay the loan with interest. You owe $5 million plus 10 percent interest, for a total 
of $5.5 million. You have $5,526,316, so your round-trip profit is a risk-free $26,316.
The activity that we have illustrated here goes by the name of covered interest arbitrage. 
The term covered refers to the fact that we are covered in the event of a change in the ex-
change rate because we lock in the forward exchange rate today.
Interest Rate Parity
If we assume that significant covered interest arbitrage opportunities do not exist, then 
there must be some relationship between spot exchange rates, forward exchange rates, and 
relative interest rates. To see what this relationship is, note that, in general, Strategy 1, in-
vesting in a riskless U.S. investment, gives us (1 + RUS) for every dollar we invest. Strategy 
2, investing in a foreign risk-free investment, gives us S0 × (1 + RFC)/F1 for every dollar we 
invest. Because these have to be equal to prevent arbitrage, it must be the case that:
1 + RUS = S0 × (1 + RFC)/F1
For exchange rates and 
even pictures of non-U.S. 
currencies, see  
www.travlang.com/money.
How are the international 
markets doing? Find out 
at marketwatch.com.

	
c h a p t e r  1 8
International Aspects of Financial Management	
599
Rearranging this a bit gets us the famous interest rate parity (IRP) condition:
F1/S0 = (1 + RFC)/(1 + RUS)	
[18.4]
There is a very useful approximation for IRP that illustrates very clearly what is going 
on and is not difficult to remember. If we define the percentage forward premium or dis-
count as (F1 − S0)/S0, then IRP says that this percentage premium or discount is approxi-
mately equal to the difference in interest rates:
(F1 − S0)/S0 = RFC − RUS	
[18.5]
Very loosely, what IRP says is that any difference in interest rates between two coun-
tries for some period is just offset by the change in the relative value of the currencies, 
thereby eliminating any arbitrage possibilities. Notice that we could also write:
F1 = S0 × [1 + (RFC − RUS)]	
[18.6]
In general, if we have t periods instead of just one, the IRP approximation will be written as:
Ft = S0 × [1 + (RFC − RUS)]t	
[18.7]
interest rate parity 
(IRP)
The condition stating that 
the interest rate differential 
between two countries is 
equal to the percentage 
difference between the 
forward exchange rate and 
the spot exchange rate.
EXAMPLE
18.5  Parity Check
Suppose the exchange rate for Japanese yen, S0, is currently ¥120 = $1. If the interest rate in the 
United States is RUS = 10% and the interest rate in Japan is RJ = 5%, then what must the one-year 
forward rate be to prevent covered interest arbitrage?
	
F1 = S0 × [1 + (RJ − RUS)]
	
= ¥120 × [1 + (.05 − .10)]
	
= ¥120 × .95
	
= ¥114
Notice that the yen will sell at a premium relative to the dollar (why?).
concept questions
18.4a 	 What is interest rate parity?
18.4b 	 Do you expect that interest rate parity will hold more closely than purchasing power 
parity? Why?
EXCHANGE RATE RISK
Exchange rate risk is the natural consequence of international operations in a world where 
relative currency values move up and down. As we discuss next, there are three different 
types of exchange rate risk, or exposure: short-run exposure, long-run exposure, and trans-
lation exposure.
Short-Run Exposure
The day-to-day fluctuations in exchange rates create short-run risks for international 
firms. Most such firms have contractual agreements to buy and sell goods in the near 
18.5
exchange rate risk
The risk related to having 
international operations in 
a world where relative 
currency values vary.

600	
p a r t  9
Topics in Business Finance
future at set prices. When different currencies are involved, such transactions have an 
extra element of risk.
For example, imagine that you are importing imitation pasta from Italy and re-
selling it in the United States under the Impasta brand name. Your largest customer 
has ordered 10,000 cases of Impasta. You place the order with your supplier today, 
but you won’t pay until the goods arrive in 60 days. Your selling price is $6 per case. 
Your cost is €4.48 per case, and the exchange rate is currently €.80, so it takes €.80 
to buy $1.
At the current exchange rate, your cost in dollars from filling the order is €4.48/€.80 = 
$5.60 per case, so your pretax profit on the order is 10,000 × ($6 − 5.60) = $4,000. 
­However, the exchange rate in 60 days will probably be different, so your profit will ­depend 
on what the exchange rate in the future turns out to be.
For example, if the rate goes to €.85, your cost is €4.48/€.85 = $5.27 per case. Your 
profit goes to $7,294. If the exchange rate goes to, say, €.747, then your cost is 
€4.48/€.747 = $6 per case, and your profit is zero.
The short-run exposure in our example can be reduced or eliminated in several ways. 
The most obvious way is to enter into a forward exchange agreement to lock in an ex-
change rate. For example, suppose the 60-day forward rate is €.82. What will your profit 
be if you hedge?
If you hedge, you lock in an exchange rate of €.82. Your cost in dollars will thus be 
€4.48/€.82 = $5.46 per case, so your profit will be 10,000 × ($6 − 5.46) = $5,366.
Long-Run Exposure
In the long run, the value of a foreign operation can fluctuate because of unanticipated 
changes in relative economic conditions. For example, imagine that we own a labor-­
intensive assembly operation located in another country to take advantage of lower wages. 
Through time, unexpected changes in economic conditions can raise the foreign wage 
­levels to the point where the cost advantage is eliminated or even becomes negative.
Hedging long-run exposure is more difficult than hedging short-term risks. For one 
thing, organized forward markets don’t exist for such long-term needs. Instead, the primary 
option that firms have is to try to match up foreign currency inflows and outflows. The 
same thing goes for matching foreign currency–denominated assets and liabilities. For ex-
ample, a firm that sells in a foreign country might try to concentrate its raw material pur-
chases and labor expense in that country. That way, the dollar values of its revenues and 
costs will move up and down together.
Similarly, a firm can reduce its long-run exchange rate risk by borrowing in the for-
eign country. Fluctuations in the value of the foreign subsidiary’s assets will then be at 
least partially offset by changes in the value of its liabilities.
One of the more common methods used to reduce long-term exchange rate exposure is 
to build a plant in the country that imports the products. This method is often used in the 
automotive industry. Honda, Toyota, and BMW, to name a few, have built plants in the 
United States. BMW’s situation is particularly interesting. It produces about 350,000 cars 
per year in South Carolina and exports about 250,000 of them. The costs of manufacturing 
the cars are mostly paid in dollars, and when BMW exports the cars to Europe, it receives 
euros. So, when the dollar weakens, these vehicles become more profitable for BMW. At 
the same time, BMW imports about 200,000 more cars to the United States each year. The 
costs of manufacturing these imported cars are mostly in euros, so they become less profit-
able when the dollar weakens. Taken together, these gains and losses tend to offset each 
other and provide BMW with a natural hedge.

	
c h a p t e r  1 8
International Aspects of Financial Management	
601
Translation Exposure
When a U.S. company calculates its accounting net income and EPS for some period, it 
must “translate” everything into dollars. This can create some problems for the accountants 
when there are significant foreign operations. In particular, two issues arise:
  1.	 What is the appropriate exchange rate to use for translating each balance sheet 
account?
  2.	 How should balance sheet accounting gains and losses from foreign currency 
translation be handled?
To illustrate the accounting problem, suppose that we started a small foreign subsid-
iary in Lilliputia a year ago. The local currency is the gulliver, abbreviated GL. At the be-
ginning of the year, the exchange rate was GL 2 = $1, and the balance sheet in gullivers 
looked like this:
Assets
GL 1,000 
Liabilities
GL 500
Equity
500
At two gullivers to the dollar, the beginning balance sheet in dollars was:
Assets
$500
Liabilities
$250
Equity
250
Lilliputia is a quiet place, and nothing at all actually happened during the year. As a result, 
net income was zero (before consideration of exchange rate changes). However, the ex-
change rate did change to 4 gullivers = $1, perhaps because the Lilliputian inflation rate is 
much higher than the U.S. inflation rate.
Because nothing happened, the accounting ending balance sheet in gullivers is the 
same as the beginning one. However, if we convert it to dollars at the new exchange rate, 
we get:
Assets
$250
Liabilities
$125
Equity
125
Notice that the value of the equity has gone down by $125, even though net income was 
exactly zero. Despite the fact that absolutely nothing really happened, there is a $125 
accounting loss. How to handle this $125 loss has been a controversial accounting 
question.
One obvious and consistent way to handle this loss is simply to report the loss on the 
parent’s income statement. During periods of volatile exchange rates, this kind of treatment 
can dramatically impact an international company’s reported EPS. This is purely an ac-
counting phenomenon, but, even so, such fluctuations are disliked by some financial 
managers.
The current approach to translation gains and losses is based on rules set out in Fi-
nancial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Statement Number 52, issued in December 
1981. For the most part, FASB 52 requires that all assets and liabilities be translated 
from the subsidiary’s currency into the parent’s currency using the exchange rate that 
currently prevails.

602	
p a r t  9
Topics in Business Finance
Any translation gains and losses that occur are accumulated in a special account within 
the shareholders’ equity section of the balance sheet. This account might be labeled some-
thing like “unrealized foreign exchange gains (losses).” These gains and losses are not re-
ported on the income statement. As a result, the impact of translation gains and losses will 
not be recognized explicitly in net income until the underlying assets and liabilities are sold 
or otherwise liquidated.
Managing Exchange Rate Risk
For a large multinational firm, the management of exchange rate risk is complicated by the 
fact that there can be many different currencies involved for many different subsidiaries. It 
is very likely that a change in some exchange rate will benefit some subsidiaries and hurt 
others. The net effect on the overall firm depends on its net exposure.
For example, suppose a firm has two divisions. Division A buys goods in the 
United States for dollars and sells them in Britain for pounds. Division B buys goods in 
Britain for pounds and sells them in the United States for dollars. If these two divisions are 
of roughly equal size in terms of their inflows and outflows, then the overall firm obvi-
ously has little exchange rate risk.
In our example, the firm’s net position in pounds (the amount coming in less the 
amount going out) is small, so the exchange rate risk is small. However, if one divi-
sion, acting on its own, were to start hedging its exchange rate risk, then the overall 
firm’s exchange rate risk would go up. The moral of the story is that multinational 
firms have to be conscious of the overall position that the firm has in a foreign cur-
rency. For this reason, management of exchange rate risk is probably best handled on a 
centralized basis.
concept questions
18.5a 	 What are the different types of exchange rate risk?
18.5b 	 How can a firm hedge short-run exchange rate risk? Long-run exchange rate risk?
POLITICAL RISK
One final element of risk in international investing is political risk. Political risk is related 
to changes in value that arise as a consequence of political actions. This is not a problem 
faced only by international firms. For example, changes in U.S. tax laws and regulations 
may benefit some U.S. firms and hurt others, so political risk exists nationally as well as 
internationally.
Some countries do have more political risk than others, however. When firms have 
operations in these riskier countries, the extra political risk may lead them to require higher 
returns on overseas investments to compensate for the risk that funds will be blocked, criti-
cal operations interrupted, or contracts abrogated. In the most extreme case, the possibility 
of outright confiscation may be a concern in countries with relatively unstable political 
environments.
Political risk also depends on the nature of the business; some businesses are less 
likely to be confiscated because they are not particularly valuable in the hands of a differ-
ent owner. An assembly operation supplying subcomponents that only the parent company 
18.6
political risk
Risk related to changes in 
value that arise ­because 
of political actions.

	
c h a p t e r  1 8
International Aspects of Financial Management	
603
uses would not be an attractive “takeover” target, for example. Similarly, a manufacturing 
operation that requires the use of specialized components from the parent is of little value 
without the parent company’s cooperation.
Natural resource developments, such as copper mining or oil drilling, are just the op-
posite. Once the operation is in place, much of the value is in the commodity. The political 
risk for such investments is much higher for this reason. Also, the issue of exploitation is 
more pronounced with such investments, again increasing the political risk.
Political risk can be hedged in several ways, particularly when confiscation or nation-
alization is a concern. The use of local financing, perhaps from the government of the 
foreign country in question, reduces the possible loss because the company can refuse to 
pay on the debt in the event of unfavorable political activities. Based on our discussion 
above, structuring the operation in such a way that it requires significant parent company 
involvement to function is another way to reduce political risk.
concept questions
18.6a 	 What is political risk?
18.6b 	 What are some ways of hedging political risk?
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The international firm has a more complicated life than the purely domestic firm. Manage-
ment must understand the connection between interest rates, foreign currency exchange 
rates, and inflation, and it must become aware of a large number of different financial 
market regulations and tax systems. This chapter was intended to be a concise introduction 
to some of the financial issues that come up in international investing.
Our coverage was necessarily brief. The main topics we discussed included:
1.	
Some basic vocabulary. We briefly defined some exotic terms such as LIBOR and 
Eurocurrency.
2.	
The basic mechanics of exchange rate quotations. We discussed the spot and forward 
markets and how exchange rates are interpreted.
3.	
The fundamental relationships between international financial variables: 
a.	
Absolute and relative purchasing power parity, or PPP.
b.	 Interest rate parity, or IRP. 
	
	
Absolute purchasing power parity states that $1 should have the same purchasing 
power in each country. This means that an orange costs the same whether you buy it 
in New York or in Tokyo. 
	
	
Relative purchasing power parity means that the expected percentage change in 
exchange rates between the currencies of two countries is equal to the difference in 
their inflation rates. 
	
	
Interest rate parity implies that the percentage difference between the forward 
exchange rate and the spot exchange rate is equal to the interest rate differential. We 
showed how covered interest arbitrage forces this relationship to hold.

604	
p a r t  9
Topics in Business Finance
4.	
Exchange rate and political risk. We described the various types of exchange rate risk 
and discussed some commonly used approaches to managing the effect of fluctuating 
exchange rates on the cash flows and value of the international firm. We also 
discussed political risk and some ways of managing exposure to it.
 POP QUIZ!
Can you answer the following questions? If your class is using Connect, log on to 
SmartBook to see if you know the answers to these and other questions, check out 
the study tools, and find out what topics require additional practice!
Section 18.1 A cross-rate between two currencies is usually quoted in what 
currency?
Section 18.2 If $1 will buy Can$.99 and A$.95, how many Canadian dollars are 
needed to buy one Australian dollar?
Section 18.3 What do you call the condition in which a commodity costs the same 
regardless of the currency used or where it is purchased?
Section 18.4 Suppose the euro currently costs $1.37 and the nominal risk-free inter-
est rate in France is 3 percent while only 2 percent in the United States. What does 
interest rate parity imply the forward rate for the euro will be?
Section 18.5 What are some strategies for hedging long-term exchange rate risk?
Section 18.6 Is a change in translation exposure a good example of political risk?
CHAPTER REVIEW AND SELF-TEST PROBLEMS
18.1 	 Relative Purchasing Power Parity.  The inflation rate in the United States is 
projected at 6 percent per year for the next several years. The Australian inflation 
rate is projected to be 2 percent during that time. The exchange rate is currently 
A$2.2. Based on relative PPP, what is the expected exchange rate in two years? 
(See Problem 12.)
18.2 	 Covered Interest Arbitrage.  The spot and 360-day forward rates on the Swiss 
franc are SF 1.8 and SF 1.7, respectively. The risk-free interest rate in the 
United States is 8 percent, and the risk-free rate in Switzerland is 5 percent. Is 
there an arbitrage opportunity here? How would you exploit it? (See Problem 7.)
■ Answers to Chapter Review and Self-Test Problems
18.1 	 From relative PPP, the expected exchange rate in two years, E(S2), is:
	
E(S2) = S0 × [1 + (hA − hUS)]2
	
where hA is the Australian inflation rate. The current exchange rate is A$2.2, so the 
expected exchange rate is:
	
	E(S2) = A$ 2.2 × [1 + (.02 − .06)]2
	
	
= A$ 2.2 × .962
	
	
= A$ 2.03

	
c h a p t e r  1 8
International Aspects of Financial Management	
605
18.2 	 From interest rate parity, the forward rate should be (approximately):
	
	F1 = S0 × [1 + (RS − RUS)]
	
	
= 1.8 × [1 + .05 − .08]
	
	
= 1.75
	
Because the forward rate is actually SF 1.7, there is an arbitrage opportunity.
	
	
To exploit the arbitrage opportunity, we first note that dollars are selling for SF 
1.7 each in the forward market. From IRP, this is too cheap because they should be 
selling for SF 1.75. So, we want to arrange to buy dollars with Swiss francs in the 
forward market. To do this, we can:
1.	
Today: Borrow, say, $10 million for 360 days. Convert it to SF 18 million in 
the spot market, and buy a forward contract at SF 1.7 to convert it back to 
dollars in 360 days. Invest the SF 18 million at 5 percent.
2.	
In one year: Your investment has grown to SF 18 × 1.05 = SF 18.9 million. 
Convert this to dollars at the rate of SF 1.7 = $1. You will have SF 18.9 million/ 
1.7 = $11,117,647. Pay off your loan with 8 percent interest at a cost of  
$10 million × 1.08 = $10,800,000 and pocket the difference of $317,647.
CRITICAL THINKING AND CONCEPTS REVIEW
LO 1 	 18.1 	
Spot and Forward Rates.  Suppose the exchange rate for the Swiss franc 
is quoted as SF 1.10 in the spot market and SF 1.13 in the 90-day forward 
market.
a.	
Is the dollar selling at a premium or a discount relative to the franc?
b.	 Does the financial market expect the franc to strengthen relative to 
the dollar? Explain.
c.	
What do you suspect is true about relative economic conditions in 
the United States and Switzerland?
LO 2 	 18.2 	 Purchasing Power Parity.  Suppose the rate of inflation in Russia will 
run about 3 percent higher than the U.S. inflation rate over the next 
several years. All other things being the same, what will happen to the 
ruble versus dollar exchange rate? What relationship are you relying on 
in answering?
LO 2 	 18.3 	 Exchange Rates.  The exchange rate for the Australian dollar is 
currently A$1.40. This exchange rate is expected to rise by 10 percent 
over the next year.
a.	
Is the Australian dollar expected to get stronger or weaker?
b.	 What do you think about the relative inflation rates in the  
United States and Australia?
c.	
What do you think about the relative nominal interest rates in the 
United States and Australia? Relative real rates?
LO 3 	 18.4 	 Yankee Bonds.  Which of the following most accurately describes a 
Yankee bond?
a.	
A bond issued by General Motors in Japan with the interest payable 
in U.S. dollars.
b.	 A bond issued by General Motors in Japan with the interest payable 
in yen.

606	
p a r t  9
Topics in Business Finance
c.	
A bond issued by Toyota in the United States with the interest 
payable in yen.
d.	 A bond issued by Toyota in the United States with the interest 
payable in dollars.
e.	
A bond issued by Toyota worldwide with the interest payable in 
dollars.
LO 1 	 18.5 	 Exchange Rates.  Are exchange rate changes necessarily good or bad for 
a particular company?
LO 4 	 18.6 	 International Risks.  At one point, Duracell International confirmed 
that it was planning to open battery-manufacturing plants in China and 
India. Manufacturing in these countries would allow Duracell to avoid 
import duties of between 30 and 35 percent that have made alkaline 
batteries prohibitively expensive for some consumers. What additional 
advantages might Duracell see in this proposal? What are some of the 
risks to Duracell?
LO 3 	 18.7 	 Multinational Corporations.  Given that many multinationals based in 
many countries have much greater sales outside their domestic markets 
than within them, what is the particular relevance of their domestic 
currency?
LO 2 	 18.8 	 Exchange Rate Movements.  Are the following statements true or false? 
Explain why.
a.	
If the general price index in Great Britain rises faster than that in the 
United States, we would expect the pound to appreciate relative to the 
dollar.
b.	 Suppose you are a German machine tool exporter and you invoice 
all of your sales in foreign currency. Further suppose that the 
European monetary authorities begin to undertake an 
expansionary monetary policy. If it is certain that the easy money 
policy will result in higher inflation rates in “Euroland” relative 
to those in other countries, then you should use the forward 
markets to protect yourself against future losses resulting from 
the deterioration in the value of the euro.
c.	
If you could accurately estimate differences in the relative inflation 
rates of two countries over a long period of time while other market 
participants were unable to do so, you could successfully speculate 
in spot currency markets.
LO 2 	 18.9 	 Exchange Rate Movements.  Some countries encourage movements in 
their exchange rate relative to those of some other country as a short-
term means of addressing foreign trade imbalances. For each of the 
following scenarios, evaluate the impact the announcement would have 
on an American importer and an American exporter doing business with 
the foreign country.
a.	
Officials in the administration of the United States government 
announce that they are comfortable with a rising Mexican peso 
relative to the dollar.
b.	 British monetary authorities announce that they feel the pound 
has been driven too low by currency speculators relative to the 
dollar.

	
c h a p t e r  1 8
International Aspects of Financial Management	
607
c.	
The Brazilian government announces that it will print billions of 
new reals and inject them into the economy in an effort to reduce the 
country’s 40 percent unemployment rate.
LO 3 	 18.10 	 International Investment.  If financial markets are perfectly competitive 
and the Eurodollar rate is above that offered in the U.S. loan market, you 
would immediately want to borrow money in the United States and invest 
it in Eurodollars. True or false? Explain.
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Select problems are available in McGraw-Hill Connect. Please see the pack-
aging options section of the preface for more information.
BASIC (Questions 1–10)
LO 1 	 1. 	 Using Exchange Rates.  Take a look back at Table 18.2 to answer the 
following questions:
a.	
If you have $100, how many Polish zlotys can you get?
b.	 How much is one euro worth?
c.	
If you have five million euros, how many dollars do you have?
d.	 Which is worth more, a New Zealand dollar or a Singapore dollar?
e.	
Which is worth more, a Mexican peso or a Chilean peso?
f.	
How many Swiss francs can you get for a euro? What do you call 
this rate?
g.	
Per unit, what is the most valuable currency of those listed? The least 
valuable?
LO 1 	 2. 	 Using the Cross-Rate.  Use the information in Table 18.2 to answer the 
following questions:
a.	
Which would you rather have, $100 or £100? Why?
b.	 Which would you rather have, $100 Canadian or £100? Why?
c.	
What is the cross-rate for Canadian dollars in terms of British pounds? 
For British pounds in terms of Canadian dollars?
LO 1 	 3. 	 Forward Exchange Rates.  Use the information in Table 18.2 to answer the 
following questions:
a.	
What is the six-month forward rate for the Japanese yen in yen per U.S. 
dollar? Is the yen selling at a premium or a discount? Explain.
b.	 What is the three-month forward rate for the Australian dollar in U.S. 
dollars per Australian dollar? Is the dollar selling at a premium or a 
discount? Explain.
c.	
What do you think will happen to the value of the dollar relative to the 
yen and the Australian dollar, based on the information in the figure? 
Explain.
LO 1 	 4. 	 Using Spot and Forward Exchange Rates.  Suppose the spot exchange rate 
for the Canadian dollar is Can$1.09 and the six-month forward rate is 
Can$1.14.
a.	
Which is worth more, a U.S. dollar or a Canadian dollar?

608	
p a r t  9
Topics in Business Finance
b.	 Assuming absolute PPP holds, what is the cost in the United States of 
an Elkhead beer if the price in Canada is Can$2.49? Why might the 
beer actually sell at a different price in the United States?
c.	
Is the U.S. dollar selling at a premium or a discount relative to the 
Canadian dollar?
d.	 Which currency is expected to appreciate in value?
e.	
Which country do you think has higher interest rates—the United States 
or Canada? Explain.
LO 1 	 5. 	 Cross-Rates and Arbitrage.  Suppose the Japanese yen exchange rate is 
¥121 = $1, and the British pound exchange rate is £1 = $1.53.
a.	
What is the cross-rate in terms of yen per pound?
b.	 Suppose the cross-rate is ¥189 = £1. Is there an arbitrage 
opportunity here? If there is, explain how to take advantage of the 
mispricing.
LO 2 	 6. 	 Interest Rate Parity.  Use Table 18.2 to answer the following questions. 
Suppose interest rate parity holds, and the current risk-free rate in the 
United States is 1.2 percent per six months. What must the six-month 
risk-free rate be in Australia? In Japan? In Great Britain?
LO 2 	 7.  	 Interest Rates and Arbitrage.  The treasurer of a major U.S. firm has 
$30 million to invest for three months. The interest rate in the United States 
is .19 percent per month. The interest rate in Great Britain is .22 percent per 
month. The spot exchange rate is £.63, and the three-month forward rate is 
£.64. Ignoring transaction costs, in which country would the treasurer want 
to invest the company’s funds? Why?
LO 2 	 8. 	 Inflation and Exchange Rates.  Suppose the current exchange rate for the 
Russian ruble is RUB 49.35. The expected exchange rate in three years is 
RUB 51.80. What is the difference in the annual inflation rates for the 
United States and Russia over this period? Assume that the anticipated rate 
is constant for both countries. What relationship are you relying on in 
answering?
LO 3 	 9. 	 Exchange Rate Risk.  Suppose your company imports computer 
motherboards from Singapore. The exchange rate is given in Table 18.2. 
You have just placed an order for 30,000 motherboards at a cost to you 
of 185.50 Singapore dollars each. You will pay for the shipment when it 
arrives in 90 days. You can sell the motherboards for $150 each. 
Calculate your profit if the exchange rate goes up or down by 10 percent 
over the next 90 days. What is the break-even exchange rate? What 
percentage rise or fall does this represent in terms of the Singapore 
dollar versus the U.S. dollar?
LO 2 	 10. 	Exchange Rates and Arbitrage.  Suppose the spot and six-month forward 
rates on the South Korean won are SKW 1,108.27 and SKW 1,110.32, 
respectively. The annual risk-free rate in the United States is 2.5 percent, 
and the annual risk-free rate in South Korea is 3.1 percent.
a.	 Is there an arbitrage opportunity here? If so, how would you 
exploit it?
b.	 What must the six-month forward rate be to prevent arbitrage?

	
c h a p t e r  1 8
International Aspects of Financial Management	
609
INTERMEDIATE (Questions 11–15)
LO 2 	 11. 	Spot versus Forward Rates.  Suppose the spot and three-month forward 
rates for the yen are ¥113.21 and ¥112.63, respectively.
a.	
Is the yen expected to get stronger or weaker?
b.	 What would you estimate is the difference between the inflation rates of 
the United States and Japan?
LO 2 	 12. 	Expected Spot Rates.  Suppose the spot exchange rate for the Hungarian 
forint is HUF 249. Interest rates in the United States are 2.7 percent per 
year. They are 4.8 percent in Hungary.
a.	
What do you predict the exchange rate will be in one year? 
b.	 In two years? 
c.	
In five years? What relationship are you using?
LO 2 	 13. 	Cross-Rates and Arbitrage.  The British pound trades at $1.5872 in London 
and $1.5769 in New York. How much profit could you earn on each trade 
with $10,000?
LO 2 	 14. 	Purchasing Power Parity and Exchange Rates.  According to purchasing 
power parity, if a Big Mac sells for $4.79 in the United States and krona 
135.34 in Iceland, what is the krona/$ exchange rate?
LO 3 	 15. 	Translation Exposure.  Betancourt International has operations in Arrakis. 
The balance sheet for this division in Arrakeen solaris shows assets of 
40,000 solaris, debt in the amount of 12,500 solaris, and equity of 27,500 
solaris.
a.	
If the current exchange ratio is 1.20 solaris per dollar, what does the 
balance sheet look like in dollars?
b.	 Assume that one year from now the balance sheet in solaris is 
exactly the same as at the beginning of the year. If the exchange rate 
is 1.30 solaris per dollar, what does the balance sheet look like in 
dollars now?
c.	
Rework part (b) assuming the exchange rate is 1.08 solaris per 
dollar.
CHALLENGE (Question 16)
LO 3 	 16. 	Translation Exposure.  In the previous problem, assume the equity 
increases by 1,500 solaris due to retained earnings. If the exchange rate at 
the end of the year is 1.24 solaris per dollar, what does the balance sheet 
look like?
WHAT’S ON 
THE WEB?
18.1 Purchasing Power Parity.  As we discussed in the chapter, one of the more famous 
examples of a violation of absolute purchasing power parity is the Big Mac index 
calculated by The Economist. This index calculates the dollar price of a McDonald’s 
Big Mac in different countries. You can find the Big Mac index by going to  
www.economist.com. Using the most recent index, which country has the most 
expensive Big Macs? Which country has the cheapest Big Macs? Why is the price  
of a Big Mac not the same in every country?

610	
p a r t  9
Topics in Business Finance
18.2 Interest Rate Parity.  Go to the Financial Times site at www.ft.com, and find the 
current exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and the euro. Next, find the U.S. dollar 
LIBOR and the Euro LIBOR interest rates. What must the one-year forward rate be to 
prevent arbitrage? What principle are you relying on in your answer?
EXCEL MASTER IT! PROBLEM
The Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis has historical exchange rates on its website, 
www.stlouisfed.org. Go to the website and look for the FRED® data. Then, download 
the exchange rate with the U.S. dollar over the past five years for the following cur-
rencies: Brazilian real, Canadian dollar, Hong Kong dollar, Japanese yen, Mexican 
new peso, South Korean won, Indian rupee, Swiss franc, Australian dollar, and euro. 
Graph the exchange rate for each of these currencies in a dashboard that can be 
printed on one page.

	
c h a p t e r  1 8
International Aspects of Financial Management	
611
1.	
What are the pros and cons of the international 
sales? What additional risks will the company face?
2.	
What happens to the company’s profits if the dol-
lar strengthens? What if the dollar weakens?
3.	
Ignoring taxes, what are S&S Air’s projected gains or 
losses from this proposed arrangement at the cur-
rent exchange rate of $1.30/€? What happens to 
profits if the exchange rate changes to $1.37/€? At 
what exchange rate will the company break even?
4.	
How could the company hedge its exchange rate 
risk? What are the implications of this approach?
5.	
Taking all factors into account, should the com-
pany pursue the international sales deal further? 
Why or why not?
QU E ST I O N S
	
Mark and Todd are confident they can handle the 
extra volume with their existing facilities, but they are 
unsure about the potential financial risks of selling their 
aircraft in Europe. In their discussion with Amalie, they 
found out that the current exchange rate is $1.30/€. This 
means that they can convert the €75,384 per airplane 
paid by Amalie to $98,000. Thus, the profit on the 
­international sales is the same as the profit on dollar-
denominated sales.
	
Mark and Todd decided to ask Chris Guthrie, their 
financial analyst, to prepare an analysis of the proposed 
international sales. Specifically, they ask Chris to answer 
the following questions.
M
ark Sexton and Todd Story, the owners of S&S Air, 
have been in discussions with an aircraft dealer in 
Europe about selling the company’s Eagle airplane. The 
Eagle sells for $98,000 and has a variable cost of 
$81,000 per airplane. Amalie Diefenbaker, the dealer, 
wants to add the Eagle to her current retail line. Amalie 
has told Mark and Todd that she feels she will be able to 
sell 15 airplanes per month in Europe. All sales will be 
made in euros, and Amalie will pay the company 
€75,384 for each plane. Amalie proposes that she order 
15 aircraft today for the first month’s sales. She will pay 
for all 15 aircraft in 90 days. This order and payment 
schedule will continue each month.
CHAPTER CASE
S&S Air Goes International

612
A
Mathematical Tables
a p p e ndi x A.1
Future value of $1 at the end of t periods = (1 + r)t
Interest Rate
Number of 
Periods
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
1
1.0100
1.0200
1.0300
1.0400
1.0500
1.0600
1.0700
1.0800
1.0900
  2
1.0201
1.0404
1.0609
1.0816
1.1025
1.1236
1.1449
1.1664
1.1881
  3
1.0303
1.0612
1.0927
1.1249
1.1576
1.1910
1.2250
1.2597
1.2950
  4
1.0406
1.0824
1.1255
1.1699
1.2155
1.2625
1.3108
1.3605
1.4116
  5
1.0510
1.1041
1.1593
1.2167
1.2763
1.3382
1.4026
1.4693
1.5386
  6
1.0615
1.1262
1.1941
1.2653
1.3401
1.4185
1.5007
1.5869
1.6771
  7
1.0721
1.1487
1.2299
1.3159
1.4071
1.5036
1.6058
1.7138
1.8280
  8
1.0829
1.1717
1.2668
1.3686
1.4775
1.5938
1.7182
1.8509
1.9926
  9
1.0937
1.1951
1.3048
1.4233
1.5513
1.6895
1.8385
1.9990
2.1719
10
1.1046
1.2190
1.3439
1.4802
1.6289
1.7908
1.9672
2.1589
2.3674
11
1.1157
1.2434
1.3842
1.5395
1.7103
1.8983
2.1049
2.3316
2.5804
12
1.1268
1.2682
1.4258
1.6010
1.7959
2.0122
2.2522
2.5182
2.8127
13
1.1381
1.2936
1.4685
1.6651
1.8856
2.1329
2.4098
2.7196
3.0658
14
1.1495
1.3195
1.5126
1.7317
1.9799
2.2609
2.5785
2.9372
3.3417
15
1.1610
1.3459
1.5580
1.8009
2.0789
2.3966
2.7590
3.1722
3.6425
16
1.1726
1.3728
1.6047
1.8730
2.1829
2.5404
2.9522
3.4259
3.9703
17
1.1843
1.4002
1.6528
1.9479
2.2920
2.6928
3.1588
3.7000
4.3276
18
1.1961
1.4282
1.7024
2.0258
2.4066
2.8543
3.3799
3.9960
4.7171
19
1.2081
1.4568
1.7535
2.1068
2.5270
3.0256
3.6165
4.3157
5.1417
20
1.2202
1.4859
1.8061
2.1911
2.6533
3.2071
3.8697
4.6610
5.6044
21
1.2324
1.5157
1.8603
2.2788
2.7860
3.3996
4.1406
5.0338
6.1088
22
1.2447
1.5460
1.9161
2.3699
2.9253
3.6035
4.4304
5.4365
6.6586
23
1.2572
1.5769
1.9736
2.4647
3.0715
3.8197
4.7405
5.8715
7.2579
24
1.2697
1.6084
2.0328
2.5633
3.2251
4.0489
5.0724
6.3412
7.9111
25
1.2824
1.6406
2.0938
2.6658
3.3864
4.2919
5.4274
6.8485
8.6231
30
1.3478
1.8114
2.4273
3.2434
4.3219
5.7435
7.6123
10.063
13.268
40
1.4889
2.2080
3.2620
4.8010
7.0400
10.286
14.974
21.725
31.409
50
1.6446
2.6916
4.3839
7.1067
11.467
18.420
29.457
46.902
74.358
60
1.8167
3.2810
5.8916
10.520
18.679
32.988
57.946
101.26
176.03

	
a p p e n d i x  A
Mathematical Tables	
613
10%
12%
14%
15%
16%
18%
20%
24%
28%
32%
36%
1.1000
1.1200
1.1400
1.1500
1.1600
1.1800
1.2000
1.2400
1.2800
1.3200
1.3600
1.2100
1.2544
1.2996
1.3225
1.3456
1.3924
1.4400
1.5376
1.6384
1.7424
1.8496
1.3310
1.4049
1.4815
1.5209
1.5609
1.6430
1.7280
1.9066
2.0972
2.3000
2.5155
1.4641
1.5735
1.6890
1.7490
1.8106
1.9388
2.0736
2.3642
2.6844
3.0360
3.4210
1.6105
1.7623
1.9254
2.0114
2.1003
2.2878
2.4883
2.9316
3.4360
4.0075
4.6526
1.7716
1.9738
2.1950
2.3131
2.4364
2.6996
2.9860
3.6352
4.3980
5.2899
6.3275
1.9487
2.2107
2.5023
2.6600
2.8262
3.1855
3.5832
4.5077
5.6295
6.9826
8.6054
2.1436
2.4760
2.8526
3.0590
3.2784
3.7589
4.2998
5.5895
7.2058
9.2170
11.703
2.3579
2.7731
3.2519
3.5179
3.8030
4.4355
5.1598
6.9310
9.2234
12.166
15.917
2.5937
3.1058
3.7072
4.0456
4.4114
5.2338
6.1917
8.5944
11.806
16.060
21.647
2.8531
3.4785
4.2262
4.6524
5.1173
6.1759
7.4301
10.657
15.112
21.199
29.439
3.1384
3.8960
4.8179
5.3503
5.9360
7.2876
8.9161
13.215
19.343
27.983
40.037
3.4523
4.3635
5.4924
6.1528
6.8858
8.5994
10.699
16.386
24.759
36.937
54.451
3.7975
4.8871
6.2613
7.0757
7.9875
10.147
12.839
20.319
31.691
48.757
74.053
4.1772
5.4736
7.1379
8.1371
9.2655
11.974
15.407
25.196
40.565
64.359
100.71
4.5950
6.1304
8.1372
9.3576
10.748
14.129
18.488
31.243
51.923
84.954
136.97
5.0545
6.8660
9.2765
10.761
12.468
16.672
22.186
38.741
66.461
112.14
186.28
5.5599
7.6900
10.575
12.375
14.463
19.673
26.623
48.039
85.071
148.02
253.34
6.1159
8.6128
12.056
14.232
16.777
23.214
31.948
59.568
108.89
195.39
344.54
6.7275
9.6463
13.743
16.367
19.461
27.393
38.338
73.864
139.38
257.92
468.57
7.4002
10.804
15.668
18.822
22.574
32.324
46.005
91.592
178.41
340.45
637.26
8.1403
12.100
17.861
21.645
26.186
38.142
55.206
113.57
228.36
449.39
866.67
8.9543
13.552
20.362
24.891
30.376
45.008
66.247
140.83
292.30
593.20
1178.7
9.8497
15.179
23.212
28.625
35.236
53.109
79.497
174.63
374.14
783.02
1603.0
10.835
17.000
26.462
32.919
40.874
62.669
95.396
216.54
478.90
1033.6
2180.1
17.449
29.960
50.950
66.212
85.850
143.37
237.38
634.82
1645.5
4142.1
10143.
45.259
93.051
188.88
267.86
378.72
750.38
1469.8
5455.9
19427.
66521.
*
117.39
289.00
700.23
1083.7
1670.7
3927.4
9100.4
46890.
*
*
*
304.48
897.60
2595.9
4384.0
7370.2
20555.
56348.
*
*
*
*
*The factor is greater than 99,999.

614	
a p p e n d i x  A
Mathematical Tables
Interest Rate
Number of 
Periods
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
  1
0.9901
0.9804
0.9709
0.9615
0.9524
0.9434
0.9346
0.9259
0.9174
  2
0.9803
0.9612
0.9426
0.9246
0.9070
0.8900
0.8734
0.8573
0.8417
  3
0.9706
0.9423
0.9151
0.8890
0.8638
0.8396
0.8163
0.7938
0.7722
  4
0.9610
0.9238
0.8885
0.8548
0.8227
0.7921
0.7629
0.7350
0.7084
  5
0.9515
0.9057
0.8626
0.8219
0.7835
0.7473
0.7130
0.6806
0.6499
  6
0.9420
0.8880
0.8375
0.7903
0.7462
0.7050
0.6663
0.6302
0.5963
  7
0.9327
0.8706
0.8131
0.7599
0.7107
0.6651
0.6227
0.5835
0.5470
  8
0.9235
0.8535
0.7894
0.7307
0.6768
0.6274
0.5820
0.5403
0.5019
  9
0.9143
0.8368
0.7664
0.7026
0.6446
0.5919
0.5439
0.5002
0.4604
10
0.9053
0.8203
0.7441
0.6756
0.6139
0.5584
0.5083
0.4632
0.4224
11
0.8963
0.8043
0.7224
0.6496
0.5847
0.5268
0.4751
0.4289
0.3875
12
0.8874
0.7885
0.7014
0.6246
0.5568
0.4970
0.4440
0.3971
0.3555
13
0.8787
0.7730
0.6810
0.6006
0.5303
0.4688
0.4150
0.3677
0.3262
14
0.8700
0.7579
0.6611
0.5775
0.5051
0.4423
0.3878
0.3405
0.2992
15
0.8613
0.7430
0.6419
0.5553
0.4810
0.4173
0.3624
0.3152
0.2745
16
0.8528
0.7284
0.6232
0.5339
0.4581
0.3936
0.3387
0.2919
0.2519
17
0.8444
0.7142
0.6050
0.5134
0.4363
0.3714
0.3166
0.2703
0.2311
18
0.8360
0.7002
0.5874
0.4936
0.4155
0.3503
0.2959
0.2502
0.2120
19
0.8277
0.6864
0.5703
0.4746
0.3957
0.3305
0.2765
0.2317
0.1945
20
0.8195
0.6730
0.5537
0.4564
0.3769
0.3118
0.2584
0.2145
0.1784
21
0.8114
0.6598
0.5375
0.4388
0.3589
0.2942
0.2415
0.1987
0.1637
22
0.8034
0.6468
0.5219
0.4220
0.3418
0.2775
0.2257
0.1839
0.1502
23
0.7954
0.6342
0.5067
0.4057
0.3256
0.2618
0.2109
0.1703
0.1378
24
0.7876
0.6217
0.4919
0.3901
0.3101
0.2470
0.1971
0.1577
0.1264
25
0.7798
0.6095
0.4776
0.3751
0.2953
0.2330
0.1842
0.1460
0.1160
30
0.7419
0.5521
0.4120
0.3083
0.2314
0.1741
0.1314
0.0994
0.0754
40
0.6717
0.4529
0.3066
0.2083
0.1420
0.0972
0.0668
0.0460
0.0318
50
0.6080
0.3715
0.2281
0.1407
0.0872
0.0543
0.0339
0.0213
0.0134
a p p e ndi x A.2
Present value of $1 to be received after t periods = 1/(1 + r)t

	
a p p e n d i x  A
Mathematical Tables	
615
10%
12%
14%
15%
16%
18%
20%
24%
28%
32%
36%
0.9091
0.8929
0.8772
0.8696
0.8621
0.8475
0.8333
0.8065
0.7813
0.7576
0.7353
0.8264
0.7972
0.7695
0.7561
0.7432
0.7182
0.6944
0.6504
0.6104
0.5739
0.5407
0.7513
0.7118
0.6750
0.6575
0.6407
0.6086
0.5787
0.5245
0.4768
0.4348
0.3975
0.6830
0.6355
0.5921
0.5718
0.5523
0.5158
0.4823
0.4230
0.3725
0.3294
0.2923
0.6209
0.5674
0.5194
0.4972
0.4761
0.4371
0.4019
0.3411
0.2910
0.2495
0.2149
0.5645
0.5066
0.4556
0.4323
0.4104
0.3704
0.3349
0.2751
0.2274
0.1890
0.1580
0.5132
0.4523
0.3996
0.3759
0.3538
0.3139
0.2791
0.2218
0.1776
0.1432
0.1162
0.4665
0.4039
0.3506
0.3269
0.3050
0.2660
0.2326
0.1789
0.1388
0.1085
0.0854
0.4241
0.3606
0.3075
0.2843
0.2630
0.2255
0.1938
0.1443
0.1084
0.0822
0.0628
0.3855
0.3220
0.2697
0.2472
0.2267
0.1911
0.1615
0.1164
0.0847
0.0623
0.0462
0.3505
0.2875
0.2366
0.2149
0.1954
0.1619
0.1346
0.0938
0.0662
0.0472
0.0340
0.3186
0.2567
0.2076
0.1869
0.1685
0.1372
0.1122
0.0757
0.0517
0.0357
0.0250
0.2897
0.2292
0.1821
0.1625
0.1452
0.1163
0.0935
0.0610
0.0404
0.0271
0.0184
0.2633
0.2046
0.1597
0.1413
0.1252
0.0985
0.0779
0.0492
0.0316
0.0205
0.0135
0.2394
0.1827
0.1401
0.1229
0.1079
0.0835
0.0649
0.0397
0.0247
0.0155
0.0099
0.2176
0.1631
0.1229
0.1069
0.0930
0.0708
0.0541
0.0320
0.0193
0.0118
0.0073
0.1978
0.1456
0.1078
0.0929
0.0802
0.0600
0.0451
0.0258
0.0150
0.0089
0.0054
0.1799
0.1300
0.0946
0.0808
0.0691
0.0508
0.0376
0.0208
0.0118
0.0068
0.0039
0.1635
0.1161
0.0829
0.0703
0.0596
0.0431
0.0313
0.0168
0.0092
0.0051
0.0029
0.1486
0.1037
0.0728
0.0611
0.0514
0.0365
0.0261
0.0135
0.0072
0.0039
0.0021
0.1351
0.0926
0.0638
0.0531
0.0443
0.0309
0.0217
0.0109
0.0056
0.0029
0.0016
0.1228
0.0826
0.0560
0.0462
0.0382
0.0262
0.0181
0.0088
0.0044
0.0022
0.0012
0.1117
0.0738
0.0491
0.0402
0.0329
0.0222
0.0151
0.0071
0.0034
0.0017
0.0008
0.1015
0.0659
0.0431
0.0349
0.0284
0.0188
0.0126
0.0057
0.0027
0.0013
0.0006
0.0923
0.0588
0.0378
0.0304
0.0245
0.0160
0.0105
0.0046
0.0021
0.0010
0.0005
0.0573
0.0334
0.0196
0.0151
0.0116
0.0070
0.0042
0.0016
0.0006
0.0002
0.0001
0.0221
0.0107
0.0053
0.0037
0.0026
0.0013
0.0007
0.0002
0.0001
*
*
0.0085
0.0035
0.0014
0.0009
0.0006
0.0003
0.0001
*
*
*
*
*The factor is zero to four decimal places.

616	
a p p e n d i x  A
Mathematical Tables
a p p e ndi x A.3
Present value of an annuity of $1 per period for t periods = [1 − 1/(1 + r)t]/r
Interest Rate
Number of 
Periods
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
  1
0.9901
0.9804
0.9709
0.9615
0.9524
0.9434
0.9346
0.9259
0.9174
  2
1.9704
1.9416
1.9135
1.8861
1.8594
1.8334
1.8080
1.7833
1.7591
  3
2.9410
2.8839
2.8286
2.7751
2.7232
2.6730
2.6243
2.5771
2.5313
  4
3.9020
3.8077
3.7171
3.6299
3.5460
3.4651
3.3872
3.3121
3.2397
  5
4.8534
4.7135
4.5797
4.4518
4.3295
4.2124
4.1002
3.9927
3.8897
  6
5.7955
5.6014
5.4172
5.2421
5.0757
4.9173
4.7665
4.6229
4.4859
  7
6.7282
6.4720
6.2303
6.0021
5.7864
5.5824
5.3893
5.2064
5.0330
  8
7.6517
7.3255
7.0197
6.7327
6.4632
6.2098
5.9713
5.7466
5.5348
  9
8.5660
8.1622
7.7861
7.4353
7.1078
6.8017
6.5152
6.2469
5.9952
10
9.4713
8.9826
8.5302
8.1109
7.7217
7.3601
7.0236
6.7101
6.4177
11
10.3676
9.7868
9.2526
8.7605
8.3064
7.8869
7.4987
7.1390
6.8052
12
11.2551
10.5753
9.9540
9.3851
8.8633
8.3838
7.9427
7.5361
7.1607
13
12.1337
11.3484
10.6350
9.9856
9.3936
8.8527
8.3577
7.9038
7.4869
14
13.0037
12.1062
11.2961
10.5631
9.8986
9.2950
8.7455
8.2442
7.7862
15
13.8651
12.8493
11.9379
11.1184
10.3797
9.7122
9.1079
8.5595
8.0607
16
14.7179
13.5777
12.5611
11.6523
10.8378
10.1059
9.4466
8.8514
8.3126
17
15.5623
14.2919
13.1661
12.1657
11.2741
10.4773
9.7632
9.1216
8.5436
18
16.3983
14.9920
13.7535
12.6593
11.6896
10.8276
10.0591
9.3719
8.7556
19
17.2260
15.6785
14.3238
13.1339
12.0853
11.1581
10.3356
9.6036
8.9501
20
18.0456
16.3514
14.8775
13.5903
12.4622
11.4699
10.5940
9.8181
9.1285
21
18.8570
17.0112
15.4150
14.0292
12.8212
11.7641
10.8355
10.0168
9.2922
22
19.6604
17.6580
15.9369
14.4511
13.1630
12.0416
11.0612
10.2007
9.4424
23
20.4558
18.2922
16.4436
14.8568
13.4886
12.3034
11.2722
10.3741
9.5802
24
21.2434
18.9139
16.9355
15.2470
13.7986
12.5504
11.4693
10.5288
9.7066
25
22.0232
19.5235
17.4131
15.6221
14.0939
12.7834
11.6536
10.6748
9.8226
30
25.8077
22.3965
19.6004
17.2920
15.3725
13.7648
12.4090
11.2578
10.2737
40
32.8347
27.3555
23.1148
19.7928
17.1591
15.0463
13.3317
11.9246
10.7574
50
39.1961
31.4236
25.7298
21.4822
18.2559
15.7619
13.8007
12.2335
10.9617

	
a p p e n d i x  A
Mathematical Tables	
617
10%
12%
14%
15%
16%
18%
20%
24%
28%
32%
0.9091
0.8929
0.8772
0.8696
0.8621
0.8475
0.8333
0.8065
0.7813
0.7576
1.7355
1.6901
1.6467
1.6257
1.6052
1.5656
1.5278
1.4568
1.3916
1.3315
2.4869
2.4018
2.3216
2.2832
2.2459
2.1743
2.1065
1.9813
1.8684
1.7663
3.1699
3.0373
2.9137
2.8550
2.7982
2.6901
2.5887
2.4043
2.2410
2.0957
3.7908
3.6048
3.4331
3.3522
3.2743
3.1272
2.9906
2.7454
2.5320
2.3452
4.3553
4.1114
3.8887
3.7845
3.6847
3.4976
3.3255
3.0205
2.7594
2.5342
4.8684
4.5638
4.2883
4.1604
4.0386
3.8115
3.6046
3.2423
2.9370
2.6775
5.3349
4.9676
4.6389
4.4873
4.3436
4.0776
3.8372
3.4212
3.0758
2.7860
5.7590
5.3282
4.9464
4.7716
4.6065
4.3030
4.0310
3.5655
3.1842
2.8681
6.1446
5.6502
5.2161
5.0188
4.8332
4.4941
4.1925
3.6819
3.2689
2.9304
6.4951
5.9377
5.4527
5.2337
5.0286
4.6560
4.3271
3.7757
3.3351
2.9776
6.8137
6.1944
5.6603
5.4206
5.1971
4.7932
4.4392
3.8514
3.3868
3.0133
7.1034
6.4235
5.8424
5.5831
5.3423
4.9095
4.5327
3.9124
3.4272
3.0404
7.3667
6.6282
6.0021
5.7245
5.4675
5.0081
4.6106
3.9616
3.4587
3.0609
7.6061
6.8109
6.1422
5.8474
5.5755
5.0916
4.6755
4.0013
3.4834
3.0764
7.8237
6.9740
6.2651
5.9542
5.6685
5.1624
4.7296
4.0333
3.5026
3.0882
8.0216
7.1196
6.3729
6.0472
5.7487
5.2223
4.7746
4.0591
3.5177
3.0971
8.2014
7.2497
6.4674
6.1280
5.8178
5.2732
4.8122
4.0799
3.5294
3.1039
8.3649
7.3658
6.5504
6.1982
5.8775
5.3162
4.8435
4.0967
3.5386
3.1090
8.5136
7.4694
6.6231
6.2593
5.9288
5.3527
4.8696
4.1103
3.5458
3.1129
8.6487
7.5620
6.6870
6.3125
5.9731
5.3837
4.8913
4.1212
3.5514
3.1158
8.7715
7.6446
6.7429
6.3587
6.0113
5.4099
4.9094
4.1300
3.5558
3.1180
8.8832
7.7184
6.7921
6.3988
6.0442
5.4321
4.9245
4.1371
3.5592
3.1197
8.9847
7.7843
6.8351
6.4338
6.0726
5.4509
4.9371
4.1428
3.5619
3.1210
9.0770
7.8431
6.8729
6.4641
6.0971
5.4669
4.9476
4.1474
3.5640
3.1220
9.4269
8.0552
7.0027
6.5660
6.1772
5.5168
4.9789
4.1601
3.5693
3.1242
9.7791
8.2438
7.1050
6.6418
6.2335
5.5482
4.9966
4.1659
3.5712
3.1250
9.9148
8.3045
7.1327
6.6605
6.2463
5.5541
4.9995
4.1666
3.5714
3.1250

618	
a p p e n d i x  A
Mathematical Tables
a p p e ndi x A.4
Future value of an annuity of $1 per period for t periods = [(1 + r)t − 1]/r
Interest Rate
Number of 
Periods
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
  1
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
  2
2.0100
2.0200
2.0300
2.0400
2.0500
2.0600
2.0700
2.0800
2.0900
  3
3.0301
3.0604
3.0909
3.1216
3.1525
3.1836
3.2149
3.2464
3.2781
  4
4.0604
4.1216
4.1836
4.2465
4.3101
4.3746
4.4399
4.5061
4.5731
  5
5.1010
5.2040
5.3091
5.4163
5.5256
5.6371
5.7507
5.8666
5.9847
  6
6.1520
6.3081
6.4684
6.6330
6.8019
6.9753
7.1533
7.3359
7.5233
  7
7.2135
7.4343
7.6625
7.8983
8.1420
8.3938
8.6540
8.9228
9.2004
  8
8.2857
8.5830
8.8932
9.2142
9.5491
9.8975
10.260
10.637
11.028
  9
9.3685
9.7546
10.159
10.583
11.027
11.491
11.978
12.488
13.021
10
10.462
10.950
11.464
12.006
12.578
13.181
13.816
14.487
15.193
11
11.567
12.169
12.808
13.486
14.207
14.972
15.784
16.645
17.560
12
12.683
13.412
14.192
15.026
15.917
16.870
17.888
18.977
20.141
13
13.809
14.680
15.618
16.627
17.713
18.882
20.141
21.495
22.953
14
14.947
15.974
17.086
18.292
19.599
21.015
22.550
24.215
26.019
15
16.097
17.293
18.599
20.024
21.579
23.276
25.129
27.152
29.361
16
17.258
18.639
20.157
21.825
23.657
25.673
27.888
30.324
33.003
17
18.430
20.012
21.762
23.698
25.840
28.213
30.840
33.750
36.974
18
19.615
21.412
23.414
25.645
28.132
30.906
33.999
37.450
41.301
19
20.811
22.841
25.117
27.671
30.539
33.760
37.379
41.446
46.018
20
22.019
24.297
26.870
29.778
33.066
36.786
40.995
45.762
51.160
21
23.239
25.783
28.676
31.969
35.719
39.993
44.865
50.423
56.765
22
24.472
27.299
30.537
34.248
38.505
43.392
49.006
55.457
62.873
23
25.716
28.845
32.453
36.618
41.430
46.996
53.436
60.893
69.532
24
26.973
30.422
34.426
39.083
44.502
50.816
58.177
66.765
76.790
25
28.243
32.030
36.459
41.646
47.727
54.865
63.249
73.106
84.701
30
34.785
40.568
47.575
56.085
66.439
79.058
94.461
113.28
136.31
40
48.886
60.402
75.401
95.026
120.80
154.76
199.64
259.06
337.88
50
64.463
84.579
112.80
152.67
209.35
290.34
406.53
573.77
815.08
60
81.670
114.05
163.05
237.99
353.58
533.13
813.52
1253.2
1944.8

	
a p p e n d i x  A
Mathematical Tables	
619
10%
12%
14%
15%
16%
18%
20%
24%
28%
32%
36%
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
2.1000
2.1200
2.1400
2.1500
2.1600
2.1800
2.2000
2.2400
2.2800
2.3200
2.3600
3.3100
3.3744
3.4396
3.4725
3.5056
3.5724
3.6400
3.7776
3.9184
4.0624
4.2096
4.6410
4.7793
4.9211
4.9934
5.0665
5.2154
5.3680
5.6842
6.0156
6.3624
6.7251
6.1051
6.3528
6.6101
6.7424
6.8771
7.1542
7.4416
8.0484
8.6999
9.3983
10.146
7.7156
8.1152
8.5355
8.7537
8.9775
9.4420
9.9299
10.980
12.136
13.406
14.799
9.4872
10.089
10.730
11.067
11.414
12.142
12.916
14.615
16.534
18.696
21.126
11.436
12.300
13.233
13.727
14.240
15.327
16.499
19.123
22.163
25.678
29.732
13.579
14.776
16.085
16.786
17.519
19.086
20.799
24.712
29.369
34.895
41.435
15.937
17.549
19.337
20.304
21.321
23.521
25.959
31.643
38.593
47.062
57.352
18.531
20.655
23.045
24.349
25.733
28.755
32.150
40.238
50.398
63.122
78.998
21.384
24.133
27.271
29.002
30.850
34.931
39.581
50.895
65.510
84.320
108.44
24.523
28.029
32.089
34.352
36.786
42.219
48.497
64.110
84.853
112.30
148.47
27.975
32.393
37.581
40.505
43.672
50.818
59.196
80.496
109.61
149.24
202.93
31.772
37.280
43.842
47.580
51.660
60.965
72.035
100.82
141.30
198.00
276.98
35.950
42.753
50.980
55.717
60.925
72.939
87.442
126.01
181.87
262.36
377.69
40.545
48.884
59.118
65.075
71.673
87.068
105.93
157.25
233.79
347.31
514.66
45.599
55.750
68.394
75.836
84.141
103.74
128.12
195.99
300.25
459.45
700.94
51.159
63.440
78.969
88.212
98.603
123.41
154.74
244.03
385.32
607.47
954.28
57.275
72.052
91.025
102.44
115.38
146.63
186.69
303.60
494.21
802.86
1298.8
64.002
81.699
104.77
118.81
134.84
174.02
225.03
377.46
633.59
1060.8
1767.4
71.403
92.503
120.44
137.63
157.41
206.34
271.03
469.06
812.00
1401.2
2404.7
79.543
104.60
138.30
159.28
183.60
244.49
326.24
582.63
1040.4
1850.6
3271.3
88.497
118.16
158.66
184.17
213.98
289.49
392.48
723.46
1332.7
2443.8
4450.0
98.347
133.33
181.87
212.79
249.21
342.60
471.98
898.09
1706.8
3226.8
6053.0
164.49
241.33
356.79
434.75
530.31
790.95
1181.9
2640.9
5873.2
12941.
28172.3
442.59
767.09
1342.0
1779.1
2360.8
4163.2
7343.9
22729.
69377.
*
*
1163.9
2400.0
4994.5
7217.7
10436.
21813.
45497.
*
*
*
*
3034.8
7471.6
18535.
29220.
46058.
*
*
*
*
*
*
*The factor is greater than 99,999.

620
Key Equations
B
   7.	 The times interest earned (TIE) ratio: 
	
Times interest earned ratio = EBIT
Interest	
[3.7]
   8.	 The cash coverage ratio: 
	
Cash coverage ratio = 
EBIT + Depreciation
Interest
	
[3.8]
   9.	 The inventory turnover ratio:  
	
Inventory turnover = 
Cost of goods sold
Inventory
	
[3.9]
10.	 The average days’ sales in inventory:  
	
Days’ sales in inventory = 
365 days
Inventory turnover	
[3.10]
11.	 The receivables turnover ratio:  
	
Receivables turnover = 
Sales
Accounts receivable	
[3.11]
12.	 The days’ sales in receivables:  
	
Days’ sales in receivables = 
365 days
Receivables turnover	
[3.12]
13.	 The total asset turnover ratio:  
	
Total asset turnover = 
Sales
Total assets	
[3.13]
14.	 Profit margin:  
	
Profit margin = Net income
Sales
	
[3.14]
15.	 Return on assets (ROA):  
	
Return on assets = Net income
Total assets	
[3.15]
16.	 Return on equity (ROE):  
	
Return on equity = Net income
Total equity	
[3.16]
17.	 Earnings per share (EPS): 
	
EPS = 
Net income
Shares outstanding	
[3.17]
18.	 The price–earnings (PE) ratio: 
	
PE ratio = 
Price per share
Earnings per share	
[3.18]
CHAPTER 2
  1.	 The balance sheet identity, or equation:  
Assets  =  Liabilities + Shareholders’ equity	
[2.1]
  2.	 The income statement equation:  
Revenues − Expenses = Income	
[2.2]
  3.	 The cash flow identity:  
Cash flow from assets = Cash flow to creditors 	
[2.3] 
	
+ Cash flow to stockholders
where 
a.	 Cash flow from assets = Operating cash flow (OCF) − Net 
capital spending − Change in net working capital (NWC)
(1)	Operating cash flow = Earnings before interest and 
taxes (EBIT) + Depreciation − Taxes
(2)	Net capital spending = Ending net fixed assets − 
Beginning net fixed assets + Depreciation
(3)	Change in net working capital = Ending NWC − 
Beginning NWC
b.	 Cash flow to creditors = Interest paid − Net new borrowing
c.	 Cash flow to stockholders = Dividend paid − Net new 
equity raised
CHAPTER 3
   1.	 The current ratio: 
	
Current ratio =
Current assets
Current liabilities	
[3.1]
  2.	 The quick, or acid-test, ratio: 
	
Quick ratio =
Current assets −Inventory
Current liabilities
	
[3.2]
  3.	 The cash ratio: 
	
Cash ratio =
Cash
Current liabilities	
[3.3]
  4.	 The total debt ratio: 
	
Total debt ratio =
Total assets −Total equity
Total assets
	
[3.4]
  5.	 The debt–equity ratio: 
	
Debt–equity ratio = Total debt/Total equity	
[3.5]
  6.	 The equity multiplier: 
	
Equity multiplier  =  Total assets/Total equity	
[3.6]

	
A P P E N D I X  B     Key Equations	
621
 2.	 The future value factor for an annuity: 
	
Annuity FV factor = (Future value factor − 1)/r 	
[5.2]
	
                 = [(1 + r)t − 1]/r
 3.	 Annuity due value = Ordinary annuity value × (1 + r)	
[5.3]
 4.	 Present value for a perpetuity: 
	
PV for a perpetuity = C/r = C × (1/r)	
[5.4]
 5.	 Effective annual rate (EAR), where m is the number of times 
the interest is compounded during the year: 
	
EAR = (1 + Quoted rate/m)m − 1	
[5.5]
CHAPTER 6
 1.	 Bond value if bond has (1) a face value of F paid at 
maturity, (2) a coupon of C paid per period, (3) t periods to 
maturity, and (4) a yield of r per period: 
	
Bond value = C × [1 − 1/(1 + r)t]/r + F/(1 + r)t 
	
Bond value = Present value of 
the coupons
 + Present value of 
the face amount 	
[6.1]
 2.	 The Fisher effect: 
	
1 + R = (1 + r) × (1 + h)	
[6.2] 
	
where h is the inflation rate
 3.	 R = r + h + r × h	
[6.3]
 4.	 R ≈ r + h	
[6.4]
CHAPTER 7
 1.	 P0 = (D1 + P1)/(1 + R)
[7.1]
 2.	 P0 = D/R
[7.2]
 3.	 P0 =
D0 × (1 + g)
R −g
=
D1
R −g
[7.3]
 4.	 Pt =
Dt × (1 + g)
R −g
=
Dt+1
R −g
[7.4]
 5.	 R = D1∕P0 + g
[7.5]
 6.	 Price at Time t = Benchmark PE ratio × EPSt
[7.6]
CHAPTER 8
	 1.	 Net present value (NPV):  
NPV = Present value of future cash flows − Investment cost
	 2.	 Payback period:  
Payback period = Number of years that pass before the sum of 
an investment’s cash flows equals the cost of the investment 
	 3.	 The average accounting return (AAR): 
	
AAR =
Average net income
Average book value
	 4.	 Internal rate of return (IRR):  
IRR = Discount rate of required return such that the net present 
value of an investment is zero
	 5.	 Profitability index: 
	
Profitability index = PV of cash flows
Cost of investment
CHAPTER 9
	 1.	 Project cash flow =	Project operating cash flow 
	
	 	
− Project change in net working capital 
	
	 	
− Project capital spending
19.	 The price–sales ratio: 
	
Price–sales ratio = 
Price per share
Sales per share	
[3.19]
20.	 The market-to-book ratio: 
	
Market-to-book ratio = 
Market value per share
Book value per share 	
[3.20]
21.	 The enterprise value: 
	
Enterprise value = Total market value of the stock  
             
  + Book value of all liabilities  
                − Cash	
[3.21]
22.	 The EBITDA ratio:  
	
EBITDA ratio = 
Enterprise value
EBITDA
	
[3.22]
23.	 The DuPont identity: 
	
ROE = Net income
Sales
× Sales
Assets ×
Assets
Total equity	
[3.23]
	
 
 
 
Return on assets (ROA)
	
ROE = Profit margin 
× Total asset turnover  
× Equity multiplier
24.	 The dividend payout ratio: 
	
Dividend payout ratio = Cash dividends
Net income
	
[3.24]
25.	 The retention ratio: 
	
Retention ratio = 
Addition to retained earnings
Net income
	
[3.25]
26.	 The internal growth rate: 
	
Internal growth rate = 
ROA × b
1 − ROA × b	
[3.26]
27.	 The sustainable growth rate: 
	
Sustainable growth rate = 
ROE × b
1 − ROE × b	
[3.27]
CHAPTER 4
  1.	 The future value of $1 invested for t periods at a rate of r per 
period: 
	
Future value = $1 × (1 + r)t	
[4.1]
  2.	 The present value of $1 to be received t periods in the future at 
a discount rate of r: 
	
PV = $1 × [1/(1 + r)t] = $1/(1 + r)t	
[4.2]
  3.	 The relationship between future value and present value (the 
basic present value equation): 
	
PV × (1 + r)t = FVt
	
PV = FVt /(1 + r)t = FVt × [1/(1 + r)t]	
[4.3]
CHAPTER 5
  1.	 The present value of an annuity of C dollars per period for t 
periods when the rate of return, or interest rate, is r : 
	
Annuity present value = C × a1 −Present value factor
r
b	 [5.1]
	
                   = C × e
1 −31/(1 + r)t4
r
f

622	
A P P E N D I X  B     Key Equations
CHAPTER 13
	1.	 Modigliani-Miller Proposition II, no taxes: 
	
	 RE = RA + (RA − RD) × (D∕E)
[13.1]
	2.	 Modigliani-Miller propositions, with taxes:  
a.  Present value of the interest tax shield:  
= (TC × D × RD)∕RD 
= TC × D
[13.2]
	
	 b.  Proposition I:  
VL = VU + TC × D
[13.3]
CHAPTER 16
	1.	 Net working capital + Fixed assets 
	
	                  = Long-term debt + Equity
[16.1]
	2.	 Net working capital = (Cash + Other current assets)   
                  − Current liabilities
[16.2]
	3.	 Cash =	Long-term debt + Equity + Current liabilities  
	
− Current assets other than cash − Fixed assets [16.3]
	4.	 The operating cycle:  
Operating cycle = Inventory period   
                + Accounts receivable period
[16.4]
	5.	 The cash cycle:  
Cash cycle = Operating cycle  
                      − Accounts payable period
[16.5]
	6.	 Total cash collections:  
Cash collections = Beginning accounts receivable 
                 + ½ × Sales
[16.6]
CHAPTER 17
	1.	 The economic order quantity (EOQ) model:
	
	 Total carrying costs =	Average inventory  
	
× Carrying costs per unit = (Q∕2) × CC

[17.1]
	2.	 Total restocking cost =	Fixed cost per order  
	
× Number of orders = F × (T∕Q)[17.2]
	3.	 Total costs	= Carrying costs + Restocking costs   
	
= (Q∕2) × CC + F × (T∕Q)
[17.3]
	4.	 Carrying costs = Restocking costs  
  (Q*∕2) × CC = F × (T∕Q*)
[17.4]
	5.	 (Q*)2 = 2T × F
CC

[17.5]
	6.	 The optimal order size Q*: 
	
	
Q* = B
2T × F
CC

[17.6]
CHAPTER 18
	1.	 [E(S1) − S0]∕S0 = hFC − hUS
[18.1]
	2.	 E(S1) = S0 × [1 + (hFC − hUS)]
[18.2]
	3.	 Relative purchasing power parity (PPP):  
E(St) = S0 × [1 + (hFC − hUS)]t
[18.3]
	4.	 Interest rate parity (IRP), exact, single period:  
F1∕S0 = (1 + RFC)∕(1 + RUS)
[18.4]
	5.	 (F1 − S0)∕S0 = RFC − RUS
[18.5]
	6.	 F1 = S0 × [1 + (RFC − RUS)]
[18.6]
	7.	 IRP, approximate, multiperiod:  
Ft = S0 × [1 + (RFC − RUS)]t
[18.7]
	 2.	 Operating cash flow = EBIT + Depreciation − Taxes
	 3.	 The tax shield approach to operating cash flow:  
OCF = (Sales − Costs) × (1 − TC) + Depreciation × TC
	 4.	 Total cash flow =	Operating cash flow − Change in NWC  
	
− Capital spending
	 5.	 Cash flow = Cash inflow − Cash outflow
CHAPTER 10
	 1.	 Total dollar return = Dividend income 
	
	                  + Capital gain (or loss)
[10.1]
	 2.	 Total cash if stock is sold = Initial investment + Total return
	
	 
[10.2]
	 3.	 Variance of returns, Var(R), or σ2: 
	
	
Var(R) =
1
T −1 [(R1 −R)2 + p + (RT −R)2]
[10.3]
	 4.	 Geometric average return =	[(1 + R1) × (1 + R2)  
	
× · · · × (1 + RT)]1/T − 1
[10.4]
CHAPTER 11
	 1.	 Risk premium = Expected return − Risk-free rate 
	
	             = E(R) − Rf
[11.1]
	 2.	 Expected return on a portfolio: 
	
	 E(RP) = x1 × E(R1) + x2 × E(R2) + · · · + xn × E(Rn)
[11.2]
	 3.	 Total return = Expected return + Unexpected return 
     
  R = E(R) + U
[11.3]
	 4.	 Announcement = Expected part + Surprise
[11.4]
	 5.	 R = E(R) + Systematic portion + Unsystematic portion [11.5]
	 6.	 Total risk = Systematic risk + Unsystematic risk
[11.6]
	 7.	 The capital asset pricing model (CAPM): 
	
	 E(Ri) = Rf + [E(RM) − Rf] βi
[11.7]
CHAPTER 12
	 1.	 RE = D1∕P0 + g
[12.1]
	 2.	 RE = Rf + βE × (RM − Rf)
[12.2]
	 3.	 RP = D∕P0
[12.3]
	 4.	 V = E + D
[12.4]
	 5.	 100% = E∕V + D∕V
[12.5]
	 6.	 Weighted average cost of capital (WACC)  
= (E∕V ) × RE + (D∕V) × RD × (1 − TC)
[12.6]
	 7.	 WACC = (E∕V) × RE + (P∕V) × RP + (D∕V) ×  
         RD × (1 − TC)
[12.7]
	 8.	 Taxes* = EBIT × TC
[12.8]
	 9.	 CFA* =	 EBIT + Depreciation − Taxes*   
	
− Change in NWC − Capital spending  
       =	EBIT + Depreciation − EBIT × TC  
	
− Change in NWC − Capital spending
[12.9]
	10.	 CFA* =	 EBIT × (1 − TC) + Depreciation − Change in NWC  
	
− Capital spending
[12.10]
	11.	 V0 =
CFA1*
1 + WACC +
CFA2*
(1 + WACC)2 +
CFA3*
(1 + WACC)3 + p
	
	    
+
CFAt* + Vt
(1 + WACC)t
[12.11]
	12.	 Vt =
CFAt*+1
WACC −g
[12.12]

Answers to Selected  
End-of-Chapter Problems C
CHAPTER 2
	 1.	 Owners’ equity = $5,680
	
	
NWC = $390
	 3.	 $83,750
	 5.	 $78,020
	 7.	 $18,297
	 9.	 $120
	11.	 −$155,500
	13.	 Book value = $4,370,000
	
	 Total NWC and market value = $5,850,000
	15.	 $6,370
	17.	 a.  $900
	
	 b.  $0
	19.	 a.  −$140,000
	
	 b.  $525,000
	21.	 a.  $2,661
	
	 b.  $6,566
	
	 c.  −$413
	
	 d.  $497; −$910
	23.	 Operating cash flow = $144,897
	
	 Capital spending = $147,348
	
	 Change in NWC = $11,471
	
	 Cash flow from assets = −$13,922
	
	 Cash flow to creditors = $5,210
	
	 Cash flow to stockholders = −$19,132
CHAPTER 3
	 1.	 Current ratio = 1.36 times
	
	
Quick ratio = .96 times
	 3.	 Receivables turnover = 11.64 times
	
	
Days’ sales in receivables = 31.36 days
	 5.	 .23; 1.23
	 7.	 15.70%
	 9.	 81.33 days
	11.	 5.71%
	13.	 14.66%
	17.	 19.82%
	19.	 7.51%
	21.	 12.43%
	23.	 15.93%
	25.	 4.58%
	27.	 $560.40
	29.	 Child profit margin = 4.00%
	
	 Store profit margin = 2.00%
	
	 Store ROE = 11.69%
	31.	 4.86 times
	33.	 8.13%
	37.	 PE ratio = 18.93 times
	
	 P/S ratio = 3.56 times
	
	 DPS = $1.43
	
	 Market-to-book = 8.82 times
	39.	 7.72%
	41.	 1.16 times
	43.	 13.61%; $9,117.35; 7.41%
CHAPTER 4
	 1.	 $1,545.87
	 3.	 $6,280.46; $18,015.33; $228,945.51; $30,513.40
	 5.	 17.39; 7.51; 16.95; 9.82
	 7.	 15.09 years; 30.18 years
	 9.	 70.02 years
	11.	 $3,700.12
	13.	 8.12%; $18,207,019.19
	15.	 −4.46%
	17.	 $54,769.65
	19.	 $20,062.92
2	1.	 $66,989.20; $59,324.70
2	3.	 201.61 months
	25.	 $9,129.90; $89,875.09
CHAPTER 5
	 1.	 $2,547.97; $2,119.91; $1,869.09
	 3.	 $5,519.84; $5,742.10; $6,799.64
	 5.	 $5,791.23; $3,299.11; $15,935.55; $24,904.27
	 7.	 $3,141.65; $6,010.97; $8,549.24; $7,517.97
	 9.	 $273,685.74; $1,985,526.07
	11.	 4.65%
	13.	 13.54%; 8.65%; 7.70%; 12.22%
	15.	 13.28%
	17.	 $4,616.85; $5,839.80; $9,343.37
	19.	 APR = 164.40%
	
	 EAR = 366.79%
	21.	 50.84 months
	23.	 .78%; 9.32%; 9.73%
623

624	
a p p e n d i x  C
Answers to Selected End-of-Chapter Problems
	25.	 $1,723,472.13
	27.	 $3,209.09
	29.	 4.68%
	31.	 $1,016.77
	33.	 $1.17; $1.36
	35.	 PV: $149,645.17; $145,609.54
	37.	 G: 11.51%
	
	 H: 11.63%
	39.	 127.52 months
	41.	 $38,973,197.21
	43.	 APR = 6.10%
	
	 EAR = 6.27%
	45.	 5.42%
	47.	 $48,550.27
	49.	 $14,116.16
	51.	 $83,714.26
	53.	 APR = 30.37%
	
	 EAR = 34.97%
CHAPTER 6
	 3.	 $913.98
	 5.	 5.70%
	 7.	 6.07%
	 9.	 2.85%; 2.81%
	11.	 4.63%
	13.	 Previous asked = $1,469.375
	17.	 $4,881.80
	19.	 +2%: −8.07%; −21.12%
	
	 −2%: 8.94%; 30.77%
	21.	 6.49%; 6.56%; 6.67%
	23.	 $1,038.25
	25.	 9.56%; 9.27%
	31.	 6.51%
	33.	 6.20%
CHAPTER 7
	 1.	 P0 = $38.83
	
	 P3 = $43.81
	
	 P15 = $70.95
	 3.	 Dividend yield = 6.22%
	
	 Capital gains yield = 4.50%
	 5.	 10.40%
	 7.	 $80.28
	 9.	 Straight voting = $7,650,034
	
	 Cumulative voting = $3,060,034
	11.	 $76.52
	13.	 $47.70; $55.65
	15.	 $79.06
	17.	 $67.18
	19.	 $94.34
	21.	 4.11%; 3.30%
	23.	 3.48%
	25.	 $34.44; 6.48%
	27.	 $76.93
CHAPTER 8
	 1.	 2.32 years
	 3.	 2.47 years; 3.11 years
	 5.	 18.79%
	 7.	 $3,876.54; −$1,111.48; 19.13%
	 9.	 $8,600; $4,032.01; $606.94; −$2,034.50
	11.	 a.  15.98%; 14.95%
	
	 b.  7.62%
	13.	 1.158; 1.072; .969
	15.	 a.  3.34 years; 1.92 years
	
	 b.  $60,579.46; $15,908.38
	
	 c.  21.02%; 30.57%
	
	 d.  1.258; 1.338
	17.	 a.  1.282; 1.166
	
	 b.  $12,241.88; $12,914.13
	19.	 0%; <0%
	21.	 a.  2.26 years; 3.03 years
	
	 b.  $109,364.59; $173,339.68
	23.	 Discounting approach = 19.41%
	
	 Reinvestment approach = 13.30%
	
	 Combination approach = 13.12%
	25.	 7.47%; $2,983.47; −$10,000; $16,728.41
CHAPTER 9
	 1.	 $35,220,000
	 3.	 $88,400
	 5.	 Year 7 allowance = $63,849.50
	 7.	 $1,380,739.20
	 9.	 $838,500
	11.	 $24,712.19
	13.	 $32,075.95
	15.	 $81,452.95; −$17,107.50
	19.	 Best-case NPV = $2,430,748.04
	
	 Worst-case NPV = −$1,816,064.69
	21.	 $27,446.78
	23.	 a.  Base-case NPV = $240,394.39  
Best-case NPV = $980,240.82  
Worst-case NPV = −$418,869.12
	
	 b.  ΔNPV/ΔFC = −$2.02
CHAPTER 10
	 1.	 Total return = 20.35%
	
	 Dividend yield = 2.29%
	
	 Capital gains yield = 18.06%
	 3.	 $2,190
	 5.	 12.10%; 8.83%
	 7.	 X: Average return = 10.2%
	
	 X: Variance = .02487
	
	 X: Standard deviation = 15.77%
	
	 Y: Average return = 14.60%
	
	 Y: Variance = .06203
	
	 Y: Standard deviation = 24.91%
	 9.	 a.  9.80%
	
	 b.  .018370; 13.55%
	11.	 1.07%; 5.33%
	13.	 2.99%
	15.	 25.40%; 27.93%
	17.	 −2.00% to 14.80%
	
	 −10.40% to 23.20%
	19.	 12%; 14.51%
	21.	 10.19%; 9.82%

	
a p p e n d i x  C
Answers to Selected End-of-Chapter Problems	
625
	23.	 8.27%
	25.	 .473%; .00000056%
CHAPTER 11
	 1.	 A: .6743
	
	 B: .3257
	 3.	 13.45%
	 5.	 11.40%
	 7.	 A: 11.20%; 3.87%
	
	 B: 18.40%; 17.26%
	 9.	 a.  11.67%
	
	 b.  .01476
	11.	 1.19
	13.	 12.58%
	15.	 12.33%
	17.	 a.  7.60%
	
	 b.  Weight of stock = .5691
	
	 c.  .825
	
	 d.  Weight of stock = 200%
	19.	 Reward-to-risk ratios:
	
	 Market = 7.00%
	
	 Y: 6.25%
	
	 Z: 7.29%
	21.	 9.25%; 10.10%
	23.	 J: .4571
	
	 E(R) = 11.57%
	27.	 C = $169,821.43
	
	 Rf = $70,178.57
CHAPTER 12
	 1.	 11.23%
	 3.	 11.28%
	 5.	 4.52%
	 7.	 a.  5.74%
	
	 b.  3.73%
	 9.	 a.  9.18%
	11.	 .34
	13.	 8.36%
	15.	 9.08%
	17.	 a.  Y and Z
	
	 b.  X and Z
	
	 c.  Incorrectly accepted: Y 
Incorrectly rejected: X
	19.	 .3620
	21.	 Cost < $46,357,615.89
	23.	 a.  5.32%
	
	 b.  11.47%
CHAPTER 13
	 1.	 a.  $1.22; $1.88; $2.25
	
	 b.  $1.13; $1.95; $2.42
	 3.	 a.  4.61%; 7.09%; 8.50%
	
	 b.  4.25%; 7.36%; 9.14%
	
	 c.  2.99%; 4.61%; 5.53%  
2.76%; 4.79%; 5.94%
	 5.	 $26.30; $7,890,000; $7,890,000
	 7.	 $52; $52
	 9.	 a.  $2,203.13
	
	 b.  $2,517.50
	
	 c.  Sell 75 shares
	11.	 a.  9.60%
	
	 b.  11.19%
	
	 c.  15.15%
	
	 d.  9.60%; 9.60%
	13.	 $5,244,000
	15.	 .58; .47
CHAPTER 14
	 1.	 $12,852
	 3.	 $85.71
	 5.	 a.  New shares = 70,000; Par value = $.50
	
	 b.  New shares = 7,000; Par value = $5.00
	 7.	 $31.50; $30.15
	11.	 Par value = $.50; Dividend per share last year = $1.33
	13.	 a.  $58.04
	
	 b.  $58.04
CHAPTER 15
	 1.	 $4,250; −$500
	 3.	 1,980,847 shares
	 5.	 2,702,703 shares
CHAPTER 16
	 1.	 a.	 No change
	
	 b.	 No change
	
	 c.	 No change
	
	 d.	 Decrease
	
	 e.	 Decrease
	
	 f.	 Decrease
	
	 g.	 No change
	
	 h.	 Decrease
	
	 i.	
Increase
	
	 j.	
Decrease
	
	 k.	 Decrease
	
	 l.	
No Change
	
	 m.	 Decrease
	
	 n.	 Decrease
	
	 o.	 Decrease
	 3.	 a.  Increase
	
	 b.  Increase
	
	 c.  Decrease
	
	 d.  No Change
	
	 e.  Decrease
	
	 f.  No Change
	 5.	 a.  $623; $630; $653; $763
	
	 b.  $525; $615; $660; $718
	
	 c.  $720; $645; $645; $807
	 7.	 21.42%
	 9.	 $2,112.50; $2,439.00; $2,741.75; $2,769.50
	11.	 $221,100; $361,850; $276,350
	13.	 a.  6.29%
	
	 b.  $465,080.96
	15.	 Average payables = $27,919.18
	
	 Average receivables = $71,804.93

626	
a p p e n d i x  C
Answers to Selected End-of-Chapter Problems
CHAPTER 17
	 1.	 $95,000; $70,700
	 3.	 $4,200; −$5,100; −$900
	 5.	 $5,920
	 7.	 $104,816.44
	 9.	 a.  19 days
	
	 b.  $1,795,890.41
	11.	 d.  20.13%; 44.59%; 13.01%; 44.32%
	13.	 2,744.15
CHAPTER 18
	 1.	 a.  Z 335.98
	
	 b.  €1.2452
	
	 c.  $6,226,000
	
	 d.  Singapore dollar
	
	 e.  Mexican peso
	
	 f.  SFr/€ = $1.2022
	
	 g.  Kuwait dinar; Vietnam dong
	 3.	 a.  ¥ 118.37; premium
	
	 b.  A$1.1831; discount
	 5.	 a.  ¥/£ = 185.13
	
	 b.  arbitrage profit per $ = $.0209
	 7.	 Invest in U.S. = $30,171,325.11
	
	 Invest in Great Britain = $29,726,585.36
	 9.	 Current = $233,343.56
	
	 +10% = $621,221.41
	
	 −10% = −$240,729.38
	
	 Breakeven = $1.2367; −5.19%
	11.	 −2.03%
	13.	 $65.32
	15.	 a.  Equity = $22,916.67
	
	 b.  Equity = $21,153.85
	
	 c.  Equity = $25,462.96

627
This appendix is intended to help you use your Hewlett-Packard 
HP-10B or Texas Instruments BA II Plus financial calculator to 
solve problems encountered in the introductory finance course. It 
describes the various calculator settings and provides keystroke so-
lutions for nine selected problems from this book. Please see your 
owner’s manual for more complete instructions. For more examples 
and problem-solving techniques, please see Financial Analysis with 
an Electronic Calculator, 6th edition, by Mark A. White (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2007).
CALCULATOR SETTINGS
Most calculator errors in the introductory finance course are the result 
of inappropriate settings. Before beginning a calculation, you should 
ask yourself the following questions:
1.	 Did I clear the financial registers?
2.	 Is the compounding frequency set to once per period?
3.	 Is the calculator in END mode?
4.	 Did I enter negative numbers using the  +/−  key? 
Clearing the Registers
All calculators have areas of memory, called registers, where vari-
ables and intermediate results are stored. There are two sets of fi-
nancial registers, the time value of money (TVM) registers and the 
cash flow (CF) registers. These must be cleared before beginning 
a new calculation. On the Hewlett-Packard HP-10B, pressing 
 
{CLEAR ALL} clears both the TVM and the CF registers.1 To clear 
the TVM registers on the BA II Plus, press  2nd   {CLR TVM}. Press 
2nd   {CLR Work} from within the cash flow worksheet to clear the 
CF registers.
Compounding Frequency
Both the HP-10B and the BA II Plus are hardwired to assume monthly 
compounding, that is, compounding 12 times per period. Because very 
few problems in the introductory finance course make this assumption, 
you should change this default setting to once per period. On the HP-
10B, press 1 
  {P/YR}. To verify that the default has been changed, 
press the 
 key, then press and briefly hold the INPUT   key.2 The 
display should read “1P_Yr”.
	
On the BA II Plus, you can specify both payment frequency and 
compounding frequency, although they should normally be set to the 
same number. To set both to once per period, press the key sequence 
2nd   {P/Y} 1  ENTER , then press  ↓  1  ENTER . Pressing 
2nd   {QUIT} returns you to standard calculator mode.
END Mode and Annuities Due
In most problems, payment is made at the end of a period, and this is 
the default setting (end mode) for both the HP-10B and the BA II Plus. 
Annuities due assume payments are made at the beginning of each pe-
riod (begin mode). On the HP-10B, pressing 
  {BEG/END} toggles 
between begin and end mode. Press the key sequence  2nd   {BGN} 
2nd   {SET}  2nd   {QUIT} to accomplish the same task on the BA II 
Plus. Both calculators will indicate on the display that your calculator 
is set for begin mode.
Sign Changes
Sign changes are used to identify the direction of cash inflows and 
outflows. Generally, cash inflows are entered as positive num-
bers and cash outflows are entered as negative numbers. To enter 
a negative number on either the HP-10B or the BA II Plus, first 
press the appropriate digit keys and then press the change sign key, 
+/−. Do not use the minus sign key,  −, as its effects are quite 
unpredictable.
SAMPLE PROBLEMS
This section provides keystroke solutions for selected problems from 
the text illustrating the nine basic financial calculator skills.
1. Future Value or Present Value of a Single Sum
Compute the future value of $2,250 at a 17 percent annual rate for 
30 years.
HP-10B
BA II PLUS
–2,250.00 PV
–2,250.00 PV
30.00 N
30.00 N
17.00 I/YR
17.00 I/Y
FV  249,895.46
CPT  FV  249,895.46
The future value is $249,895.46.
1 The 
 key is colored orange and serves as a Shift key for the functions in 
curly brackets.
2 This is the same keystroke used to clear all registers; pretty handy, eh?
Using the HP-10B  
and TI BA II Plus 
Financial Calculators D

628	
a p p e n d i x  D
Using the HP-10B and TI BA II Plus Financial Calculators
2. Present Value or Future Value of an Ordinary 
Annuity
Betty’s Bank offers you a $20,000, seven-year term loan at 11 percent 
annual interest. What will your annual loan payment be?
HP-10B
BA II PLUS
–20,000.00 PV
–20,000.00 PV
7.00 N
7.00 N
11.00 I/YR
11.00 I/Y
PMT  4,244.31
CPT  PMT  4,244.31
Your annual loan payment will be $4,244.31.
3. Finding an Unknown Interest Rate
Assume that the total cost of a college education will be $75,000 when 
your child enters college in 18 years. You presently have $7,000 to 
invest. What rate of interest must you earn on your investment to cover 
the cost of your child’s college education?
HP-10B
BA II PLUS
–7,000.00 PV
–7,000.00 PV
18.00 N
18.00 N
75,000.00 FV
75,000.00 FV
I/YR  14.08
CPT  I/Y  14.08
You must earn an annual interest rate of at least 14.08 percent to cover 
the expected future cost of your child’s education.
4. Finding an Unknown Number of Periods
One of your customers is delinquent on his accounts payable balance. 
You’ve mutually agreed to a repayment schedule of $374 per month. 
You will charge 1.4 percent per month interest on the overdue balance. 
If the current balance is $12,000, how long will it take for the account 
to be paid off?
HP-10B
BA II PLUS
–12,000.00 PV
–12,000.00 PV
1.40 I/YR
1.40 I/Y
374.00 PMT
374.00 PMT
N  42.90
CPT  N  42.90
The loan will be paid off in 42.90 months.
5. Simple Bond Pricing
Mullineaux Co. issued 11-year bonds one year ago at a coupon rate of 
8.25 percent. The bonds make semiannual payments. If the YTM on 
these bonds is 7.10 percent, what is the current bond price?
HP-10B
BA II PLUS
41.25 PMT
41.25 PMT
1,000.00 FV
1,000.00 FV
20.00 N
20.00 N
3.55 I/YR
3.55 I/Y
PV  −1,081.35
CPT  PV  −1,081.35
Because the bonds make semiannual payments, we must halve the 
coupon payment (8.25 ÷ 2 = 4.125 ==> $41.25), halve the YTM 
(7.10 ÷ 2 ==> 3.55), and double the number of periods (10 years re-
maining × 2 = 20 periods). Then, the current bond price is $1,081.35.
6. Simple Bond Yields to Maturity
Vasicek Co. has 12.5 percent coupon bonds on the market with eight 
years left to maturity. The bonds make annual payments. If one of 
these bonds currently sells for $1,145.68, what is its YTM?
HP-10B
BA II PLUS
–1,145.68 PV
–1,145.68 PV
125.00 PMT
125.00 PMT
1,000.00 FV
1,000.00 FV
8.00 N
8.00 N
I/YR  9.79
	 CPT  I/Y  9.79
The bond has a yield to maturity of 9.79 percent.
7. Cash Flow Analysis
What are the IRR and NPV of the following set of cash flows? As-
sume a discount rate of 10 percent.
Year
Cash Flow
0
−$1,300
1
400
2
300
3
1,200
HP-10B
BA II PLUS
–1,300.00 CFj
CF
400.00 CFj
2ND  {CLR Work}
1.00 
 {Nj}
–1,300.00 ENTER  ↓
300.00 CFj
400.00 ENTER  ↓
1.00 
 {Nj}
1.00 ENTER  ↓
1,200.00 CFj
300.00 ENTER  ↓
1.00 
 {Nj}
1.00 ENTER  ↓
 {IRR/YR} 17.40
1,200.00 ENTER  ↓
10.00 I/YR
1.00 ENTER  ↓
 {NPV} 213.15
IRR  CPT  17.40
NPV
10.00 ENTER
↓ CPT  213.15
The project has an IRR of 17.40 percent and an NPV of $213.15.
8. Loan Amortization
Prepare an amortization schedule for a three-year loan of $24,000. 
The interest rate is 16 percent per year, and the loan calls for equal 
annual payments. How much interest is paid in the third year? How 
much total interest is paid over the life of the loan?
	
To prepare a complete amortization schedule, you must amortize 
each payment one at a time:

	
a p p e n d i x  D
Using the HP-10B and TI BA II Plus Financial Calculators	
629
HP-10B
BA II PLUS
	
−24,000.00 	 PV
	
–24,000.00 	 PV
	
16.00 	
I/YR
	
16.00 	 I/Y
	
3.00 	 N
	
3.00 	 N
	
PMT  	 10,686.19
	
CPT  PMT  	10,686.19
	
1.00 INPUT  
 {AMORT} =  	
3,840.00 <== Interest
	
2ND  {AMORT} 	 2ND  {CLR Work}
	
= 	
6,846.19 <== Principal
	
= 	 −17,153.81 <== Balance
	1.00 ENTER  ↓
	
2.00 INPUT  
 {AMORT} = 	
2,744.61 <== Interest 1.00
	1.00 ENTER  ↓	 −17,153.81 <== Balance
	
= 	
7,941.58 <== Principal
	
↓	
6,846.19 <== Principal
	
= 	 −9,212.23 <== Balance
	
↓	
3,840.00 <== Interest
	
3.00 INPUT  
 {AMORT} = 	
1,473.96 <== Interest
	
↓
	
= 	
9,212.23 <== Principal
	2.00 ENTER  ↓
	
= 	
0.00 <== Balance
	2.00 ENTER  ↓	 −9,212.23 <== Balance
	
↓	
7,941.58 <== Principal
	
↓	
2,744.61 <== Interest
	
↓
	3.00 ENTER  ↓
	3.00 ENTER  ↓	
0.00 <== Balance
	
↓	
9,212.23 <== Principal
	
↓	
1,473.96 <== Interest
	
↓
Interest of $1,473.96 is paid in the third year.
	
Enter both a beginning and an ending period to compute the total amount of interest or principal paid over a particular period of time.
HP-10B
BA II PLUS
	
−24,000.00 	 PV
	
–24,000.00 	 PV
	
16.00 	
I/YR
	
16.00 	 I/Y
	
3.00 	 N
	
3.00 	 N
	
PMT  	 10,686.19
	
CPT  PMT  	10,686.19
	
1.00 	
INPUT  
	
2ND  {AMORT} 	 2ND  {CLR Work}
	
3.00 
 {AMORT} = 	
8,058.57 <== Interest
	1.00 ENTER  ↓
	
= 	 24,000.00 <== Principal
	
= 	
0.00 <== Balance
	3.00 ENTER  ↓	
0.00 <== Balance
	
↓	
24,000.00 <== Principal
	
↓	
8,058.57 <== Interest
Total interest of $8,058.57 is paid over the life of the loan.
9. Interest Rate Conversions
Find the effective annual rate, EAR, corresponding to a 7 percent an-
nual percentage rate, APR, compounded quarterly.
HP-10B
BA II PLUS
4.00 
 {P/YR} 
	 2ND  {IConv}
7.00 
 {NOM%}
7.00 ENTER
 {EFF%} 7.19
↓ ↓
4.00 ENTER
↑ CPT  7.19
The effective annual rate equals 7.19 percent.

630
B
Beckman, Theodore N., 563
Benioff, Marc, 495
Bernanke, Ben, 150
Block, S. B., 258
Brav, A., 471, 474–475
Briloff, Abraham, 80
Brin, Sergey, 495
Buffett, Warren, 33
D
DeAngelo, H., 472
DeAngelo, L., 472
Dimson, Elroy, 332
E
Elton, E. J., 362
F
Ford, Henry, 310
G
Graham, J. R., 258, 471, 474–475
Gruber, M. J., 362
H
Harvey, C. R., 258, 471, 474–475
I
Ibbotson, R. G., 314, 496–497
J
Jaffe, J. F., 393
Jordan, B. D., 393
K
Keynes, John Maynard, 551
M
Mankiw, N. Gregory, 33
Marsh, Paul, 332
Mehra, Rajnish, 332
Michaely, R., 471, 474–475
Moore, J. S., 258
O
Obama, Barack, 33
P
Page, Larry, 495
R
Reichert, A. K., 258
Ritter, Jay R., 486, 496–499, 503
Roberts, Brian, 218
Romney, Mitt, 33
Ross, S. A., 393
S
Santayana, George, 310
Sindelar, J. L, 496, 497, 498
Sinquefield, Rex, 314
Stanley, M. T., 258
Statman, Meir, 362
Staunton, Michael, 332
T
Trump, Donald, 445
W
Westerfield, R. W., 393
Z
Zaslav, David, 13
Zimmer, George, 1, 13
Name Index

Average collection period (ACP), 60
Average returns, 320–322
arithmetic vs. geometric 
averages, 333
calculation of, 320, 333–335
geometric average returns, 
calculation of, 333–334
historical record (1926–2014), 
320–321, 326
risk premiums, 321
Average tax rate, 31
marginal tax rates vs., 31
for various industries, 32
B
Balance sheet, 22–26, 56
assets, 23
common-size balance sheets, 
53–54
debt vs. equity, 25
example, 24
liabilities and owners’ equity, 
23–24
liquidity, 25
market value vs. book value, 
25–26
net working capital, 24
Banker’s acceptance, 566
Bankruptcy, 443
Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and 
Consumer Protection Act of 
2005 (BAPCPA), 445
Bankruptcy costs, 435–437
direct costs, 436
financial distress costs, 436
indirect costs, 436–438
Bankruptcy process, 443–447
agreements to avoid, 447
financial management and, 
446–447
liquidation and reorganization, 
443–444
prepackaged bankruptcy, 445
reorganization, 444–445
strategic bankruptcies, 447
Annual percentage rate 
(APR), 142
effective annual rate (EAR) and, 
141–144
financial calculators and, 133
spreadsheets and, 144
Annuity, 131–132
annuity payments, 134
financial calculator, 133
finding payment, 134
finding rate, 136
future values for, 137–138
number of payments, 135
PV for annuity cash flows, 
132–133
spreadsheet strategies,  
134–135
summary of calculations, 139
Annuity due, 137–138
Annuity tables, 133
Apple, 526
Arithmetic average return, 333
Arrearage, 219
Articles of incorporation, 8
Asked price, 187
Asset management, 59–61
days’ sales in inventory, 59–60
days’ sales in receivables, 60
inventory turnover, 59–60
payables turnover, 61
receivables turnover, 60
total asset turnover, 61
Asset-specific risks, 360
Asset utilization ratios, 59, 64
Assets, 22–23
Auction markets, 16–17
AutoZone, 198
Availability delay, 554–555
Average accounting return 
(AAR), 245–246
advantages/disadvantages  
of, 246
average accounting return rule, 
246
defined, 245
A
Abbott Laboratories (ABT), 442
ABC approach, 571–572
ABN AMBRO, 171
Abnormal returns, 505
Absolute priority rule  
(APR), 444
Absolute purchasing power parity, 
593–594
Accelerated cost recovery system 
(ACRS), 283
Accounting, finance and, 3
Accounting insolvency, 443
Accounts payable, 534
Accounts payable period, 522
Accounts receivable 
financing, 536
Accounts receivable period, 521
Acid-test ratio, 57
Adobe Systems, 205
Aftertax cash flow, 278
Aftermarket, 494
Agency cost, 12
Agency problem, 12
control of corporation, 12–15
stockholders’ vs. managers 
interests, 13–14
Agency relationships, 12
Aging schedule, 569
Alibaba, 495
Allen System Group, 446
Amazon.com, 532
American Depository Receipt 
(ADR), 587
American Electric Power  
(AEP), 442
America Online (AOL), 291
AmeriServ Food Distribution,  
Inc., 182
Amortization, 59
Amortization schedule,  
147–148
Amortized loans, 146
Announcements and news, 
358–359
Subject Index
631

632	
S u b j e c t  I n d e x
Capital asset pricing model 
(CAPM), 373
Capital budgeting, 5, 237; see also 
Internal rate of return (IRR); 
Net present value (NPV); 
Payback rule
additional considerations in, 
296–299
average accounting return, 
245–246
capital rationing, 298–299
contingency planning, 296–298
financial management  
decisions, 5
hard rationing, 299
managerial options and, 296–298
net working capital, 277, 
282–283
practice of, 257–259
profitability index, 256–257
size, timing, and risk of future 
cash flows, 5
strategic options, 298
summary of investment  
criteria, 259
techniques in practice, 258
WACC and, 399–400
Capital expenditures, 534
Capital gains yield, 213
Capital intensity ratio, 61
Capital investment decisions, 274
capital rationing, 298–299
depreciation, 283–285
evaluating NPV estimates, 
290–292
example analysis, 286–290
incremental cash flows, 276–278
managerial options, 296
net working capital, 282–283
pro forma financial statements, 
278–279
project cash flows, 275, 279–281
scenario and what-if analyses, 
292–296
tax shield approach, 281
Capital market efficiency, 336–339
efficient markets hypothesis, 
337–339
forms of, 339
price behavior, 336
Bonds and bond valuation, 23, 
166–176
call provision, 179–180
debt vs. equity, 176
features and prices, 166, 175
financial calculator,  
173–174
indenture, 177
interest rate risk, 169–171
long-term debt, 176–177
protective covenants, 180
repayment, 179
security, 178–179
semiannual coupons, 169
seniority, 179
spreadsheet strategies, 174–175
terms of a bond, 178
values and yields, 166–169
yield to maturity, 171–172
Book building, 493
Book value, 25
market value vs., 25–26, 285
Borrower, 175
Brackets, 489
Break-even EBIT, 428
Broker, 220
Bullock Gold Mining (case), 273
Business ethics, 10
Business failure, 443
Business finance, 2
defined, 4
financial management decisions, 
5–6
financial manager and, 4–6
working capital management, 6, 
518, 558
Business organization
corporation, 7–9
forms of, 6–9
partnership, 7
sole proprietorship, 6–7
Business risk, 432
Buybacks, 464
Bylaws, 8
C
Call premium, 179
Call protected bond, 179
Call provision, 179
Cannibalism, 277
Banks, credit information, 568
BASF, 388
BATS Exchange, 224
Bearer form, 178
BellSouth, 171
Benchmark, choice of, 74–79
Berkshire Hathaway Corporation, 
33
Best case, 294
Best efforts underwriting,  
493
Beta, risk premium, 368–369
Beta coefficient, 365–366
portfolio betas, 367
for selected companies, 365
total risk vs., 366
Beta for FLIR Systems (case),  
387
Bid-ask spread, 187
Bid price, 187
Big Mac Index, 595
Blanket inventory lien, 537
BMW, 600
Board of directors, 217
Boeing, 532
Bond markets, 186–189
bond price quotes, 188–189
bond price reporting,  
187–188
buying and selling bonds, 
186–187
U.S. Treasury quotes, 189
Bond ratings, 180–182
Bond types, 182–185
convertible bond, 185
exotic bonds, 185–186
floating-rate bonds, 184–185
government bonds, 182–183
put bond, 185
structured notes, 185
zero coupon bonds, 183–184
Bond valuation. see Bonds and 
bond valuation
Bond yields
determinants of, 192–195
financial calculator, 173–174
term structure of interest rates, 
192–193
yield curve and, 193–195
Bondholders, 23

	
S u b j e c t  I n d e x 	
633
controlling disbursements, 
558–559
increasing disbursement  
float, 558
management of, 557
zero-balance accounts, 559
Cash discount, 564
Cash dividends, 456–459
standard method of payment, 457
stock repurchases vs., 464–466
Cash flow, 33–37
aftertax cash flow, 278
cash flow from assets, 34–36
incremental cash flow, 275
level cash flows, 131–137
nonconventional cash flows, 
250–252
project cash flows, 239
relevant cash flows, 275
stand-alone principle, 275
stock valuation, 206–207
summary, 37
timing of, 139
to and from firm, 15–16
Cash flow from assets, 34–36
capital spending, 35
change in net working capital, 
35, 38–39
example of, 37–39
free cash flow, 36
operating cash flow, 34–35
Cash flow time line, 522
Cash flow to creditors, 36, 39
Cash flow to stockholders,  
36–37, 39
Cash Flows and Financial 
Statements at Sunset Boards, 
Inc. (case), 50
Cash management
benefits of holding cash, 
551–552
cash collection and 
concentration, 555–557
ethical and legal questions, 554
float and, 552–555
investing idle cash, 559–560
managing disbursements, 557–559
money market securities, 561–562
planned or possible expenditures, 
560
Financing S&S Air’s Expansion 
Plans with a Bond Issue, 204
A Job at S&S Air, 347–348
McGee Cake Company, 21
Piepkorn Manufacturing 
Working Capital Management, 
Part 1, 549
Piepkorn Manufacturing 
Working Capital Management, 
Part 2, 585
Ratios and Financial Planning at 
S&S Air, Inc., 95–96
S&S Air Goes International, 611
S&S Air Goes Public, 517
S&S Air’s Mortgage, 164
Stephenson Real Estate 
Recapitalization, 454
Stock Valuation at Ragan,  
Inc., 235
Cash; see also Cash management
activities that increase/ 
decrease, 520
benefits of holding, 551–552
investing idle cash, 559–562
reasons for holding, 551
seasonal cash demands, 560
sources/uses of, 520
tracing cash, 519–520
Cash balance, 534–535
Cash budget, 533–535
cash balance, 534–535
cash outflows, 534
sales and cash collections, 533
Cash collection, 555–557
components of collection time, 
555–556
costs and, 283
lockboxes, 556
sales and, 533–534
Cash concentration, 556–557
Cash coverage ratio, 59
Cash cycle, 522, 524–525
calculation of, 523–525
defining of, 521
industry comparisons of, 526
interpretation of, 525–527
operating cycle and, 521–527
Cash disbursements, 557–559
controlled disbursement  
account, 559
Capital market history
arithmetic vs. geometric 
averages, 333–335
average return, 333
stock market risk premium, 
331–332
technical trading rules, 330
2008 bear market, 328–329
use of, 329–330
Capital One, 205
Capital rationing, 298–299
hard rationing, 299
soft rationing, 298
Capital spending, 34–35, 38, 288
project net working capital, 280
Capital structure, 6, 424; see also 
Financial leverage; Optimal 
capital structure
business and financial risk, 432
corporate taxes, 433–435
cost of equity capital, 430–432
financial management decisions, 
5–6
homemade leverage, 428–429
interest tax shield, 433–434
leverage and, 428–429
M&M Proposition I, 430
M&M Proposition II, 430–432
managerial recommendations, 
440
observed structures, 441–443
optimal capital structure, 424
static theory of, 437–438
target capital structure, 390
U.S. industries, 441
Capital structure decision, 424n
Capital structure weights, 397
Captive finance company, 567
Carrying costs, 528, 571, 573–575
flexible/restrictive policy, 529
Cases
The Beta for FLIR Systems, 387
Bullock Gold Mining, 273
Cash Flows and Financial 
Statements at Sunset Boards, 
Inc., 50
Conch Republic Electronics, 308
Cost of Capital for Layton 
Motors, 422
Electronic Timing, Inc., 484

634	
S u b j e c t  I n d e x
international corporations, 9
management goals, 12
shareholder’s vs. manager’s 
interests, 13–15
stakeholders, 15
Cost of capital, 375
divisional and project costs, 
406–410
Eastman’s example, 400–406
financial policy and, 390
optimal capital structure and, 
438–440
required return vs., 389–390
SML and, 375
summary of calculations, 400
Cost of Capital for Layton Motors 
(case), 422
Cost of debt, 394–396
Eastman example, 403–404
Cost of equity, 391–394
capital structure and, 430–432
dividend growth model 
approach, 391–393
Eastman example, 402–403
financial leverage and (M&M 
Proposition II), 430–432
M&M Proposition I, 430
SML approach, 393–394
Cost of goods sold (CoGS), 69
Cost of preferred stock, 395
Costs
carrying costs, 573–574
cash collections and, 283
financial distress costs, 436
inventory costs, 571–572
of issuing securities, 505–509
shortage costs, 574
time and, 28–29
Coupon, 166
Coupon rate, 166
Covered interest arbitrage, 597–598
Credit analysis, 562, 567–568
credit evaluation and  
scoring, 568
credit information, 567–568
Credit cost curve, 566
Credit information, 567–568
banks, 568
customer’s payment history, 568
financial statements, 567–568
Common stock, 216; see also 
Stock valuation
classes of stock, 217–218
dividends, 218
features of, 216–218
frequency distribution of returns 
(1926–2014), 322
other rights, 218
proxy voting, 217
shareholder rights, 216–217
Company valuation, with WACC, 
410–412
Comparables (comps), 214–215
Competition, 564
Competitive offer, 492
Compound interest, 99, 102
Compounding, 99
effective annual rates and, 
140–141
future value and, 98–104
Concentration banks, 557
Conch Republic Electronics  
(case), 308
Consols, 138
Consumer demand, 564
Continental Airlines, 446
Contingency planning, 296
option to abandon, 297
option to expand, 296–297
option to wait, 297
Control of the firm, 13–14
Controlled disbursement 
account, 559
Controller, 4
Conventional factoring, 536
Convertible bond, 185
Corporate ethics, 11
Corporate finance, 2
Corporate investors, 463
Corporate securities, trading in, 17
Corporate tax rates, 30–31
Corporate taxes, capital structure 
and, 433–435
Corporation, 7–9
agency problem, 12
cash flows to and from firm, 15
control of firm, 13–14
dividend smoothing, 471–472
financial management goal, 9–10
financial markets and, 15–17
Cash management—Cont.
precautionary motive, 551
reasons to hold cash, 551–552
short-term securities, 560–561
speculative motive, 551
temporary cash surpluses, 560
transaction motive, 551
Cash-out, 528
Cash outflows, 534
capital expenditures, 534
long-term financing expenses, 534
payments of accounts  
payable, 534
wages, taxes, and other  
expenses, 534
Cash ratio, 58
Cash reserves, 531
CAT bonds, 186
Certificates of deposit (CDs), 561
Check Clearing for the 21st 
Century, 554–555
Chief financial officer (CFO), 4
Cisco, 532
Citizens Financial, 291
Classified boards, 217
Clean price, 189
Cleanup period, 536
Clientele effect, 464
Coca–Cola, 171, 586
Collar, 185
Collateral, 178, 568
Collateral value, 564
Collectibles, 111
Collection effort, 569
Collection float, 552
Collection policy, 562, 568–569
aging schedule, 569
collection effort, 569
monitoring receivables, 568–569
Collection time, 555–556
Combination approach, 255–256
Comcast, 218
Commercial draft, 566
Commercial paper, 537, 561
Committed lines of credit, 536
Common equity, 23
Common-size balance sheets, 53–54
Common-size income statements, 
54–55
Common-size statements, 53

	
S u b j e c t  I n d e x 	
635
Dividend growth model approach, 
391–393
advantages/disadvantages of, 
392–393
estimating g, 392
implementation of, 391
Dividend payout, 69, 457
chronology of, 457–458
corporations smoothing, 471–472
dividend payers, 469–471
pros and cons of, 474
Dividend policy, 71, 455–456
cash dividends, 456–459
clientele effects, 464
corporations smoothing, 
471–472
dividends and dividend payers, 
469–471
high payout factors, 462–463
irrelevance of, 460–461
low payout factors, 461–462
pros/cons of, 474
summary of findings on, 472
Dividend yield, 213, 457
Dividends per share, 27, 457
Divisional cost of capital, 408
DMM’s post, 222
Dollar returns, 310–311
Double taxation, 8
Dow Jones Industrial Average 
(DJIA), 328
DuPont identity, 65–69
expanded analysis, 67–69
extended DuPont chart, 68
ROE and, 66
for Yahoo! and Google, 67
Dutch auction underwriting, 493
E
E. F. Hutton, 554
Earnings management, 30
Earnings per share (EPS),  
27, 63, 425
EBIT vs., 426
financial leverage, 425–426
share repurchase and, 468
Eastman Chemical
calculating WACC for, 400–406
cost of debt, 403–404
cost of equity, 402–403
Debtor, 175
Declaration date, 457
Deed of trust, 177
Default risk, 561
Default risk premium, 194
Deferred call provision, 179
Dell, 526
Depreciation, 28, 283
modified ACRS (MACRS) 
depreciation, 284–285
as noncash item, 28
Depreciation tax shield, 281
Derived-demand inventories, 
576–578
just-in-time inventory, 578
materials requirements planning 
(MRP), 577
Designated market makers 
(DMMs), 221–222
Diebold, 526
Direct bankruptcy costs, 436
Dirty price, 189
Disbursement float, 552, 558
Discount bond, 168
Discount factor, 106
Discount rate, 106
determination of, 109–111
single-period investment, 109
Discounted cash flow (DCF) 
valuation, 106, 122, 238
internal rate of return (IRR), 248
modified internal rate of return 
(MIRR), 255
profitability index (PI),  
256–257
Distribution, 456
Diversifiable risk, 363
Diversification, 360
effect of, 361
portfolio risk and, 361–364
principle of, 362
systematic risk, 363–364
unsystematic risk and,  
362–363
Dividend, 216, 218, 456, 472
cash dividends, 456–457
characteristics of, 218
cumulative/noncumulative, 219
survey evidence on, 474–475
Dividend growth model, 209
Credit instrument, 565–566
Credit period, 563
factors that influence, 564
length of, 563
Credit policy
collection policy, 562
components of, 562
credit analysis, 562
optimal credit policy, 566–567
terms of sale, 562
Credit reports, 568
Credit risk, 564
Credit scoring, 568
Creditor, 175
Cross-rates, 587, 590–592
Crowdfunding, 489–490
Cumulative dividend, 219
Cumulative voting, 216
Currency appreciation/ 
depreciation, 597
Currency swap, 588
Current assets, 23, 519
alternative financing policies, 
529–531
in practice, 532
short-term financial policy, 527
size of firm’s investment in, 
527–529
Current liabilities, 23, 519, 532
Current ratio, 56–57
Current yield, 172
Customer type, 564
Cyclical activities, 560
D
Date of payment, 458
Date of record, 458
Days’ sales in inventory, 59
Days’ sales in receivables, 60
Dealer, 220
Dealer vs. auction markets, 16–17
Dealers, 220
Debenture, 176, 178
Debt; see also Bankruptcy costs
cost of debt, 394–396
equity vs., 25, 176, 504
long-term debt, 176–177
preferred stock as, 219
Debt–equity ratio, 58, 424
Debt securities, 175

636	
S u b j e c t  I n d e x
financial institutions, 2–3
four basic areas of, 2–3
international finance, 4
investments, 2
management and, 3–4
marketing and, 3
overview of, 1–4
personal financial decisions, 4
reasons for study, 3–4
Financial Accounting Standards 
Board (FASB), 30
Financial advisers, 2
Financial analysts, 3
Financial calculator, 103–104
annuity present values, 133
bond prices and yields, 173–174
future value, 103–104
present value of multiple cash 
flows, 129–130
Financial distress costs, 436, 440
Financial EDI (electronic data 
interchange), 554
Financial institutions, 2–3
Financial leverage, 25
corporate borrowing and 
homemade leverage, 428–429
cost of equity and, 430–432
effect of, 425–429
EPS vs. EBIT, 426–427
EPS and ROE, 425–426
impact of, 425
Financial leverage ratios, 58
Financial management
bankruptcy process, 446–447
goal of, 9–11
international aspects of, 586
profit maximization, 9
Sarbanes–Oxley Act, 10–11
Financial management decisions, 
5–6
capital budgeting, 5
capital structure, 6
working capital management, 6
Financial manager, 4–5
business finance and, 4–6
inventory policy, 570
Financial markets
cash flows to and from firm, 
15–16
corporation and, 15–17
Equity multiplier, 58
Equity securities, 175
Erosion, 277
Ethical and legal questions of  
float, 554
Euro Disney, 297
Eurobonds, 587
Eurocurrency, 587
Ex-dividend date, 457–458
price behavior around, 458
Excess return, 321
Exchange rate, 589
cross-rates and triangle  
arbitrage, 590–592
interest rates and, 597–599
quotations, 590
Exchange rate risk, 599–602
long-run exposure, 600
management of, 602
short-run exposure, 599–600
translation exposure, 601–602
Exit strategy, 488
Exotic bonds, 186
Expected return, 350–351
announcements and news, 
358–359
calculation of, 351–352
portfolio expected return, 354–356
systematic risk and, 372
unexpected returns and, 358
variance and, 350–352
Experian, 568
External uses of financial 
statements, 74
Extra cash dividend, 457
ExxonMobil, 177, 468, 553
F
Face value, 166
Facebook, 72
Factoring receivables, 536
Fallen angels, 182
Federal Bankruptcy Reform Act  
of 1978
Chapter 7, 443
Chapter 11, 444–445
Field warehouse financing, 537
Finance
accounting and, 3
corporate finance, 2
EBIT (earnings before interest and 
taxes), 34, 59
break-even EBIT, 428
EPS vs., 426–427
EBITD (earnings before interest, 
taxes, and depreciation), 59
EBITDA (earnings before interest, 
taxes, depreciation, and 
amortization), 59
EBITDA ratio, 63–64
Economic order quantity  
(EOQ), 575
Economic order quantity (EOQ) 
model, 572–576
carrying costs, 573–574
extensions to, 576
inventory depletion, 573
reorder points, 576
safety stocks, 576
shortage costs, 574
total costs, 574–575
Economic value added (EVA), 398
The Economist, 595
Effective annual rate (EAR), 141
annual percentage rate (APR) 
and, 142–144
calculating and comparing, 141
compounding, 140–141
financial calculators and, 144
spreadsheets and, 144
Efficient capital market, 336
price behavior in, 336–337
Efficient markets hypothesis 
(EMH), 337
common misconceptions about, 
338–339
semistrong form, 339
Electronic communications 
networks (ECNs), 223
Electronic data interchange  
(EDI), 554
Electronic Timing, Inc. (case), 484
Embedded debt cost, 395
Enron Corporation, 11
Enterprise value, 64–65
Equifax, 568
Equity, 22
debt vs., 25, 176
new equity sales and value of 
firm, 504

	
S u b j e c t  I n d e x 	
637
The General Theory of 
Employment, Interest, and 
Money (Keynes), 551
Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles (GAAP), 25
income statement and, 28
Geometric average return, 333
arithmetic average returns  
vs., 333
calculation of, 333–334
Gilts, 588
Globalization, 587
Google, 495
Government bonds, 182–183
Green Shoe provision, 494
Growth
company’s stock and, 72
constant growth, 208–209
determinants of, 71
internal growth rate, 70
nonconstant growth, 211–212
ROA and ROE, 70–71
sustainable growth rate, 70–71
zero growth, 208
Growth stocks, 207, 331
H
Hard rationing, 299
Harley-Davidson (HOG), 51, 225
Hewlett-Packard (HP), 291
Historical cost, 25
Holders of record, 458
Homemade leverage, 428
Honda, 600
I
Income statement, 27–30, 56
common-size income  
statements, 54–55
earnings management, 30
GAAP and, 28
noncash items, 28
time and costs, 28–29
Incremental cash flows, 275–278
financing costs, 277
net working capital, 277
opportunity costs, 276–277
other issues, 278
side effects, 277
sunk costs, 276
Flat-rate tax, 32
Float, 552–555
collection float, 552–553
disbursement float, 552
EDI and Check 21, 554–555
net float, 552–553
Float management, 553–554
availability delay, 554
ethical and legal questions, 554
mailing time, 554
processing delay, 554
Floating-rate bonds (floaters), 
184–185
Floor brokers, 221
Flotation costs, 462, 505
Ford Motor Company, 217
Forecasting risk, 291
Foreign bonds, 587
Foreign exchange market, 
588–593
forward trade, 588, 592
spot trade, 592
types of participants in, 588
types of transactions, 592–593
Forward exchange rate, 592
Forward trade, 592
Free cash flow, 36
Frequency distribution
normal distribution, 326–327
return on common stocks  
(1926–2014), 322
variability and, 322–333
Full invoice price, 189
Future value (FV), 98–101
annuities, 137–138
calculating with financial 
calculator, 103–104
compounding and, 98–104
multiperiod investing, 98–102
multiple cash flows, 123–126
present value vs., 108–109
single period investing, 98
Future value interest factor, 99–101
G
The Gap, 79
General cash offer, 491
General Electric (GE), 236, 550
General Motors (GM), 186, 578
General partnership, 7
primary vs. secondary markets, 
15–17
trading in corporate securities, 17
Financial policy, 71
cost of capital and, 390
Financial ratios, 55–56, 80; see 
also Ratio analysis
common ratios, 64
Financial risk, 432
Financial statement analysis
choosing a benchmark, 74–79
external uses, 74
internal uses, 74
peer group analysis, 74–75
problems with, 79–81
selected financial information 
(example), 76–78
time-trend analysis, 74
Financial statements; see also Ratio 
analysis
common-size balance sheets, 
53–54
common-size income 
statements, 54–55
credit information, 567–568
pro forma statements, 278–279
reasons for use of, 73–74
standardized statements,  
52–55
using information of, 73–79
Financing costs, 277
Financing life cycle of a firm, 
486–488
venture capital, 486–488
Financing S&S Air’s Expansion 
Plans with a Bond Issue 
(case), 204
Finished goods inventory, 570
Firm commitment  
underwriting, 492
First-stage financing, 487
Fisher effect, 190–191
Five Cs of credit, 568
capacity, 568
capital, 568
character, 568
collateral, 568
conditions, 568
Fixed assets, 23
Fixed costs, 29

638	
S u b j e c t  I n d e x
Investments, 2
collectibles as, 111
mutually exclusive investments, 
252–254
summary of investment criteria, 
259
Invoice, 563
Invoice date, 563
Issue costs, 504
J
A Job at S&S Air (case), 347–348
JOBS Act, 489
Joint stock companies, 8
Jos. A. Bank, 13
Junk bonds, 181
Just-in-time (JIT) inventory, 578
K
Kanban systems, 578
Keiretsu, 578
Key employee retention plans 
(KERPs), 445
Kiting, 554
L
Large company stocks, historical 
record, 314
Legal bankruptcy, 443
Lehman Brothers, 444–445, 447
Lender, 175
Letter of comment, 489
Level coupon bond, 166
Leverage
corporate borrowing and, 
428–429
homemade leverage, 428
Leverage ratios, 58
Liabilities, 22–25
Limited liability company (LLC), 8
Limited partnership, 7
Line of credit, 536
Liquidating dividend, 457
Liquidation, 443
reorganization and, 443–445
Liquidity, 25
Liquidity measures, 56–58
Liquidity premium, 195
modified internal rate of return 
(MIRR), 255–256
mutually exclusive investments, 
252–254
nonconventional cash flows, 
250–252
problems with, 250–252
spreadsheet calculation of, 250
Internal revenue service (IRS), 8
Internal and sustainable growth, 
69–70
determinants of growth, 71
dividend payout and earnings 
retention, 69–70
internal growth rate, 70
ROA, ROE, and growth, 70–71
summary of, 72
sustainable growth rate, 70–71
Internal uses of financial 
statements, 74
International corporations,  
9, 586
International finance, 3, 587
terminology of, 587–588
International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS), 30
Internet bubble, 500
Inventory costs, 571–572
Inventory depletion, 573
Inventory loan, 537
Inventory management,  
570–571
financial manager, 570
inventory costs, 571
inventory policy, 570
inventory types, 570
Inventory management techniques, 
571–578
ABC approach, 571–572
carrying costs, 573–574
derived-demand inventories, 
576–577
economic order quantity (EOQ) 
model, 572–573
inventory depletion, 573
shortage costs, 574–575
Inventory period, 521, 524
Inventory turnover, 59, 524
Inventory types, 570
Indenture, 177
Indirect bankruptcy costs, 436
Inflation
Fisher effect, 190–191
interest rates and, 190–191
real vs. nominal rates, 190
year-to-year inflation  
(1926–2014), 320
Inflation-linked bond, 185
Inflation premium, 193
Initial public offering (IPO), 491, 
495–503; see also Selling 
securities to the public
cost of issuing securities, 
505–509
evidence on underpricing, 
496–497
partial adjustment phenomenon, 
501–503
underpricing, 495–496
underpricing evidence,  
496–501
Inside quotes, 223
Intangible assets, 23
Intel Corp, 224
Interest on interest, 99
Interest-only loans, 145–146
Interest rate parity (IRP), 
598–599
Interest rate risk, 169–171
time to maturity and, 170
Interest rate risk premium, 193
Interest rate swap, 588
Interest rates
exchange rates and, 597–599
Fisher effect, 190–191
inflation and, 190–192
real vs. nominal rates, 190
relative interest rates, 531
term structure of, 192–194
U.S. rates (1800–2014), 192
Interest tax shield, 433–434
Internal growth rate, 70, 72
Internal rate of return (IRR), 
247–256
advantages/disadvantages  
of, 255
calculation of, 249
IRR rule, 247

	
S u b j e c t  I n d e x 	
639
Moody’s, 180–181
Morgan Stanley, 11
Mortgage-backed securities 
(MBSs), 186
Mortgage securities, 178
Mortgage trust indenture, 178
Multinationals, 586
Multiple cash flows
financial calculator, 129–130
Future value (FV), 123–125
present value (PV), 126–129
spreadsheet for, 131
Multiple rates of return, 252
Municipal notes and bonds, 182
Mutually exclusive investment 
decisions, 252–254
N
NASD Automated Quotations 
system, 17
NASDAQ (NASD Automated 
Quotations System), 220
electronic communications 
networks (ECNs), 223
operations of, 223
National Association of Securities 
Dealers (NASD), 17
NCR, 526
Negative covenant, 180
Negotiated offer, 492
Net float, 553
Net income, 27
Net present value (NPV),  
238–241
basic idea of, 237–238
estimating of, 238–240
evaluating estimates, 290–292
mutually exclusive investments, 
252–254
net present value rule, 240
redeeming qualities of, 254
spreadsheet calculation, 240–241
Net present value profile, 249
Net working capital, 24, 518
in capital budgeting, 277, 
282–283
capital spending, 280
change in, 34, 288
tracing cash and, 519–520
Managerial information, 504
Managerial options, capital 
budgeting and, 296
Managers
recommendations for capital 
structure, 440
shareholder’s vs. own interests, 
13–14
of short-term financial  
problems, 523
Marginal tax rate, 31
Market portfolios, 372–373
Market risk, 364
Market risk premium, 373
Market risks, 360
Market-to-book ratio, 63
Market value, 25–26
book value vs., 25–26, 285
Market value measures, 63–65
earnings per share (EPS),  
63, 425
EBITDA ratio, 63–64
enterprise value, 63–64
market-to-book ratio, 63
price–earnings ratio (PE), 63
price–sales ratio, 63
Marketability, 561
Marketing, finance and, 3
Martha Stewart Omnimedia, 500
Materials requirements planning 
(MRP), 577
Maturity, 166
short-term securities, 560–561
Maturity factoring, 536
Maturity hedging, 531
Member, 220
Men’s Wearhouse, 1, 13
Mezzanine level, 487
Microsoft, 468, 550
Modified ACRs (MACRS) 
depreciation, 284–285
Modified internal rate of return 
(MIRR), 255–256
combination approach, 255–256
discounting approach, 255
IRR vs., 256
reinvestment approach, 255
Money market securities, 561
types of, 561–562
Listing, 17
Loan amortization, 145
using a spreadsheet, 149
Loan types, 145–149
amortized loans, 146–147
interest-only loans, 145–146
pure discount loans, 145
Lockboxes, 556–557
Lockup agreement, 494
London Interbank Offered Rate 
(LIBOR), 588
London Stock Exchange (LSE), 17
Alternative Investment Market 
(AIM), 11
Long-term corporate bonds, 
historical record, 315
Long-term debt, 176–177
features of an ExxonMobil bond, 
177–180
indenture, 177
issuing of, 509–510
Long-term financing expenses, 534
Long-term liabilities, 23
Long-term solvency measures, 
58–59, 64
cash coverage, 59
debt–equity ratio, 58
equity multiplier, 58
times interest earned, 58–59
total debt ratio, 58
Long-term U.S. government bonds, 
historical record, 215
Lukoil, 22
M
M&M Proposition I, 430
the pie model, 430
summary of, 435
taxes and, 434–435
M&M Proposition II, 431
cost of equity and financial 
leverage, 430–432
McGee Cake Company (case), 21
Maersk Oil, 22
Mailing time, 554–555
Management, finance and, 3–4
Management goals, 12
Managerial compensation, 13

640	
S u b j e c t  I n d e x
Plowback ratio, 69
Political risk, 602–603
Portfolio, 354
diversification, 363
portfolio expected returns, 
354–356
portfolio variance, 356–357
portfolio weights, 354
standard deviation, 357
Portfolio betas, 367
Portfolio expected returns, 354–356
unexpected returns and, 358
Portfolio management, 2
Portfolio risk, diversification and, 
361–364
Portfolio variance, 356–357
standard deviation and, 357
Portfolio weight, 354
Positive covenant, 180
Precautionary motive, 551
Preemptive right, 218
Preferred stock, 219
cost of, 395–396
cumulative/noncumulative 
dividends, 219
as debt, 219
stated value, 219
Premium bond, 168
Prepackaged bankruptcy, 445
Present value interest factor, 106–107
Present value (PV), 105
annuity cash flows, 132–133
cash flow timing, 139
determining discount rate, 
109–112
discounting, 105–108
financial calculator, 129–130
finding number of periods, 
112–113
future value vs., 108–109
multiple cash flows, 126–129
for multiple periods, 106
single-period case, 105–106
spreadsheet for, 131
Price–earnings (PE) ratio, 63
Price–sales ratio, 63
Primary market, 15–16, 220
secondary markets vs., 15–16
Principal value, 178
Principle of diversification, 362
Order costs, 528
Order flow, 221
Organizational chart, 5, 522
operating cycle and, 522–523
Overallotment option, 494
Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board 
(OTCBB), 226
Over-the-counter collection, 556
Over-the-counter (OTC) markets, 
17, 226
Owners’ equity, 23
P
Palm, Inc., 291, 501
Par value, 166
Par value bond, 166
Paralysis by analysis, 294
Paramount Pictures, 274
Partial adjustment phenomenon, 
501–502
Partnership, 7
Partnership agreement, 7
Payables period, 525
Payables turnover, 61, 524
Payback period, 241
Payback rule, 241–244
advantages/disadvantages of, 244
analyzing the rule, 243
calculating payback, 242
defining the rule, 241–243
redeeming qualities of, 243–244
summary of, 244
Peer group analysis, 74–75
Percentage returns, 312–314
Period costs, 29
Perishability, 564
Perpetuity, 131, 138
summary of calculations, 139
Pessimistic scenario, 294
Petrobras, 181–182
Piepkorn Manufacturing Working 
Capital Management, Part 1 
(case), 549
Piepkorn Manufacturing Working 
Capital Management, Part 2 
(case), 585
Pink sheets, 226
Piracy, 277
Planned or possible expenditures, 
560
New York Stock Exchange 
(NYSE), 218, 220
floor activity, 221–222
members, 220–221
operations, 221
organization of, 220–222
Nominal rates, 190
Noncash items, 28
Noncommitted lines of credit, 536
Nonconstant growth, 211–212
Noncumulative dividend, 219
Nondiversifiable risk, 364
Normal distribution, 326–327
North American Industry 
Classification System 
(NAICS), 75
Note, 176, 178
NPV. see Net present value (NPV)
O
Open account, 565
Open market purchases, 465
Operating cash flow, 34–35
example analysis, 287
project operating cash flow, 
279–280
tax shield approach, 281
Operating cycle, 521, 524
calculation of, 523–525
defining of, 521
firm’s organizational chart, 
522–523
Opportunity cost, 276
Optimal capital structure, 424, 
437–440
cost of capital and, 438–440
financial distress, 440
managerial recommendations, 
440
static theory of, 437–438
taxes, 440
Optimal credit policy, 566–567
cost of granting credit, 567
organizing the credit function, 
566–567
total credit cost curve, 566
Optimistic scenario, 294
Option to abandon, 297
Option to expand, 296–297
Option to wait, 297

	
S u b j e c t  I n d e x 	
641
Return on assets (ROA), 62
growth and, 70
Return on book assets, 62
Return on book equity, 62
Return on equity (ROE), 62, 66
growth and, 70
Return on investment, 310–314
calculation of, 313–314
dollar returns, 310–312
historical record on, 314–319
percentage returns, 312–313
systematic and unsystematic 
components of, 360–361
variability of returns, 322–324
Return on net worth, 62
Reverse split, 476
Revolving credit arrangement, 536
Reward-to-risk ratio, 369
Rights offer/rights offering, 491
Risk
in an investment, 310
business and financial risk, 432
diversifiable risk, 363
exchange rate risk, 599–602
forecasting risk, 291
political risk, 602–603
reward-to-risk ratio, 369
systematic and unsystematic, 
360, 362–365
Risk-free return, 321
Risk premium, 321, 350
beta and, 368–369
stock market risk premium, 
331–332
Risk and return
reward-to-risk ratio, 369
summary of concepts, 374
Road show, 493
Round lot, 476
Royal Bank of Scotland, 291
Rule of 72, 110
S
S&S Air Goes International 
(case), 611
S&S Air Goes Public (case), 517
S&S Air’s Mortgage (case), 164
Safety reserves costs, 528
Safety stock, 576–577
Salesforce.com, 495
Quiznos, 423
Quoted interest rate, 141
R
Rate of return, 110
multiple rates of return, 252
Ratio analysis, 55–65
asset management or turnover 
measures, 59–61
long-term solvency measures, 
58–59
market value measures, 63–66
profitability measures, 61–62
short-term solvency/liquidity 
measures, 56–58
Ratios and Financial Planning at 
S&S Air, Inc. (case), 95–96
Raw materials, 570
Real vs. nominal rates, 190
Real rates, 190
Receivables
credit and, 562
monitoring of, 568–569
Receivables period, 524
Receivables turnover, 60, 524
Recognition principle, 28
Red herring, 489
Registered form, 178
Registration statement, 488
Regular cash dividend, 456
Reinvestment approach, 255
Relative interest rates, 531
Relative purchasing power parity, 
593–594
Reorder points, 576–577
Reorganization, 443
liquidation and, 443–445
Repayment, 179
Republic National Bank, 171
Repurchases, 464
cash dividends vs., 466–467
EPS and, 468
real-world considerations in, 
467–468
Required return, 310
components of, 213–214
cost of capital vs., 389–390
Restocking costs, 575
Restructurings, 424
Retention ratio, 69
Private equity, 486
Private placements, 510
Pro forma financial statements, 
278–279
Processing delay, 554–555
Procter & Gamble, 468, 472
Product costs, 29
Profit margin, 62, 71
Profit maximization, 9
Profitability index (PI), 256–257
advantages/disadvantages of, 257
Profitability measures, 61–62, 64
profit margin, 62
return on assets, 62
return on equity, 62
Project cash flows, 275, 279–281
incremental cash flows, 275–278
net working capital and capital 
spending, 280, 282–283
operating cash flow, 279–280
pro forma financial statements, 
278–279
relevant cash flows, 275
stand-alone principle, 275
tax shield approach, 281
total cash flow and value, 
280–281
Project costs of capital, 406–410
Promissory note, 565
Prospectus, 489
Protective covenant, 180
Proxy, 217
Proxy fight, 13
Proxy voting, 217
Public limited companies, 8
Purchasing power parity (PPP), 
593–597
absolute PPP, 593–594
currency appreciation/
depreciation, 597
relative PPP, 595–596
Pure discount loans, 145
Pure play approach, 408–409
Put bond, 185
Put provision, 185
Q
Qualcomm, 455
Quick (or acid-test) ratio, 57
Quiet period, 495

642	
S u b j e c t  I n d e x
Sinking fund, 179
Sleeping Beauty bonds, 171
Small-company stocks, historical 
record, 315
Soft rationing, 298
Sole proprietorship, 6
Sources of cash, 520
Special dividend, 457
Speculative motive, 551
Spot exchange rate, 592
Spot trade, 592
Spread, 492, 505
Staggered boards, 217
Stakeholders, 15
Stalking horse, 445
Stand-alone principle, 275
Standard deviation, 323, 353
historical variance and,  
323–325
portfolio variance and, 367
Standard Industrial 
Classification (SIC) codes, 
74–75
Standard and Poor’s (S&P), 
180–181
Stanley Works, 11, 472
Stated interest rate, 141
Stated value, 219
Static theory of capital structure, 
437–438
Stephenson Real Estate 
Recapitalization (case), 434
Stern Stewart & Co., 398
Stock buybacks, 468
Stock dividend, 475
benchmark case, 476
popular trading range, 476
value of, 475–477
Stock markets, 220–225
dealers and brokers, 220
ECNs, 223–225
listing, 17
NASDAQ operations, 17, 223
NYSE, 17, 220–222
Pink Sheets and OTC Bulletin 
Board, 226
risk premiums for countries, 
331–332
stock market reporting, 225
Stock-out, 528
cost of issuing, 505–509
crowdfunding, 489
IPOs and underpricing,  
495–501
issuing long-term debt,  
509–510
methods of issuing, 491
new equity sales and value of the 
firm, 504
shelf registration, 510–511
underwriters, 492–494
Semiannual coupons, 169
Semistrong form efficient, 339
Seniority, 179
Sensitivity analysis, 294–296
Series EE bond, 97
Shake Shack, 485, 502
Shareholder rights, 216
Shareholders’ equity, 23
Shelf registration, 510–511
Short-term borrowing, 536–537
accounts receivable financing, 
536
best financing policy, 531–532
inventory loans, 537
secured loans, 536
unsecured loans, 536
Short-term finance, 519
Short-term financial planning, 
519, 538
managers of, 523
Short-term financial policy; see 
also Cash budget
aspects of, 527–532
current assets, 527
Short-term securities, 560–561
default risk, 561
marketability, 561
maturity, 560–561
taxability, 561
Short-term solvency ratios,  
56–58, 64
cash ratio, 58
current ratio, 56–57
quick (acid-test ratio), 57
Shortage costs, 528–529, 571, 574
Sight draft, 566
Simple interest, 99
Single-period present value, 
105–106
Sarbanes–Oxley Act, 10–11
Sbarro, 423
Scenario analysis, 293–294
Seasonal cash demands, 560
Seasoned equity offering (SEO), 
491, 504
Second-stage financing, 487
Secondary market, 15–16, 220
auction markets, 16–17
dealer markets, 17
Secured loans, 536–537
accounts receivable financing, 
536
inventory loans, 537
Securities Act of 1933, 488
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 
488, 491n
Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC), 488
EDGAR site, 29, 61
Rule 415 shelf registration, 
510–511
selling securities to the public, 
16, 488–489
Securities Industry and Financial 
Markets Association 
(SIFMA), 179
Security, 178
Security analysis, 2
Security market line (SML), 
372–374
basic argument, 369–370
beta and risk premium, 368
Capital Asset Pricing Model, 373
cost of capital and, 375, 393–394
fundamental result, 370–371
market portfolios, 372–373
reward-to-risk ratio, 369
WACC and, 407–408
Security market line (SML) 
approach
advantages/disadvantages of, 394
implementation of, 393
Seed money, 487
Selling, general, and administrative 
expenses (SG&A), 69
Selling securities to the public, 
488–490
alternative issue methods, 491
basic procedure of, 488–489

	
S u b j e c t  I n d e x 	
643
finding number of periods, 
112–113
future value and compounding, 
98–102
present value and discounting, 
105–108
present value vs. future value, 
108–109
spreadsheet for calculations, 
114–115
summary of calculations, 113
Time Warner, 291
Times interest earned (TIE), 58, 78
TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected 
Securities), 185
Tokyo Stock Exchange, 17
Tombstone, 489–490
Total asset turnover, 61, 71
Total credit cost curve, 566
Total debt ratio, 58
Total risk, beta vs., 366
Toyota, 600
Toys R Us, 560
Trade acceptance, 566
Trade credit, 537
Trade Reporting and Compliance 
Engine (TRACE), 187
Trading costs, 528
Trading range, 476
Transaction motive, 551
Translation exposure, 601–602
Treasurer, 5
Treasury yield curve, 194–195
Treynor index, 369
Triangle arbitrage, 590–592
Trump Hotels and Casinos, 445
Trust deed, 178
Trust receipt, 537
Tullow Oil PLC, 22
Turnover measures. see Asset 
management
U
Underpricing of IPOs, 495–496
evidence on, 496–498
explanations for, 502–503
global phenomenon of, 499
1999–2000 experience, 497
Underwriters, 492–495
choice of, 492
Syndicate, 492
Systematic risk, 360
beta and, 364–367
diversification, 363–364
expected returns and, 372
measurement of, 364–366
Systematic risk principle, 364
T
Takeovers, 13
Tangible assets, 23
Target, 205
Target capital structure, 390
Targeted repurchase, 466
Tax-exempt investors, 463
Tax Reform Act of 1986, 283
Tax shield approach, 281
Taxability premium, 195
Taxes, 30–32, 534
average vs. marginal tax rates, 
31–32
capital structure and, 433–435
corporate tax rates, 30–31, 440
corporate taxes and capital 
structure, 433–435
flat-rate tax, 32
M&M Proposition I, 434–435
short-term securities, 561
taxable vs. municipal bonds, 183
weighted average cost of capital, 
397–398
Technical insolvency, 443
Technical trading rules, 330
Temporary cash surpluses, 560
Tender offer, 465
Term loans, 510
Term structure of interest rates, 
192–194
Terms of sale, 562
basic form, 563
credit period, 563
3Com, 501
3D Systems, 51
Ticker symbol, 14
Time draft, 566
Time line, 123–124
Time-trend analysis, 74
Time value of money, 98
determining discount rate, 
109–112
Stock repurchase, cash dividends 
vs., 464–465
Stock split, 475
benchmark case, 476
reverse splits, 476
trading range, 476
Stock valuation, 207–215
cash flows, 206–207
comparables (comps),  
214–215
constant growth dividend, 
208–211
dividend growth, 209
dividend growth model, 209
growth stocks, 207
nonconstant growth dividend, 
211–212
required return components, 
213–214
summary of, 215
supernormal growth, 212–213
zero growth dividend, 208
Stockbroker, 2
Stockholder value added 
(SVA), 398
Straight voting, 216
Strategic bankruptcy, 447
Strategic options, 298
Strong form efficient, 339
Structured notes, 185
Student loans, 150
Subjective approach, 409–410
Sunk cost, 276
Super Bowl indicator, 330
Supernormal growth, 212
Supplemental liquidity providers 
(SLPs), 221
Supply chain management 
(SCM), 578
Sustainable growth rate,  
70–73
dividend payout, 69
earnings retention, 69
factors of, 71
retention ratio, 69
summary of, 72
Swaps, 588
SWIFT (Society for Worldwide 
Interbank Financial 
Telecommunications), 588

644	
S u b j e c t  I n d e x
Washington Mutual, 447
Weak form efficient, 339
Weighted average cost of capital 
(WACC), 388–389, 397
calculation of, 399
capital budgeting problems, 
399–400
capital structure weights, 
396–397
company valuation with, 
410–412
Eastman Chemical example, 
400–406
oil industry valuations, 401
pure play approach, 408–409
SML and, 407–408
subjective approach, 409–410
taxes and, 397–398
Work-in-progress inventory, 570
Working capital, 6
Working capital management, 6, 
518, 550
World Wrestling Federation 
Entertainment, Inc., 490, 500
Worst case, 294
Y
Yield curve
bond yields and, 193–195
Treasury yield curve, 195
Yield to maturity (YTM), 166
finding the yield, 171–172
Z
Zero-balance account, 559
Zero coupon bond, 183–184
U.S. Treasury note and bond prices, 
189
Unlimited liability, 7
Unseasoned new issue, 491
Unsecured loans, 536
Unsystematic risk, 360, 363
diversification and, 362–363
Uses of cash, 520
V
Value, sources of, 292
Value of the firm, new equity sales 
and, 504
Value Line Investment Survey, 366
Variability of returns, 322–332
frequency distributions and 
variability, 322–323
historical variance and standard 
deviation, 323–326
normal distribution, 326–327
2008 bear market, 328–329
Variable costs, 29
Variance, 323
calculation of, 325, 352–353
historical variance, 323–325
portfolio variance, 356–357
Venture capital (VC), 486
choice of, 487–488
realities of, 487
Vulture capitalists, 486n
W
Wages, 534
Walmart, 72, 532
Walt Disney, 171
Warrants, 492
Underwriting
aftermarket, 494
best efforts, 493
Dutch auction, 493–494
firm commitment, 492–493
green shoe provision, 494
lockup agreements, 494–495
quiet period, 495
types of, 492–494
Unexpected returns, 358
Unfunded debt, 176
Uniform price auction, 493
Unique risks, 360
U.S. Department of Justice 
(DOJ), 11
U.S. financial markets, historical 
record, 314–319
average returns (1926–2014), 
320–321
average returns, standard 
deviations, and frequency 
distributions (1926–2014), 326
geometric vs. arithmetic average 
returns (1926–2014), 334
large company stocks, 314, 317
long-term corporate bonds, 
315, 319
long-term government bonds, 
315
small-company stocks, 315, 317
Treasury bills, 315, 319
year-to-year total returns  
(1926–2014), 318
U.S. Treasury, 97
U.S. Treasury bills, 561
historical record, 315

