
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ESTIMATING FOR RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION 
S e c o n d  E d i t i o n
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

       This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed 
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate 
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for 
materials in your areas of interest.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ESTIMATING FOR 
RESIDENTIAL 
CONSTRUCTION 
S E C O N D  E D I T I O N
David J. Pratt
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

© 2012, 2006 Delmar, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein 
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means 
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, 
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, 
or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under 
 Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2011920495
ISBN-13: 978-1-1113-0887-2
ISBN-10: 1-1113-0887-X
Delmar 
5 Maxwell Drive
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with 
oﬃ  ce locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom, 
Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local oﬃ  ce at: 
international.cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Delmar, visit www.cengage.com/delmar
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred 
online store www.CengageBrain.com
Notice to the Reader
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein or perform any independent 
analysis in connection with any of the product information contained herein. Publisher does not assume, 
and  expressly disclaims, any obligation to obtain and include information other than that  provided to it by 
the manufacturer. The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions that might be 
indicated by the activities  described herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By following the instructions 
contained herein, the reader willingly assumes all risks in connection with such instructions. The publisher 
makes no representations or warranties of any kind, including but not limited to, the warranties of ﬁ tness for 
 particular purpose or merchantability, nor are any such representations  implied with  respect to the material set 
forth herein, and the publisher takes no  responsibility with respect to such material. The publisher shall not be 
liable for any  special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or part, from the readers’ use of, 
or reliance upon, this material.
Estimating for Residential Construction, 2E
David J. Pratt
Vice President, Career and Professional 
 Editorial: Dave Garza
Director of Learning Solutions: Sandy Clark
Acquisitions Editor: Stacy Masucci
Managing Editor: Larry Main
Senior Product Manager: John Fisher
Senior Editorial Assistant: Andrea Timpano
Vice President, Career and Professional 
 Marketing: Jennifer Baker
Marketing Director: Deborah Yarnell
Marketing Manager: Katie Hall
Marketing Coordinator: Mark Pierro
Production Director: Wendy Troeger
Production Manager: Mark Bernard
Senior Content Project Manager: David 
Plagenza
Senior Art Director: Casey Kirchmayer
Technology Project Manager: Joe Pliss
Compositor: MPS Limited, a Macmillan Company
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Printed in the United States of America 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 15 14 13 12 11
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

v
CONTENTS
 
Preface xi
Chapter 1 
INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES 1
Objectives 1
Key Terms  1
Introduction 2
Estimates in the Residential Construction Industry 2
Builders and Residential Markets 2
Types of Contract 4
Uses of Estimates 5
Methods of Estimating 8
Architects and Designers 12
Green Building and Sustainable Construction 13
Drawings and Specifi cations 15
Soils Reports 15
Site Visits 16
Summary 18
Recommended Resources 19
Review Questions 20
Practice Problems 20
Chapter 2 
ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT 21
Objectives 21
Key Terms 21
Introduction 21
The Quantity Takeoff 34
Computer Estimating 39
Summary 43
Recommended Resources 44
Review Questions 44
Practice Problems 44
Chapter 3 
MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 47
Objectives 47
Key Terms 47
Introduction 47
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

vi 
CONTENTS
Measuring Sitework and Excavation Work Generally 48
Measuring Notes 59
Site Utilities 59
Example of Sitework Takeoff 60
Summary 71
Recommended Resources 72
Review Questions 72
Practice Problems 73
Chapter 4 
MEASURING CONCRETE WORK 77
Objectives 77
Key Terms 77
Introduction 77
Measuring Notes—Concrete 78
Measuring Formwork Generally 80
Measuring Notes—Formwork 80
Measuring Notes—Finishes and Miscellaneous Concrete Work 82
Example of Concrete Work Takeoff 83
Summary 87
Recommended Resources 87
Review Questions 88
Practice Problems 88
Chapter 5 
MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 91
Objectives 91
Key Terms 91
Introduction 91
Measuring Rough Carpentry  92
Measuring Notes—Rough Carpentry  93
Measuring Finish Carpentry and Millwork 95
Measuring Notes—Finish Carpentry 95
Measuring Notes—Doors and Frames 96
Measuring Notes—Windows 96
Measuring Notes—Bathroom Accessories 96
Measuring Notes—Finish Hardware 97
Example of Rough Carpentry Floor System Takeoff  97
Example of Wall System Takeoff 100
Example of Roof System Takeoff 106
Example of Finish Carpentry Takeoff 108
Example of a Dormer Roof System Takeoff 108
Summary 117
Recommended Resources 117
Review Questions 117
Practice Problems 118
Chapter 6 
MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES 119
Objectives 119
Key Terms 119
Introduction 119
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CONTENTS 
vii
Measuring Masonry Work 120
Measuring Exterior and Interior Finishes 130
Example of Interior Finishes Takeoff 136
Summary 139
Recommended Resources 140
Review Questions 140
Practice Problems 141
Chapter 7 
 ESTIMATING PLUMBING, HEATING, VENTILATING, 
AND AIR CONDITIONING (HVAC), AND ELECTRICAL WORK 143
Objectives 143
Key Terms 143
Introduction 144
Plumbing Work Generally 144
HVAC Work Generally 145
Electrical Work Generally 146
Pricing the Work 147
Estimating Shortcuts 147
Summary 150
Recommended Resources 150
Review Questions 150
Practice Problems 151
Chapter 8 
PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES 153
Objectives 153
Key Terms 153
Introduction 153
Project Schedule 155
General Expenses 157
Green Building Provisions 164
Other General Expenses 165
Add-Ons 166
Example of General Expenses Pricing 168
Summary 171
Recommended Resources 171
Review Questions 172
Practice Problems 172
Chapter 9 
PRICING THE WORK 173
Objectives 173
Key Terms 173
Introduction 173
Homebuilder’s Risk 175
Pricing Labor and Equipment 176
Bid Pricing Strategies 182
Preparing Bill of Materials 182
Pricing Materials Generally 184
Pricing Backfi ll and Gravel Materials 185
Pricing Concrete Materials 188
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

viii 
CONTENTS
Pricing Carpentry Materials 190
Pricing Subcontractor’s Work 192
Example of Recap and Pricing for House Example 194
Example of Bill of Materials 199
Summary 202
Recommended Resources 203
Review Questions 203
Practice Problems 204
Chapter 10 
PRICING EQUIPMENT 205
Objectives 205
Key Terms 205
Introduction 205
Summary 219
Recommended Resources 220
Review Questions 220
Practice Problems 220
Chapter 11 
SUBCONTRACTOR WORK 223
Objectives 223
Key Terms 223
Introduction 223
Managing Subcontract Pricing Procedures 225
List of Subtrades for a Bid 225
Contacting Subtrades 227
Unknown Subtrades 227
Unsolicited Subtrade Bids 227
Evaluating Subcontractors  228
Bonding of Subtrades 229
Pre-Bid Subtrade Proposals 229
Analyzing Subtrade Bids 230
Scope of Work 231
Summary  233
Recommended Resources 234
Review Questions 234
Practice Problems 235
Chapter 12 
ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS 237
Objectives 237
Key Terms 237
Introduction 237
In Advance of Bid Closing  242
The Bid Form 242
Alternative Prices 245
Allowances 245
Bid Security 246
Owner’s Bid Conditions 247
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CONTENTS 
ix
The Pre-Bid Review 247
Bid Markup 249
Bid Clarifi cations 251
The Bid Closing 251
Receiving Subtrade Bids 252
Subtrade Conditions 254
Bid Breakdown 254
Computerized Bid Closing 255
After the Bid 255
Post-Bid Review 257
Summary Example of House Project 257
Summary 259
Recommended Resources 260
Review Questions 260
Practice Problems 260
Chapter 13 
ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 263
Objectives 263
Key Terms 263
Introduction 263
Contracts for Remodeling Work 264
The Remodeling Estimate 265
Measuring the Work 266
The Remodeling Takeoff 267
Pricing Remodeling Work 269
Pricing Materials 271
Pricing General Expenses 276
The Summary and Bid 276
Example of a Remodeling Estimate 276
Summary 286
Recommended Resources 287
Review Questions 287
Practice Problems 287
CHAPTER 14 
COMPUTER ESTIMATING 291
Objectives 291
Key Terms 291
Introduction 291
Estimating with ICE 297
Setting Up the Estimate 297
The Job Information Window 297
The Takeoff Process 298
Estimate Example 298
Using the Drill Down Navigation Bar 327
Adding Prices 330
Pricing General Expenses  333
Recommended Resources 344
Review Questions 344
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

x 
CONTENTS
Appendix A 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 347
Appendix B 
THE METRIC SYSTEM AND CONVERSIONS 353
Appendix C 
FORMULAE USED IN ESTIMATING 355
Appendix D 
SAMPLE HOUSE DRAWINGS 357
Appendix E 
SAMPLE DRAWINGS FOR A 4-UNIT APARTMENT BUILDING 365
 
 
INDEX  371
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xi
PREFACE
Intended Use & Level
Estimating for Residential Construction, 2E is intended for 2-year and 4-year post-
secondary construction programs. It is written to provide the reader with the 
resources necessary to learn how to estimate the construction costs of residential 
buildings and remodelling projects using modern technology and following the 
methods employed by estimators in the residential sector. The book is primarily 
intended for the person who is beginning to learn the practice of cost estimating 
whether they are a student taking a course in estimating at college, or someone who 
has recently assumed estimating responsibilities for a builder or consultant. The text 
will also be of interest to construction managers, supervisors, and practicing estima-
tors who, from time to time, may wish to refer to a source of estimating data or 
simply investigate how other estimators approach this subject.
Approach
The goal of the text is to describe an easy to follow step-by-step method of estimat-
ing that can be used to produce an accurate construction cost estimate in the mini-
mum of time; a cost estimate that is easy to review and one that is recognized by 
experienced estimators as the product of a professional. While the text concentrates 
on the kind of small projects typically undertaken by homebuilders, the techniques 
developed here can be applied to the many different types of projects ranging in 
scope from a single detached home to multi-unit high-rise buildings. The examples 
offered relate to a single-family house, a 4-unit apartment building, and a small 
renovation project. These projects were selected for their relative simplicity so that 
the reader can concentrate on the estimating technique rather than having to spend 
time unravelling complicated detail.
The estimating process presented is not intended to be some radical, new method 
of estimating, instead, it is estimating as it is currently pursued by professional esti-
mators doing essentially what estimators have always done but with far more speed, 
accuracy, and thoroughness using all the modern innovations that advance the ef-
fi ciency and effectiveness of the process.
Note that all prices used in the text are for illustrative purposes only, actual 
prices of construction work vary considerably from place to place and from time to 
time and should be carefully considered before using in actual estimates. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xii 
PREFACE
Text Layout
■ Chapter 1 introduces readers to the estimating process. 
■ Chapter 2 explains the types of calculations used in estimating and describes the 
general principles of measuring work and preparing quantity takeoffs, which is 
one of the main components of the estimating process. In chapter 3 the quantity 
takeoff of excavation work is discussed in detail and an example of a full estimate 
begins in this chapter and continues in the chapters that follow. This example 
takes the reader through all of the stages of an estimate of a house from initial 
takeoff to completion of the cost summary. The house drawings used for this 
 example can be found in appendix D.
■ Chapters 4 through 7 consider the takeoff process for concrete, carpentry, 
 masonry, plumbing, HVAC, and electrical work. 
■ Chapters 8 through 10 concern the pricing of the builder’s work including the 
pricing of equipment involved in the work. 
■ In Chapter 11 the pricing of subcontracted work is studied and Chapter 12 deals 
with estimate summaries and bids.  
■ Chapter 13 examines the estimating process for remodeling work and works 
through an example of a complete estimate for a renovation project.
■ The fi nal chapter, Chapter 14, presents a full estimate with step-by-step directions 
for a 4-unit apartment building using ICE software from MC2.
■ Appendix A contains a glossary of terms.
■ Appendix B describes the metric units used in estimating and provides unit con-
version factors for English to metric and metric to English conversions.
■ Appendix C provides an overview of the equations used in estimating.
■ Appendix D consists of a set of house drawings used for takeoff examples.
■ Appendix E consists of a set of drawings for a 4-unit apartment building used for 
the ICE software example.
Key Features
There are also many features to help enhance learning for the reader.  These features 
can be found integrated throughout the textbook:
■ Key Terms are highlighted and defi ned in each chapter and provide the reader 
with the necessary terminology for effective communication in the construc-
tion fi eld.
■ Examples illustrate important estimations in a step-by-step approach that 
allows the reader to see how costs are worked out in the preparation of bids.
■ Review Questions and Practice Problems appear at the end of each chapter 
and allow students to apply what they have learned in the chapter.
■ Recommended Resources provide helpful links and references that contain 
additional information on the content presented in the chapter.
New to This Edition
■ Coverage of Green Building and Sustainable Construction and the NAHB National 
Green Building Program has been added to Chapter 1.
■ Chapter 14 is new to this edition and covers the inclusion of extensive  computer 
applications. There is also the inclusion of examples of the use of MC2 and 
 Timberline software in residential estimating. This new edition also has an online 
student companion site containing Excel spreadsheets for use in estimating. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
PREFACE 
xiii
Accessing the Student Companion Site from CengageBrain
You can obtain Excel spreadsheets for estimating from the Student Companion site 
at CengageBrain by following these steps: 
 
1. With your computer’s web browser, go to www.cengagebrain.com.
 
2. Enter the name of the author, title of the book, or the book’s ISBN (interna-
tional standard book number) in the Search window.
 
3. Locate the desired book and then click on Access Now.
 
4. Under Book Resources on the left side of the screen will be a list of the assets 
available for download.
Supplement
An Instructor’s Resource CD providing solutions to all end-of-chapter review ques-
tions, chapter presentations in PowerPoint, and a testbank is also available. Order #: 
1-1113-0888-8.
About the Author
David J. Pratt is a Professor of Civil Engineering Technology at Southern Alberta 
Institute of Technology. Professor Pratt has had a long career as a construction con-
sultant and before that as estimator for a number of building and construction com-
panies. He is a member of the Canadian Institute of Quantity Surveyors and holds 
a degree in Quantity Surveying from Liverpool College of Building together with a 
degree in Economics from the University of Calgary. 
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the large number of people who contributed to this text. Par-
ticular thanks goes to the following: 
■ Ken Head of Head Construction who has been building houses for as long as 
I have been estimating them.
■ Trevor Canuel for preparing house drawings.
■ Sue Zegarelli of Partners Composition for copyediting.
■ The large group of professional estimators, many of whom are former stu-
dents of mine, who continue to give me insight into the estimator’s task.
In addition, many thanks go to the reviewers, who provided guidance through-
out the development of the text:
Joe Dusek
Triton Community College
River Grove, IL
Richard Harrington
SUNY–Delhi
Delhi, NY
Robert Irion
AAA Construction School
Jacksonville, FL
Chester Melton
Isothermal Community College
Spindale, NC
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xiv 
PREFACE
Darwin Olson
Anoka-Hennepin Technical College
Anoka, MN 
Timothy Ray
Midlands Technical College
Columbia, SC
Sean Quinn
Lansing Community College
Lansing, MI
Mark Walsh
Indian Hills Community College
Centerville, IN
Kevin Ward
McEachern High School
Powder Springs, GA
Brenda Yamin
Erie Community College
Williamsville, NY
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be 
able to:
■ Explain what a building estimate is and what is needed to compile a building 
estimate.
■ Identify the different types of builder and contracts found in the residential con-
struction industry.
■ Identify the different uses of estimates in the residential construction.
■ Explain how value analysis may be used to try to maximize the value obtained 
from a project.
■ Explain how bills of material are prepared.
■ Outline the role of architects and designers in the residential sector.
■ Explain the purpose of soils reports and site visits in the estimating process.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
1
INTRODUCTION TO 
BUILDING COST ESTIMATES
apartment
architects
bill of materials
condominium
cost plus contracts
custom homes
designers
duplexes
feasibility estimate
fi rm price contract
green building
lump sum contracts
prime consultants
production builders
row housing 
semi-custom homes
spec builders and specs 
home
specifi cations
takeoff and taking off
unit price contracts
value analysis
KEY TERMS 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES
Introduction
In general terms, an estimate is an evaluation of a future cost; a building cost esti-
mate is an attempt to determine the likely cost of some building work before the 
work is done. In order to compile such a cost estimate, the estimator needs to answer 
two basic questions:
 
1. How much work is required to be done?
 
2. What will it cost to do this work?
In the construction industry, the process of measuring the amount of work to be 
done is called taking off and the product obtained from this process is referred to as 
a takeoff. After the work is measured, the takeoff may then be processed and priced 
in a number of different ways depending upon what the estimate is to be used for.
Estimates in the Residential Construction Industry
There are a number of different types of estimates in the residential construction 
industry, each serving a different purpose. The type of estimate required in any given 
situation depends upon the residential market served by the builder preparing the 
estimate, the nature of the contract with the home purchaser or owner, and the pur-
pose of the estimate (see Figure 1.1). 
Builders and Residential Markets
There are basically three distinct groups of builders serving the residential construc-
tion market: those that build new homes for sale to home buyers; those that work 
under contract to the property owner to build a custom home or renovate an exist-
ing property for the owner; and those that construct multi-unit residential buildings 
for owners/developers. 
Spec Builders
This fi rst group of homebuilders buys land for building homes, often in the form 
of housing lots in a new subdivision. Spec builders decide on the type of houses to 
build and make many in-house decisions about the design of the homes they will 
build. Because this business involves a certain amount of speculation, this group is 
often referred to as speculative builders (spec builders), and a home built before it 
Figure 1.1 
Estimates, Residential Markets, and Contracts
Types of Estimate 
Residential Market 
Types of Contract
• Feasibility Estimate 
• Speculative Homes 
• Home Purchase
• Preliminary Estimate 
• Production Homes 
• Firm Price Lump Sum 
• Bill of Material 
• Semi-Custom Homes 
• Variable Price Lump Sum
• Detailed Estimate 
• Custom Homes 
• Cost Plus Percentage
• Budget Estimate 
• Townhouses 
• Cost Plus Fixed Fee
• Cost Control Estimate • Condominiums 
• Cost Plus Variable Fee
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES 
3
has been sold is called a spec home. Some spec builders construct a series of homes of 
basically the same design, almost like on a production line. These builders are often 
called production builders. 
The main marketing tool of the spec builder is the show home. The builder con-
structs a home of the design they have decided upon and use it to show prospective 
buyers what they will receive if they buy from this builder. When a sale is made, the 
builder enters into a contract with the buyer to construct a similar home on one of 
the builder’s lots for an agreed sale price. The buyer will generally have some choice 
about the construction of their new home. The buyer will at least be allowed to select 
kitchen cabinets, fl oor fi nishes, and paint colors. Sometimes spec builders offer much 
more fl exibility with regard to design; they may start with a standard plan, then 
allow the buyer to make changes in size, add or delete features, and so on to meet the 
buyer’s particular needs. Because this homebuyer has so much infl uence in the fi nal 
design, these houses are referred to as semi-custom homes.
Custom Home Builders
The builders of custom homes do not take the same risks as spec builders. They do 
not have to buy building lots, nor do they need to construct show homes, and the 
owner that hires them usually makes all the design decisions. Some owners employ 
architectural consultants to prepare plans and specifi cations for their home. House 
plans are also available from plan service organizations that offer off-the-shelf de-
signs, or the owner may simply take their ideas directly to a builder, and together 
compile a design. Some of the larger builders have in-house designers to provide this 
service on custom home projects. 
If the owner did not go directly to a homebuilder, the next step, once a design 
is established, is to fi nd a builder to construct their home. Here owners and their 
consultants may organize a competitive bid if they wish to fi nd the best price to com-
plete the project. Up to six contractors that the owner and/or consultant consider to 
be qualifi ed and fi nancially sound are asked to submit prices to construct the home 
as detailed in the plans and specifi cations. Then, once all bids are received, the owner 
usually awards the contract to the lowest bidder.
On the other hand, the owner may choose a particular builder to construct the 
home because they believe this builder has certain qualities that distinguish it from 
the competition. In which case, the project price will probably be higher than if a 
bid competition was used, but the owner may be willing to pay the extra to have 
this builder do the work. The builder will still usually be required to quote a fi rm 
price for the job, and a savvy owner will request a price breakdown and details of 
the builder’s estimate. The owner and/or their consultant can then go over the price 
breakdown and may call upon the builder to explain some of the prices. A solid, 
well-presented estimate can help the builder obtain the job in this situation.
In all of these situations, the builder who is selected to do the work will be 
required to enter into a contract with the owner. This will usually be a fi rm price 
contract, but there are possible alternative arrangements.
Multi-Unit Residential Contractors
Multi-unit residential projects include:
■ Duplexes
■ Row housing or townhouses comprising two, three, four, or more attached units
■ Apartment buildings
■ Condominium developments
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES
Builders of multi-unit projects usually work for owner/developers who hire 
them on a contract basis. Under terms of these agreements, the builder is required to 
complete the project as detailed in the plans and specifi cations prepared by a consul-
tant for a stipulated lump-sum amount. Builders will usually be selected following 
competitive bid and, on the larger jobs, they will often be required to be bonded just 
as contractors are on commercial projects. While homebuilders may construct some 
of the small two, three, or four unit jobs, the larger projects are usually out of their 
league and are built by specialized or commercial construction companies.
Types of Contract
Contracts used in the residential construction industry can be grouped into three 
main categories:
■ Lump sum contracts
■ Cost plus contracts
■ Unit price contracts 
Stipulated Lump Sum Contracts
Under the terms of a stipulated lump sum contract, often referred to as a fi rm price 
contract, the builder agrees to complete the project as described in the plans and 
specifi cations for a fi xed sum. As long as the scope of work is not changed, the 
builder will be paid the agreed amount, no more, no less. For this arrangement to 
succeed, the scope of work has to be precisely defi ned in the plans and specifi cations. 
Any uncertainties will usually lead to disputes between the owner and the builder. 
Because changes are almost inevitable on building contracts, the terms of the con-
tract will include a mechanism for making scope changes and adjusting the contract 
price to refl ect these changes.
Under the terms of these contracts, the risk of cost overruns lies with the builder. 
If the cost of materials turns out to be higher than estimated, the builder will pay 
the extra cost. When bidders anticipate the possibility of price increases, they often 
add contingency sums to their bid price to compensate for the risk they are taking. 
If prices do not rise, these contingencies will simply add to the builder’s profi t on the 
job.
In order to shift contract risks to the owner, some builders have modifi ed the 
terms of lump sum contracts (by means of an escalation clause) to allow price in-
creases to be added to the original contract sum. This results in what might be called 
a variable price lump sum contract since the fi nal price will be adjusted for price 
changes for materials, equipment, and possible subtrades. 
Stipulated lump sum contracts are commonly used on custom home projects and 
on multi-unit residential projects. When a competitive bid has been used to select 
a builder, the successful bidder will usually be awarded a fi rm price contract. Also, 
the agreement made by spec builders with homebuyers can be considered a kind of 
stipulated price contract since the builder agrees to complete the home for the sale 
price. However, there may be provisions in the sales agreement, similar to the escala-
tion clause previously mentioned, that allow the agreed price to rise when there are 
unanticipated price increases.
Cost Plus Contracts
Cost plus contracts allow the builder to be compensated for all the costs of con-
structing the project plus an agreed upon fee. Under these terms, the owner bares 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES 
5
the risk of cost overruns, but the owner will not be paying for any contingency sums 
previously mentioned when price increases fail to materialize. If for some reason 
the project scope of work is diffi cult to pin down, as is the case with some renova-
tion projects, the owner may feel that there is an advantage in choosing a cost plus 
contract. This type of contract is also used in situations where the owner has hired 
a builder directly without going through a bid competition. In this case, either the 
owner places a great deal of trust in the builder or is willing to spend time closely 
monitoring costs as the work progresses.
The amount of fee included in a cost plus contract may be a percentage of the 
cost of the work, a fi xed sum, or a variable sum. Owners do not generally favor per-
centage fees because this type of agreement provides no incentive for cost control. 
In fact, the higher the costs, the more profi t the builder will make. There is also no 
incentive to control costs when fees are fi xed, but at least it will not result in rewards 
for ineffi ciency. In order to provide a cost control incentive, provisions have to be 
included that allow the fee to increase when savings are made and to decrease when 
project costs exceed expectations. These provisions result in what is known as a vari-
able fee cost plus contract.
Unit Price Contracts
Unit price contracts are appropriate when there is some uncertainty about the 
amount of work to be done. These contracts are not often used on housing projects 
since on most jobs the amount of work involved is established before a builder is 
hired. There may, however, be situations, typically related to earthwork, where some 
task is required but the quantity of this work is not known. For example, a builder 
may have to remove an existing underground sewer pipe as part of a project. The 
location of the pipe may be known but depth below grade is not. Under the terms 
of a unit price contract, the builder would not bid a sum for the whole job; instead 
he would quote unit prices for the work involved. In this example, the builder may 
quote $15.00 per cubic yard for the trench excavation and $25.00 per cubic yard 
for common backfi ll.
A unit price contract, therefore, has two parts:
 
1. Prices per unit of measurement for the different types of work involved in the 
project, and
 
2. Measurement of the actual work completed.
At the end of the job, the amount of work completed is measured and recorded, 
and then the builder is paid his unit prices multiplied by the quantity of work done. 
So, continuing the example, if our builder excavates and backfi lls 100 cubic yards on 
the project, he will be paid:
100 cu. yds. 3 $15.00 5 $1,500.00
100 cu. yds. 3 $25.00 5 $2,500.00
 
Total 
$4,000.00
Uses of Estimates
Estimates are used for a number of different purposes in residential construction:
■ Determining the feasibility of a project
■ Calculating an approximate price of a project
■ Providing value analysis
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES
■ Setting sales prices
■ Calculating bid prices
■ Determining project budgets in cost control
Project Feasibility
A question that almost always arises when someone is considering the construction 
of a new home is: Do we have suffi cient money to build this house? So, when this 
person consults a builder with their ideas about the new home, they inevitably raise 
the question of cost. At this early stage, the builder will have very little information 
about the proposed house. Perhaps the location, a rough idea of size and style of de-
sign may be known, but usually not much more. Based in this scant data, the builder 
now has to put together an estimate to determine if the concept is fi nancially feasible. 
Hence, this fi rst estimate is often called the feasibility estimate. 
For a developer who is considering a sizable investment in a new residential proj-
ect not only will the projected cost be a prime consideration, but they will also be 
concerned about the value of the development. The value of a proposed building is 
basically what it is worth once it has been constructed. Value can be appraised from 
the profi ts that are expected to fl ow after project completion, or, if the concept of 
profi ts is not applicable to the venture, it can be based on an assessment of the benefi ts 
that are expected to materialize from the new facility. In either case, an attempt will 
be made to place a monetary value on the fi nished project. As costs and benefi ts are 
usually extended over a number of years, monetary value will normally be determined 
by means of “present worth” analysis or other “time value of money” concepts.
Using this analysis, a feasible project can be defi ned as one where the anticipated 
value of all benefi ts exceeds the estimated total cost of putting the project in place. 
The cost profi le of a commercial project includes many constituent parts including 
the cost of the land required, the cost of fi nancing the project, the legal and gen-
eral administrative costs, the cost of designing and administrating the work and, of 
course, the construction cost of the work. Further costs may also need to be consid-
ered, such as commissioning costs, operating costs and, possibly, marketing costs. 
Some costs are relatively easy to establish.
The cost of land and fi nancing, for instance, is not diffi cult to determine since 
current market prices and interest rates are normally easy to establish, but the 
amount of what is most often the major cost component—the construction cost—is 
far more diffi cult to ascertain with any certainty. We will see that the most accurate 
way to predetermine the cost of construction work is by means of a detailed esti-
mate using the methods employed by builders. However, a detailed estimate requires 
complete design details, and as we have said, these are generally not available at this 
early stage of a project.
So a feasibility or conceptual estimate is normally produced from merely the 
notion the owner has of what he or she would like to see constructed. If the owners’ 
analysis has begun with the assessed value of the project, they should be in a position 
to say that the project is viable if it can be built for a certain price, where this price 
is the maximum amount the owner is willing to pay to obtain the benefi ts that are 
anticipated from the project. Alternatively, analysis may lead an owner to conclude 
that a certain structure of defi nite size and scope is necessary to generate the specifi c 
benefi ts that are sought. Typically the owner’s fi nancial situation reveals that there is 
only a certain amount of funds available to spend on this structure. In this case, the 
obvious question will be “can I build the structure for this amount?”
In either case, the owner needs an estimate of the most likely cost of the work. 
This estimate, because of the lack of design details, must be prepared using one of 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES 
7
the approximate estimating techniques that follow, but this is not to say a crude ap-
proximation of costs will suffi ce. The feasibility decision, which may involve many 
thousands if not millions of dollars, is of major importance to most owners and 
developers, so the accuracy of the predicted costs used in the calculations is crucial 
if the following decisions are to be sound. Builders should note that the price they 
come up with at this time is the one the client always remembers.
Value Analysis
In the process of value analysis, the estimated cost of a component or element of a 
building is compared with the perceived value of that element to consider if the sum 
allocated to that part of the building is justifi ed by the value provided by the compo-
nent. At the time of the conceptual estimate, the estimator will have made numerous 
assumptions about these elements based on his discussions with the owner and his 
perception of the owner’s needs. For instance, the exterior cladding of the building 
may have been assumed to be vinyl siding.
During the design stage, it might be suggested that the cladding be changed 
to brick masonry. Cost estimates of the alternatives and the relative benefi ts of the 
two systems will be evaluated to determine if the extra cost of the more expensive 
brick cladding is justifi ed by the increased value of brick masonry over vinyl siding 
exterior. Then, if a decision to spend the extra amount on exterior cladding is made 
and the overall budget is still to be maintained, a saving in another element must 
be found to balance the additional cost of the cladding. His process is repeated so 
that the fi nal design represents the greatest value for the money invested in the new 
project.
Estimates for Setting Sales Prices
For the spec builder, estimates are used when setting the basic sales price of a new 
home. If cost-based pricing is used, the builder begins with the price of the lot, and 
then adds the estimated cost of construction together with markup to arrive at the 
sales price. Adjustments for the homebuyer’s choices will be made at the time of 
the sale. 
Alternatively, some builders use a value-based approach to pricing. With this 
method of pricing, the builder fi rst investigates the current market prices of the types 
of home he intends to construct. This determines the sales price of the home, but, in 
order to make a profi t, the builder has to construct the house for something less that 
this sales price. Therefore, an estimate is also required when value-based pricing is 
used. In this case, the full cost of a certain design of home is estimated to determine 
if it can be built for the market price including the required profi t. If the estimated 
cost including markup exceeds the market price, design modifi cations may be have 
to be made to make the deal profi table. Alternatively, the builder may simply choose 
not to build that particular design of house.
For semi-custom homes, the builder will have a cost estimate and sales price 
for the standard design; the sales price will then be adjusted for all of the owner’s 
modifi cations to customize the home. Each design change will call for an estimate 
of the cost of the new feature, which will be compared with the cost of the standard 
feature. The estimates of these design modifi cations may be presented to homebuyers 
in a format similar to a menu. For instance, buyers may be offered a list of alterna-
tive kitchen layouts each one priced separately, then a list of alternative fl oor fi nishes, 
and so on. The sales person merely adjusts the base price of the home to account for 
each of the owner’s choices to arrive at the fi nal price.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES
Estimates for Calculating Bid Prices
Custom home builders use estimates to determine their bid prices for the work. 
Owners usually invite a number of builders to quote a price to construct their home 
in accordance with the drawings and specifi cations provided by the owner. In this 
situation, each builder will estimate the cost of the project and submit a bid to the 
owner before the bid closing date. The owner will generally proceed to award a con-
tract to the builder who quotes the lowest amount for the work.
Builders in the multi-unit residential sector also obtain most of their work by 
means of competitive bids. On larger projects, owners and developers often hire ar-
chitects to prepare the plans and specifi cations and go on to administer the project to 
completion. The type of estimating used in this part of the residential industry is very 
similar to the commercial construction estimating process that is outlined in some 
detail in Fundamentals of Construction Estimating.1
Cost Control Estimates
In a recent publication of the National Association of Home Builders,2 “sloppy cost 
control” was listed as one of the top-ten ways builders mess up their businesses. 
According to this book, “inaccurate and ineffi cient estimating procedure” is the 
number one fi nancial control problem in the home building business. Obviously the 
homebuilder who obtains his work in bid competitions relies on accurate estimat-
ing in order to make a profi t; if the costs are underestimated, profi ts will quickly 
disappear. All builders need to establish budgets for their projects, and then obtain 
feedback (preferably on a monthly basis) to determine if budgets are being met on 
each job. This process begins with an accurate estimate from which budgets may be 
established. Further estimating is then needed each month to determine how much 
work has been done and how much it has cost to do that work. 
A budget document is just another way of displaying an estimate. It usually 
follows a simpler format than the estimate recap used for pricing because fewer 
 details are required and there is no need to divide it into general expenses and trades. 
See Figure 1.2 for an example of how a budget may be presented.
Methods of Estimating
Methods of estimating can be divided into two main categories: preliminary esti-
mating methods and detailed estimating methods. The price per unit and the price 
per unit area are the two most frequently used methods of preparing preliminary 
estimates. These are used in the early stages of a project to provide at least a rough 
estimate of the construction cost at a time when there is no detailed information 
available about the nature of the proposed project. The detailed estimating method, 
because it offers so much greater accuracy, is the method of choice for most builders 
calculating prices when drawings and specifi cations are available. Certainly it should 
be the only method of estimating used to prepare a bid price.
Price Per Unit
The price per unit method of estimating is used on multi-unit projects. It be-
gins with an analysis of the cost of projects that have been completed. After 
1. Fundamentals of Construction Estimating by David Pratt, Delmar Thomson Learning, New York, 2nd 
Edition, 2004
2. Building With Attitude by Al Trellis and Paul Sharp, Home Builder Press, Washington DC, 1999
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES 
9
PROJECT BUDGET
JOB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DATE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  
 
LABOR 
MATERIALS EQUIPMENT SUBTRADE 
TOTAL
 No. DESCRIPTION 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$
 1 
Schedule
 2 
Permits
 3 
Project Supervision
 4 
Project Signs
 5 
Survey and Plot Plan
 6 
Stake Out
 7 
Site Security
 8 
Equipment Rentals
 9 
Municipal Charges
 10 
Excavation and Backfill
 11 
Soils Testing
 12 
Plumbing—Rough In
 13 
Temporary Site Services
 14 
Temporary Hoarding
 15 
Temporary Heating
 16 
Concrete
 17 
Formwork
 18 
Safety and First Aid
 19 
Rentals
 20 
Framing
 21 
Heating—Rough In
 22 
Windows
 23 
Doors
 24 
Hardware
 25 
Roofing
 26 
Exterior Finish
 27 
Electrical—Rough In
 28 
Cabinets
29 
Bathroom Accessories
 30 
Appliances
 31 
Heating Finish
 32 
Plumbing Finish
 33 
Permanent Connections
 34 
Flooring
 35 
Drywall
 36 
Painting
 37 
Electrical Finish
 38 
Cleanup
 39 
Snow Removal
 40 
New Home Warranty
 
Figure 1.2 
Example of Budget Format
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES
completing an apartment building, for example, the analyst would divide the con-
struction cost of the new building by number of suites it contains to determine 
the cost per suite. This unit price can then be used as a guide to price future apart-
ment projects by multiplying the number of suites in the proposed facility by this 
unit price per suite. 
An accurate forecast of cost will be obtained only if the future project is very 
similar to those previously analyzed with regard to such items as the design of the 
building, the price of resources used, the total project size, the quality of fi nish, 
the geographical location, and the time of year when the work was undertaken. 
Clearly, differences between the previous projects and the new one can be expected 
in most of these areas, but making the proper price adjustments for these project 
differences is very diffi cult which seriously reduces the accuracy of price per unit 
estimates.
Using this estimating method can generate a rough estimate quickly, so is often 
used to determine the very fi rst notion of a price in early discussions of a multi-unit 
project and as a crude means of comparing the known costs of different buildings. 
Examples—Price Per Unit
 
1. A builder recently completed a 16-unit apartment building for a construction 
cost of $3,113,100, so the cost per unit was $3,113,100/16 5 $194,569. 
Using this analysis, the cost of a proposed 12-unit apartment can be quickly 
calculated as: 12 3 $194,569 5 $2,334,828.
 
2. In the second example, a developer is considering the construction of a 
40-unit senior citizens home. The construction cost of a similar project con-
taining 30 units was $7,552,000, so the cost per unit was $7,552,000/30 5 
$251,733. The developer believes that prices have risen by 10% since the 
construction of the fi rst building, so the cost per unit is now expected to be 
$251,733 3 1.10 5 $276,907; therefore, the anticipated cost of the new 
40-unit home would be 40 3 $276,907 5 $11,076,280.
Obviously, further price adjustments will be required if the proposed facility is going 
to differ in any respect from the previously completed project, but this method does 
provide a quick way to establish at least an approximation of the construction cost, 
which can be useful in the early stages of the new project.
Price Per Unit Area
With the price per unit area estimating method, the unit of analysis is the square foot 
or square meter of gross fl oor area of the project. The gross fl oor area is defi ned as 
the area of all fl oors measured to the outside of containing walls. As with the cost per 
unit method, fi rst the construction cost of completed projects have to be analyzed. 
This time, the known project construction cost is divided by the gross fl oor area of 
the project to obtain a cost per unit area. This unit rate can then be applied to future 
projects to estimate their construction cost. 
This is the most common method of preliminary estimating because it is easy to 
understand and a large amount of published data on prices per square foot is avail-
able that can supplement data obtained from a builder’s analysis of its own projects. 
Because one of the fi rst details of design to be defi ned is always the fl oor area of a 
proposed building, this method of estimating can be applied very early in the de-
velopment of a project. However, virtually all the same variable factors that make 
accuracy diffi cult to attain with the price per unit method of estimating also apply to 
this price per square foot analysis.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES 
11
Examples—Price Per Unit Area
 
1. Most custom home builders keep a record of the cost of constructing their 
projects. So, when a prospective client asks what it will cost to build their 
house, the builder can refer back to the record of a similar house constructed 
in the past and do a simple calculation to obtain at least a rough idea of 
what the construction cost will be. For example, say a house of 2,000 square 
feet was previously built for $243,000; the cost per square foot would be 
$243,000/2,000 5 $121.50. If the client wants to build a similar residence 
but of 2,400 square feet fl oor area, the cost can quickly be estimated to be 
(2,400 3 $121.50) $291,600.
 
2. A sophisticated cost record of a project would include a breakdown of the 
total cost so that the cost per square foot for each major component could be 
determined. This information could then be used to adjust the total price to 
refl ect the particular requirements of the client. If we return to the example 
above, the client may indicate that she would like a specifi c type of carpet 
that the builder knows is more expensive than the one used in the previous 
project. The cost record of the previous job indicates that the amount spent 
on carpets was $9,000, which works out to be $4.50 per square foot. Then, 
if the carpet required for the new home is calculated to be approximately 
$14.00 per square foot, the price adjustment would be as follows: 
Estimated basic price (as above) 
5 $291,600
Less carpet allowance 2,400 3 $4.50 
5 ,$10,800.
Add new carpet allowance 2,400 3 $14.00 5 $33,600
Revised estimated price 
5 $314,400
 
 With good cost records and clear details of what the client is looking for, any 
number of these adjustments could be made to arrive at a better estimate of 
the cost of the client’s particular project requirements.
Detailed Estimates
The process of detailed estimating is the subject matter of a majority of this book, 
but before we begin to examine all the particular aspects of this topic, it may be 
useful to consider what the essence of this subject is. Whether prepared by hand, 
by computer spreadsheet, or by means of a totally computerized system, a detailed 
estimate can be analyzed in terms of six distinct procedures:
 
1. Quantity Takeoff—The work to be performed by the builder is measured in 
accordance with standard rules of measurement.
 
2. Recap Quantities—The quantities of work taken off are sorted and listed to 
comply with the trade breakdown to facilitate the process of pricing. 
 
3. Pricing the Recap—Prices for the required labor, equipment, and materi-
als are entered against the quantities to determine the estimated cost of the 
builder’s own work.
 
4. Pricing Subcontractor’s Work—Prices are obtained from competing sub-
trades who quote to perform the work of their trade then, usually, the lowest 
bid from each trade is entered into the estimate.
 
5. Pricing General Expenses—The costs of the anticipated project overheads are 
calculated and added to the estimate.
 
6. Summary—All the estimated prices are summarized and the contractor’s 
markup is added.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES
The detailed estimating method, rather than any of the other estimating methods 
considered, is far more likely to produce a price that is an accurate forecast of the 
actual costs of building a project. Because the very survival of builders and subtrades 
who obtain work by offering fi rm price bids often rests on the accuracy of their es-
timating, it will come as no surprise that detailed estimating is the method of choice 
for bid preparation in the highly competitive building industry.
The basis of a detailed estimate is the accurate assessment of the work in the 
form of a quantity takeoff that can only be obtained from the full design of the proj-
ect. Because of this requirement and also because detailed estimating is such a time-
consuming process, feasibility estimates are usually prepared by the other quicker, 
but less accurate methods previously considered. 
Materials Estimates
A detailed construction estimate can also be used to generate a bill of materials. This 
document lists the quantities of all materials required to construct a project. It is 
compiled directly from the estimator’s takeoff of the work. Bills of material are usu-
ally divided into categories that correspond to the type of materials obtained from 
specialized suppliers, such as:
■ Gravel materials
■ Concrete materials
■ Carpentry materials
Copies of the appropriate categories can then be sent to individual suppliers for 
pricing. Categories can further be divided into packages, for example, carpentry 
materials may comprise:
■ Cribbing package
■ Main fl oor framing package
■ Roof framing package
When computer estimating is used, producing a bill of materials report from a 
takeoff can be as easy as pressing a button, and, if up-to-date database prices have 
been maintained, the bill of materials can be fully priced. Alternatively, unpriced 
bills of material can be sent to suppliers who simply have to apply unit prices to the 
quantities of materials listed to produce their quotes. 
Architects and Designers
The principal role of architects and designers in the residential sector is to create 
designs for new building and renovation projects. Consultant architects are sel-
dom appointed on custom homes these days, except perhaps for some larger and 
expensive undertakings since the expense would be far beyond the means of most 
homeowners. Architects are, however, employed as prime consultants on most large 
multi-unit developments where the size of such an undertaking justifi es the expense. 
Prime consultants will not only prepare plans and specifi cations on these projects, 
but they will usually also provide administration services throughout the course of 
the work. Indeed, on major developments, architects or architectural companies 
often play the lead role in moving a project from the conceptual phase through to 
fi nal completion. 
In the case of single custom homes, some owners obtain designs from plan ser-
vice companies for a fraction of the fee an architect would charge; other owners rely 
on builders who often have in-house design staff to prepare plans and specifi cations 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES 
13
for new homes. Many of the larger spec builders also have in-house design capabili-
ties so that they can ensure that their designs continue to be fashionable. Spec build-
ers with smaller organizations tend to rely more on plan services when home designs 
need to be updated.
Green Building and Sustainable Construction
“Green,” “sustainable,” “eco-friendly,” “energy-effi cient,” “organic” are all terms we 
have come to be familiar with over recent years and the homebuilding industry has 
certainly not escaped this phenomenon in our society. The green building movement 
has grown and is still evolving; homebuilders are aware of this and most are re-
sponding to their customers’ needs in this area. Homebuyers have become concerned 
about such matters as energy consumption, renewable materials, water usage, and 
indoor air quality. Consequently, many builders are now addressing these issues in 
the design of their projects, the products and materials used, and even the construc-
tion methods employed to build their homes. Government agencies have also re-
sponded to the green movement by publishing guidelines and, in some cases, offering 
incentives to builders who adopt green construction.
Knowledgeable homebuyers realize that building green comes with a price tag, 
but they also appreciate that spending extra for an energy-effi cient heating system 
soon pays off with reduced energy consumption costs; that water is becoming a 
scarce resource and needs to be conserved; that many products in new homes emit 
unhealthy gases; and that consuming nonreplaceable resources is not such a good 
idea. So these prospective homeowners are looking for assurances that the homes 
they buy meet at least minimum standards that deal with these issues.
There are many green building standards that defi ne how a “green” house should 
be built, what materials should be used, and what performance standards should 
be met by the completed house. Perhaps the most well-known set of standards 
and rating system for green building come from the US Green Building Council’s 
(USGBC’s) Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Green Building 
Rating System.
LEED Certiﬁ cation
The USGBC, a construction industry organization whose membership includes own-
ers, designers, and contractors, developed the LEED rating system as an objective 
standard for certifying that a building is environmentally friendly. Because of the 
wide variety of construction projects, LEED has developed several different versions 
of LEED including:
■ New commercial construction
■ Commercial interiors
■ Existing buildings: operation and maintenance
■ Core and shell
■ Homes
■ Neighborhood development
■ Portfolio program
■ LEED for schools
■ LEED for retail
■ LEED for health care
In each of these categories, LEED programs award certifi cates when a project achieves 
the required points for achievement in green construction. Points are awarded in all 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES
aspects of the construction process, for example, in homebuilding points can be ob-
tained for such things as:
■ Use of effi cient insulation
■ Adoption of high-performance windows
■ Tight construction of the building envelope
■ Use of effi cient heating and cooling equipment
Various levels of certifi cation are attainable depending on how many points have 
been awarded out of a total of 100:
■ Certifi cation: 
26–32 points
■ Silver: 
 
33–38 points
■ Gold: 
 
39–51 points
■ Platinum:  
52–69 points
Homebuilders generally, however, view LEED certifi cation as expensive; there are a 
series of fees for registration, certifi cation review, etc. Many feel that LEED is ap-
propriate only for certain types of projects such as high-end custom homes. An alter-
native green building rating system is offered by the National Association of Home 
Builders; this seeks to be more in line with the needs of its membership.
NAHB National Green Building Program
National Green Building Certifi cation is an application of the ICC 700-2008 Na-
tional Green Building Standard that has been offi cially approved by the American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI). Like LEED, the NAHBGreen program uses a 
points system to rate projects and, on the basis of number of points achieved, offers 
four green certifi cation levels: Bronze, Silver, Gold, and Emerald.
Residential buildings, remodeling projects, and developments can be Green 
 Certifi ed by addressing key green construction areas including:
■ Lot design, preparation, and site development
■ Resource effi ciency
■ Energy effi ciency
■ Water effi ciency
■ Indoor environmental quality
■ Operation, maintenance, and homeowner education
After all points have been confi rmed in the fi eld by an impartial third party, the 
NAHB Research Center is able to certify a home under the NAHBGreen program.
Green Building and Estimating
The question is: How will adoption of green building techniques affect your cost 
estimate of the work? Most green building requirements will automatically be dealt 
with by following the estimating procedures described in this text. For example, if a 
green design calls for energy-effi cient wall and roof systems, the cost of building to 
meet these specifi cations will be refl ected in the labor, material, and equipment prices 
used in the estimate; the cost of providing such items as ventilation energy recovery 
equipment will be refl ected in the price of the mechanical subcontractor supplying 
these units; and so on. 
There may, however, be some additional costs for building green such as the cost 
of sorting recyclable items at the site and the cost of fees if LEED or NAHBGreen 
certifi cation is pursued. These types of costs are added to the project’s general ex-
penses in the estimate; general expenses are discussed in Chapter 8. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES 
15
As noted earlier, some municipalities and government agencies are offering in-
centives for builders to implement green construction. These may be in the form of 
tax rebates or reduced building permit fees, so the estimator needs to be aware of 
these schemes in order to make an adjustment to the price of the project.
Drawings and Speciﬁ cations
The role of drawings and specifi cations is to communicate to the builder exactly 
what is to be built. On single-home residential jobs, all the information necessary 
to build the project is usually contained in a set of working drawings together with 
supplementary notes regarding items such as cabinets, fl oor coverings, paint colors, 
light fi xtures, and any other selections made by the owner. Specifi cations are usually 
noted on the drawings of these smaller projects. 
On larger projects, drawings will be supplemented by a separately bound set 
of specifi cations that go into much detail about the materials and workmanship re-
quired on the project. Where the owner is seeking bids from builders for the project, 
information about contracts and bid procedures will also be found in the specifi ca-
tions. If a soils report has been compiled, a copy of this document may also be pro-
vided for information to builders.
A set of drawings for a new home will usually include the following:
■ A plot plan that provides information about the site of the home and shows 
property lines together with the location of the building on the lot
■ Plan views of each level of the proposed building from which the reader can 
obtain information about the size and layout of the house
■ Building elevations that show what the building will look like as viewed from 
the front, sides, and back
■ Cross-sections that show the construction of foundations, fl oors, walls, and 
roofs 
■ Additional sketches and information about building components
For example, full set of home plans can be found in Appendix D of this text.
Soils Reports
The soils report is a resource that is available on most large projects and also on 
some smaller jobs. This document provides information about the subsurface con-
ditions at the site obtained from bore holes and/or other investigations made by a 
soils engineer. The purpose of the report is to furnish data about the site for use in 
the design of the foundation system. Indeed, the report usually includes advice about 
the type of foundation systems suitable for the conditions encountered. However, the 
information contained in the report can also be very helpful to the excavator since 
it not only discloses the type of soil that will probably be found at the site, but also 
provides an indication of the moisture content of this soil. Both of these factors can 
have a profound effect on the cost of excavation work.
A soils report usually begins with an introduction identifying the name and loca-
tion of the project, the name of the owner and the name of the prime consultant, and 
it states the objective of the study. Details of the investigation then follow includ-
ing the date of the site was examined, the method of investigation undertaken, and 
general details of the borehole procedures. Next, the report addresses the nature of 
the subsurface conditions encountered and goes on to provide comments and recom-
mendations about the foundation system together with detailed information about 
the test hole results.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES
An estimator is cautioned to read the contract documents carefully to determine 
the true status of the soils report because, while some contracts contemplate extra 
compensation to a contractor who is mislead by information contained in the report, 
many contracts state that the contractor should not rely upon information provided 
by the soils report but should make its own investigation of subsurface conditions. 
Site Visits
Whether it is a custom home to be built or a multi-unit residential project, the bid 
price for the work will always depend, at least to some extent, on the characteristics 
of the particular site where the building is to be constructed. A site visit is always an 
important part of a bid estimate but, if there is no soils report on the project, what is 
uncovered on the visit may be crucial to the accuracy of an estimate. While an expe-
rienced estimator will certainly know what to look for and assess when investigating 
the site, the presence of a more senior estimator and/or a project superintendent on 
the visit will always be valuable if only to offer alternative viewpoints in the evalua-
tion of the data obtained.
Figure 1.3 lists the items that are normally considered on the site visit. The con-
dition of the site and any soil information that can be observed will impact the price 
of the excavation work estimated. Many of the other items examined are included in 
the general expenses of the project; pricing these items is dealt with in Chapter 8. It 
is recommended that photographs or videos be taken on the site visit since the condi-
tion of the site may change in the time between the bid and the start of work. Also, 
the condition of structures adjacent to the site should be carefully documented and 
photographed at this time, especially if these structures are in poor condition. This 
information could be important in determining if damage to these occurred before 
or after the project work began.
Environmental concerns are another important area for the estimator to con-
sider on the site visit. Complying with exacting environmental requirements can be 
a very costly proposition for a contractor, so the estimator must review the contract 
documents thoroughly to assess the extent of liability for possible environmental 
problems the contractor is assuming under the terms of the contract. Every effort 
should then be made to investigate the history of the site from local information and 
by reviewing soils reports and any environmental assessments that might be avail-
able. Special attention should be paid to the possibility of soil contamination in the 
location of the site. Only by assembling accurate data can the contractor quantify 
the fi nancial risk imposed by the contract regarding environmental issues, then an 
appropriate sum can be added to the bid to cover this risk.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES 
17
SITE VISIT CHECKLIST
 
Estimator: 
____________________  
Date: __________________ 
 
Job Number: 
____________________  
Location: __________________ 
 
Project Name: 
____________________  
__________________ 
 
 
Distance from Office: 
_________________________________________________
 
Weather Conditions: 
_________________________________________________
 
Access and Roads: 
_________________________________________________
 
Sidewalk Crossings: 
_________________________________________________
 
Site Conditions: 
_________________________________________________
 
 
_________________________________________________  
 
 
 
_________________________________________________
 
Adjacent Structures: 
_________________________________________________
 
 
_________________________________________________
 
 
_________________________________________________
 
Obstructions: 
_________________________________________________
 
Shoring or Underpinning: 
_________________________________________________
 
Depth of Topsoil: 
_________________________________________________
 
Soil Data: 
_________________________________________________
 
Ground Water: 
_________________________________________________
 
Soil Disposal Location: 
_________________________________________________
 
Distance to Borrow Pit: 
_________________________________________________
 
Local Sand & Gravel: 
_________________________________________________
 
Electrical Service: 
_________________________________________________
 
Telephone: 
_________________________________________________
 
Sewer & Water Services: 
_________________________________________________
 
Parking and Storage: 
_________________________________________________
 
Security Needs: 
_________________________________________________
 Temporary Fences Required: _________________________________________________
 
Garbage Disposal: 
_________________________________________________
 
Toilets: 
_________________________________________________
 
Site History: 
_________________________________________________
 
Possible Contamination: 
_________________________________________________
 
Other Comments: 
_________________________________________________
 _________________________________________________________________________
 _________________________________________________________________________
 _________________________________________________________________________
 _________________________________________________________________________
Figure 1.3 
Site Visit-Checklist
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES
SUMMARY
■ A building cost estimate is an attempt to determine the likely cost of some 
building work before the work is done.
■ In residential construction, the type of estimate used depends upon the resi-
dential market served by the builder preparing the estimate, the nature of the 
contract with the home purchaser or owner, and the purpose of the estimate. 
■ The three main groups of builders serving the residential construction market 
are: 
• Spec builders
• Custom home builders
• Multi-unit residential contractors
■ Contracts used by homebuilders and residential contractors include:
• Stipulated lump sum
—Firm price
—Variable price
• Cost plus
—Percentage fee
—Fixed fee
—Variable fee
• Unit Price
■ Residential estimates are prepared for many different purposes, including:
• Determining the feasibility of a project
• Calculating an approximate price of a project
• Setting sales prices
• Calculating bid prices
• Determining project budgets in cost control
■ When projects are no more than ideas, feasibility estimates are prepared in re-
sponse to questions such as: Do we have suffi cient money to build this house? 
■ In addition to cost, developers of commercial projects are also interested in 
value when considering construction of a new project.
■ The estimated cost of a component or element of a building is compared with 
the perceived value of that element in the value analysis process.
■ The spec builder uses estimates when setting the sales price of a new home.
■ Sales prices may be set by means of cost-based pricing or by value-based 
pricing.
■ Custom home builders and multi-unit contractors prepare their bid prices by 
means of detailed estimates.
■ Cost control should be an important consideration of all builders.
■ Estimates are used to set project budgets and monitor budgets during con-
struction of a project.
■ Preliminary estimates can be prepared by several different methods:
• Price per unit
• Price per unit area
■ Detailed estimates include six distinct procedures:
• Quantity takeoff
• Recap quantities
• Price recaps
• Price subcontractor’s work
• Price general expenses
• Summarize and add markup
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES 
19
■ Detailed construction estimates can also be used to generate bills of material 
that list the quantities of all materials required to construct a project.
■ The principal role of architects and designers in the residential sector is to 
create designs for new building and renovation projects.
■ Green building has become an established feature of the homebuilding in-
dustry and its scope is still expanding. Many homebuilders identify benefi ts 
in having their projects certifi ed as meeting the standards of the LEED or the 
NAHBGreen rating systems. The cost of accomplishing these green build-
ing standards is generally automatically accounted for in the estimating pro-
cess, but additional costs may need to be considered in the project’s general 
expenses.
■ Drawings and specifi cations are used in residential projects to communicate 
to the builder exactly what is to be built. They usually comprise:
• A plot plan 
• Plan views of each level of the proposed building 
• Building elevations 
• Cross-sections 
• Additional sketches and information
■ Soils reports, prepared for large and some small projects, provide information 
about the subsurface conditions at the site obtained from bore holes and/or 
other investigations made by a soils engineer.
■ A site visit is always an important part of a bid estimate but, if there is no 
soils report on the project, what is uncovered on the visit may be crucial to 
the accuracy of an estimate.
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
 Information  
Web Page Address
 
■ National Association of Home Builders— 
http://www.nahb.org/default.aspx
Provides information about the home-
building industry together with education, 
books, and publications for homebuilders. 
You will also fi nd much information 
about the NAHB National Green 
Building Program on this web site.
 
■ Builder Central—Provides information 
http://www.buildercentral.com/
for and about homebuilders.
 
■ B4UBUILD.COM—A web site for use  
http://www.b4ubuild.com/
by anyone involved with residential 
construction. It contains information
about the building process, house plans,
construction contracts, and much more.
 
■ US Green Building Council—LEED rating 
http://www.usgbc.org/
system. 
 
 
 
DisplayPage.aspx?CategoryID=19
 
■ Much information can also be obtained 
by using key words such as Building 
Estimates, Home Plans, Green Building, 
and Value Analysis in web search engines.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20 
CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTION TO BUILDING COST ESTIMATES
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. Explain what a building cost estimate is.
 2. Explain the following terms:
a. Spec builder
b. Production builder
c. Custom home builder
 3. Compare the risks taken by a spec builder with those taken by a custom home 
builder.
 4. Describe the process by which builders are selected for large multi-unit residen-
tial projects.
 5. What is a fi rm price contract?
 6. How can you provide incentive for a builder to exercise cost control with a cost 
plus contract?
 7. How would a builder determine the feasibility of an owner’s custom home 
proposal?
 8. How can value analysis be used with the design of a house?
 9. Describe the value-based approach to setting the sales price of a home.
 10. How is estimating used in the cost control process?
 11. Describe the following methods of preliminary estimating:
a. Cost per unit
b. Cost per unit area
 12. What is the most accurate method of estimating the cost of a building project, 
and why is it more accurate than other methods?
 13. What is listed on a bill of materials, and what format is usually adopted for a bill 
of materials?
 14. On what kind of project would you fi nd architects in the role of prime consultant?
 15. What is usually contained in a set of drawings for a new house? 
 16. On a site visit, why is it important to investigate the condition of structures ad-
jacent to the site of the new project? 
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
 1. Based on the following information, how much would the amount paid to this 
subcontractor be?
a. The subtrade’s bid indicated that they would excavate trenches for $15.00 per 
cubic yard, they would lay pipes for $2.75 per foot, and they would backfi ll 
trenches for $12.00 per cubic yard.
b. The quantity of work completed on the job was 120 cubic yards of excava-
tion and backfi ll and 92 feet of pipe.
 2. What would the range of prices be for a 2,200 square foot home when the 
builder’s cost ranges from $65.00 to $120.00 per square foot?
 3. A 3,000 square feet custom home was recently constructed at a cost of $331,500, 
which includes $23,000 for heating and ventilating the house. What would be 
the estimated cost of a new home of 3,500 square feet, if it was similar to the 
previous home in all respects except that a more expensive heating and ventilat-
ing system is required that is expected to cost $9.00 per square foot?
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

21
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
2
ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES 
OF MEASUREMENT
Introduction
There are a number of different ways that the work of a construction project is measured:
 
1. By counting the number of pieces; for example, the number of doors
 
2. By measuring the length of an item, such as a pipe
 
3. By measuring an area of a material; for instance, the area of fl oor sheathing
 
4. By measuring the volume of a material, such as concrete
 
5. By measuring the weight of materials, such as structural steel beams
assembly
computer estimating
Excel spreadsheets
extensions
mensuration
method of measurement
pricing sheet
quantity sheet
specifi cations
takeoff item
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be able to:
■ Describe the different ways of measuring the work of a construction project.
■ Calculate the centerline length of perimeter footings and walls.
■ Calculate the areas and perimeters of rectangles, triangles, and other shapes en-
countered in buildings.
■ Calculate the volume footings, walls, and trenches.
■ Describe the quantity takeoff process.
■ Describe what is measured in the takeoff and the composition of takeoff items.
■ Explain the level of accuracy desired in estimating.
■ Describe how an estimate is organized in order to minimize errors.
KEY TERMS 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

22 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT
In order to accurately perform the many calculations required for these mea-
surements, an estimator needs a thorough knowledge and skill in mensuration 
( application of the principles of measurement required to calculate lengths, areas, 
and volumes). Even when items are enumerated, the estimator frequently has to per-
form calculations to arrive at the quantity of items required; anchor bolts and joists 
are typical examples. While the number of anchor bolts for columns can usually by 
counted directly from the plans, the anchor bolts along the length of a wall plate 
may not all be shown on the drawings. Instead, there is often a note that bolts are 
required at 24-inches on center along the length of the plate. Items like joists are also 
often not fully detailed on the drawings. In such cases, the number of joists required 
has to be determined from the specifi ed spacing of these components. 
Calculating Number of Items
When items like anchor bolts, joists, and studs are spaced out at certain intervals 
along a straight line, we calculate the number required by fi rst dividing the length of 
the line by the spacing, then rounding up to the next whole number and adding one.
EXAMPLE 2.1
Figure 2.1 shows the top of a wall that is 7' long. Suppose that we want to lay 
out joists on this wall spaced 16" (1.33') from the center of one joist to the next. 
7' / 1.33' 5 5.26 
Rounding up gives six joists. 
Adding the required end joist gives seven joists in total.
Figure 2.1 
Calculating Number of Joists
Plan of Joists on Wall
7'-0"
Wall Below
Joist Spacing
16"
7'-0" / 16" rounded up gives 6 joists
Plus additional joist required at the end
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT 
23
EXAMPLE 2.2
In the next example, anchor bolts are required to be installed at a spacing of 
24" from bolt to bolt along the top of a wall 13'-0" long. The end bolts are also 
required to be 2" from the end of the wall as shown on Figure 2.2.
To calculate the number of bolts, we fi rst deduct the 2" from each end 
of the wall: 13'-0" less 4" leaves 12'-8". Next, we divide the 12'-8" by 24" 
(12'-8" / 2'-0"). This gives 6.3, which we round up to 7. We then add one to 
account for the end bolt, so the required number of bolts is 8.
Length Calculations
Whenever possible, the length of an item of work is obtained directly from the di-
mensions given on the drawings. Sometimes dimensions are missing, in which case 
the estimator may be able to determine the length by reference to dimensions shown 
on other plans. You may have to add and/or subtract a number of dimensions from a 
drawing to arrive at the required length. Also, the estimator has to remember to read 
a set of drawings as a whole. This means you may have to search through a number 
of plans to fi nd the dimensions that enable you to calculate the length of something 
shown on a particular drawing.
As a last resort, it is occasionally necessary to scale off a length from the drawings. 
Scaling is not recommended because, even when plans indicate that they are drawn to 
a certain scale, they may not be accurate or, as sometimes happens in the design pro-
cess, changes are made to the plans that cause some lengths to be out of scale.
Figure 2.2 
Calculating Number of Anchor Bolts
13'-0"
Anchor Bolts
2"
2"
24"
Spacing
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x
Number of Bolts Required:
 
13'-0"
 
Less 2 x 2"       < -4" >
 
_______
 
12'-8"
 
_______
 
12'-8" / 2'-0" = 
6.3
 
Round up = 
7
 Add last bolt = 
8 bolts
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT
Perimeter Calculations
Many buildings have perimeter walls. In these situations, the volume of material in 
the wall is obtained by multiplying together the centerline length of the wall, the 
width of the wall, and the height of the wall. Once it is determined, the centerline 
length of the wall is often used for a number of calculations, so it is useful for an 
estimator to be able to quickly and accurately calculate the length of a perimeter 
centerline. 
EXAMPLE 2.3
A perimeter length is calculated from the fi gured dimensions that are provided 
on the plan of the structure. Figure 2.3 shows the plan of a basement wall 
with the dimensions to the exterior of the walls. The length of the outside 
perimeter can be determined in this fashion:
 
2 3 42'-0"  5  84'-0"
 
2 3 26'-0"  5  52'-0"
Thus, the exterior perimeter 
5 136'-0"
To arrive at the centerline length, it is necessary to deduct the thickness of 
the wall at each corner, that is 4 3 8" 5 2'-8", which makes the total cen-
terline 133'-4". The reason for making this adjustment at the corners can be 
seen from the enlarged detail of a corner shown in Figure 2.3. 
EXAMPLE 2.4
When the fi rst perimeter length was calculated, it was measured to the exte-
rior corner. However, to obtain the centerline perimeter, one half the width of 
the wall has to be deducted from each dimension. So, at this corner, 2 3 8"/2 
(8") has to be deducted. Because altogether there are four corners, the total 
adjustment is 4 3 8", which is 32" or 2'-8". 
The full calculation of the centerline perimeter would appear like this:
 
2 3 42'-0"  5  
84'-0"
 
2 3 26'-0"  5  
52'-0"
 
 
5  
136'-0"
 
Less 4 3 8" 
5  
< 2'-8" >
 
 
5  
133'-4"
In Figure 2.4, the plan of the building is not a full rectangle, but a portion of the 
building is cut away. This cutout will certainly reduce the fl oor area within the walls, 
but it will not affect the length of the perimeter wall. In fact, we do not need to know 
the size of the cutout in order to calculate the length of the wall centerline. 
Adding two times the full building length to two times the full building width 
and making an adjustment for four exterior corners will still give the centerline 
length. Although there are fi ve exterior corners on this plan, the effect on the cen-
terline length of an interior corner balances the effect of an exterior corner, so they 
cancel each other leaving just four exterior corners. This hypothesis that interior 
corners cancel the effect of exterior corners is demonstrated on Figure 2.5.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT 
25
Figure 2.3 
Perimeter Centerline Calculations
42'-0"
8" Wall
26'-0"
Centerline
Plan of Wall
Plan of Corner
At a corner, 2 x 1/2 width of wall
has to be deducted from the
outside dimensions to determine
the centerline perimeter length
1/2 Width of Wall
1/2 Width
of Wall
Outside Dimension
Dimension to Center
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

26 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT
Figure 2.4 
Perimeter Centerline Calculations
25'-0"
6" Wall
16'-0"
Centerline
Plan of Wall
Cutout
Perimeter Calculation: 
2 x 25'-0" = 
50'-0"
 
2 x 16'-0" = 
32'-0"
 
 
______
 
 
82'-0"
 
Less 4 x 6"    = 
<2'-0">
 
 
______
 
Centerline: 
80'-0"
 
Figure 2.5 
Interior and Exterior Corners
A
B
An exterior corner balances 
the effect of an interior corner, 
so there is no change to the
length of the centerline in this 
situation. All three lines are the 
same length from A to B.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT 
27
Figure 2.6 and Figure 2.7 show further examples of perimeter calculations for a 
number of different building shapes.
Figure 2.6 
Perimeter Centerline Calculations
24'-3"
Plan of Wall
 
18'-6"
 
+ 5'-0"
 
______
 
2 x 23'-6" 
= 
47'-0"
 
2 x 24'-3" 
= 
48'-6"
 
 
______
 
 
95'-6"
 
Less 4 x 10" 
= 
<3'-4">
 
 
______
 
Centerline:   
 
92'-2"
 
 
______
 
 
______
18'-6"
5'-0"
10" Wall
Perimeter Calculation: 
2 x 38'-2" 
= 
76'-4"
 
17'-10"
 
+  3'-0"
 
______
 
2 x 20'-10" 
= 
41'-8"
 
2 x 3'-0" 
= 
6'-0"
 
 
______
 
 
124'-0"
 
Less 4 x 1'-0" 
= 
<4'-0">
 
 
________
 
Centerline:   
 
120'-0"
 
 
______
 
 
______
Plan of Wall
17'-10"
3'-0"
38'-2"
12" Wall
Perimeter Calculation:
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

28 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT
Perimeters—Quick Method
To speed up the takeoff process, many residential estimators use the external perim-
eter rather than centerline perimeter for calculations. In Example 2.3, the external 
perimeter was quickly calculated as 136 feet; using this method, this length would be 
used to calculate trench, footing, and wall volumes rather than taking time to make 
the adjustment to determine the centerline perimeter. This approach saves time and, 
at least for small buildings, the error in the resulting quantities is not signifi cant.
Calculating Areas
Most of the areas we are required to calculate in residential estimating will be rect-
angular in shape, but occasionally the estimator may encounter triangles, parallelo-
grams, trapezoids, and other quadrilateral shapes. Even part or whole circles are 
occasionally encountered in buildings. Figure 2.8 provides the formulae for calculat-
ing the perimeter and the area of a number of different shapes.1
1. See Appendix C for a list of formulas to calculate lengths, areas, and volumes
Figure 2.7 
Calculating the Centerline of a Circular Wall
 
Perimeter Calculation:
 
Radius to centerline = 
26'-0"
 
Less 
< -7" >
 
 
________
 
 
25'-5"
 
Centerline = 2 x π x 25'-5"
 
= 2 x 3.14 x 25.42
 
= 159.64
 
= 159'-8"
 _______
14" Wall
Plan of Wall
= 
26'-0"
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT 
29
Figure 2.8 
Perimeters and Areas of Various Geometrical Shapes
1.  Rectangle
2.  Parallelogram
3.  Trapezoid
4.  Triangle
5.  Quadrilateral
6.  Circle
7.  Pythagoras
Shape
Formulae
 
Perimeter = 2a + 2b
 
Area = a x b
a
b
 
Perimeter = 2a + 2b
 
Area = a x h
a
b
h
a
d
c
h
 
Perimeter = a + b + c + d
 
Area = (a + b) x h
 
 
    2
h
c
 
Perimeter = a + b + c
 
Area = a x h
 
 ––––
 
 2
a
b
a
c
d
b
 
Perimeter = a + b + c + d
 
Area = (divide into triangles)
r
 Circumference = 2 π r
 
Area = π r2
b
h
a
h2 = a2 + b2
Therefore, length h =     a
2 + b
2
b
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT
We have also included the Pythagorean formula in Figure 2.8. This formula is 
often required to calculate the length of sloping lines, such as those found on roof 
systems.
Note that inches are converted to decimals of a foot for area calculations so 
that the results are stated in square feet. Working to two decimal places generally 
provides suffi cient accuracy for estimating purposes; Figure 2.9 shows the decimal 
equivalents of inches.
Figure 2.10, Figure 2.11, and Figure 2.12 show calculations of the area and 
 perimeter of some of the different shapes found on buildings.
Calculating Volumes
Pad footings are usually shaped like a rectangular box, so the volume of concrete in 
the footing is calculated by multiplying the footing length by the width by the depth. 
This formula can also be used to calculate the amount of concrete in a rectangular 
column.
Circular columns are cylindrical, and their volume is determined using the fol-
lowing formula: 
Volume 5 p r  2 3 h, where r is the radius and h is the height of the column. 
See Figure 2.13 for examples of calculating volumes of pad footings and columns.
To calculate the volume of concrete in a continuous footing to the perimeter of 
a building, use this formula: 
Volume 5 Centerline Length 3 Width 3 Depth 
The same formula can be used to calculate the volume of a perimeter trench or 
the volume of a perimeter wall. In fact, when a wall sits on top of a perimeter footing 
that is in a trench, the wall, the footing, and the trench all have the same centerline 
length. Consequently, the estimator has to be particularly careful when calculating a 
perimeter centerline length for a building since this single dimension can be used for 
a number of different calculations in an estimate.
Volumes of material are usually required to be stated in cubic yards, but di-
mensions are normally given in feet and inches. So, to determine cubic yards, fi rst 
calculate volumes by multiplying together length, width, and depth each in feet to 
give cubic feet, and then divide by 27 (since there are 27 cubic feet in a cubic yard) 
to establish the number of cubic yards. 
Figure 2.9 
Feet–Inches Conversions
Inches  
Feet 
Inches 
Feet
 1" 
= 
0.08' 
7" 
= 
0.58'
 2" 
= 
0.17' 
8" 
= 
0.67'
 3" 
= 
0.25' 
9" 
= 
0.75'
 4" 
= 
0.33' 
10" 
= 
0.83'
 5" 
= 
0.42 
11" 
= 
0.92'
 6" 
= 
0.50' 
12" 
= 
1.00' 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT 
31
Figure 2.10 
Area and Perimeter Calculations
1. Semi-circular Window
 
 
Area: 
π x 3.0 x 3.0 / 2 = 3.14 x 9.0 / 2
 
 
 = 14.13 sq. ft.
 
Perimeter: 
6.0 + (π x 3.0) = 6.0 + (3.14 x 3.0)
 
 
 = 15.42 ft.
2. Circular Window
 
 
Area: 
π x 5.25 x 5.25 / 2 = 3.14 x 10.56 / 2
 
 
 = 16.58 sq. ft.
 
Perimeter: 
π x 10.5 = 3.14 x 10.5
 
 
 = 32.97 ft.
3. Gable of a Mansard Roof
 
First the lengths A and B have to be calculated:
Using the slope ratio of 1:4, if 4 units are 8'-0",
then 1 unit is 2'-0"
Therefore, length A is 2'-0"
Thus, length B = 32'-0" – (2 x 2'-0") = 28'-0"
Using the ratio 2:1, the height H = 1 unit
where (B/2) is 2 units
Thus, height H = (28'-0" / 2) / 2 = 7'-0"
 
Area 1: 
((32.0 + 28.0) / 2) x 8.0 = 30.0 x 8.0
(The trapezoid below) 
 = 240 sq. ft.
 
Area 2: 
28.0 x 7.0 / 2 = 98 sq. ft.
 
 
  _________
(The triangle above)
 
Total Area: 
Area 1 + Area 2 = 338 sq. ft.
 
 
  _________
 
 
  _________
Using Pythagoras, the height of the leaning wall is equal
to the square root of (2.02 + 8.02) = 8.25
And, the slope width of the roof is equal to
the square root of (14.02 + 7.02) = 15.65
Perimeter: 32.0 + (2 x 8.25) + (2 x 15.65) = 79.8 ft.
6'-0"
10'-6"
32'-0"
A
H
8'-0"
B
1
2
1
4
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT
Figure 2.11 
Area and Perimeter Calculations
Roof Gable 1
 
The roof slope ratio 36:12 can also be written as 3:1
 
Using the ratio 3:1, the height H = 1 unit where (span/2) is 3 units
 
Thus, height H = (36'-0" / 2) / 3 = 6'-0"
 
 
Area: 
36.0 x 6.0 / 2 = 108 sq. ft.
 
Perimeter: Length of roof slope = square root of (18.02 + 6.02)
 
 
 
 
 
= square root of 360.0
 
 
 
 
 
= 18.98
 
 
 
 
 
= 19'-0"
 
 
 
 
 So, perimeter = 2 x19'-0" + 36'-0"
 
 
 
 
 
 = 74'-0"
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roof Gable 2
 
First, the roof slope ratio 24:12 = 2:1 and 48:12 = 4:1
 
From these ratios 2:1 and 4:1; if we add the two horizontal
 
components 2 and 4 we get 6 units. So, if the span 24'-0" is
 
equivalent to 6 units, the height of 1 unit = 24' / 6 = 4'-0"
 
Also, the A length is 2/6 of 24'-0" = 8'-0" and, therefore, B = 16'-0"
 
 
Area: 
24.0 x 4.0 / 2 = 48 sq. ft.
 
Perimeter: Length of roof slope1 = square root of (8.02 + 4.02)
 
 
 
 
 
= square root of 80.0
 
 
 
 
 
= 8.94
 
 
 
 
 
= 8'-11"
 
 
 
Length of roof slope2 = square root of (16.02 + 4.02)
 
 
 
 
 
= square root of 272.0
 
 
 
 
 
= 16.49
 
 
 
 
 
= 16'-6"
 
 
 
 
So, perimeter  = 8'-11" + 16'-6" + 24'-0"
 
 
 
 
 
 = 49'-5"
36'-0"
H
12
36
24'-0"
H
12
48
 
12
24
B
A
Figure 2.12 
Perimeter Calculations
Plan of Wall
Perimeter Centerline Calculation
Straight walls: 
2 x 38'-6" 
77'-0"
 
+ 
42'-0"
 
 
––––––
 
 
119'-0"
 
Less 2 x 8" = 
< 1'-4" >
 
 
––––––
 
 
117'-8"
Radius of centerline of circle
 
= 42'-0" / 2 – 8" / 2
 
= 21'-0" – 4
 
= 20'-8"
Length of centerline of 1/2 circle
 
= π x radius
 
= 3.14 x 20'-8" 
= 
64'-11"
 
 
 
––––––
 
 Total Centerline: 
182'-7"
 
 
 
––––––
 
 
 
––––––
8" Wall
38'-6"
42'-0"
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT 
33
When the sides of a trench are cut back to a slope (as they often are for safety 
reasons), the volume of the trench is calculated using the average width of the trench: 
Volume 5 Centerline Length 3 Average Width 3 Depth
Similarly, when the depth of trench varies, the volume is found by using the 
average depth: 
Volume 5 Centerline Length 3 Average Width 3 Average Depth
Figure 2.13 
Volume Calculations
6'-6"
Pad Footing
Volume: 
= length x width x depth
 
= 6.50 x 4.25 x 2.00
 
= 55.25 cu. ft.
 
= 55.25 / 27 cu. yds.
 
= 2.0 cu. yds.
Column
Volume: 
= length x width x depth
 
= 1.83 x 1.50 x 10.00
 
= 27.45 cu. ft.
 
= 27.45 / 27 cu. yds.
 
= 1.0 cu. yds.
Circular Column
Volume 
= π x r2 x height
 
= 3.14 x 1.082 x 12.00
 
= 43.95 cu. ft.
 
= 43.95 / 27 cu. yds.
 
= 1.6 cu. yds.
4'-3"
2'-0"
1'-10"
1'-6"
10'-0"
12'-0"
2'-2"
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT
Figure 2.14 shows an example of calculating the volume of perimeter trenches 
with cutback sides. 
 The Quantity Takeoff
An estimate begins with a quantity takeoff. A quantity takeoff is a process of measur-
ing the work of the project in the form of a series of quantifi ed work items. To prepare 
the takeoff, an estimator has to break down the design that is shown on the drawings 
and described in the specifi cations into pre-defi ned tasks (work items). These items 
correspond to the operations the builder will perform to complete the work of the 
project. Many estimators maintain a catalog of standard items that represent work 
Figure 2.14 
Trench Volume Calculations
Plan of Trench
Section A - A
 
 
Perimeter Centerline
 
 
 
2 x 41.00 = 
82.00
 
 
 
2 x 32.50 = 
65.00
 
 
 
2 x 3.00 = 
6.00
 
 
 
–––––––––
 
 
 
Outside: 
153.00
 
 
 Less 4 x 12'-0" 
< 48.00 >
 
 
 
–––––––––
 
 
 
 
105.00'
 
 
 
–––––––––
 
 
 
–––––––––
 
Average Width of Trench =  12.00 + 2.00
 
 
 
–––––––––
 
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
= 
7.00'
 
 
 
–––––––––
 
 
 
–––––––––
 
 
Volume of Trench
 
 
= Perimeter Centerline x Average Width x Depth
 
 
= 105.00 x 7.00 x 5.00
 
 
= 3675.00 cu. ft.
 
 
= 136.11 cu. yds.
 
 
From the slope ratio 1:1
Length A = 5'-0"
Therefore, top width B = 12'-0"
3'-0"
A
A
32'-6"
41'-0"
A
A
B
5'-0"
2'-0"
1
1
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT 
35
tasks encountered on the kind of projects they estimate. This catalog can be in a book 
form or in the form of a database in a software program. Junior estimators especially 
often use such a catalog of standard work items as a checklist to help ensure that all 
the categories of work in the project are accounted for in the takeoff process. 
Each item considered in the takeoff is measured according to a uniform set of 
rules with the object of producing a list of work items and their associated quanti-
ties in a format familiar to estimators. Because a standard format is used, estimators 
are able to more easily evaluate the work of each item and proceed to put a price on 
this work. In each subsequent chapter, where the measurement of the work of a par-
ticular trade is studied, we have included “measuring notes” which outline detailed 
rules regarding how the items of work of that trade are to be measured. These rules 
of measurement are based on the Method of Measurement followed by professional 
quantity surveyors and estimators. It is strongly recommended that estimators, at 
least those in the same company, apply a standard method of measuring work such 
as this, because price information that is gathered can only be shared if it relates to 
work that has been measured in the same fashion. 
What Is Measured
The estimator should note that the work measured in the takeoff process for a 
residential project is generally the quantity of materials required for the job. The 
 objective of a materials takeoff is to compute the amount of material that needs to 
be purchased in order to construct each particular item of the project. However, a 
quantity takeoff for a cost estimate has to go a little further than a purely materials 
takeoff because additional information is often required for pricing. 
For example, “160 square feet of ½" G1S ply” may be adequate for a material 
takeoff, but information about what the plywood is to be used for is required in 
a takeoff for a cost estimate. This is because the labor price of installation varies 
 according to whether the material is to be applied to fl oors, walls, or soffi ts.
Also, there are a number of work items measured in a cost estimate takeoff that 
do not involve materials. For example, the item “Hand Troweling” has only a labor 
price associated with it; what is measured for this work item is the plan area of con-
crete to be troweled, there is no material to consider.
Takeoff Items and General Rules of Measurement
 
1. Takeoff items comprise two components:
 
a. Dimensions that defi ne the size or quantity of the item in accordance with 
the required units of measurement for that item; and
 
b. A description that classifi es the item for pricing. 
 
2. Dimensions are entered onto the takeoff in the order length, width, and depth 
(or height).
 
3. Dimensions are written in feet to two decimal places, thus, 5'-10" would be 
written into a dimension column as 5.83. 
 
4. If a dimension does not come directly from a drawing, the estimator shall 
provide evidence in the form of side calculations showing how the dimension 
was determined. This is done for even the simplest calculation.
 
5. Dimensions are rounded to the nearest whole inch. However, to avoid com-
pounding rounding errors, fractions of an inch are not rounded in side calcu-
lations until the end result of the calculation is obtained.
 
6. Dimensions fi gured on the drawings, or those calculated from fi gured dimen-
sions are used in preference to scaled dimensions. The estimator should scale 
drawings to obtain dimensions only as a last resort because drawings are not 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT
always accurately drawn to scale. (But see discussion of the use of digitizers 
in Chapter 3.)
 
7. Deductions listed with the dimensions are written in red or are enclosed in 
brackets and are noted as deductions.
 
8. Extensions (the result of multiplying dimensions together) are calculated to 
the nearest whole number whether it is linear feet, square feet, or cubic feet.
 
9. Totals in the extensions column are rounded off to the nearest whole number.
 
10. Throughout the takeoff, headings are inserted to indicate such factors as 
the trade being taken-off, the location of the work under consideration, or 
the phase in which the work is classifi ed. Side notes are also recommended 
to explain what is being measured, especially when the work is complex or 
unusual. All of these headings and notations help provide an audit trail so 
that the estimator or any other interested party can more easily review the 
takeoff.
 
11. Headings and side notes into the takeoff should not be overlooked when 
using a computer estimating system, especially if dimensions are entered into 
the computer directly from the drawings without making hand-written notes. 
The computer may be able to print a report that shows the takeoff items in 
the order in which they were measured, but on a large job without headings 
and notes in the takeoff, it will be almost impossible to review this data to 
determine which part of the project the items relate to and whether or not all 
the work of the project has been accounted for.
 
12. It is recommended that the estimator use highlighter pens to check off items 
of work as the takeoff progresses. This allows her/him to identify what has 
been measured and distinguishes what remains to be considered. 
 
13. Takeoff descriptions contain suffi cient information for the estimator to later 
price the work. Estimators use abbreviations extensively in takeoffs to in-
crease the speed of the process. Detail that can easily be added at the pricing 
stage may also be omitted from descriptions at the time of the takeoff.
 
      To illustrate this point, consider a project that requires three mixes of 
concrete: mix A for foundations, mix B for columns, and mix C for all other 
concrete, and mix A consists of 3,500 psi concrete with type V cement and 
4 percent air entrainment. The estimator will describe the use of the con-
crete in the takeoff in terms of footings, foundation walls, columns up to 
the  second fl oor, and slabs-on-grade, but it wastes time to include a full mix 
description with each concrete takeoff item. The type of mix and its price has 
to be considered at the pricing stage, so why not leave the mix categorization 
until that time? See the examples of recaps in Chapter 11 for a description of 
how this mix classifying can easily be performed.
 
14. Generally, when describing a takeoff item, the estimator does not mention in 
the description or measure separately any of the following items because they 
will be dealt with when the takeoff items are priced:
 
a. Transportation or any other costs associated with the delivery of the 
 materials involved
 
b. Unloading materials
 
c. Hoisting requirements
 
d. Labor setting, fi tting, or fi xing in position
 
e. Lapping, cutting, or waste of materials
 
f. Stripping formwork
 
g. Form oil
 
h. Rough hardware
 
i. Scaffold and falsework 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT 
37
 
15. On special projects that require extensive or complicated scaffold systems, it 
may be necessary to take off the quantities of scaffold required. Otherwise 
normal scaffold requirements, and all the other items listed previously, are 
accounted for later in the pricing process.
 
16. The estimator should be aware that while all the above rules are in place to 
obtain the consistency and objectivity required, there is always an occasional 
situation where the work is not routine and a better result may be obtained 
if the rules are relaxed for once. To continue to be effective, an estimator has 
to preserve a certain fl exibility of approach keeping in mind their major goal 
is to price the work of the project as effi ciently as possible.
Accuracy of Measurement
The quantity takeoff should accurately refl ect the amount of work involved in a proj-
ect, but how accurately should the work be measured? There is no clear answer to this 
question since the level of accuracy pursued by the estimator depends on the costs and 
benefi ts of attaining high accuracy. Devoting extra time to improving the accuracy of 
the measurement of certain items of work may not be justifi ed. All we can say is that 
the takeoff has to be as accurate as possible given the nature of the work being mea-
sured and the cost of attaining high accuracy.
To demonstrate this, consider the measurement of concrete work items. It is 
not diffi cult to calculate the quantities of concrete with a high degree of accuracy 
since concrete items are usually well detailed on contract drawings. Also, the time 
spent carefully measuring concrete work can be justifi ed because items of concrete 
are relatively expensive. In contrast, excavation items are not detailed well (if at all) 
on drawings, and the unit prices of these items are usually quite low. With the exca-
vation trade, the estimator usually has to ascertain the dimensions of the work by 
 applying judgment based on experience; this results in an assessment that may be 
quite different from the volumes of work actually excavated. Clearly, there is little 
benefi t in spending much time developing and carefully measuring what is only a 
theoretical impression of the excavation requirements of a project. However, the 
estimator still needs to make a reasonable evaluation of excavations because, even 
though the price per cubic yard may be as low as $10.00 when there are 1,000 cubic 
yards of material to excavate and haul away for a row of new houses, the total price 
of the work is signifi cant.
Because of this, an estimator constantly has to balance the cost of achieving high 
accuracy against the value obtained from the increase in accuracy. This is not an easy 
task, particularly for those new to estimating. Our advice to the estimator who is in 
some doubt about whether the time spent improving the accuracy of a measurement 
is justifi ed is to err on the side of caution and spend the extra time because a more 
accurate takeoff is always a better takeoff.
Takeoff Order
The order of the takeoff will generally follow the sequence of the work tasks of 
the project. However, some estimators fi nd it preferable to measure concrete work, 
before excavation work even though excavation activities usually have to precede 
concrete work on the job. The reason for considering concrete work fi rst is that the 
sizes and details of concrete items are clearly defi ned on the drawings, whereas exca-
vation requirements have to be assessed. Therefore, measuring concrete fi rst allows 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

38 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT
the estimator to become familiar with the project and, consequently, more effi cient 
later at assessing the excavation requirements. As an estimator, you must decide 
which of these alternative approaches to adopt.
Takeoff Strategy and the Use of Assemblies
An estimator needs a strategy to deal with large projects. Without a systematic 
approach, the estimator can easily become lost in the takeoff process and reach a 
point where it is not clear exactly what has and what has not been measured. This 
can cause extreme frustration to the estimator and can lead to high stress and, in 
some cases, absolute panic. A simple yet effective strategy that can be used with 
any estimate consists of fi rst dividing the project into manageable parts, proceed-
ing through the takeoff one part at a time, and, within each of these parts, measur-
ing the work as a sequence of assemblies. How to divide up the project is entirely 
dependent on its nature; high-rise jobs, for instance, are most easily divided fl oor 
by fl oor or by groups of fl oors. Where the project comprises a number of build-
ings, it is usually best to do the takeoff building by building. The estimator will 
often fi nd that the contract drawings for large projects are conveniently divided 
into parts, so it makes sense to complete the takeoff of one part and then move on 
to the next.
Once the project is divided into manageably sized parts, assemblies are dis-
tinguished, within each of these parts. An assembly is a component of the work 
that can be considered in isolation from the other components of the work. The 
notion of an assembly will develop as the reader progresses through the takeoffs 
that follow. For now, though, consider the example of a perimeter foundation 
wall as an assembly in the estimate of a house. The basic idea is that the estima-
tor measures all the work involved in an identifi ed assembly, then moves on to 
consider the next assembly. So, in this example, the estimator may takeoff all of 
the following items associated with this one assembly before passing on to the 
next assembly:
 
1. The concrete in the wall
 
2. The forms to the sides of the wall
 
3. The forms to openings and blockouts in the wall
 
4. The rubbed fi nish on the exposed concrete of the wall
 
5. The reinforcing steel in the wall
The major advantages of taking off by assemblies are that the assembly is evalu-
ated only once and that a number of items within the assembly can share the same 
dimensions. If this procedure was not adopted and the estimator was to measure all 
the concrete on the project and then all the forms followed by all the cement fi nishes 
and embedded miscellaneous items, there is a great deal of wasted time reassessing 
each assembly each time it is encountered. The same assembly dimensions would be 
referred to over and over again in this series of takeoffs and, possibly, recalculated 
each time they are needed.
Another advantage of this approach is that takeoff by assemblies, or “work 
packages,” is used in many of the better computer estimating programs that pro-
duce a very powerful and speedy estimating tool. A student who becomes familiar 
with the concept and use of assemblies when learning estimating will be more 
adept where these features are encountered in computer programs and will be 
better able to develop and customize them to obtain maximum benefi ts from 
their use.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT 
39
Also, the process of scheduling the project is made easier when assemblies have 
been used in the takeoff because the activity breakdown used by schedulers cor-
responds quite closely to the assemblies measured by the estimator. Some computer 
estimating packages can integrate with scheduling packages to allow the scheduler 
to directly transfer the estimate assemblies to the schedule.
Estimating Stationery (Standard Forms)
Specially printed forms designed for each of the various estimating procedures are 
used to increase productivity and contribute to the accuracy of an estimate. There are 
a number of different formats of these forms available to the estimator, the decision 
on which to adopt depends upon the method of estimating that is used.  Figure 2.15 
shows the form of quantity sheet used for quantity takeoffs in the following chap-
ters, and Figure 2.16 shows the form of pricing sheets used. 
In this book, the quantity takeoff is recapped onto separate sheets for pricing 
so one form of stationery is used for the takeoff, and a second for the recap. The 
process of recapping quantities onto a separate pricing sheet is adopted because it 
makes the task of pricing an estimate far more effi cient since all related items are 
gathered together in a concise manner. To price the takeoff directly would entail a 
long and tedious process with a great deal of repetition, especially with estimates of 
larger projects. On the other hand, there may be some advantage to directly pricing 
the takeoff on small projects. Figure 2.17 shows an example of a combined takeoff 
and pricing sheet that could be used for this purpose.
Computer Estimating
Although the stationery described above was set up for estimating by hand, it can 
also be used on a computer spreadsheet; in fact, the takeoff and pricing examples 
that follow in the text are all prepared using Excel spreadsheets. This practice not 
only reduces the incidence of calculating errors but also greatly speeds up the esti-
mating process, especially when the copying facility can be exploited. Once you have 
an Excel takeoff, recap, and summary completed, that is, linked together as demon-
strated later in the text, you can use this template over and over for future estimates 
by merely adjusting the dimensions and prices to refl ect specifi c requirements for 
each job. Note that the takeoff, pricing, and summary templates used in the text are 
all available online in a student companion to this text.
The use of specialized computer software can also greatly increase the ef-
fi ciency of the estimating process. When using a program such as ICE from MC2 
Software, once the takeoff data is entered, the computer performs all the arith-
metical functions needed to arrive at the required total net quantities; items are 
then automatically priced from the database, sorted, and summarized into the re-
quired format to arrive at the estimated cost of the project. Adding waste factors, 
converting takeoff quantities to order units, and all the other adjustments that the 
estimator would make to arrive at the fi nal price of the work are handled by the 
program. 
Especially in the case of larger projects, all this automation can leave estimators 
wondering exactly what they have done; the software does offer a number of ways 
of auditing a takeoff to facilitate checking of input to verify that all aspects of the 
job have been accounted for in the measurement process. Reviewing the estimate 
can be further enhanced by inserting headings and explanatory notes in the takeoff; 
this makes it much easier for a second estimator to quickly check for errors and/or 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT
Figure 2.15 
Quantity Sheet Stationery
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No.
JOB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  DATE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
ESTIMATOR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . EXTENDED . . . . . . . . . EXT. CHKD . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
DESCRIPTION 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT 
41
Figure 2.16 
Pricing Sheet Stationery
PRICING SHEET 
SHEET No.
JOB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  DATE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
ESTIMATED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT 
 
UNIT 
 
UNIT
 No. 
DESCRIPTION 
QUANTITY 
UNIT PRICE 
LABOR PRICE MATERIALS PRICE 
EQUIP. 
SUBS. 
TOTAL
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

42 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT
Figure 2.17 
Combined Takeoff and Pricing Sheets
ESTIMATE SHEET 
Page No.
JOB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  DATE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
ESTIMATED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  EXTENDED . . . . . . . . . .  CHECKED . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 
 
No. 
DIMENSIONS 
  
Total 
UNIT 
 
UNIT 
 
UNIT
 No. 
DESCRIPTION 
Pieces 
 
Extension 
Quantity 
PRICE 
LABOR 
PRICE 
MATERIALS 
PRICE 
TOTAL
omissions in a takeoff. However, some estimators still like to prepare takeoff notes 
on paper before entering items and dimensions into the computer. These notes pro-
vide a record of how the estimator proceeded and give details of how the numbers 
entered into the computer were obtained. For example, the computer audit trail 
may confi rm that a certain number was inputted as the length of a wall, but backup 
notes would be useful if a question arises about where the number came from for 
the length of this wall.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT 
43
A fully worked example of an estimate prepared using MC2 ICE software for a 
4-unit bi-level building is included in Chapter 14.
SUMMARY
■ The work of a project is measured in a number of different ways in an 
estimate:
• By counting the number of pieces; for example, the number of doors
• By measuring the length of an item, such as a pipe
• By measuring an area of a material, such as sheathing
• By measuring the volume of a material, such as concrete
• By measuring the weight of materials, such as structural steel beams
■ The estimator requires knowledge and skill in mensuration (measurement of 
lengths, areas, and volumes) to perform the many calculations involved when 
measuring work.
■ As an estimator, you need to be able to calculate the perimeter and area of a 
variety of shapes and compute the volume of solid fi gures of various shapes.
■ From the dimensions of a building, it is also useful for the estimator to accu-
rately calculate the building perimeter that is used to determine the quantities 
of trench, footing, and wall around a building.
■ A quantity takeoff is defi ned as a process of measuring the work of a project 
in the form of a list of quantifi ed work items measured in accordance with a 
uniform set of rules.
■ Note that quantities of materials are measured in the takeoff process, but the 
takeoff for a cost estimate is more than just a list of materials.
■ There are two systems of measurement used in the North American construc-
tion industry: the traditional English units, and metric units; however, resi-
dential projects are for the most part designed using English units.
■ Takeoff items comprise dimensions and a description; dimensions are always 
recorded in the order: length, width, and height.
■ Descriptions contain suffi cient information for the estimator to price the 
work.
■ The quantity takeoff should accurately refl ect the amount of work in the 
project. While high accuracy is possible with well-detailed concrete items, a 
margin of error has to be allowed with excavation work since it is never well 
detailed on project drawings.
■ The order of the takeoff will generally follow the sequence of construction, 
although some estimators prefer to measure concrete work before an assess-
ment of earthwork requirements is undertaken.
■ A strategy is needed for completing a takeoff of larger projects:
• Divide the project into manageable parts
• Consider one part of the project at a time
• Measure the work as a series of assemblies
• Complete the takeoff for one assembly before passing on to the next
■ Specially designed forms designed for each of the various estimating proce-
dures is used to increase productivity and contribute to the accuracy of an 
estimate.
■ The computer is an important estimating tool; it can greatly increase the 
 effi ciency of the estimating process and also lead to improved accuracy.
■ Takeoffs prepared using computer software can be audited to check for  errors 
and/or omissions, but “takeoff notes” are a useful supplement to record 
 exactly how an estimate was prepared.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

44 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
 Information 
Web Page Address
 
■ Use a Web Search Engine such as 
http://www.ask.com 
“Ask” to get information about
measuring areas and volumes.
 
■ Much information about ICE estimating 
http://www.mc2-ice.com/ 
software can be obtained from the 
MC2 web page.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. What units of measurement would you use to measure the following items of 
work?
 
 a. Floor sheathing
 
 b. Trench excavation
 
 c. Footing drains
 
 d. Duplex electrical receptacles
 2. Defi ne quantity takeoff.
 3. What is the difference between a materials takeoff and a takeoff used for a cost 
estimate?
 4. In what order are dimensions entered into a takeoff?
 5. Why is an estimator advised to insert headings and side notes into a takeoff?
 6. How accurate should a takeoff be?
 7. What is the usual order followed in a takeoff? Also, what is a common exception 
to this?
 8. What is the advantage to doing a takeoff by assembly?
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
 1. If anchor bolts were required to be inserted 6" from the end of a wall and spaced 
at 36" on center along the length of the wall, how many bolts would be required 
for a 33'-0" long wall?
 2. Calculate the area and the length of perimeter of each shape on Figure 2.18.
 3. How many cubic yards of concrete is required for ten circular columns each 
12'-0" high and 20" diameter?
  4. Calculate the volume, in cubic yards, of a trench that is 240'-0" long and 6'-0" 
deep with cut-back sides so that the top width of the trench is 12'-0" and the 
bottom width is 3'-0".
 5. Figure 2.19 shows the plan of a concrete wall that is 10'-0" high. Calculate the 
volume of concrete in this wall. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT 
45
Figure 2.18 
Calculate Areas and Perimeters
48'-0"
29'-6"
12'-6"
12'-6"
Area:
Perimeter:
32'-4"
Area:
Perimeter:
Area:
Perimeter:
1
2
18'-6"
10'-0"
10'-3"
10'-3"
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46 
CHAPTER 2—ARITHMETIC AND PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT
Figure 2.19 
Plan of Wall 
98'-9"
42'-8"
71'-5"
143'-3"
10" Wall typ.
Plan Area
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

47
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
MEASURING EXCAVATION 
AND SITEWORK
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be able to:
■ Describe how excavation and other sitework are measured generally.
■ Describe bank measure, and explain swell factors and compaction factors.
■ Explain the potential hazards of excavation work, and describe the safety features 
adopted to deal with these dangers.
■ Calculate volumes of excavation and backfi ll for basements, pits, and trenches.
■ Describe the use of an electronic digitizer and its function in sitework takeoffs.
■ Describe and use the “grid method” of calculating cut and fi ll volumes.
■ Complete a takeoff of sitework for a residential project.
KEY TERMS 
Introduction
Most homebuilders subcontract the excavation and sitework tasks required to con-
struct a house so their estimators generally do not have to measure the work in-
volved, but it is useful to be able to calculate the quantities of excavation and fi ll 
involved for a number of reasons:
 
1. In order to determine the amount of fi ll required, some or all of which may 
need to be imported if native excavated material is not suitable for backfi ll
 
2. To determine the amount of surplus soil to be removed from the site
 
3. To determine the duration of sitework and excavation tasks for a schedule
 
4. To compile an accurate cost estimate if you are the builder or subtrade per-
forming this work
bank measure
compaction factor
digitizers
plot plan
swell factor
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
Measuring Sitework and Excavation Work Generally
Measuring sitework and excavation work is different from measuring most of the 
other work of a construction project because drawings show very little detail about 
the specifi c requirements of sitework or excavation operations. The drawings do 
provide details of the new construction required for the project, but information 
about what is currently to be found at the site of the proposed work is usually not 
indicated. On larger projects, builders are often advised in the “Instructions to Bid-
ders” to satisfy themselves as to the present condition of the site. Furthermore, the 
size and depth of foundations may be defi ned in detail on the drawings, but there 
is typically nothing disclosed about the dimensions and shape of the excavations 
required to accommodate these constructions. 
Before the estimator can measure the site work, she/he has to make an assess-
ment of excavation requirements from whatever data there is on the drawings and 
from information gathered on visits to the site. Since the site conditions will also 
impact the pricing of other items in the estimate, the estimator should make use of 
a checklist of items to consider on a site visit so that important information is not 
overlooked. This is discussed in Chapter 1 under “Site Visits.”
Bank Measure Swell and Compaction Factors
The soil that is extracted from an excavation is less dense than before it was ex-
cavated, so it will occupy more space than it did when it was in the ground. For 
example, if a hole of 10 cubic yards volume is excavated, the pile of soil removed 
from the hole might occupy 13 cubic yards; therefore, 13 cubic yards of material will 
have to be transported if it is required to be removed from the site. The difference 
between the volume of the hole and the volume of the material once it has been dug 
out is known as the swell factor. 
A similar adjustment factor is required regarding fi lling operations. If an excava-
tion of 10 cubic yards capacity is to be fi lled with gravel, as much as 14 cubic yards 
of loose gravel may be required because the material will have to be compacted. 
That is, it will be more dense after it is deposited and there will also be some waste 
of gravel to consider. Here the difference between the volume of the hole to be fi lled 
and the volume of fi ll material is referred to as the compaction factor.
In accordance with the general principle of measuring net quantities, excavation 
and backfi ll quantities are calculated using bank measure. Bank measure amounts 
are obtained by using the dimensions of the holes excavated or fi lled with no adjust-
ment made to the quantities obtained for swell or compaction of materials. Swell 
factors and compaction factors will be accounted for later in the estimating process 
when items are priced. 
Excavation Safety Considerations
The potential danger to workers in trenches and by the sides of excavations due 
to cave-ins of the earth embankments is a safety hazard that must be considered 
in every quantity takeoff of excavation work. The federal Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration (OSHA) Construction Safety and Health Regulations require 
that the sides of all earth embankments and trenches be adequately protected by a 
shoring system or by cutting back the sides of the excavations to a safe angle. As a 
consequence, the estimator must allow extra excavation for cutting back the face 
of excavations to a suitable angle wherever this is possible. Where restricted space 
or other circumstances prohibit cutbacks, the estimator may have to include a sys-
tem of shoring and bracing, but this is usually an inferior choice because it is a far 
more expensive alternative. It is important that the estimator carefully study the 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
49
OSHA requirements for excavations since excavation rules are so strongly enforced 
by OSHA. The estimator will also need to consider particular state regulations re-
garding excavation safety requirements since specifi c details may vary from state to 
state. For instance, some states require that shoring systems over a certain depth be 
designed by and be constructed under the supervision of a professional engineer. This 
will have cost implications that cannot be ignored in the estimate.
Calculating Volumes of Excavation and Backﬁ ll for Trenches 
A trench is an elongated excavation that is distinguished from a pit or a basement 
because it is excavated in a different way and usually with different equipment from 
that used for other types of excavation. Trenches are generally excavated using an ex-
cavator called a “backhoe” that sits astride the route of the trench. The machine digs 
material and casts it to one side as it moves backwards along the line of the trench. 
As discussed in Chapter 2, because both the width and the depth of a trench may 
vary along its length, the volume of the trench is obtained by multiplying the center-
line length of the trench by the average width and by the average depth:
Volume of Trench 5 Centerline Length 3 Average Width 3 Average Depth
Examples of Excavation and Backﬁ ll Calculations for Trenches
See Figure 3.1 for the details of a trench for a garden wall.
EXAMPLE 3.1
Average depth of trench 5 (5.0' 1 7.0")/2
 
5 6.0'
Average width of trench:
 Width of footing 
 
3.0'
 Add for work space 
  2.0' (this is 2 times 1'-0")
 Add for cutback 
  6.0' (this is 2 times ½ depth of trench)
 Total Width  
5 11.0'
Volume of Excavation 
5 Centerline Length 3 Average Width 3 Average Depth
 
5 100.0' 3 11.0' 3 6.0'
 
5 6,600 cu. ft.
 
5 6,600/27 cu. yds.
 
5 244.4 cu. yds.
The best way to calculate the volume of backfi ll material required is to simply deduct the 
space taken up in the trench by the footing and the wall from the volume of excavation:
EXAMPLE 3.2
Volume of Backfi ll 5 Volume of Excavation 2 Volume of Footing 2 Volume of Wall
 
5 6,600 2 (100.0 3 3.0 3 2.0) 2 (100.0 3 1.0 3 4.0)
(Note that only the portion of the wall that is in the trench is deducted, so the 
height of wall in the trench is the average trench depth minus 2'-0" for the 
footing: 6'-0"– 2'-0" 5 4'-0".)
 
 
 
5 6,600 2 600 2 400
 
 
 
5 5,600 cu. ft.
 
 
 
5 5,600/27 cu. yds.
 
 
 
5 207.4 cu. yds.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
Trench 5'-0" Deep
here
100'-0"
Trench 7'-0" Deep
here
Plan
of Wall
Section
A - A
A
A
1'-0"
8'-0" High Masonry Wall
Equal to Depth of Trench
Equal to
Depth/2
Backfill to here
Average Trench Width
5'-0" to 7'-0"
1'-0"
3'-0"
1'-0"
2'-0"
1
1
Figure 3.1 
Garden Wall Trench Excavation
See Figure 3.2 for the details of a trench for a foundation wall.
EXAMPLE 3.3
Length of centerline 
5 (2 3 40.00') 1 (2 3 20.00') 2 (4 3 0.83')
 
5 116.68'
Width of trench 
5 (2 3 1.00') 1 2.00'
 
5 4.00'
Average depth of trench 5 (4.75' 1 4.50' 1 6.08' 1 6.67')/4
 
5 5.50'
Volume of Excavation  5 Centerline Length 3 Average Width 3 Average Depth
 
5 116.68 3 4.00 3 5.50
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
51
Figure 3.2 
Foundation Wall Excavation
40'-0"
4'-6" Deep
6'-1" Deep
6'-8" Deep
2'-0" × 1'-0" Concrete Footing
8'-0" High Masonry Wall
12"
4'-9" Deep
20'-0"
10" Wall
A
A
Plan
Section A - A
Each Side
Varies
Centerline
Foundation Wall
Not to Scale
Grade
 
5 2,566.96/27 cu. yds.
 
5 95.1 cu. yds.
Volume of Backfi ll  
5  Volume of Excavation 2 Volume of Footing 2 Volume 
of Wall
 
5  2,566.96 2 (116.68 3 2.00 3 1.00) 
2 (116.68 3 0.83 3 4.50)
 
5 2,566.96 2 233.36 2 457.80
 
5 1,875.80/27 cu. yds.
 
5 67.5 cu. yds.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
Calculating Volumes of Excavation and Backﬁ ll for Basements
A backhoe may be used to excavate small basements and pits, but larger holes are 
usually excavated using excavators called “front-end-loaders.” These machines dig 
material in a scooping motion and may cast it to one side or load the soil onto trucks 
that remove it from the site. 
If the ground elevation varies over the building area, the depth of the base-
ment excavation will also vary. In this case, the estimator’s fi rst task is to determine 
the average depth from the existing grade down to the bottom of the excavation. 
Since most basements have a concrete slab-on-grade with a layer of gravel under 
this slab, basements are usually excavated down to the underside of this gravel. To 
obtain the average depth, measure the depth from the ground surface to the bot-
tom of the gravel at each corner of the basement, and then calculate the average of 
these depths. 
Similar to trenches, the sides of pits and basement excavations are usually cut 
back to a safe angle so that workers in the basement are not exposed to the dangers 
associated with the collapse of the sides of excavations. The easiest way to compute, 
at least roughly, the volume of this complicated shape of excavation is to use the 
average length and the average width in the calculations; this results in the following 
formula for basement excavations:
Volume of Basement 5 Average Length 3 Average Width 3 Average Depth
Examples of Excavation and Backﬁ ll Calculations for Basements
See Figure 3.3 for the details of a basement excavation for a house.
EXAMPLE 3.4
Average depth of excavation 5 (5.83' 1 4.17' 1 3.33' 1 4.67')/4
 
 
5 4.5'
Average length of excavation:
 
Length of building  
40.0'
 
Add for work space  
2.0' (this is 2 times 1'-0")
 
Add for cutback 
   4.5' (this is 2 times ½ depth of excavation)
 
Total Length 
5 46.5'
Average width of excavation:
 
Width of building 
 
28.0'
 
Add for work space  
2.0' (this is 2 times 1'-0")
 
Add for cutback 
 
4.5' (this is 2 times ½ depth of excavation)
 
Total Width  
5 34.5'
Volume of Excavation 
5  Average Length 3 Average Width 3 Average
Depth
 
 
5 46.5' 3 34.5' 3 4.5'
 
 
5 7,219 cu. ft.
 
 
5 7,219/27 cu. yds.
 
 
5 267.4 cu. yds.
To calculate the volume of backfi ll around the building, we once again deduct 
the space taken up by the building from the total volume of excavation.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
53
EXAMPLE 3.5
Volume of Backfi ll  
5 Volume of Excavation 2 Volume of Building 
 
5 7,219 2 (40.0 3 28.0 3 4.5)
(Note that only the portion of the building that is in the excavation is deducted, 
so the depth is 4'-6" which is the same depth as the excavation.)
 
5 7,219 2 5,040
 
5 2,179 cu. ft.
 
5 2,179/27 cu. yds.
 
5 80.7 cu. yds.
5'-10" Deep
Plan 
of House 
Section 
A - A 
4'-2" Deep
A
A
4'-8" Deep
40'-0"
28'-0"
3'-4" Deep
 
Average Depth
 
of Basement
 
 5.83
 
 4.17
 
 3.33
 
 4.67
 
–––––
 
 18.00/4
 
Average:    4.50
 
 
–––––
 
 
–––––
Equal to Depth
of Basement
Depth/2
4'-6" Ave.
Average Width of Excavation
Backfill to here
1
1
12"
Work
Space
Figure 3.3 
Basement Excavation
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

54 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
See Figure 3.4 for the details of a trench for a foundation wall.
EXAMPLE 3.6
Depth of excavation 
5 (8.00' 1 0.67') 2 1.33'
 
5 7.34'
Average length of excavation 5 50.00' 1 (2 3 2.00') 1 7.34' (lay-back)
 
5 61.34'
Average width of excavation 5 32.50' 1 (2 3 2.00') 1 7.34' (lay-back)
 
5 43.84'
Volume of excavation 
5 61.34' 3 43.84' 3 7.34'
(ignoring cutout) 
5 19,738.33 cu. ft.
Volume of cutout 
5 24.50' 3 8.00' 3 7.34'
 
5 1,438.64 cu. ft.
(Note that lay-backs do not have to be added to the cutout dimensions be-
cause these have already been accounted for in the length and width of the 
overall excavation.)
Volume of excavation  
5 19,738.33 2 1,438.64 cu. ft.
(less cutout) 
5 18,299.69/27 cu. yds.
 
5 677.8 cu. yds.
Volume of Backfi ll 
5 Volume of Excavation 2 Volume of Building
 
5  18,299.69 2 (32.50' 3 25.50' 3 7.34') 
2 (24.50' 3 24.50' 3 7.34')
 
5 18,299.69 2 6,083.03 2 4,405.84
 
5 7,810.82/27 cu. yds.
 
5 289.3 cu. yds.
Use of Digitizers
Digitizers are electronic devices that enable the user to take measurements from 
drawings and input the data directly into a computer program. There are two main 
types of digitizer: sonic and tablet. Both of these types of digitizer employ a pointer 
or cursor to locate points and lines. With the sonic digitizer, the cursor emits a sonic 
code that is identifi ed by two receivers that are used to calculate the precise location 
of the cursor. Using this system, any drawing can be scanned regardless of its size or 
the type of surface it is placed upon. The sonic receivers have be set up so that there is 
no obstruction between them and the cursor as it travels across the drawing, and the 
estimator has to ensure that measurements recorded are in accordance with the scale 
of the drawing. Clearly, drawings have to be drawn to scale for any type of digitizer 
to provide accurate data.
With tablet digitizers, drawings have to be laid out on an electronic tablet which 
functions to identify the specifi c location of the cursor as it moves over the surface 
of the tablet. Because of the size of construction project drawings, tablets as large as 
42" 3 60" and larger may have to be used if all the information on a drawing is to 
be accessible at one time. 
The information gathered by the digitizer is then available for processing in 
computer programs so that lengths, areas, volumes, item counts, and sophisticated 
calculations such as cut and fi ll volumes can be determined very swiftly. Digitiz-
ers can also be linked to estimating software systems and used as an alternative to 
the keyboard for inputting the data into the system. Some estimating systems can 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
55
Figure 3.4 
Basement Excavation 2
32'-6"
8'-0"
24'-6"
50'-0"
8" Masonry Wall
Wall 8'-0" High
Plan Area
Section
1
1
24"
16"
6" Concrete
8" Gravel
Footing 24" × 8"
be operated directly from the digitizer, thereby eliminating any need to handle the 
keyboard. This setup provides a powerful tool for estimators because it allows large 
amounts of data to be quickly and accurately inputted into the computer without 
having to “key in” long lists of numbers.
One of the main disadvantages of using digitizers is that the accuracy of the 
system depends entirely upon the accuracy of the drawings that are scanned. A 
fundamental takeoff principle is that the estimator should only rely on scaled 
dimensions as a last resort, the reason being that when sizes are changed in the 
design process, these changes are often carried out by modifying the fi gured di-
mensions without changing the actual size of objects shown on the drawings 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

56 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
to comply with their new dimensions. The result is that drawings wind up out 
of scale, and the digitizer system that scans these drawings generates erroneous 
output.
Cut and Fill Calculations
Certainly the fastest and probably the most accurate way to calculate volumes of 
cut and fi ll over a site when true scale drawings are available is to use an electronic 
digitizer in conjunction with a software program specifi cally for this type of applica-
tion discussed previously. Alternatively, there are a number of “manual” methods of 
obtaining the quantities of cut and of fi ll. One such method uses a grid of elevations 
to provide the data necessary to make the calculations.
The Grid Method of Calculating Cut and Fill Quantities 
Calculation by the “grid method” requires a survey of the site showing the eleva-
tion of the existing grade at each intersecting point on the grid. The elevation of 
the required new grade is also plotted at each intersection point. From these two 
elevations, the depth of cut or fi ll can then be obtained at each point. From here on, 
cut calculations are separate from fi ll calculations. To fi gure the volume of cut at an 
intersection point, the depth of cut at this point is multiplied by the area the inter-
section point applies to. By then adding together all of the individual cut volumes 
computed in this way, you will have the total volume of cut on the site. Following the 
same process using the fi ll depths will establish the individual and total fi ll volumes 
for the site. Figure 3.5 describes how grids are set up and how grid areas are used in 
this method of calculating cut and fi ll volumes.
The accuracy of this method of calculating cut and fi ll volumes depends upon 
the grid spacing. Generally the closer the grid spacing, the more accurate the results 
are. However, a closer grid spacing leads to more calculations and a longer process-
ing time. Since this process is very repetitive, the processing time can be greatly re-
duced by using a computer program to perform the calculations.
For a complete calculation of volumes of cut and fi ll over a site using this “grid 
method” with a computer spread sheet program, see Figure 3.6.
Measuring Excavation and Sitework in a Takeoff
Here and in the sections that follow, rules of measurement are offered in order to 
provide a consistent method of measurement for estimators. This not only allows 
estimators to use and check each other’s takeoffs more easily, but it also helps esti-
mators work close together effectively on larger projects since following the same 
rules enables one estimator to know more readily what and how her/his colleagues 
are measuring in the estimating process. 
Having a shared set of measurement rules also provides a more objective means 
of tracking productivities on a project. For instance, if different analysts were to 
track costs per cubic yard of excavations but each was measuring the work with dif-
ferent allowances for swell factors and compaction factors, there would be no way 
to compare the results of each analyst’s work.
Landscaping and other site improvement work are sometimes required; this 
is most common on multi-unit projects or where the builder is responsible for an 
overall housing development. Landscaping is often subcontracted to specialized 
companies, but the homebuilder may occasionally perform the work using its own 
workforce, so we have included notes on how to measure site improvement opera-
tions, again to ensure uniformity in the preparation of takeoffs.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
57
Setting Up the Grid:
— The grid lines labeled A, B, and C below run north-south and they are equally spaced.
— The grid lines labeled 1, 2, and 3 run east-west and they are equally spaced.
— Thus, the distance from line A to line B has to equal the distance from line B to line C.
— And, the distance from line 1 to line 2 has to equal the distance from line 2 to line 3.
— But, the spacing of the grid lines running north-south does not have to be the same
 
spacing as the east-west grid lines.
Grid Areas:
— The “grid area” is the area bounded by four grid lines.
— Thus, the area bounded by lines 1, 2, A, and B is one “grid area.”
— Note that there are four “grid areas” 1-2-A-B, 1-2-B-C, 2-3-A-B, and 2-3-B-C.
— Also note that each of these “grid areas” will have the same size.
— Thus, if the north-south grid spacing is 10 feet and the east-west grid spacing is 12 feet,
 
then each “grid area” will be 120 square feet.
Intersection Points (Stations):
— The point where two grid lines intersect is called a “station.”
— The arrows at each station indicate the area or areas that the station applies to.
— Thus, station 1-A applies to one area and the value of this area = “grid area”/4
— And, station 1-B applies to two areas, each of which has a value of “grid area”/4 etc.
— The term “frequency” is used in the calculations that follow; this refers to the number
 
of areas a particular station applies to.
— So, in this diagram, these are the stations, their respective frequencies, and the area
 
constant which is the grid area (120 square feet) divided by 4:
 
 
 
Area
 
Station 
Frequency 
Constant
 
1-A 
1 
30
 
1-B 
2 
30
 
1-C 
1 
30
 
2-A 
2 
30
 
2-B 
4 
30
 
2-C 
2 
30
 
3-A 
1 
30
 
3-B 
2 
30
 
3-C 
1 
30
 
 
A 
B 
C
1
2
3
Grid Area/4
N
Figure 3.5 
Grid Stations and Frequencies
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
Tabulation of Results:
 
 
New 
Existing Depth 
Depth 
 
Area 
Volume 
Volume
 Station 
Elev. 
Elev. 
Cut 
Fill 
Frequency Constant 
Cut 
Fill
 1A 
4.2 
6.5 
2.3 
0.0 
1 
80 
184 
0
 1B 
4.4 
5.0 
0.6 
0.0 
2 
80 
96 
0
 1C 
4.6 
3.0 
0.0 
1.6 
2 
80 
0 
256
 1D 
4.8 
1.9 
0.0 
2.9 
1 
80 
0 
232
 2A 
4.4 
5.1 
0.7 
0.0 
2 
80 
112 
0
 2B 
4.6 
3.2 
0.0 
1.4 
4 
80 
0 
448
 2C 
4.8 
2.8 
0.0 
2.0 
4 
80 
0 
640
 2D 
5.0 
4.5 
0.0 
0.5 
2 
80 
0 
80
 3A 
4.6 
3.6 
0.0 
1.0 
2 
80 
0 
160
 3B 
4.8 
2.0 
0.0 
2.8 
4 
80 
0 
896
 3C 
5.0 
5.3 
0.3 
0.0 
4 
80 
96 
0
 3D 
5.2 
7.1 
1.9 
0.0 
2 
80 
304 
0
 4A 
4.8 
1.9 
0.0 
2.9 
2 
80 
0 
464
 4B 
5.0 
4.0 
0.0 
1.0 
4 
80 
0 
320
 4C 
5.2 
8.2 
3.0 
0.0 
4 
80 
960 
0
 4D 
5.4 
10.0 
4.6 
0.0 
2 
80 
736 
0
 5A 
5.0 
3.0 
0.0 
2.0 
1 
80 
0 
160
 5B 
5.2 
3.8 
0.0 
1.4 
2 
80 
0 
224
 5C 
5.4 
6.4 
1.0 
0.0 
2 
80 
160 
0
 5D 
5.6 
7.0 
1.4 
0.0 
1 
80 
112 
0
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
––––– 
–––––
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2,760 cu. ft. 
3,880 cu. ft.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102.2 cu. yd. 143.7 cu. yd.
 
Summary: Bulk Cut 
- 
102.2 cu. yds.
 
 Bulk Fill 
- 
143.7 cu. yds.
 
 Import Fill Material 
- 
41.5 cu. yds.
 
 Dispose Surplus 
- 
0 cu. yds.
 
A 
B 
C 
D
1
2
3
4
5
The following data is shown at each intersection point (station) on the grid: 
 
 
Elevation of New Grade 
Elevation of Existing Grade 
 
 
 
Depth of Cut 
Depth of Fill 
Plan of Site (Grid 20' x 16') 
 4.2 6.5 
4.4 
5.0 
4.6 
3.0 
4.8 
1.9
 2.3  
0.6 
 
 
1.6 
 
2.9
 4.4 5.1 
4.6 
3.2 
4.8 
2.8 
5.0 
4.5
 0.7  
 
1.4 
 
2.0 
 
0.5
 4.6 3.6 
4.8 
2.0 
5.0 
5.3 
5.2 
7.1
 
 1.0 
  
2.8 
0.3 
 
1.9
 4.8 1.9 
5.0 
4.0 
5.2 
8.2 
5.4 
10.0
 
 2.9 
 
1.0 
3.0 
 
4.6
 5.0 3.0 
5.2 
3.8 
5.4 
6.4 
5.6 
7.0
 
 2.0 
 
1.4 
1.0 
 
1.4
 
 
Figure 3.6 
Cut and Fill Excavation by the Grid Method
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
59
Measuring Notes
Excavation and Backﬁ ll
 
1. Measure excavations, backfi ll, and fi ll material in cubic yards “bank measure,” 
that is, using the actual dimensions with no allowance for swell factors or 
compaction factors of materials.
 
2. Classify and measure separately excavations in the following categories:
 
a. Site clearing
 
b. Excavation over site to reduced levels
 
c. Basement excavations
 
d. Trench excavations
 
e. Pit excavations
 
3. If different types of materials are to be excavated in any of the above catego-
ries, describe and measure separately each particular material.
 
4. Measure hand excavation separately.
 
5. Describe and measure separately different types of fi ll and backfi ll materials 
within each of the above categories. 
 
6. Classify and measure separately fi ll and backfi ll materials in the following 
categories:
 
a. Fill over site to raised levels
 
b. Backfi ll to basements
 
c. Backfi ll to trenches
 
d. Backfi ll to pits
 
e. Gravel under slabs on grade
 
f. Gravel base course
Site Improvements
 
7. Measure concrete paving, sidewalks, curbs, and gutters in accordance with 
concrete work requirements (see Chapter 4).
 
8. Describe asphalt paving and measure in square feet.
Fences
 
9. Describe fences stating height and measure in linear feet.
 
10. Describe and enumerate gates.
Mulching, Seeding, and Sodding
 
11. Describe mulching material stating required thickness and measure in square 
yards.
 
12. Describe method of seeding and measure in square yards.
 
13. Describe sodding and measure in square yards.
Plants, Shrubs, and Trees
 
14. Describe and enumerate plants, shrubs, and trees.
Site Utilities
Water Lines
 
15. Enumerate connecting water lines to the main.
 
16. Describe water pipes stating the size and measure in linear feet.
 
17. Describe and enumerate valves and fi ttings.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
Sewer Lines and Septic Tanks
 
18. Enumerate connecting the sanitary sewer to the main.
 
19. Describe sewer pipes stating the size and measure in linear feet.
 
20. Describe stating the required capacity and enumerate septic tanks. 
Sample Drawings
Figure 3.7 is a set of drawings for a project comprising a single-family home. The 
takeoff examples in this chapter and in the chapters that follow are taken from 
these sample drawings. These drawings can also be found in Appendix D for quick 
reference.
The fi rst of these drawings is a plot plan showing the size and shape of the prop-
erty upon which the house is to be constructed. Land surveyors prepare plot plans to 
establish the location of property lines around the building, then, once the building is 
constructed, these plans are used to confi rm the position of the building on the site. 
Plot plans are usually required when applying for a building permit and may also be 
required by the lender when setting up a mortgage on the property. 
In addition to the dimensions of the site, the plot plan also shows:
■ The property lines
■ A North arrow
■ The location of the building
■ The outside dimensions of the building
■ The setback of the building from the property lines
■ The elevation of the main floor of the building relative to the ground 
elevations around the building
■ The location of the underground utilities to the building
The remaining drawings show the design details of the house to be constructed.
Example of Sitework Takeoff
Figure 3.8a and Figure 3.8b show the takeoff for the sitework on the sample house 
project described on drawings shown in Figure 3.7.
Comments on the Sitework Takeoff Shown in Figure 3.8a and Figure 3.8b
 
1. This particular site has no topsoil to be stripped, so the fi rst calculation is for 
the depth of basement to be excavated.
 
2. The average ground level over the area of the house is calculated from the 
elevations at the four corners of the house.
 
3. The depth of the basement excavation will extend from the ground level over 
the area of the house down to the level of the underside (u/s) of the gravel 
below the basement slab. The elevation of the underside of the gravel is not 
provided on the drawings, so we have to determine it from the information 
given:
 
The elevation of top of the main fl oor 
100'-0"
 
(this is indicated on the site plan) 
 
Less: top of foundation wall to top of sub-fl oor   
(1'-9¾")
 
Less: top of footing to top of foundation wall    
(7'-1¾")
 
Less: depth of gravel 
(-8")
     
90'-4½"
This is equal to 90.38 feet.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
61
PROPERTY LINE
28I-10II
DECK
13I-1II
15I-9
II
97
I-6
II
2I-0II
TOP OF SUB-FLOOR 100I-0II
97
I-5
II
97
I-7
II
4
I-6II
14
I-8II
6
I-7II
6
I-0II
40
I-0
II
12
I-7II
17
I-5
II
97
I-7
II
32I-0II
97
I-4
II
N
LOCATION OF U/G UTILITIES
26
I-0II
LOCATE AND SIZE 
CONC. STEPS
AS PER CONTRACTOR
97
I
120I-0II
PROPERTY LINE
15I-2II
PROPERTY LINE
70I-0
II
97
I-10
II
96I-10II
103I-7II
16496
PROPERTY
LINE
Figure 3.7 
Sample House Drawings
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
B
28'-10"
15'-9"
17'-6"
6'-11"
4'-5"
DECKING AS 
PER CONTRACTOR
6'-7"
3'-0"
3'-7"
WP
WP
DISHWASHER
RANGE
2'-0"
S S S
KITCHEN
FRIDGE
2'-4"
14'-18"
25'-9"
7'-3"
2'-0"
2'-0"
3'-4"
6'-5"
6'-8"
2'-0"
8'-3"
FUTURE FIREPLACE
2
s
r
DINING ROOM
8'-3"
12'-1"
3'-6"
3'-4"
B
4
A
F
TV
ICT
T
DEN
9'-5"
5'-3"
10'-1"
C
G
G
1
A-3
10'-1"
40'-0"
PRECAST CONC. STEP
& PRECAST CONC.
STEP BRACKETS (BELOW).
(AS PER MANUFACTURE SPECS.)
(SIZE & INSTALL AS PER
CONTRACTOR).
6X6 WOOD COLUMNS
SECURED TO PRECAST
CONCRETE STEP (TYP.)
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
WP
ENTRANCE
CLOSET
CLOSET
3 RISERS UP
11 RISERS DOWN
S S S
S
3
3
1
9
8
F
WOOD BANISTER
C/W CONTINUOUS
WOOD RAILINGS
SPACED 100
APART (TYPICAL)
LIVING ROOM
2X6 PLUMBING WALL
C/W VENT STACK.
C/W SOUND BATT INSULATE
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
10'-0"
13'-8"
1
A-3
4'-6"
2'-4"
1'-18"
C
9'-4"
5'-3"
C
A
B
B
4
BEDROOM
BEDROOM
4
8
10'-2"
S
S S
S S
S
3
3
S
CLOSET
CLOSET
8'-9"
ATTIC
HATCH
LINEN
3
7
C
BATHROOM
1'-9"
2'-11"
3'-4"
2'-2"
5'-5"
3'-0"
4'-9"
E
D
20'-10"
8'-10"
5'-5"
BATH
3
B
7'-7"
r
3'-3"
M.C.
F
R
R
S
M.C.
TV
F
13'-10"
10'-4"
MASTER BEDROOM
8
4
3'-4"
6'-8"
2'-5"
2'-5"
28'-10"
C
T
S
S S S
T
Figure 3.7 
Sample House Drawings (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
63
15'-9"
14'-5" (TO C/L OF PILSTER)
1'-4"
1'-4"
5'-7"
(TO C/L OF PILSTER)
3 PLY 2X8 #2 FIR
LARCH BEAM
2X8 #2 FIR/LARCH
JOISTS @ 16" O.C.
10' @ CONC. PILES
TO BELOW 
FROST LEVEL
6'-7"
6'-7"
E
HOSE BIB
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
12'-1"
4'-2"
1'-9"
4'-4"
D
PC
2X10 TJI FLOOR JOISTS (AS PER ENG SPECS.)
JOISTS @ 16" O.C. (TYPICAL)
2X10 TJI FLOOR JOISTS (AS PER ENG SPECS.)
JOISTS @ 16" O.C. (TYPICAL)
14'-8"
6'-3"
F
2 PLY 2X10 #2 FIR
DOUBLE JOISTS
(TYPICAL)
PC
6X10 
PARALAM BEAM 
(AS PER ENG. 
SPECS.)
32" X 32" C 8"
CONC. FOOTING
(TYPICAL)
ADJ. STEEL 
POST
(TYPICAL)
11 RISERS UP
3 RISERS UP
1
A-3
1
A-3
4'-6"
20'-2"
6
EXHAUST & FRESH AIR INTAKE (FURNACE)
DRYER EXHAUST
HOSE BIB (AS PER CONTRACTOR)
F
40'-0"
13'-7"
E
FUTURE
DRYER
FUTURE
WASHER
T.D.
S
H.W.
F.D.
S
PC
FURNACE
4X4 WOOD POST (TYP.)
ON CONC. FOOTING PADS
(24X24X8)
(TYPICAL)
9'-1"
8'-10"
40'-0"
10'-0"
7'-3"
F
F
14'-4"
7'-3"
14'-1" (TO C/L OF BEAM)
14'-9" (TO C/L OF BEAM)
28'-10"
S S
S
20'-10"
Figure 3.7 
Sample House Drawings (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

64 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
A
E
G
A
B
F
D
GRADE
12
4
32"X32"X8"
CONC. FOOTING
(TYPICAL)
4" DRAIN TILE
C/W DRAIN ROCK TO
INSTALL AROUND ENTIRE
FOUNDATION PARAMETER
TOP OF FOOTING
PRECAST CONC. STEP
& PRECAST CONC. STEP BRACKETS
(AS PER MANUFACTURE SPECS.)
GRADE
TOP OF FOUNDATION WALL
TOP OF SUB-FLOOR
TOP OF WALL
TOP OF ROOF
GALV. IRON CANOPY COVER
ON 1/2" SHEATHING
ON 2 PLY 2X10 CANTILEVER
CANOPY BEAMS & FRAMING
C/W SOFFIT (FINISHED
AS PER CONTRACTOR)
ON 6X6 COLUMN
SECURED TO CONC. 
STEP BELOW.
7'-13/4"
1'-93/4"
8'-1"
5'-53/4"
Figure 3.7 
Sample House Drawings (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
65
1
G
G
C
C
C
2'-0"
DECKING AS PER CONTRACTOR
(AS PER A.B.C.)
(TYPICAL)
PILES TO
BELOW 
FROST
LEVELS
(TYPICAL)
ASPHALT SHINGLES
PROVIDE FLASHING AS REQUIRED
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
VERTICAL VINYL SIDING
8'X6" WOOD COLUMNS
FINISH TO MATCH
WINDOW TRIM
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
CONC. LANDING
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
PROVIDE SHUTTERS (TYPICAL AS SHOWN)
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
VINYL SIDING
PARGING
GRADE
B
2
ALUMINUM SIDING
SOFFITS & FASCIA
GRADE
Figure 3.7 
Sample House Drawings (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

66 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
F
F
D
F
PROVIDE FLASHING AS REQUIRED
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
ASPHALT SHINGLES
(TYPICAL)
2'-0"
DECKING AS PER CONTRACTOR
(AS PER A.B.C.)
F
F
ALUMINUM SIDING
SOFFITS & FASCIA
GRADE
Figure 3.7 
Sample House Drawings (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
67
WINDOW SCHEDULE
 
UNIT: 
UNIT SIZING: 
R.O. (LXH):
 
 
NOT IN CONTRACT
 
 
36"X50" (F) 
42"X72"
 
 
36"X15" (A)
 
 
27"X30" (A-F) 
64"X37"
 
 
36"X30" (A-F) 
83"X37"
 
 
27"X22" (A) 
33"X29"
 
 
36"X24" (A) 
37"X13"
 
 
12"X6'4" (SEALED) LIGHTS 
67"X84"
 
UNIT: 
DOOR SCHEDULE 
LOCATION:
 
 
3'X6'8"X1" (C/W SIDE LIGHTS) 
F-ENTRANCE
 
 
5'X6'8" PATIO DOOR 
NOOK
 
 
2'4"X6'8"X1" 
ENSUITE & BATH
 
 
2'6"X6'8"X1" 
BEDROOMS
 
 
NOT IN CONTRACT
 
 
2'10"X6'8"X1" 
BASEMENT
 
 
2'0"X6'8" 
BI-FOLD
 
 
4'0"X6'8" 
BI-FOLD
 
 
3'0"X6'8" 
BI-FOLD
WHOLE DOOR FRAME
A
B
C X3
D
E
F X4
G X2 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
SINGLE POLE SWITCH
3-WAY POLE SWITCH
FURNACE SWITCH
DUPLEX CONVENIENCE OUTLET
ELECTRIC RANGE
ELECTRIC CLOTHES DRYER
RAZOR OUTLET
WEATHER PROOF OUTLET
CEILING LIGHT
PULL CHAIN LIGHT
WALL LIGHT
CEILING FAN
BATHROOM EXHAUST FAN
THERMOSTAT
SMOKE ALARM
INTERNET CABLE
TELEVISION OUTLET
TELEPHONE JACK
ELEC. LEGEND
T
SF
S 3
S
R
D
R
WP
PC
F
F
T
S
ICT
TV
EXTERIOR WALL CONST (NEW & EXISTING)
(SIDING BY CONTRACTOR)
(BUILDING PAPER/SHEATHING MEMBRANE)
1/2" O.S.B. SHEATHING
2X6 WALL STUDS @ 16" O.C.
R20 BATT. INSUL. OR BETTER
6 MIL. POLY. VAP. BARR.
1/2" DRYWALL
ROOF CONSTRUCTION
ASPHALT SHINGLES ON
1/2" O.S.B. SHEATHING c/w "H" CLIPS
ENG. APPROVED FINK TRUSSES @ 16" O.C.
R12 BATT INSUL. OR BETTER
6MIL. POLY. VAP. BARR.
1/2" DRYWALL CEILING
PROVIDE INSULATION STOPS AT WALL (TYP.)
FLOOR CONSTRUCTION
FLOOR FINISH (AS PER CONTRACTOR)
UNDERLAY (WHERE REQUIRED AS PER CONTRACTOR)
3/4" T&G SUB FLOOR (GLUED & SECURED TO JOISTS)
2X10 TJI FLOOR JOISTS @ 16" O.C.
(OR AS PER ENG. SPECS).
NOTE: INSTALL R12 INSULATION BATT.
 
@ TOP OF FOUNDATION WALLS
 
ALONG INSIDE FACE OF RIM JOISTS
 
C/W 6MIL. VAPOUR BARRIER
ALL STRAPPING & CROSS BRIDGING
(AS PER ENG. SPECS).
W/ 1/2" GYPSUM BOARD (BASEMENT CEILING)
INTERIOR WALL CONST.
2X4 STUDS @ 16" o.c.
1/2" DRYWALL BOTH SIDES
INTERIOR BATHROOM WALL CONST.
2X4 STUDS @ 16" o.c.
1/2" WATER PROOF DRYWALL.
(ALL AROUND TUB AREA
INCLUDING ANY MARKED
EXTERIOR WALLS).
BASEMENT FLOOR SLAB
(AS PER CONTRACTOR, APPROVED BY ENG.)
4" MIN. CONC. SLAB
C/W 6MIL. POLY VAP. BAR.
ON 8" MIN. COMPACTED GRAVEL FILL
(REBAR OR WIRE MESH AS REQUIRED)
FOUNDATION WALL CONST.
2X6 SILL PLATE (SECURED BY
LAG BOLTS INTO CONC. WALL,
C/W GASKETS TO MATCH) ON
8" WIDE CONCRETE WALL STRUCTURE:
C/W DAMPROOFING FROM ABOVE GRADE
ON OUTSIDE OF WALL
& PARGING ABOVE GRADE TO UNDER WALL SIDING
2-10MM REBAR TOP & BOTTOM.
ON 16"X8" FOOTING (C/W KEYWAY)
W/ #4 REBAR TOP & BOTTOM.
W/ WEEPING (DRAIN) TILE & ROCK
TO SURROUND EXTERIOR FACE OF FOOTINGS.
(ENTIRE PERIMETER OF STRUCTURE)
.10MIL POLY MOISTURE BARRIER
 
(OUTSIDE FACE) TO ABOVE GRADE
C/W INTERIOR FURRING WALL CONSTRUCTION:
 
2X4 WALL STUDS @ 16" O.C.
 
(INCLUDING TOP & BOTTOM PLATES)
 
W/ R12 INSULATION
E
D
C
B
A
F
G
Figure 3.7 
Sample House Drawings (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

68 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 
1 of 2
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
 
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Excavation and Backfill
 Elev of 
Elev of
 Ave Grade 
U/S of Gravel
 
97.42 
Main Floor: 100.00
 
97.58 
Less
 
97.58 
1'-93/4"
 
97.50 
7'-13/4"
 
97.52 
-8" (9'-71/2")
 
 
 90'-41/2"
 (90.38) 
= 90.38
 
7.14 
Depth of Excav.
 
40.00 
x 
28.83
 
 4.00 
 
4.00
 
7.14 
 
7.14
 
51.14 
 
39.97
EXCAV BSMT 
 
51.14 
39.97 
7.14 
14,595
 
 
 
 
 
 
541 
CY
BACKFILL BSMT 
   as excav. 
 
 
14,595
 
DDT 
40.00 
28.83 
7.14 
(8,234)
 
 
 
 
 
6,361
 
 
 
 
 
236 
CY
4" Dia FOOTING DRAIN 
 
145.66 
 
 
146 
LF
 
80.00
 
57.66
 
137.66 
Outside wall perimeter
 
8.00
 
145.66 
Centerline of pipe
DRAIN GRAVEL 
 
145.66 
2.00 
2.00 
583
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
CY
DEDUCT BACKFILL BSMT 
 
 
Ditto 
 
(22) 
CY
 
W/S 2 x 2.0
C/B 2 x 1/2 x 7.14
2 x 40.00
2 x 28.83
4 x 2 x 1.00
Ave:
Figure 3.8a 
Excavation and Backfi ll Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
69
Figure 3.8b 
Service Trench Takeoff
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 
2 of 2
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Utility Services Trench
 Ave Depth 
Ave Width
5.00 
Bottom: 2.50
6.00 
Cutback: 5.50
5.50 
 8.00
EXCAV TRENCH  
26.00 
8.00 
5.50 
1,144
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
CY
SAND BEDDING 
  26.00  
3.00 
0.50 
39
 
 Ave Width 
 
 
 
 
1 
CY
 
Bottom: 2.50
 
Cutback: 0.50
 
 3.00
BACKFILL TRENCH 
 
as excav. 
 
 
1,144
 
DDT 
sand 
 
 
(39)
 
 
 
 
 
1,105
 
 
 
 
 
41 
CY
 
Ave:
 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

70 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
Equal to Depth
of Basement
7.14'
Depth/2
3.57'
7'-14" Ave.
Average Width of
Excavation
Backfill to here
1
1
24"
Work
Space
Each
Side
Figure 3.9 
Cross-Section Through Basement Excavation
 
4. Then the difference between the average ground level and the elevation of the 
bottom of the gravel gives the depth of the basement excavation:
 
 
 
97.52'
 
 
 
(90.38')
 
 
Depth of excavation: 
7.14'
 
5. The length and width of the basement excavation is based on the size of the 
house, so we start with the dimensions of the house to the outside of the 
walls shown on the basement plan.
 
6. A 2'-0" wide workspace is allowed outside of the foundation walls, and an allow-
ance is also made for cutting back the sides of the excavation. (See Figure 3.9.)
 
7. The volume of backfi ll is equal to the volume of excavation less the space taken 
up by the building. (The space taken up by the footing projection is ignored here.)
 
      Note that the abbreviation “DDT” indicates a deduction, and the amount 
of the deduction is placed in brackets.
 
8. A footing drain is located 1'-0" outside of the foundation wall, so the length 
of this drain is calculated from the outside perimeter of the house:
 
 
Plus the adjustment for corners:  
137.66'
 
 
4 corners 3 2 3 1.0' at each corner gives: 
 8.00'
 
 
Centerline perimeter: 
145.66'
 
9. The footing drain is required to be surrounded by drain gravel, so an area 
2'-0" 3 2'-0" is allowed around the pipe.
 
10. The space taken up by drain gravel reduces the amount of basement backfi ll 
required, so an adjustment is made to account for this. 
 
11. A Utilities Trench is a trench that is excavated to accommodate building utili-
ties such as sewer, water, and electrical lines. Figure 3.10 gives details of what 
the estimator allows for when measuring this trench work.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
71
SUMMARY
■ Even though most homebuilders subcontract the excavation work on a proj-
ect, it is useful for the estimator to be able to take off quantities of excavation 
and sitework.
■ The estimator has to make an assessment of sitework requirements based on 
what is shown on the plans and in the specifi cations, but there is usually very 
little detail of excavation requirements provided on the bid drawings.
■ The estimator’s site visit will be another useful source of information about 
sitework requirements for the project. 
5'-0" Deep at Building
Plan
Section A - A
6'-0" Deep at
Property Line
A
A
26'-0"
Property
Line
Backfill
5'-6"
Sand Bedding
1
1
Location of
Utilities Trench
Building
A
6"
2'-6"
Figure 3.10 
Utility Trench Details
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

72 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
■ Because soil expands when it is excavated, a swell factor is used to calculate 
the increased volume of material after it has been excavated.
■ Similarly, a compaction factor is used to calculate the total amount of mate-
rial required to backfi ll excavations with compacted soils and/or gravels.
■ Excavation and backfi ll quantities are measured bank measure with no al-
lowance for swell factors or compaction factors at the time of the takeoff.
■ It is important that the estimator to be familiar with safety requirements for 
excavations to ensure that the sitework takeoff refl ects these requirements.
■ The following formulas are used to calculate the amount of excavations:
• Volume of Trench 5 Centerline Length 3 Average Width 3 Average Depth
• Volume of Basement 5 Average Length 3 Average Width 3 Average Depth
■ The effi ciency of the sitework takeoff, especially cut and fi ll operations, can 
be greatly increased by using a digitizer, an electronic device that enables you 
to take measurements from drawings and input this data directly into a com-
puter program.
■ The “grid method” may be used to calculate volumes of cut and fi ll over a site. 
This requires a survey showing the elevation of the existing grade at each inter-
section point on the grid. The elevation of the required new grade is also plot-
ted at each intersection point and, from these two elevations, the depth of cut 
or fi ll can then be obtained at each point. From here on, cut calculations are 
separate from fi ll calculations. To fi gure the volume of cut at an intersection 
point, the depth of cut at this point is multiplied by the area “covered” by that 
intersection point. Then, by adding together all of the individual cut volumes 
computed in this way, you will have the total volume of cut on the site.
■ In general, items of excavation, backfi ll, and fi ll materials are measured in 
cubic yards or cubic meters bank measure.
■ Some of the information required to measure sitework is found on plot plans 
that show the size and shape of the property upon which the house is to be 
constructed.
■ A takeoff of sitework for a house project is demonstrated.
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
 Information  
Web Page Address
 
■ See the OSHA web site for information  
http://www.osha.gov/
about construction safety.
 
■ There is a great deal of information on 
http://www.tenlinks.com/
the web about digitizers—Tenlinks 
Technology/Computers/
is one useful site. 
HARDWARE/INPUT/DIGIT.HTM
 
■ To see construction equipment in  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
action, YouTube is a great resource.  
fH4lgQdQL_4&feature=related
 
 The link listed here shows a backhoe 
excavating a basement for a house.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. Explain why it is useful for an estimator of residential projects to have some skills 
in excavation takeoff.
 2. Why is it generally more diffi cult to measure excavation work than it is to mea-
sure other work on a project?
 3. How do swell factors and compaction factors affect the measurement of excava-
tion and backfi ll?
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
73
 4. What safety features does the estimator have to account for in connection with 
trench excavations?
 5. How can digitizers help in an excavation takeoff?
 6. How does the estimator account for surplus material left over from excavation 
and backfi ll operations?
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
 1. Calculate the volume of excavation and backfi ll for the basement shown in 
Figure 3.11.
 2. Calculate the volume of cut and fi ll for the site shown in Figure 3.12.
 3. Calculate the volume of excavation and backfill for the trench shown in 
Figure 3.13.
 4. Calculate the volume of cut and fi ll for the site area shown in Figure 3.14.
Figure 3.11 
Basement Excavation
5'-6" Deep
Plan
of House
Section
A - A
5'-2" Deep
A
A
5'-8" Deep
36'-0"
32'-0"
5'-4" Deep
Equal to Depth
of Basement
Depth/2
 Ave. Depth
Average Width of Excavation
Backfill to here
1
1
18"
Work
Space
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

74 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK
 
A 
B 
C 
D 
1 
 
 
 2 
      3 
      4 
      5 
 
The following data is shown at each intersection point (station) on the grid:
 
Elevation of New Grade 
Elevation of Existing Grade
 
Plan of Site (Grid 25' x 20')
 5.0 6.5 
5.5 
5.0 
6.0 
3.0 
6.5 
1.9 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 5.2 5.1 
5.7 
3.2 
6.2 
2.8 
6.7 
4.5 
 
 
 5.4 3.6 
5.9 
2.0 
6.4 
5.3 
6.9 
7.1 
 
 
 5.6 1.9 
6.1 
4.0 
6.6 
8.2 
7.1 
10.0 
 
 
 5.8 3.0 
6.3 
3.8 
6.8 
6.4 
7.3 
7.0 
Figure 3.12 
Cut and Fill Excavation by the Grid Method
Trench 4'-0" Deep
here
120'-0"
Trench 8'-6" Deep
here
Plan
of Trench
Section
A - A
A
A
10"
Masonry Wall
Backfill to here
4'-0" to 8'-6"
1'-0"
2'-8"
1'-0"
1'-8"
1
1
Figure 3.13 
Trench Excavation
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 3—MEASURING EXCAVATION AND SITEWORK 
75
Figure 3.14 
Cut and Fill Plan
30'-0" (typ.)
36'-0" (typ.)
Site Plan
10.00 14.88
10.50 12.02
10.50 13.66
11.00 8.61
9.50 16.12
10.00 15.36
11.00 15.33
11.50 7.24
10.00 14.07
10.50 14.92
11.50 10.37
10.50 8.79
11.00 9.02
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

77
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
MEASURING 
CONCRETE WORK
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be able to:
■ Describe how concrete work is measured in a takeoff by assembly.
■ Measure concrete items from drawings and specifi cations.
■ Make an assessment of formwork requirements from the details of concrete pro-
vided on drawings.
■ Describe how concrete fi nishes are measured.
■ Describe how welded wire mesh is measured.
■ Describe how reinforcing steel is measured.
■ Complete a takeoff of concrete work for a residential project.
KEY TERMS 
blockouts
cutouts
formwork
net in place
pilasters
reinforcing steel (rebar)
slab-on-grade
suspended slab
welded wire mesh
Introduction
Preparing a quantity takeoff of concrete work requires the estimator to measure 
a combination of items, some of which are detailed on the drawings while others 
have to be inferred from what the drawings disclose. When drawings are well pre-
pared, items of concrete such as footings, walls, and columns are clearly shown, 
but details of the formwork required for this work are not provided on the draw-
ings. The assessment of formwork requirements will be based on the estimator’s 
knowledge of what is required for each of the different concrete components. Simi-
larly, concrete fi nishes and items such as curing slabs are not generally explicit on 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

78 
CHAPTER 4—MEASURING CONCRETE WORK
the drawings, so the estimator must add their knowledge of construction work to 
what is shown on the drawings in order to determine the extent of these implicit 
items. 
Because the concrete is detailed on the drawings, it makes sense to begin 
the takeoff by measuring the volume of concrete in an item, then, after the con-
crete dimensions are defi ned, consider the formwork requirements followed by 
the fi nishes that are needed, etc. Also, in accordance with the basic principles 
previously discussed regarding taking off by assembly, a good practice is to mea-
sure all work associated with one concrete assembly before considering the next 
assembly.
For example, if there were concrete footings, walls, and columns to consider 
on a project, we could begin with the footings. First fi nd the dimensions of foot-
ing concrete from the drawings, and then reuse these dimensions to calculate the 
area of formwork and the length of keyway required. Conclude this assembly 
by measuring anything else associated with the footings. After the work on the 
footings is measured, we would turn our attention to the walls and measure all 
the items associated with them. Finally, we would deal with the columns in the 
same way. 
This approach allows the estimator to focus on one type of work item at a time 
and fully understand all of its requirements before moving on to the next item. Al-
ternative approaches, such as measuring all the concrete for items then measuring all 
the formwork for these items, require the estimator to be constantly jumping from 
one type of item to another. Preparing a takeoff in this way requires the estimator to 
come back to an item such as footings three or four times, which is not an effi cient 
way to proceed.
Measuring work by assembly also corresponds to the way most estimating 
softwares function. The estimator enters the dimensions of the concrete for an 
assembly such as a slab-on-grade and then the program, usually by means of 
menus, allows the estimator to select such things as the type of forms, the kind of 
reinforcing, the method of fi nishing, and so forth, required for this slab. As these 
selections will vary little from job to job, most softwares allow you to save the 
selections, so that the estimator on subsequent jobs needs only to enter the size 
of the concrete and merely by pressing a button can include all the additional 
requirements.
Measuring Notes—Concrete
 
1. Measure concrete in cubic yards net in place. Calculate the volume of concrete 
from the dimensions given on the drawings with no adjustment for “add on” 
factors. Additional material required because of spillage, expanding forms, 
and wastage is accounted for later in the pricing process by means of a waste 
factor added to concrete items.
 
2. Do not adjust the quantity of concrete for reinforcing steel and inserts that 
displace concrete. Also, do not deduct for openings in the concrete that are 
less than 1 cubic foot of volume.
 
3. Classify concrete and measure separately in the following categories:
 
a. Pile caps
 
b. Footings
 
c. Retaining walls
 
d. Grade beams
 
e. Columns and pedestals
 
f. Beams
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 4—MEASURING CONCRETE WORK 
79
Figure 4.1 
Height of Concrete Walls and Columns
 
g. Slabs on grade
 
h. Suspended slabs
 
i. Floor toppings
 
j. Stairs and landings
 
k. Curbs
 
l. Sidewalks
 
4. If different mixes of concrete are used in any of the categories listed in 
item 3, measure each mix separately. For instance, where different strengths 
of concrete are specifi ed for an interior slab on grade and an exterior patio 
slab, separately calculate the quantity of concrete for each type of concrete 
in slabs.
 
5. Where columns and walls extend between the fl oors of a building, measure 
these components from the top surface of the slab below up to the undersur-
face of the slab or beam above. See Figure 4.1.
 
6. Beams may be measured separately from slabs. However, if they are to be 
poured monolithically with the slabs, the quantity of concrete in the beams 
should be added to the slab concrete for pricing.
Suspended Slab
Height of Column
Beam
Column Footing
Wall Footing
Slab-on-Grade
Height
of
Wall
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80 
CHAPTER 4—MEASURING CONCRETE WORK
Measuring Formwork Generally
The formwork operations involve a number of activities including fabricating and 
erecting the forms, stripping, moving, cleaning, and oiling the forms for reuse. All 
of these activities and the materials involved are allowed for in the pricing of the 
forms. 
In general, the estimator measures the surface of the concrete that comes into 
contact with the forms. In the case of footing forms, this surface will usually be 
formed with lumber or plywood. Most footings on a housing project are formed 
with 2 3 8 lumber, in which case the length of this lumber will be measured. In the 
case where plywood forms are to be used, the area of plywood in contact with the 
concrete is measured.
Wall forms are usually measured in linear feet stating the height of the forms. 
Therefore, for an 8-foot high wall 100 feet long, the wall forms would be measured 
as 200 linear feet of 8" high wall forms.
The estimator does not have to be concerned about the design of the forms at the 
time of the takeoff; all that needs to be established is which surfaces of the concrete 
require forms. In the past, estimators have agonized over such things as whether the 
bottom of an opening or the sloped top surface of a wall needs to be formed. If dis-
cussion with your colleagues does not provide an answer, the prudent estimator will 
always exercise caution and allow the forms. 
A recent innovation in home building, especially in the colder climate areas, is 
the introduction of insulated concrete foundations. These are specially made ex-
panded polystyrene blocks that are fi lled with concrete to form the house founda-
tions, thus eliminating the need for separate formwork. The Styrofoam acts as the 
forms and becomes the permanent insulation for the basement walls. To access more 
information see the Recommended Resources at the end of this chapter. 
Measuring Notes—Formwork
 
1. Measure formwork in square feet of contact area, i.e., the actual surface of 
formwork that is in contact with the concrete. 
 
2. Classify formwork into the same categories as listed for concrete. As an il-
lustration, consider a project with concrete footings, walls, and columns: in 
this situation forms to footings, forms to walls, and forms to columns would 
each be described and measured separately. There are, however, a number 
of factors that may have no effect on the price of the concreting operations 
but do affect the price of formwork and, therefore, should be noted. For 
example, the volume of concrete in all walls, whether they are straight or 
curved, will have the same price, but the price of forms to curved walls will 
differ from that of straight walls, so the forms to curved surfaces must be 
kept separate. 
 
3. Measure bulkhead and edge forms separately. For example, if there were open-
ings in a wall, the area of blockouts (the edges around the openings) would 
be measured separately from the wall forms. Similarly, if there are pilasters 
projecting from the walls, the area of the pilasters would be calculated and 
noted separately from the wall forms. See Figure 4.2 for different categories 
of formwork in a wall system.
 
4. Measure forms to slab edges separately from forms to beams and forms to 
walls even where the edge forms may be extensions of beam or wall forms 
(Figure 4.3).
 
5. Forms are generally measured across openings for windows in walls. The es-
timator must distinguish between what are openings and what are cutouts. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 4—MEASURING CONCRETE WORK 
81
Forms To Sides and
   Face of Pilaster Separate
       From Wall Forms
Concrete Wall
Blockout Forms
Required Around
Door Opening
Blockout Forms
Required Around
Window Opening
Wall Forms Both Sides
Figure 4.2 
Formwork Categories
Forms to Sides of Walls
Form Slab Edges
Forms to Soffit of Slab
Forms to Sides
and Bottom
of Beam
Form Slab Edges
Form Sides
of Beam
Figure 4.3 
Concrete Wall, Slab, and Beam Forms
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

82 
CHAPTER 4—MEASURING CONCRETE WORK
Openings less than 100 square feet are not deducted, but all cutouts would 
be deducted (see Figure 4.4).
 
6. Describe items of formwork that are linear in nature stating their size and 
measure their length in feet. Grooves, chases, keyways, chamfers, and narrow 
strips of formwork, less than 1 foot wide, are measured in this fashion.
 
7. Describe forms to circular columns stating the diameter, and measure the 
height of the column in feet.
Measuring Notes—Finishes and Miscellaneous Concrete Work
 
1. Measure slab fi nishes in square feet of the plan area and vertical fi nishes in 
square feet of the exposed concrete surface. 
 
2. Classify fi nishes fi rst in terms of what is being fi nished: slabs, walls, columns, 
stairs, sidewalks, and so on. Then separate by type of fi nish: wood fl oat, sack 
rubbed, steel trowel, broom fi nish, and such like. 
Window Locations
Cut Out Area
4' High Wall Forms
8' High Wall Forms
Figure 4.4 
Openings and Cutouts in Formwork
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 4—MEASURING CONCRETE WORK 
83
Curing Slabs and Vapor Barriers
 
3. Measure curing slabs in square feet.
 
4. Measure vapor barriers to slabs in square feet of the plan area; add 10 percent 
to this area to allow for overlaps.
 
5. Measure welded wire mesh in plan area with an additional 10 percent in-
cluded for overlaps at the edges. 
Reinforcing Steel
 
6. Measure bar reinforcing steel in linear feet and then convert these measure-
ments to weights by multiplying the length of each bar by the unit weight per 
foot for that bar size. See Figure 4.5 for the unit weights of reinforcing bars 
of various sizes.
Miscellaneous Concrete Items
 
7. Describe and enumerate anchor bolts and other inserts into the concrete.
 
8. Measure inserts such as waterstops in linear feet.
 
9. Measure expansion joints in linear feet stating the size of joint and the type of 
material used. If a sealant is required in connection with the joint, measure it 
separately in linear feet stating the size and type of sealant.  It is useful for the 
estimator to draw a small sketch on the margin of the takeoff to clarify this 
kind of complex detail. 
 
10. Measure grout to anchor bolts and base plates in cubic feet separating differ-
ent types of materials.
 
11. Measure saw cuts to concrete in linear feet stating the size of the cut. Here it is 
important to note whether old or new concrete is to be cut and what is to be 
cut: slabs, walls, or columns.
Example of Concrete Work Takeoff
Figure 4.6a and Figure 4.6b show the takeoff for the concrete work of the sample 
house project shown on drawings Figure 3.7 in Chapter 3.
Figure 4.5 
Reinforcing Bars
REINFORCING BARS
Bar
Designation
Weight
lbs/foot
Diameter
No. 2
0.167 lbs
0.250"
No. 3
0.376 lbs
0.375"
No. 4
0.668 lbs
0.500"
No. 5
1.043 lbs
0.625"
No. 6
1.502 lbs
0.750"
No. 7
2.044 lbs
0.875"
No. 8
2.670 lbs
1.000"
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

84 
CHAPTER 4—MEASURING CONCRETE WORK
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 
1 of 2
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Concrete Work
 
80.00
 
57.66
 137.66 
Outside wall perimeter 
 
 
 
(2.66) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 x 8 
2 x 8
 135.00 
Centerline of wall 
 
 
 
 
Conc. 
Forms 
Forms
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L x W x D 
2 x L No. x 2 x (L+W)
CONC. FTGS. 
 
 
135.00 
1.33 
0.67 
120 
270 
-
 
 
 
(Pads) 
3 
2.67 
2.67 
0.67 
14 
- 
32
 
 
 
 
2 
2.00 
2.00 
0.67 
5 
- 
16
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
139 
270 
48
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
CY               
270
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
318 LF
FORM 2 x 4 KEYWAY 
 
 
135.00 
 
 
135 
LF               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8" High
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conc. 
Wall Forms 
2 x 8 Blockouts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L x W x D 
2 x L No. x 2 x (L + H)
CONC. WALLS 
 
 
135.00 
0.67 
8.00 
724 
270 
-
 
 
 
(Windows) DDT 
4 
3.08 
0.67 
1.08 
(9) 
- 
33
 
 
 
(Drop Landing) DDT 
 
9.08 
0.67 
0.92 
(6) 
- 
20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
709 
270 LF 
53 LF
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
CY               
 1'-93/4"
 (103/4") Depth of joists and sheathing
 
11" = 0.92
DAMP PROOF WALLS 
 
 
137.66 
- 
8.00 
1,101 
SF              
#4 REBAR 
 
4 
135.00 
 
 
540
 
 
Add 10% for Laps 
 
 
 
 
 
54
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
594 
x 0.668        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
397 
lbs  
2 x 40.00
2 x 28.83
4 x 0.67
Less:
Drop Landing:
Figure 4.6a 
Concrete Work Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 4—MEASURING CONCRETE WORK 
85
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 
2 of 2
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
 
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Concrete Work (Cont’d.)
40.00 x 28.83 Outside dimensions
(1.33) x (1.33)
38.67 x 27.50 Inside 
 
Finish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conc. 
and Curing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L x W x D 
L x W
CONC. S.O.G. 
 
 
38.67 
27.50 
0.33 
351 
1,063 
SF           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
CY              
6mil POLY. V.B. 
 
1.1 
38.67 
27.50 
 
1,170 
SF               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GRAVEL UNDER S.O.G. 
 
 
38.67 
27.50 
0.67 
712
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
CY              
2 x 6 SILL PLATE 
 
 
137.66 
 
 
138 
LF              
 
 
+4 Corners
 
 
27 Bolts
1/2" x 9" A.B.’s 
 
27 
 
 
 
27 
No.             
Deck Supports
DRILL 10" DIA. HOLES FOR PILES 
 2 
 
 
6.00 
12 
LF              
CONC. PILES 
 2 x 3.14 
0.42 
0.42 
8.00 
9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
CY              
10" DIA FIBER TUBES 
 
2 
 
 
8.00 
16 
LF               
 
Less
2 x 0.67
137.66 / 6.00 = 23
Figure 4.6b 
Concrete Work Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

86 
CHAPTER 4—MEASURING CONCRETE WORK
The design of the foundation system for this house consists of a concrete footing 
supporting a reinforced concrete basement wall. For information about alternative 
designs for foundation systems, see the energy effi cient construction details listed in 
Recommended Resources at the end of this chapter.
Comments on the Concrete Work Takeoff Figure 4.6a and Figure 4.6b
 
1. First the centerline length of the perimeter footing is calculated; this is the 
same length as the centerline of the perimeter wall. The width and height 
of the footing are shown on the drawings, so these fi gures can be entered 
directly into the dimension columns.
 
2. The same strength concrete, 3,000 psi, is to be used for the footings, walls, 
and slab-on-grade so the strength is not mentioned in the takeoff description. 
This information is left until the pricing stage to consider.
 
3. The concrete for the three pad footings is added to the continuous footing 
concrete.
 
4. Footing forms are measured to each side of the continuous footing (2 3 cen-
terline length) and to the perimeter of each pad footing.
 
5. The keyway is the same length as the centerline of the wall.
 
6. The basement walls are measured as 8'-0" high, which is a standard dimension 
for a full-height basement.
 
7. Deductions are made from the wall concrete for the window openings because 
each opening exceeds 1 cubic foot in volume.
 
8. There is also a deduction from the wall concrete at the landing since the wall 
only comes up to the landing level at this location (drop landing). 
 
9. Blockout forms are measured to the perimeter of the window openings and the 
opening for the drop landing.
 
10. The damp proofi ng (tar) to the exterior of the concrete wall is measured here. 
Note the exterior wall perimeter is used.
 
11. The drawing notes indicate two rows of #4 rebar is required at the top 
and also at the bottom of the wall. This is measured fi rst in length plus 
10 percent added for laps in the bars, and then the quantity is converted 
to pounds using the conversion factor of 0.668 pounds per foot for this 
bar size.
 
12. The basement slab-on-grade extends to the inside of the exterior walls so the 
thickness of the walls (2 3 8") is deducted from the outside dimensions to 
obtain the dimensions of the slab.
 
13. The plan area of the slab is measured for concrete fi nish and curing.
 
14. The vapor barrier under the slab is also measured as the plan area but the 
quantity is increased by 10 percent to allow for laps in the material.
 
15. A convenient place to measure the gravel under the slab-on-grade is directly 
after the concrete since it is the same area as the concrete—only the thickness 
differs from the concrete.
 
16. It is also convenient to measure the sill plate at this stage, but this item will be 
recapped and priced in the rough carpentry section.
 
17. The sill plate is secured by anchor bolts spaced at 6'-0" on center. The number 
of bolts required is calculated by dividing the exterior perimeter of the wall 
by the spacing (6'-0") then adding an extra bolt for each corner in the wall.
 
18. The work in the pile supports to the deck is measured. This consists of drilling 
holes, then the concrete and forms for the piles. Fiber tubes are the forms 
used for the circular piles. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 4—MEASURING CONCRETE WORK 
87
SUMMARY
■ Preparing a quantity takeoff of concrete work requires the estimator to mea-
sure a combination of items such as concrete, formwork, concrete fi nishes, etc. 
■ Whereas concrete is clearly shown on the project drawings, few details of 
formwork are provided. The estimator, therefore, needs to make an assess-
ment of formwork requirements from the details of the concrete given. 
■ In a takeoff of concrete work, the estimator should work through the project 
dealing with one assembly at a time measuring all the work associated with 
one assembly before passing on to the next.
■ Concrete is measured in cubic yards net in place.
■ Concrete is classifi ed in terms of the use to which the concrete is put.
■ Different mixes of concrete are measured separately. 
■ Formwork is generally measured in linear feet or square feet of contact area.
■ Formwork is classifi ed in terms of use, just as concrete is. Forms to curved 
surfaces are measured separately.
■ Because only the area of forms in contact with the concrete is measured, the 
estimator does not have to be concerned about details of the design of the 
forms at the time of the takeoff.
■ Formwork to pilasters, bulkheads, edges, etc. are measured separately.
■ Items of formwork such as grooves, keyways, notches, and chamfers are de-
scribed stating their size and are measured in linear feet.
■ Forms to circular columns are described giving the diameter of the column 
and are measured in linear feet or meters to the height of the column. 
■ Concrete fi nishes are generally measured in square feet.
■ Slab fi nishes and curing slabs are all measured in square feet of the plan area.
■ Welded wire mesh reinforcing is also measured in square feet or square me-
ters of the plan area, with further percentage added to allow for the laps in 
the mesh.
■ Builders often subcontract fabricating and placing reinforcing steel, in which 
case the subcontractors would take off and price this trade.
■ A takeoff of concrete work for a house project is demonstrated.
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
  Information 
Web Page Address
 
■ Energy-effi cient construction 
details including many tips on 
how to build in order to save 
energy are found on many web 
sites. These are some examples 
of what is available:
 
 US Department of Energy 
 http://www1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/
building_america/
 
 Green Home Guide 
 http://greenhomeguide.com/askapro/
question/are-skylights-a-good-idea
 
 Earth Share 
 http://www.earthshare.org/2008/09/
button-up-your.html?gclid=
CPKehKiQnqMCFQVvbAod_355ng
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

88 
CHAPTER 4—MEASURING CONCRETE WORK
 
 Green construction 
 http://www.energyeffi cienthomes.ca/
icf.html
 
■ Insulated concrete foundations 
http://www.epsmolders.org/
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. Preparing a takeoff of concrete work requires the estimator to measure a number 
of different items. Which of these items are usually shown on the project draw-
ings and which are not shown?
 2. Why is it recommended that the estimator takeoff assembly by assembly rather 
than measuring all the concrete together then all the forms together?
 3. What size of opening is deducted when measuring wall forms?
 4. If an opening for a door is required in a concrete wall, what is measured in the 
takeoff?
 5. Why are pilaster forms measured separately from wall forms?
 6. How is the concrete and formwork measured for circular columns?
 7. Describe the procedure for measuring rebar.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
 1. Take off the excavation and concrete work required for the construction of the 
driveway shown on Figure 4.7.
 2. Take off all the concrete work for a basement consisting of a 10" concrete wall, 
7'-6" high. The wall is supported by a 2'-3" 3 1'-0" concrete footing. Also in-
clude a 5"-thick concrete slab-on-grade placed on a 7"-thick bed of gravel. The 
size of the basement is 30'-0" 3 32'-5" measured to the outside of the basement 
walls. 
 3. Take off all the concrete work for the foundations and slab-on-grade shown in 
Figure 4.8.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 4—MEASURING CONCRETE WORK 
89
Figure 4.7 
Concrete Driveway Details
Existing Steps to House
Existing Garage Slab
12'-0" Wide Driveway
21'-0" 
4'-6" 
6'-0" 
Existing City Sidewalk
PLAN
SECTION
6"
4" Concrete Driveway
8 x 8 x 10/10 Welded Wire Mesh
Topsoil and
Sodding
Not in
Contract
Existing
Grade
Compacted Sand Below Curbs
12"
8" Gravel
24"
18"
Concrete Curbs
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

90 
CHAPTER 4—MEASURING CONCRETE WORK
Figure 4.8 
Foundations and Slab-on-Grade Details
Curing
Concrete Wall 2'-0" High
Trowel Finish
6" Concrete (3,000 psi)
6 x 6 1.4/1.4 WWM
Vapor Barrier
8" Washed Gravel
Keyway
1'-8"
Section
Footing 2'-0" x 10"
Thicken Edges to 14" x 14" Ave. Width
10'-0"
10'-0"
Plan Area
Sawcut Joints
32'-8"
120'-8"
8" Wall typ.
58'-4"
68'-6"
6" S.O.G. on 8" Gravel
24"
Each Side
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

91
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
5
MEASURING 
CARPENTRY WORK
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be 
able to:
■ Explain why a detailed knowledge of carpentry construction is useful in order to 
prepare a carpentry takeoff for a residential building.
■ Calculate quantities of lumber using board measure units.
■ Describe how to measure rough carpentry work in a takeoff.
■ Describe how to measure fi nish carpentry and miscellaneous item work in a take-
off.
■ Use quick methods to take off joists and studs.
■ Complete a takeoff of rough carpentry, fi nish carpentry, and miscellaneous items 
for a residential project.
Introduction
In order to prepare a detailed, realistic quantity takeoff of the carpentry work the 
estimator must have a comprehensive knowledge of carpentry details and practices. 
This is particularly true for estimating housing and other buildings of wood frame 
construction because, on these types of projects, few specifi c details of framing re-
quirements are shown on the design drawings. Instead, the builder is left to con-
struct the framing in accordance with standard practices and code requirements. 
board measure
engineered joist
joist hangers
nominal sizes
oriented strand board (OSB)
parallam beam
pre-hung doors
rough hardware
sheathing
soffi ts
subfl oors
teleposts
KEY TERMS 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

92 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
As a consequence, in order to assess rough carpentry requirements adequately, the 
estimator has to be familiar with framing methods and must also be alert to design 
requirements such as the need for extra joists or additional studs in certain locations. 
Students who are not experienced in carpentry work are advised to study one 
or more of the many reference books available on this subject which will help them 
to better understand the essentials of a rough carpentry takeoff.1
Measuring Rough Carpentry 
Board Measure
Most lumber used in construction has been dressed; this means that surfaces are 
sanded to a smooth fi nish. This process reduces the size of the cross section of the 
lumber; however, even though the true dimensions of an item may be 11/2" by 31/2", 
it is still referred to by its nominal size, which is 2 by 4. See Figure 5.1 for the nomi-
nal and dressed sizes of lumber.
The unit of measurement of lumber is generally the board measure (BM), which 
is sometimes referred to as board foot (BF) and a 1000-board feet is written MBF. 
Board measure is a cubic measure where one unit of BM is equivalent to a 1 3 12 
board 1 foot long. To calculate the BM of lumber, multiply the length in feet by the 
nominal width and thickness of the pieces in inches and divide the product by 12. 
Quantities are rounded off to the nearest whole board foot. Pieces of lumber, beams, 
joists, plates, etc., are fi rst measured by length in the takeoff process and are then 
converted to board measure. See Figure 5.2 for examples of BM calculations.
Figure 5.1 
Nominal and Dressed Lumber Sizes
 
Nominal 
Dressed
 
1 x 2 
3/4 x 11/2
 
1 x 3 
3/4 x 21/2
 
1 x 4 
3/4 x 31/2
 
2 x 4 
11/2 x 31/2
 
2 x 6 
11/2 x 51/2
 
2 x 8 
11/2 x 71/4
 
2 x 10 
11/2 x 91/4
 
2 x 12 
11/2 x 111/4
 
2 x 14 
11/2 x 131/4
 
3 x 3 
21/2 x 21/2
 
4 x 4 
31/2 x 31/2
 
6 x 6 
51/2 x 51/2
1. See the Web Page Help Box at the end of this chapter for information about carpentry construction 
details on the Internet
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 
93
Measuring Notes—Rough Carpentry 
Rough Carpentry Generally
 
1. Measure lumber by piece, by length in feet, or in board measure as described 
previously.
 
2. Measure items of lumber separately on the basis of the following categories:
 
a. Dimensions: 2 3 4, 2 3 6, 2 3 8, etc.
 
b. Dressing: “Rough sawn” and S4S (surfaced on four sides) are the usual 
alternatives.  
 
c. Grade: Construction lumber is graded in a two-step process. First, the 
grade category is identifi ed, e.g., structural light framing; then the grade 
within that category, e.g., select structural. See Figure 5.3 for a list of the 
National Grading Rule lumber classes for construction lumber.
 
d. Species: Most lumber for rough carpentry is soft wood. Common types 
include Douglas fi r, larch, eastern hemlock, western hemlock, sitka spruce, 
cedar, and pine.
 
3. Lumber required to have a special treatment (i.e., kiln dried, pressure treated, 
etc.) shall be kept separate and described.
 
4. Measure wallboards in square feet.
 
5. Do not deduct for openings less than 40 square feet in area.
 
6. Classify wallboards and measure separately in the following categories:
 
a. Type of material
 
b. Thickness
Framing Work
 
7. Measure items of lumber for framing separately in the following categories:
 
a. Plates 
h. Rafters
 
b. Studs 
i. Ridges
 
c. Joists 
j. Hip and valley rafters
 
d. Bridging 
k. Lookouts and overhangs
 
e. Lintels 
l. Gussets and scabs
 
f. Solid beams 
m. Purlins
 
g. Built-up beams 
n. Other items of framing
Figure 5.2 
Board Measure Calculations
 
Takeoff Item 
Calculation 
Result
 
12 pieces of 1 x 2 - 10 feet long 
12 x 1 x 2 x 10 / 12 
20.00 BM
 
20 pieces of 1 x 4 - 8 feet long 
20 x 1 x 4 x 8 / 12 
53.33 BM
 
8 pieces of 1 x 12 - 12 feet long 
8 x 1 x 12 x 12 / 12 
96.00 BM
 
60 pieces of 2 x 4 - 8 feet long 
60 x 2 x 4 x 8 / 12 
320.00 BM
 14 pieces of 2 x 12 - 16 feet long 
14 x 2 x 12 x 16 / 12 
448.00 BM
 
6 pieces of 3 x 3 - 8 feet long 
6 x 3 x 3 x 8 / 12 
36.00 BM
 
9 pieces of 3 x 4 - 12 feet long 
9 x 3 x 4 x 12 / 12 
108.00 BM
 
4 pieces of 4 x 6 - 14 feet long 
4 x 4 x 6 x 14 / 12 
112.00 BM
 
2 pieces of 4 x 8 - 10 feet long 
2 x 4 x 8 x 10 / 12 
53.33 BM
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

94 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
Trusses, Truss Joists, and Truss Rafters
 
8. Enumerate and fully describe prefabricated trusses, truss joists, and truss 
rafters.
Manufactured Beams, Joists, and Rafters
 
9. Measure and fully describe manufactured beams, joists, and rafters in linear 
feet.
Sheathing
 
10. Measure sheathing in square feet; describe and measure separately wall, fl oor, 
and roof sheathing.
 
11. Measure diagonal work separately from other sheathing.
 
12. Measure common boards, ship-lap, tongued and grooved, plywood, and 
other types of sheathing separately.
 
13. Describe and measure separately work to sloping surfaces.
Copings, Cant Strips, and Fascias 
 
14. Measure copings, cant strips, fascias, and other similar items in linear feet.
Soffi ts
 
15. Measure soffi ts in square feet; measure different materials separately.
Sidings
 
16. Measure sidings in square feet; describe the type of material used and state 
whether vertical, horizontal, or diagonal.
 
Lumber Class 
Grade
 
Light Framing 
Construction
 
 
Standard
 
 
Utility
 
Structural Light Framing 
Select
 
 
1
 
 
2
 
Studs 
Stud
 
(2 to 4 inches thick, 2 to 4 inches wide) 
Economy Stud
 
Structural Joist and Planks 
Select Structural
 
 
1
 
 
2
 
 
3
 
Appearance Framing 
Appearance
Figure 5.3 
Soft Wood Lumber Grades
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 
95
Vapor Barriers and Air Barriers
 
17. Measure vapor barriers and air barriers in square feet describing the type of 
material used. Increase quantities to allow for overlaps in these materials.
Underlay and Subfl oors
 
18. Measure underlay and subfl oors in square feet stating the type of material 
used.
Blocking and Furring
 
19. Measure blocking and furring in linear feet or board measure and classify in 
the following categories:
 
a. Blocking stating purpose and location
 
b. Furring stating purpose and location
 
c. Nailing trips
 
d. Strapping
 
e. Grounds
 
f. Rough bucks
 
g. Sleepers
Rough Hardware
 
20. Include an allowance for rough hardware based on the value of the carpentry 
material in the estimate.
Measuring Finish Carpentry and Millwork
Finish carpentry includes trim, baseboard, stairs, paneling, doors, windows, cabinets, 
and all the other visible woodwork on a project. Some items of rough carpentry are 
measured at the same time as the fi nish carpentry items. For example, grounds or strap-
ping may be required to support paneling, or blocking may be necessary for cabinets.
Measuring Notes—Finish Carpentry
Finish Carpentry Generally 
 
1. Classify items of fi nish carpentry and measure separately according to ma-
terials, size, and method of installation, i.e., wall-mounted items would be 
measured separately from fl oor-mounted or ceiling-mounted items.
 
2. Measure grounds, rough bucks, backing, etc., in the Rough Carpentry section.
 
3. Include an allowance for rough hardware for carpentry work.
Trim
 
4. Measure trim in linear feet stating size.
 
5. Keep built-up items, such as valance boxes, false beams, etc., separate and 
fully describe them.
 
6. Measure baseboard and carpet strip through door openings, i.e., do not de-
duct for these openings.
Shelving
 
7. Measure shelving in linear feet stating width.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

96 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
Stairs
 
8. Measure and fully describe prefabricated stairs stating the width of stair and 
the number of risers.
 
9. Describe balusters and handrails and measure in linear feet.
Cabinets, Countertops, and Cupboards 
 
10. Enumerate and fully describe cabinets, countertops, and cupboards. Alterna-
tively, units can be measured in linear feet describing the type and size of the 
unit and method of installation.
Paneling 
 
11. Describe paneling and measure in square feet.
Measuring Notes—Doors and Frames
Doors and door frames are usually obtained from vendors who quote prices to sup-
ply and deliver the specifi ed goods to the site. The builder needs to add the cost of 
handling and installing doors and frames. For this purpose, doors and door frames 
shall be enumerated stating their size and type of material.
Some doors may arrive at the site pre-hung, complete with fi nish hardware, 
while other doors must be hung at the site and fi tted with necessary hardware. These 
should be enumerated separately.
On most projects, a door schedule that provides information about the type and 
size of doors and frames will be included with the drawings. Details of the hardware 
are also usually specifi ed for each door. The estimator will fi nd these schedules in-
valuable in preparing door takeoffs because all that remains to be done is to count 
the number of doors required of each type listed on the schedule. Sometimes even 
this information is provided on the schedule.
Measuring Notes—Windows
On some projects, subtrades may supply and install complete window units. How-
ever, on most housing projects, window and door components will be obtained from 
suppliers and then be installed on site by the general builder. To measure this work, 
individual windows shall be enumerated and fully described, including the rough 
opening sizes of the units.
Measuring Notes—Bathroom Accessories
Enumerate and fully describe the following items:
a. Shower curtain rods 
 
f.  Toilet roll holders
b. Soap dispenser units 
 
g. Towel dispensers
c. Grab bars and towel bars  
h. Waste receptacles
d. Mirrors  
 
 
i.  Medicine cabinets
e. Napkin dispensers 
 
j.  Coat hooks
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 
97
Measuring Notes—Finish Hardware
Finish hardware includes the following items that shall be enumerated and fully 
described:
a. Hinges (in sets of two hinges) 
g. Latch sets
b. Flush bolts 
h. Kick plates
c. Bumper plates 
i. Panic hardware
d. Deadlocks 
j. Push plates
e. Doorstops 
k. Pull bars
f. Lock sets 
l. Door closers
Example of Rough Carpentry Floor System Takeoff 
Figure 5.4a shows the takeoff for the rough carpentry fl oor system on this project.
Comments on the Floor System Takeoff Shown in Figure 5.4a
 
1. The rough carpentry takeoff begins at the foundations with the supports for 
the fl oor beam. The beam is supported by the concrete walls at the ends and 
by adjustable steel posts in the middle. These posts are commonly known as 
teleposts.
 
2. The fl oor beam consists of a 6" 3 10" parallam beam. This is a manufactured 
wood component2 that passes across the building. These beams are made by 
gluing together a number of thin boards to form a structural member bigger 
than the trees from which the boards were sawn. 
 
3. Engineered joists3 are used to support the fl oor sheathing. See Figure 5.5 for 
an illustration of a parallam beam and engineered joists.
 
4. The full length of the building is used for length of this beam even though the 
beam would stop short of the outside of the basement walls.
 
5. Floor joists are required at 16" on center. To determine the number of joists, 
divide the length of the fl oor by 1.33', round up to the nearest whole number, 
and then add the extra end joist. 
 
6. Double joists are required as shown on the fl oor-framing plan. 
 
7. Header joists are needed at the outside of the building running perpendicular 
to the joists (40' long). They are also required next to the stairs and landing. 
Again, this is shown on the fl oor-framing plan.
 
8. All lumber will be classifi ed as Structural Grade Light Framing on this proj-
ect so this does not have to be included in the takeoff descriptions.
 
9. A 4" 3 4" wood post is shown at each side of the basement stairs.
 
10. Floor sheathing extends across the whole fl oor area plus the future fi replace 
area. Note that there are no deductions for openings where the stairs are located.
 
11. The landing at the front entrance is to be constructed of the same materials 
as the fl oor system. There are suffi cient joist and sheathing material measured 
here for the landing.
Deck Construction 
  
12. The 2 3 8 joists for the deck are supported on one side by a 3-ply 2 3 8 beam 
and on the other side by a header attached to the outside of the basement wall.
2. See the Web Page Help Box at the end of this chapter for information about “parallam” beams on the 
Internet
3. See the Web Page Help Box at the end of this chapter for information about engineered joists on the Internet
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

98 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
DESCRIPTION
DIMENSIONS
TIMES
Length
Width
Height
Rough Carpentry
- Floor System
3" Dia. TELEPOSTS
3
-
-
-
3
No.
6 x 10 PARALLAM BEAM
40.00
-
-
40
LF
40.00 / 1.33 = 30 + 1
2 X 10 ENG. JOISTS
31
28.83
-
-
894
(Extension)
5
2.00
-
-
10
Fireplace: 4.50 / 1.33 = 4 +1
(Doubles)
2
16.75
-
-
34
2
14.75
-
-
30
By Stairs: 14'-1"
3
14.08
-
-
42
Less (4'-2")
2
9.92
-
-
20
9'-11"
(Headers)
2
40.00
-
-
80
2
9.08
-
-
18
6
3.33
-
-
20
1147
LF
4 x 4  WOOD POSTS
2
8.00
-
-
16
21
BM
¾" T & G  FLOOR SHEATHING
40.00
28.92
-
1157
(Fireplace)
4.50
2.00
-
9
1166
SF
Deck
2 x 8 IN BEAM
3
15.75
-
-
47
63
BM
2 x 8 JOISTS
13
8.00
-
-
104
(Headers)
2
16.00
-
-
32
15.75 / 1.33  = 12 + 1
136
181
BM
15.75
5.58
2 x 4 CEDAR DECKING
15.75
5.58
-
88
SF / 0.33  =
266 LF
3.00
1.67
40" HIGH CEDAR RAILING
27.67
-
-
28
LF
1.67
27.67
3'-7" WIDE CEDAR STEPS
1
-
-
-
1
No.
COMPRISING 2-TREADS 
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 1 of 10
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
Figure 5.4a 
Floor System Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 
99
 
13. The length of 2 3 4 boards required for decking is easily calculated by  dividing 
the area of the deck (88 SF) by the 4" center-to-center spacing of the boards 
(0.33 feet).
Canopy Over Entrance 
 
14. The height of the 6 3 6 posts is not clear from the drawings, but we can see 
that it is going to exceed the height of windows (G) that are 84" high. So 
8'-0" high posts are allowed for.
 
15. The canopy is taken to be the same size as the precast concrete step at the 
entrance. Although this is not dimensioned, the wall dimensions suggest that 
it is about 7'-0" long and its width is about half this (3'-6").
 
16. The joists are attached to the building with joist hangers—these are enumerated.
Measuring Joists—Quick Method
It does not matter which way you run the joists for the takeoff of a fl oor system; 
you will generate roughly the same quantity whichever way they run. In fact, you 
can calculate the total length of joists required by simply dividing the fl oor area 
by the joist spacing and adding for headers and double joists. For example, in the 
house takeoff above the fl oor area is 1,162.2 square feet; dividing this value by the 
joist spacing (1.33') gives 874 feet of joists. Adding for double joists, headers, etc., 
takes this up to 1,127 feet, which is not too far off the more accurately calculated 
quantity of 1,147 feet. When waste factors are added, the difference may not be 
signifi cant.
Parallam Beam
Engineered Joists
Figure 5.5 
Parallam Beam and Engineered Joists
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
Example of Wall System Takeoff
Figure 5.4b, Figure 5.4c, and Figure 5.4d show the takeoff for the rough carpentry 
wall system on this project.
Comments on the Wall System Takeoff Shown in Figure 5.4b, 
Figure 5.4c, and Figure 5.4d
 
17. The perimeter of the outside face of the building is used to calculate the 
length of the exterior stud wall. This wall comprises three 2 3 6 plates, with 
studs spaced at 16" on center.
 
18. Two extra studs are allowed at each corner in the wall, at the intersection of 
two walls and at each opening. 
 
19. One-half inch oriented strand board (OSB) is specifi ed as wall sheathing on 
this job. Note that there are no deductions from the total area for window or 
door openings.
 
20. 2 3 10 lintels are specifi ed for openings in the exterior walls. The length of 
these lintels is equal to the width of the rough opening plus 3".
 
21. A 2 3 4 stud wall is shown on the inside of the concrete basement walls and 
to the sides of the basement stairs. Three plates are measured for this wall. 
The wall length is obtained by dividing the total length of the plates by 3; this 
length is then divided by 16" to arrive at the number of studs. Again, extra 
studs are added for corners and openings in this wall.  
 
22. Interior main fl oor: non-load–bearing partitions may have just two plates 
but three plates have been allowed because many builders like partitions 
to match the exterior walls; this allows them to use the same standard stud 
length for all walls.
 
23. Plates for partitions are measured without deductions for door openings.
 
24. There are so many interior partitions on the main fl oor that a systematic 
approach is needed to ensure that all walls are included in the takeoff. The 
technique used here is to consider fi rst the walls that run left to right (L-R) 
starting at the top of the drawing, then the walls that run from top to bot-
tom (T-B) starting at the left of the drawing. It is a good idea to highlight the 
lengths of the walls as they are measured to keep track of progress and ensure 
all partition walls have been accounted for.
 
25. The number of studs for these partitions is calculated as before with extra 
studs added for corners/intersections and openings.
 
26. A 2 3 6 stud wall is called for between the two bathrooms.
 
27. A single 2 3 4 lintel is measured for each of the openings in these non-load–
bearing partitions.
Counting Studs—Quick Method
Calculating the number of studs required for wall is always an approximation be-
cause there are many places where an extra stud may be added and places where one 
can be eliminated. A quick way to calculate, at least roughly, the number of studs 
required for a wall without assessing the number of extras required is to allow one 
stud every foot when the stud spacing is 16". In house takeoff above this method 
would generate 142 of the 2 3 6 studs, where the accurate calculation came to a 
total of 167. Here again, when waste factors are added, the difference may not be 
signifi cant.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 
101
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 2 of 10
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
 
 
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Canopy Over Entrance
6 x 6 8' POSTS 
 
2 
- 
- 
- 
2 
No.
2 x 10 JOISTS 
 
7 
3.50 
- 
- 
25 
 
 
 
(Headers) 
2 
7.00 
- 
- 
14
7.00 / 1.33 = 6 + 1 = 7 
 
 
 
 
 
39
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
BM
2 x 10 JOIST HANGERS 
7 
- 
- 
- 
7 
No.
Wall System
- Main Floor - Exterior
 
80.00
 
57.66
 137.66 
Outside Wall Perimeter
2 x 6 PLATES 
 
3 
137.66 
- 
- 
413
 
 
 
(Chimney) 
3 
8.50 
- 
- 
26
 
4.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
438 
BM
 
4.50
 
8.50
137.66 / 1.33 = 106
8.5 / 1.33 = 6 + 1
2 x 6 STUDS 
 
106 
- 
- 
- 
106
 
 
 
(Extras) 
2 x 25 
- 
- 
- 
50
 
 
 
(Chimney) 
7 
- 
- 
- 
7
 
 
 
(Extras) 
2 x 2 
- 
- 
- 
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
167 
No.
1/2" OSB WALL SHEATHING 
 
137.66 
- 
8.00 
1101
 
 
 
 
 
8.50 
- 
8.00 
68
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1169 
SF
 
 
 
2 x 2.00
2 x 40.00
2 x 28.83
Figure 5.4b 
Wall System Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

102 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
Figure 5.4c 
Wall System Takeoff
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 3 of 10
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Wall System (Cont’d)
2 x 10 LINTELS 
(Door 1) 
2 
5.83 
 
 
12
 
 
 
(Door 2) 
2 
5.25 
 
 
11
 
5'-4" 
 
(Windows B) 
2 
3.92 
 
 
8
 
+  3" 
 
(Windows C) 
3 x 2 
5.58 
 
 
33
 
5'-7" 
 
(Windows D) 
2 
7.17 
 
 
14
 
6'-11" 
 
(Windows E) 
2 
3.00 
 
 
6
 
+  3" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72
 
7'-2" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120 
BM
 
2'-9"
 
+  3"
 
3'-0"
Interior Basement
2 x 4 PLATES 
 
 
3 
135.68 
 
 
407
 
 
 
(Side of Stairs) 
2 x 3 
9.91 
 
 
59
 
79.34 
14.08 
 
3 
3.33 
 
 
10
 
56.34 
–4.17 
 
 
 
 
 
476
 135.68 
9.91 
 
 
 
 
 
318 
BM
2 x 4 STUDS 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
141 
No.
 
158.83  / 1.33 = 119.4
 
corners 2 x 6 
= 
12
 openings 2 x 5 
= 
10
 
  
 
141.4
2 x 10 LINTELS  
(Windows F) 
4 
3.43 
 
 
14
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
BM
2 x 4 LINTELS  
(Door 6) 
2 
3.08 
 
 
6
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
BM
2 x 39.67 =
2 x 28.17 =
5'-7"
+  3"
5'-10"
5'-0"
+  3"
5'-3"
3'-8"
+  3"
3'-11"
476 / 3 =
3.08
0.25
3.43
2.83
0.25
3.08
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 
103
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 4 of 10
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Wall System (Cont’d)
Interior Main Floor
2 x 4 PLATES  
(L - R) 
 
12.08 
 
 
12
 
 
 
 
2 
3.25 
 
 
7 
 
2.33 
 
 
 
2.92 
 
 
3
 
8.75 
 
 
 
1.75 
 
 
2
 
3.33 
 
 
 
17.92 
 
 
18
 
6.67 
 
 
 
6.67 
 
 
7
 
21.08 
 
 
 
21.08 
 
 
21
 
 
 
 
 
2.33 
 
 
2
 
 
 
(T - B) 
 
8.25 
 
 
8
 
 
 
 
2 
15.34 
 
 
31
 
 
 
 
 
3.00 
 
 
3
 
 
 
 
 
1.67 
 
 
2
 
 
 
 
 
2.17 
 
 
2
 
 
 
 
2 
2.42 
 
 
5
 
 
 
 
 
9.42 
 
 
9
 
 
 
 
3 
10.17 
 
 
31
 162.0 / 1.33 = 
122 
 
 
 
 
3 x 
162
 
23 x 2 = 
46 
 
 
 
 
= 
485
 
12 x 2 = 
24 
 
 
 
 
 
324 
BM
 
 
192
2 x 4 STUDS 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
192 
No.
2 x 6 PLATES 
 
 
3 
4.67 
 
 
14 
BM
2 x 6 STUDS 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5 
No.
4 + 1 = 5
2 x 4 LINTELS  
(Door 3) 
2 
2.58 
 
 
5
 
  
 
(Door 4) 
4 
2.75 
 
 
11
 
  
 
(Bifold 7) 
 
2.25 
 
 
2
 
  
 
(Bifold 8) 
3 
4.25 
 
 
13
 
  
 
(Bifold 9) 
 
3.25 
 
 
3
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
LF = 23 BM
7.58
10.34
17.92
13.67
1.67
15.34
Corners
Openings
1.75
2.92
4.67
2.33
0.25
2.58
4.67 / 1.33 =
Figure 5.4d 
Wall System Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

104 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 5 of 10
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Roof System
 
 
 
 
40.0 / 2 = 20 + 1 – 2
 
= 19
“KING POST” TRUSSES 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
19 
No.
28'-10" SPAN
GABLE ENDS 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2 
 No.
1/2" WALL SHEATHING 
 
2 x 1/2 
32.83 
- 
5.50 
181 
SF
 
28.83
 
4.00
 
32.83
1 x 3 RIBBONS  
 
5 
40.00 
 
 
200 
LF
2 x 4 RIDGE BLOCKING 
 
 
44.00 
 
 
29 
BM
 
14.42
 
2.00
 
16.42
 
5.47
5.47 x   10 = 17.30
2 x 4 BARGE RAFTERS 
 
4 
17.30 
 
 
69
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
BM
9 + 1 = 10
2 x 4 LOOKOUTS 
 
 
4 x 10 
4.00 
 
160
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
107 
BM
2 x 6 ROUGH FASCIA 
 
2 
44.00 
 
 
88 
BM
ROOF SADDLE 2'-3" LONG 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
(Behind Chimney)
Overhangs
28.83 / 2 =
Overhang
/ 3 =
17.3 / 2.0 =
Figure 5.4e 
Roof System Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 
105
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 6 of 10
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
 
 
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Roof System (Cont’d)
 
 
 
 
2 x 4 CEILING BLOCKING 
 
 
137.66 
 
 
92 
BM
1/2" OSB ROOF SHEATHING  
2 
44.00 
17.30 
 
1522 
SF
Eaves
VENTED ALUM. SOFFIT 
 
2 
40.00 
2.00 
 
160
 
 
 
(Sloped) 
4 
17.30 
2.00 
 
138
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
298 
SF
ALUM. “J” MOULD 
 
2 
40.00 
 
 
80
 
 
 
 
4 
17.30 
 
 
69
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
149 
LF
ALUM. FASCIA 6" HIGH 
 
2 
44.00 
 
 
88
 
 
 
 
4 
17.30 
 
 
69
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
157 
LF
Stairs
3'-4" WIDE STAIR w. 11-RISERS 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
DITTO w. 3-RISERS 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
BASEMENT HANDRAIL 
 
 
12.00 
 
 
12.00 
LF
WOOD RAILINGS 40" HIGH 
 
 
9.33 
 
 
9.00 
LF
 
 
3.33
6.00
9.33
 
 
 
Figure 5.4f 
Roof System Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

106 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
Example of Roof System Takeoff
Figure 5.4e and Figure 5.4f show the takeoff for the rough carpentry roof system on 
this project.
Comments on the Roof System Takeoff Shown in Figure 5.4e and Figure 5.4f
 
28. The number of trusses required is calculated in a similar manner to joists; 
the length of the building is divided by the truss spacing plus one for the end 
truss, but two trusses are deducted since gable ends will be substituted for 
these.
 
29. Wall sheathing is measured to the gable ends.
 
30. The 1 3 3 ribbons are not shown on the drawings; they are attached, along 
the length of the roof, to the truss members that exceed 6'-0" long to perform 
the same function as bridging.
 
31. Ridge blocking is measured along the ridge of the trusses plus the width of 
the overhang outside of the gables. 
 
32. The length of the barge rafter is equal to the slope length of the roof. This 
length can be determined using the slope ratio of the roof. With a 1:3 slope, 
the slope length (hypoteneuse) is the square root of 10, times the roof height; 
see the sketch in Figure 5.6.
 
33. See Figure 5.6 and Figure 5.7 for details of the ridge blocking, barge rafters, 
lookouts, and ceiling blocking.
 
34. The rough fascia is attached to the tails of the trusses and the bottom ends of 
the barge rafters.
 
35. See Figure 5.8 for details of the eaves.
With a 1:3 slope
the slope length is
  10 x roof height
End Wall of House
Lookout
Locations
3
1
Gable End
Section on
Figure 5.7
2'-0"
2 x 4 Barge Rafter
2 x 6
Rough
Fascia
1 : Roof Height
3
10
Figure 5.6 
Gable End to Roof
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 
107
Roof Sheathing
Truss Tail
Rough Fascia
Aluminum Fascia
Aluminum Soffit
“J” Mould
1/2" Wall Sheathing
2 x 6 Studs
Figure 5.8 
Detail at Eaves
Truss
2 x 4 Ridge
Blocking
2'-0"
2'-0"
2 x 4 Barge
Rafter
2 x 4 Lookouts
Gable End
2 x 6 Rough
Fascia
2 x 6 Stud Wall
2 x 6 Ceiling
Blocking
Figure 5.7 
Section Through Roof Gable
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

108 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
Example of Finish Carpentry Takeoff
Figure 5.4g, Figure 5.4h, Figure 5.4i, and Figure 5.4j show the takeoff for the rough 
carpentry wall system on this project.
Comments on the Finish Carpentry Takeoff Shown in Figure 5.4g, Figure 5.4h, 
Figure 5.4i, and Figure 5.4j
 
36. The stairs do not have to be measured in detail; they will be obtained prefab-
ricated for installation.
 
37. The length of the 12-foot handrail is scaled from the plans.
 
38. Minimal details are included in the takeoff descriptions of doors, hardware, 
and windows; this allows the takeoff to proceed without having to constantly 
check on the different item specifi cations. At this stage there is no need, for 
instance, to ascertain the precise type of interior doors required when they 
are all to be of the same type. Specifi c requirements can be verifi ed when 
these items are priced.
 
39. Doors will be priced as complete units so it is not necessary to take off door-
frames, trim, and door stops since the full door price will include all of these 
items.
 
40. Note that the quantity of hinges is given in pairs while the other items of 
hardware are enumerated.
 
41. The length of baseboard is determined by taking two times the overall length 
plus two times the overall width of all rooms regardless of shape. Note that 
closets are considered to be separate rooms, and no deductions are made for 
door openings.
 
42. In the baseboard length calculation, the dimensions indicated on the draw-
ings are used without adjustments for wall thicknesses, etc. It is not necessary 
to calculate the precise length of each piece of baseboard because the time 
taken to do this is not justifi ed by the cost of the item.
Example of a Dormer Roof System Takeoff
Figure 5.9a and Figure 5.9b show the drawings of a roof system that incorporates 
two dormer windows.
Figure 5.10a and Figure 5.10b show the takeoff for the dormer roof system.
Comments on the Dormer Roof System Takeoff
 
1. The number of rafters required on one side of this roof is calculated in a simi-
lar manner to joists: the length of the building is divided by the rafter spacing 
(16") plus one for the end rafter, but two rafters are deducted as gable ends 
will replace the end rafters.
 
2. Given that the roof has a 12:12 slope, the rise and the run are both equal to 
10'-0" plus 2'-0" for the overhang that gives 12'-0". You can then use the 
Pythagoras formula to calculate the diagonal joist length. 
 
3. Double rafters are added to the sides of the dormers, but there is no adjust-
ment for the six rafters that have to be cut at the dormers. The cut pieces are 
considered to be just waste.
 
4. We are assuming the use of prefabricated gage ends for this roof, but sheath-
ing to the gables is still measured.
 
5. Measuring the ridge, ceiling joists, collar ties, and rough fascia is straightforward.
 
6. The width of the roof sheathing is equal to the length of the joists that was 
calculated earlier. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 
109
 
7. Stud walls are located about half way down the rafter, so they will be 
 approximately half the height of the roof: this gives 5'-0" for their height.
 
8. 2 3 8 Headers are required at the top and bottom of the dormer openings.
 
9. There are also 2 3 4 stud walls to the sides of the dormers.
 
10. The 2 3 4 rafters are to the dormer roof.
 
11. Sheathing is required to the dormer roofs, the dormer sides, and the triangles 
(gables) outside the dormer rafters. 
Figure 5.4g 
Finish Carpentry Takeoff
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 7 of 10
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Finish Carpentry
Doors
 
 
3'-0" x 6'-8" EXTR. DOOR 
(1) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
C/W 12" WIDE SIDELIGHTS
5'-0" x 6'-8" PATIO DOOR 
(2) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
2'-4" x 6'-8" INTR. DOOR 
(3) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2 
No.
2'-6" x 6'-8" INTR. DOOR 
(4) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
4 
No.
2'-10" x 6'-8" INTR. DOOR 
(6) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
2'-0" x 6'-8" BIFOLD 
(7) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
4'-0" x 6'-8" BIFOLD 
(8) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3 
No.
3'-0" x 6'-8" BIFOLD 
(9) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
ATTIC ACCESS HATCH 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
Door Hardware
4" BUTT HINGES 
(1) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
11/2 
Pr
31/2" BUTT HINGES 
(3, 4, 6) 
7 
- 
- 
- 
7 
Pr
KEY-IN-KNOB LOCKSET 
(1) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
DEAD BOLTS 
 
(1) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2 
No.
PASSAGE SETS  
(4) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
4 
No.
PRIVACY SETS  
(3, 6) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3 
No.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

110 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 8 of 10
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
 
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS 
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height 
Finish Carpentry (Cont’d) 
Windows 
 
 
 
36" x 50" F / 36" x 15" A 
(B) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No. 
 
27" x 30" A - F 
 
(C) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3 
No. 
 
36" x 30" A - F 
 
(D) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No. 
 
27" x 22" A 
 
(E) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No. 
 
36" x 24" A 
 
(F) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
4 
No. 
 
 
1" x 2" WINDOW TRIM 
(B) 
2 
3.50 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
6.00 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
(C) 
2 
5.33 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
2 
3.08 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(D) 
2 
6.92 
 
 
14 
 
 
 
 
2 
3.08 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(E) 
2 
2.75 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
2 
2.42 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
(Front Door) 
 
5.58 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
2 
7.00 
 
 
14 
 
 
 
(Patio Door) 
 
5.25 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
2 
6.92 
 
 
14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
105 
LF 
Cabinets 
 
2' x 3' FLOOR MOUNTED 
 
 
8.00 
 
 
8.00 
C/W COUNTERTOP 
 
 
4.00 
 
 
4.00 
 
 
 
 
 
3.33 
 
 
3.33 
 
 
 
 
2 
3.00 
 
 
6.00 
 
 
 
 
 
3.33 
 
 
3.33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24.66 
LF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.4h 
Finish Carpentry Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 
111
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 9 of 10
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Cabinets (Cont’d)
 
 
1' x 2'-8" WALL MOUNTED 
 
 
1.75
 
 
 
 
 
2.00
 
 
 
 
 
4.75
 
 
 
 
 
3.25
 
 
 
 
 
4.00
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.75 
LF
2' x 2'-6" BATHROOM VANITY  
 
5.33
 
 
 
 
 
3.33
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.66 
LF
1'-3" WIDE CLOSET SHELVES 
3 
6.00 
- 
- 
18.00
 
 
 
 
 
4.00 
- 
- 
4.00
 
 
 
(Linen) 
4 
2.25 
- 
- 
9.00
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31.00 
LF
ADJUSTABLE CLOSET RODS  
- 
- 
- 
- 
4 
No.
Bathroom Accessories
TOILET ROLL HOLDER 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2 
No.
5'-4" x 3' MIRROR 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
MEDICINE CABINET 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2 
No.
SHOWER ROD  
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
Appliances 
 
DISHWASHER  
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
FRIDGE 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
RANGE 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
Figure 5.4i 
Finish Carpentry Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

112 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
Figure 5.4j 
Finish Carpentry Takeoff
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 10 of 10
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Finish Carpentry (Cont’d)
 
 
1" x 3" BASEBOARD 
 
2 
33.33 
- 
- 
67
 
 (Living/Dining/Entrance) 
2 
28.00 
- 
- 
56
 
 
 
 
2 
8.25 
- 
- 
17
 
 
 
(Lin Closet) 
2 
2.92 
- 
- 
6
 
 
 
 
2 
2.17 
- 
- 
4
 
 
 (Front Ent Closet) 
2 
2.33 
- 
- 
5
 
 
 
 
2 
4.00 
- 
- 
8
 
 
 
(Ensuite) 
2 
7.58 
- 
- 
15
 
 
 
 
2 
5.25 
- 
- 
11
 
 
 
(Bathroom) 
2 
7.58 
- 
- 
15
 
 
 
 
2 
9.33 
- 
- 
19
 
 
 
(M Bed) 
2 
10.33 
- 
- 
21
 
 
 
 
2 
13.82 
- 
- 
28
 
 
 
(3-Closets) 
6 
6.67 
- 
- 
40
 
 
 
 
6 
2.42 
- 
- 
15
 
 
 
(Bed 2) 
2 
10.00 
- 
- 
20
 
 
 
 
2 
10.17 
- 
- 
20
 
 
 
(Bed 3) 
2 
8.75 
- 
- 
18
 
 
 
 
2 
10.17 
- 
- 
20
 
 
 
(Den) 
2 
12.08 
- 
- 
24
 
 
 
 
2 
9.42 
- 
- 
19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
446 
LF
PLUMBING Rough in and Finish 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
HEATING Rough in and Finish  
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
ELECTRICAL Rough in and Finish 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 40.00
 (6.67)
 33.33
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 
113
Figure 5.9a 
Dormer Roof Plan
Gable End
1 × 8 Valley Rafter
Double 2 × 8 Headers
Cripple Common Rafter
40'-0"
5'-4"
20'-0"
2'-0"
3'-0"
5'-0"
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

114 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
Figure 5.9b 
Dormer Roof Section
1'-4"
5'-8"
2'-0"
2'-0"
8'-0"
12
12
2 × 4 Dormer Rafters
2 × 4 Dormer Rafter
Plate
2 × 4 Dormer Studs
2 × 8 Rough
Fascia
2 × 4 Stud Walls 
2 × 10 Ridge Board 
2 × 6 Dormer Ridge
2 × 6 Common Rafters @ 16" o.c.
3/8" Roof Sheathing (not shown)
2 × 4 Collar Ties 
2 × 8 Ceiling Joists
4 × 4 Cant
Blocking
Double 2 × 4 Headers
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 
115
Figure 5.10a 
Dormer Roof System Takeoff
DESCRIPTION
  DIMENSIONS
TIMES Length
Width
Height
Roof System
40.0 / 1.33 = 30 + 1 - 2
                    = 29
2 x 6 RAFTERS
2 x 29
16.97
-
-
984
(Doubles)
4
16.97
-
-
68
2 X 122 = 288
1052 BM
 288 = 16.97
GABLE ENDS - 20' SPAN
-
-
-
-
2 No.
" ROOF SHEATHING
" WALL SHEATHING
 2 x 
3/8
3/8
½
24.00
-
10.00
240 SF
(To Gables)
2 x 10 RIDGE
40.00
-
-
40
67 BM
2 x 8 CEILING JOISTS
29
22.00
-
-
638
851 BM
2 x 4 COLLAR TIES
29
6.00
-
-
174
232 BM
2 x 8 ROUGH FASCIA
2
40.00
-
-
80
107 BM
2
40.00
16.97
-
1358 SF
2 x 4 PLATES
2 x 2
40.00
-
-
160
(Stud Walls)
107 BM
4 x 4 CANT BLOCKING
2
40.00
-
-
80
53 BM
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 
1 of 2
JOB:         Dormer Roof Example  
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: DJP 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

116 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
Figure 5.10b 
Dormer Roof System Takeoff
DESCRIPTION
  DIMENSIONS
TIMES
Length
Width
Height
2 x 4 STUDS
2 x 31
5.00
-
-
310
207 BM
40'/1.33' = 30 + 1 = 31
DORMER  FRAMING
2 x 8 HEADERS
2 x 2 
5.33
-
-
21
2 x 2 
2.67
-
-
11
2 x 2.67 2= 14.26
32
 14.26 = 3.78 on plan
43 BM
1.33 2 + 3.78 2 = 16.07
 16.07 = 4
2 x 2 
4.00
-
-
16
21 BM
2 x 4 STUDS
2 x 8 VALLEY
2 x 2 
5.67
-
-
23
2 x 2 
4.67
-
-
19
2 x 2 
3.67
-
-
15
56
37 BM
2 x 4 PLATES
2 x 2 
3.00
12
8 BM
2 x 4 RAFTERS
2 x 8 
3.00
48
1.33 2 + 2.67 2 = 8.91 
2 x 2 
1.50
6
 8.91 = 3
54
36 BM
2 x 6 RIDGE
2
5.67
11 BM
3/8" ROOF SHEATHING
2 x 2 
5.67
3.00
68 SF
3/8" WALL SHEATHING
 4 x ½
3.00
-
5.67
34
(Dormer Gable)  
 2 x ½
5.33
-
1.33
7
41 SF
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 
2 of 2
JOB:         Dormer Roof Example  
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: DJP 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK 
117
SUMMARY
■ A thorough knowledge of carpentry construction is required to prepare a 
detailed estimate of this trade.  This is particularly true for estimating wood 
frame structures where carpentry details are often lacking.
■ Lumber is usually described according to its nominal size, which is larger 
than the actual dressed size of lumber.
■ The unit of measure of lumber is generally the board measure (BM).
■ To calculate the BM of a piece of lumber, multiply the length of the piece in 
feet by the nominal width and thickness of the piece in inches, and then divide 
by 12.
■ Items of lumber are classifi ed in terms of:
• Dimension
• Dressing
• Grade
• Species
■ Framing lumber is further classifi ed in terms of use, for example, plates, joists, 
lintels, etc.
■ Trusses and rafters are described and enumerated.
■ Sheathing and siding is measured in square feet or square meters.
■ Items of fi nish carpentry are generally classifi ed and measured separately ac-
cording to materials, size, and method of fi xing.
■ Cabinets are described and enumerated; alternatively, units are measured in 
linear feet describing type and size of unit.
■ Doors and windows are enumerated stating type and size of each. This infor-
mation is usually obtainable from door and window schedules provided on 
the drawings.
■ Bathroom accessories are enumerated and fully described in the takeoff process.
■ Finish hardware is enumerated and fully described in the takeoff.
■ Exterior and interior fi nishes are usually subcontracted, but the builder’s esti-
mator should be able to takeoff and price this work if required.
■ A takeoff of rough carpentry and fi nish carpentry work for a house project is 
demonstrated.
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
 Information  
Web Page Address
 
■ Carpentry details—There are many books  
http://openlibrary.org/books/
and online resources illustrating carpentry  
OL2876275M/Basic_carpentry_
details; this is just one of them. 
illustrated
 
■ Parallam Beams 
 http://www.usglu-lam.com/
products/parallambeams/
 
■ Engineered Joists 
 http://www.usglu-lam.com/
products/ijoist/
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. Why is it desirable for the estimator of carpentry work to have a thorough 
knowledge of carpentry construction?
 2. Describe how lumber is differentiated in the takeoff.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

118 
CHAPTER 5—MEASURING CARPENTRY WORK
 3. How are wallboards measured?
 4. List six framing classifi cations that have to be measured separately in a takeoff.
  5. Describe how air barriers are measured.
 6. What is a “parallam” beam?
 7. Describe a quick method of calculating the length of decking required for a 
given area of deck.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
 1. Calculate the board measure amounts in Figure 5.11.
 2. If a fl oor measured 20'-0" 3 31'-0", how many joists at 16" on center would be 
required if they spanned the 20'-0" dimension?
 3. Calculate the length of barge rafters from the following data:
 
 
Case 1 
Case 2 
Case 3 
Case 4
 
Roof slope 
2 : 12 
3 : 12 
4 : 12 
6 : 12
 
Building width 
24'-0" 
29'-0" 
30'-0" 
36'-0"
 
Eaves overhang 
 2'-0" 
2'-6" 
 3'-0" 
4'-0"
 4. Take off all the roof system components (except for dormers) shown in Fig-
ure 5.9a and Figure 5.9b for a building of dimensions 50'-0" 3 24'-0" measured 
to the outside of the exterior walls.
Takeoff Item 
Board Measure
100 pieces of 1 x 3 - feet long
25 pieces of 1 x 6 - 6 feet long
11 pieces of 1 x 8 - 10 feet long
60 pieces of 2 x 3 - 8 feet long
36 pieces of 2 x 4 - 12 feet long
19 pieces of 2 x 6 - 10 feet long
90 pieces of 3 x 3 - 12 feet long
14 pieces of 4 x 4 - 18 feet long
22 pieces of 4 x 10 - 16 feet long
Figure 5.11 
Board Measure Calculations
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

119
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be 
able to:
■ Explain how masonry work and fi nishes are measured in a takeoff.
■  Measure masonry items, exterior, and interior fi nishes from drawings and 
specifi cations.
■ Explain how masonry items and fi nishes are classifi ed in the takeoff process.
■ Describe the main factors affecting the measurement of brick masonry.
■  Use conversion factors to calculate quantities of bricks, blocks, and  masonry 
mortar.
■  Given the size of masonry units and the thickness of the mortar joints between 
them, calculate the value of conversion factors to determine the number of bricks/
blocks and the volume of mortar.
■  Complete a takeoff of masonry work, exterior, and interior fi nishes for a residen-
tial project.
KEY TERMS 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
6
MEASURING 
MASONRY AND FINISHES
Introduction
Masonry work includes construction with clay bricks, concrete bricks and blocks, 
clay tiles, natural and artifi cial stone. Subcontractors usually undertake masonry 
work; they supply materials, equipment, and the labor required to complete the 
work of this trade. Here we will deal with the measurement of standard clay brick 
brick-on-edge course
ladder reinforcement
net in place
R-value
scope of work
soldier course
standard bricks
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

120 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES
and concrete block masonry. While masonry work that involves products other than 
standard bricks and concrete blocks may be measured in a similar fashion to that 
described herein, this specialized work is beyond the scope of this text.
As we have previously stated regarding other trades, a thorough knowledge of ma-
sonry construction is a defi nite asset when taking off the work in this trade. Particular 
attention has to be paid to items such as masonry bond and mortar joint treatment 
that have signifi cant effect upon material usage, waste factors, and mortar consump-
tion. A minimum knowledge of terminology is required before masonry requirements 
can be properly interpreted to determine such items as the type of units required and 
their requisite features, together with aspects of the numerous accessories associated 
with masonry work. We have not attempted to explore any of the many features of 
masonry construction practices in this text. The student is advised to consult and 
study one or more of the many texts that deal with this specifi c subject.
Measuring Masonry Work
In accordance with the general principles followed in the measurement of the work 
of other trades, masonry work is measured net in place, and the necessary allowances 
for waste and breakage are considered later in the estimating process when this work 
is priced. The units of measurement for masonry are generally number of masonry 
pieces such as concrete blocks or, in the case of bricks, the number of thousands of 
clay bricks. Calculating the number of masonry units involves a two-stage process: 
 
1. The area of masonry is measured. 
 
2. A standard factor is applied to determine the number of masonry units re-
quired for area measured.
A number of other items associated with unit masonry which may or may not 
be detailed or noted on the drawings also have to be measured, including mortar, 
wire ladder reinforcement to joints, metal ties used between walls, and extra work 
and materials involved in control joists, sills, lintels, and arches. All of these items 
are considered in the masonry takeoff as detailed in the following text. Loose and 
rigid insulation to masonry is also included in this work, and in some places the ma-
sonry trade includes membrane barriers, insulation, and similar materials behind 
masonry where the masonry is the last work installed. 
Estimators need to be familiar with the scope of work in their geographical loca-
tion. This defi nes what items the masonry contractor has to include and what items 
of work are excluded from their trade. The masonry estimator will then be able to 
takeoff and price everything that is included in the masonry trade on the project. 
The knowledge of scope is essential to the person estimating the masonry work for 
a specialized masonry trade contractor; it is also valuable to the builder’s estimator 
whose job it is to ensure that all the work of the project is included in the total price, 
whether the work is to be performed by the masonry trade or someone else. 
The builder estimator’s role in handling problems associated with a subtrade’s 
scope of work is discussed in Chapter 11. The builder’s estimator will, however, 
need to address items of work that are connected with the masonry trade but which 
are specifi cally excluded from the subtrade quote. If these items of work are not to 
be included as part of the subtrade’s work, their cost will have to be estimated with 
the builder’s work. 
A typical example of the kind of work item that is related to masonry work but 
may not be included in the quote from a subtrade is insulation material. Even if rigid 
insulation is attached to the blockwork, the masonry subtrade may not supply or 
install it. Therefore, it would have to be measured and priced separately.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES 
121
Brick Masonry
Bricks are generally made in large batches in a manufacturing plant where a mixture 
of clay and water is fi rst dried, then molded, and lastly fi red to produce the fi nished 
product. They can also be made of different materials, manufactured by different 
methods, and also, they can be used in many different ways in the construction 
process. All of these factors will infl uence the price of the masonry, but the main fac-
tors affecting the measurement of brick masonry are the size of the brick units, the 
size of the joints between bricks, the wall thickness, and the pattern of brick bond 
utilized. Bricks are available in a large number of different sizes, but the Common 
Brick Manufacturers Association has adopted a standard size with the nominal di-
mensions of 2¼" by 33⁄4" by 8". Bricks of this size are referred to as standard bricks, 
and this is the brick size used in the takeoff examples that follow. 
All of the variables previously listed will also impact the measurement of the 
mortar needed for brick masonry. From the size of the bricks and the thickness of 
the mortar required, the amount of mortar per 100 square feet of wall can be readily 
calculated; examples are shown below. To avoid having to perform these calcula-
tions for all of the combinations of sizes involved, many estimators refer to texts that 
offer tables of factors to use in calculating numbers of masonry units and volumes of 
mortar per 100-square foot of wall area. For example, from Walker’s The Building 
Estimators Reference Book1, the amount of mortar required for the bricks previ-
ously described is specifi ed as 5.7 cubic feet per thousand bricks. Information about 
quantities of bricks per square foot and mortar requirements over a wide range of 
brick sizes is also available from brick manufacturers and from organizations such 
as the Brick Institute of America (BIA).
Sometimes designated courses of bricks are required to be laid in a different way 
than the rest of the courses in a wall. For example, a soldier course may be required 
above openings or a brick-on-edge course may be required at the sill of openings. 
These features are measured separately because the number of bricks per square foot 
of the special course may be different from the number of bricks per square foot of 
wall area generally.
Concrete Blocks
There are fewer variables to consider with concrete blocks than with clay bricks, 
but blocks do come in different sizes, and the thickness of joints between blocks 
can vary. See Figure 6.1 for standard block and lintel block sizes together with some 
architectural blocks for an 8-inch thick wall. 
Conversion Factors
As mentioned, tables are published in reference works that list quantities of bricks or 
blocks per square foot area of masonry. The number of “standard bricks” per square 
foot of wall for different wall thicknesses, joint thicknesses, and various bonds is 
given in Walker’s reference book which states, for instance, that a 4½-inch wall with 
3⁄8-inch brick joints and laid in running bond will have 6.67 bricks per square foot 
of wall area.
Tables also list the number of standard-sized concrete blocks and the amount of 
mortar required per 100 square feet of wall. From the same reference source cited, 
1. The Building Estimator’s Reference Book, published by Frank R. Walker Company, 28th. Edition, 
Chicago, 2006.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

122 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES
for a wall of 8-inch nominal thickness built with standard blocks of size 75⁄8 by 75⁄8 
by 155⁄8 inches and a joint thickness of 3⁄8 inches, the tables indicate that 112.5 blocks 
together with 6 cubic feet of mortar are required for 100 square feet of wall area.
Where non-standard size brick or block units are to be used, the estimator may 
have to calculate the conversion factors. So, if bricks of size 35⁄8 by 35⁄8 by 155⁄8  inches 
with 3⁄8-inch wide mortar joints, the conversion factor may be calculated in the fol-
lowing way:
The length of a brick is 155/8 plus a mortar joint (3/8) 5 16 inches
The height of a brick is 35/8 plus a mortar joint (3/8) 5 4 inches
So, the area of the face of a brick, including mortar joints, is 16 3 4 5 64 square 
inches
1 square foot (144 square inches) / 64 square inches 5 2.25
(Note: Only the dimensions of the face of the brick are required; the brick thick-
ness does not affect the calculation.)
Therefore, there are 21/4 bricks for each square foot of wall face.
Standard Blocks
Nominal Size 8 x 8 x 16
Lintel Blocks
Nominal Size 8 x 8 x 16
Splitface Block
Nominal Size 8 x 8 x 16
Rib Splitface Block
Nominal Size 8 x 8 x 16
75/8"
155/8"
75/8"
75/8"
75/8"
155/8"
Figure 6.1 
Concrete Blocks
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES 
123
For the volume of mortar per square foot of wall area, the volume of brick plus 
joints is calculated less the volume of brick per square foot of wall area. (Note: Here 
the brick thickness—35⁄8—does have to be taken into account.) 
EXAMPLE 6.1
Volume of brick 1 joints 
5 35⁄8 3 (35⁄8 1 3⁄8) 3 (155⁄8 1 3⁄8)
 
5 232 cubic inches/brick
And:  since 1 cu. foot 
5 1728 cubic inches
Volume of brick 1 joints  
5 232 / 1728
 
5 0.134 cubic feet/brick
Volume of brick alone 
5 35⁄8 3 35⁄8 3 155⁄8
 
5 205.23 cubic inches
Thus, 205.23 / 1728 
5 0.119 cubic feet/brick
Therefore, the volume of mortar 
5 0.134 2 0.119
 
5 0.015 cubic feet/brick
Hence, the volume of mortar per square foot of wall area 
 
5 0.015 3 2.25
 
5  0.035 cubic feet/square foot
This is equivalent to 0.129 cubic yards of mortar per 100 square feet of wall 
area. In practice, however, this mortar quantity will be too low because, in addition 
to mortar wasted and spilled, in the process of laying bricks some mortar is squeezed 
into the voids in the bricks and, sometimes, mortar is left to bulge from the joints. 
Therefore, the mortar factor could be increased by as much as 40 percent to allow 
for the additional quantity required. 
Measuring Notes—Masonry
 
1. Measure all masonry quantities “net in place” and do not deduct for open-
ings that are less than 10 square feet.
 
2. Masonry work includes scaffolding and hoisting.
 
3. Measure masonry work in the following categories:
 
a. Facings
 
b. Backing to facings
 
c. Walls and partitions
 
d. Furring to walls
 
e. Fire protection
 
4. Masonry work that is circular on plan is measured separately.
 
5. Describe cleaning of exposed masonry surfaces and measure in square feet.
 
6. Measure silicone treatment of masonry surfaces in square feet stating the 
number of coats required.
 
7.  Measure expansion joints or control joints in masonry in linear feet and fully 
describe these joints. Specify any required joint fi ller material (caulking) in 
the description of the joint system.
 
8. Measure mortar in cubic feet and provide details of any admixtures required.
 
9. Separately measure colored mortar where it is required.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

124 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES
 
10. Measure wire reinforcement in masonry joints in linear feet and fully de-
scribe. “Ladder” or “truss” reinforcement may be specifi ed; indicate which is 
required.
 
11. Enumerate anchor bolts, sleeves, brackets, and similar items that are built 
into masonry and fully describe these items. 
 
 (Note: Built-in metal components, such as anchor bolts, lintels, and similar 
items may be supplied and installed by the Masonry Trade; alternatively, they 
could be supplied by the Miscellaneous Metals subtrade and installed by the 
Masonry Contractor. Clarify which is the case in the takeoff.)
 
12. Measure building in lintels, sills, copings, fl ashings, and similar items in lin-
ear feet and fully describe the items involved. 
 
13. Enumerate weep holes where they are required to be formed using plastic 
inserts and suchlike. 
 
14. Measure rigid insulation to masonry work in square feet describing the type 
and thickness of material.
Brick Masonry
 
15. Enumerate bricks describing the type and dimensions of the bricks.
 
16. Separately measure bricks required to be laid in any other pattern than run-
ning bond, examples: soldier courses or brick-on-edge courses.
 
17. Enumerate and fully describe brick ties.
Concrete Block Masonry
 
18. Enumerate concrete block masonry units stating the type and size of blocks.
 
19. Separately enumerate special units required at corners, jambs, heads, sills, 
and other similar locations.
 
20. Measure in cubic yards and fully describe loose fi ll or foam insulation to 
blockwork cores.
 
21. Measure in cubic yards concrete in core fi lls and bond beams stating the 
strength and type of concrete to be used. 
 
22. Measure in linear feet reinforcing steel to core fi lls and bond beams stating 
the size and type of rebar to be used.
Trade rules in some locations require the subcontractor to supply reinforcing 
steel to the project to supply the rebar for the masonry work. The masonry subtrade 
or the builder, whomever is completing the masonry work, then installs this rebar. 
Example of Concrete Block Masonry Takeoff 
See Figure 6.2 for details of an alternative concrete block basement for the house, and 
see Figure 6.3 for the takeoff of an alternative concrete block basement for the house.
Comments on the Concrete Block Masonry Takeoff
 
1. The concrete footing is the same as that for the original concrete foundation 
design, so the footing concrete and forms takeoff remains the same as before.
 
2. For the number of concrete blocks for the wall, fi rst calculate the area of the 
wall, then multiply this area by 112.5 blocks per 100 square feet.
 
3. There are no deductions for windows or the drop landing since none of these 
openings exceeds 10 square feet.
 
4. Multiply the area of the wall by 6/100 to determine the cubic feet of mortar 
required for this concrete block wall.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES 
125
 
5. Six-inch wide truss type reinforcing is required in every second course of 
the blockwork. The length of this material can be quickly determined by 
dividing the area of the wall by the spacing of the reinforced courses, which 
is 16".
 
6. Lintel blocks are needed over the window openings. The width of each  window 
is 3'-0", and the lintel extends 28" wider than the opening (14" each side).  
This extension of the lintel provides support, and the length 28" was used to 
give a total of 64", which is exactly the length of four blocks (4 3 16" 5 64").
 
7. The lintel blocks are fi lled with concrete and reinforced with a single #4 size 
reinforcing rod.
Plan
40'-0"
28'-10"
8" Concrete Block Wall
8' - 0" High
16" x 8" Concrete Footing
Section A - A
A
A
Figure 6.2 
Alternative Concrete Block Foundation 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

126 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES
Example of Brickwork Takeoff 
Figure 6.4 and Figure 6.5 give details of an alternative exterior fi nish of brick facings 
to the front of the house. See Figure 6.6 for the takeoff of this brick facings exterior 
fi nish to the front of the house.
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 
1 of 1
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Concrete and Masonry Work
 
80.00
 
57.66
 137.66 
Outside Wall Perimeter 
 
 
 
(2.66) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 x 8 
2 x 8
 135.00 
Centerline of Wall 
 
 
 
 
Conc. 
Forms 
Forms
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L x W x D 
2 x L No. x 2 x (L+W)
CONC. FTGS. 
 
 
135.00 
1.33 
0.67 
120 
270 
-
 
 
 
(Pads) 
3 
2.67 
2.67 
0.67 
14 
- 
32
 
 
 
 
2 
2.00 
2.00 
0.67 
5 
- 
16
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
139 
270 
48
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
CY               
270
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
318 LF
8" CONC. BLOCK WALL 
 
 
135.00 
 
8.00 
1,080 
x 112.5/100 = 
1215 Blocks     
MORTAR  
 
 
- 
- 
- 
1,080 
x 6.00/100 = 
65 cu. ft.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 CY      
JOINT REINFORCING 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
1,080 
/ 1.33 = 
 
812 LF
(6" wide truss every 2nd course)
LINTEL BLOCKS 
 
4 
5.33 
 
 
21 
/ 1.33 = 
 
16 Blocks
Deduct 8" CONC. BLOCKS 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
< 16 > 
Blocks
CONC. IN BOND BEAMS 
 
4 
5.33 
0.50 
0.58 
6 
cu. ft.
#4 REBAR 
 
4 
5.33 
 
 
21 
LF 
2 x 40.00
2 x 28.83
4 x 0.67
Figure 6.3 
Alternative Masonry Foundation Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES 
127
Plan
40'-0"
Section A - A
A
A
3'-0"
41/2" Brick Facings
7'-0"
1'-10"
Figure 6.4 
Alternative Brick Exterior Finish
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

128 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES
4" x 4" Steel Angle
12" Wide Flashing
Figure 6.5 
Masonry Wall Details
Comments on Brickwork Takeoff
 
1. Figure 6.4 shows facing bricks are to be applied to the front left side of the 
house as shown on the sketches. The front width plus the two returns gives 
an overall brickwork length of 46'-0".
 
2. The net area of brickwork is required so all window openings are deducted 
(but any opening less than 10 square feet is ignored).
 
3. To calculate the number of bricks with a 3⁄8" mortar joint, multiply the wall 
area by the standard factors of 6.67 bricks per square foot.
 
4. The amount of mortar required for bricks with this joint thickness is 8.7 
cubic feet per 1,000-bricks.
 
5. Brick ties are spaced 2'-0" horizontally and 1'-4" vertically; the number of 
ties required is obtained by dividing the wall area by the product of the spac-
ing (2 3 1.33).
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES 
129
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 
1 of 1
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Brick Facings Alternate
 40.00 
7.00
 
6.00 
1.83
 46.00 
8.83 
 
 
 
 
FACING BRICKS 
 
 
46.00 
- 
8.83 
406 
 
 
 
(Windows) DDT 
3 
5.33 
- 
3.08 
(49) 
 
 
 
(Front Door) DDT 
 
9.17 
- 
6.67 
(61) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
296 
x 6.67 = 
1973 No.
MORTAR  
 
 
- 
- 
- 
1,973 
x 8.7 / 1000 
17  cu. ft.     
BRICK TIES 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
296 /(2 x 1.33) 
 = 
111 No.
(Spacing 24" x 16")
4" x 4" x 1/4" ANGLE 
 
 
46.00 
 
 
46
 
 
 
 
3 
7.33 
 
 
22
 
5.33 
9.17 
 
 
11.17 
 
 
11
 
2.00 
2.00 
 
 
 
 
 
79 
LF
 
7.33 
11.17
1/2" DRILLED ANCHORS 
 
24 
- 
- 
- 
24 
No.
46.00 / 2.00 = 23 + 1 = 24
12" WIDE FLASHING 
 
 
46.00 
 
 
 
46 
LF
WEEP HOLES 
 
 
17 
- 
- 
- 
17 
No.
46.00 / 3.00 = 16 + 1 = 17
 
   
 
2 x 3.00
2 x 1.00
Figure 6.6 
Alternative Brick Facings Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES
 
6. The steel angle lintel over the windows and the front entrance extends 1 foot 
on each side of the opening, so 2 feet is added to the opening width to give 
the length of lintel required.
 
7. The shelf angle supporting the full length of the brick wall is attached to the 
footing by means of drilled anchors into the concrete foundation wall. The 
number of these inserts is found by dividing the length of the angle by the spac-
ing of the inserts. See fi gure 6.5.
 
8. A 12" wide fl ashing is installed at the foot of the wall; this is the same length 
as the angle support at this location.
 
9. Weep holes at 4'-0" spacing are built into the lowest brick course which sits 
on top of the shelf angle. These allow water that seeps behind the facings to 
drain to the outside of the brickwork.
Measuring Exterior and Interior Finishes
Because there can be a large number of different items to take into account in the 
fi nishes to a building, the estimator needs to follow a systematic method of measur-
ing this work in order to prepare an accurate takeoff. The method adopted here for 
exterior fi nishes is to begin by considering what is required for the foundations, then 
for the exterior walls, followed by the roof. All of the foundation treatments and 
fi nishes are measured before moving on to the items related to the walls above grade; 
then, once this is completed, the roofi ng items are dealt with.
Measuring interior fi nishes begins by considering all the work associated with 
the fl oors, next the walls fi nishes and associated items are measured, and fi nally, 
fi nishes to ceilings are measured.
Measuring Notes—Exterior Finishes
Finishes Generally
 
1. Measure exterior and interior fi nishes in square feet.
 
2. Do not deduct for openings less than 40 square feet.
Damp Proofi ng and Waterproofi ng 
 
3. Measure damp proofi ng and waterproofi ng separately in the following cat-
egories stating the material to which it is applied:
 
a. Damp proofi ng
 
b. Built-up bituminous waterproofi ng
 
c. Sheet waterproofi ng
 
d. Fluid applied waterproofi ng
 
e. Water repellants
 
4. Separately measure the protective covering.
 
5.  Measure grooves, chases, and similar items in linear feet.
Thermal Protection 
 
6. Measure thermal protection in the following categories stating the resistance 
of the material to heat fl ow (the R-value of the material):
 
a. Building insulation
 
b. Roof and deck insulation
 
c. Exterior insulation and fi nish systems
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES 
131
 
d. Vapor barriers
 
e. Air barriers (building wrap)
 
7. Describe and measure separately insulation installed by blowing into place.
Siding 
 
8. Measure siding in the following categories stating the material to which it is 
applied:
 
a. Aluminum siding
 
b. Wood and plywood siding
 
c. Vinyl siding
 
d. Composite wall panels
 
e. Fiber-reinforced cementitious panels
 
f. Exterior wall assemblies
Roofi ng 
 
9. Measure roofi ng in the following categories stating the material to which it 
is applied:
 
a. Manufactured roof panels
 
b. Plastic roof panels
 
c. Manufactured composite roof panels
 
d. Asphalt singles
 
e. Wood shakes
 
f. Roof tiles
 
g. Built-up bituminous roofi ng
 
h. Single membrane roofi ng
 
10. Separately describe the component parts of roof systems including: sheath-
ing, paper, primer, vapor barrier, underlayment, insulation, felt, asphalt, 
gravel, etc. 
Flashings and Sheet Metal 
 
11. Measure fl ashings and sheet metal in linear feet stating the width in the fol-
lowing categories:
 
a. Sheet metal roofi ng
 
b. Sheet metal fl ashings
 
c. Plastic fl ashings
 
12. Separately measure gutters, valleys, hips, and underlayment strips.
Roof Specialties and Accessories 
 
13. Measure roof specialties and accessories in linear feet in the following 
categories:
 
a. Eaves trough and gutters
 
b. Down spouts
 
14. Describe and enumerate roof scuppers.
 
15. Describe and enumerate plash pads.
 
16. Measure roof pavers in square feet.
 
17. Describe and enumerate roof hatches.
Example of Exterior Finishes Takeoff
Figure 6.7a and Figure 6.7b show the takeoff for the exterior fi nishes takeoff.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

132 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 
1 of 2
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Exterior Finishes
 80.00
 57.66 
 137.66 
 
 
 
 
 
ASPHALT D/PROOFING 
 
137.66 
- 
8.00 
1,101 
SF
 
97.42
 
97.58
 
97.58
 
97.50
 390.08 
100.00
 
97.52 
(97.52)
 
2.48 – 0.83 + 0.50 = 2.15
 
1/2" PARGING 
 
 
137.66 
- 
2.15 
296 
SF
 
8.00
 
(1.00)
 
1.08
 
8.08
VINYL SIDING 
 
 
137.66 
- 
8.08 
1,112
 
 
 
(Windows C) DDT 
3 
5.33 
- 
3.08 
(49)
 
7.00 
 
(Entrance) 
 
5.58 
- 
6.15 
(34)
 
0.96 
 
(Patio Door 2) DDT 
 
5.00 
- 
6.67 
(33)
 
(1.81) 
 
(Window B) DDT 
 
3.50 
- 
6.00 
(21)
 
6.15 
 
(Window E) DDT 
 
2.75 
- 
2.42 
(7)
 
 
 
(Window D) DDT 
 
6.92 
- 
3.08 
(21)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
946 
SF
BUILDING WRAP 
 
1,112 sf + 10%  
 
1,223 
SF
PAINT EXTERIOR WINDOWS (B) 
 
3.50 
- 
6.00 
21
 
 
 
(C) 
3 
5.33 
- 
3.08 
49
 
 
 
(D) 
 
6.92 
- 
3.08 
21
 
 
 
(E) 
 
2.75 
- 
2.42 
7
 
 
 
(F) 
4 
3.08 
- 
1.08 
13
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112 
SF
PAINT EXTERIOR DOORS (1 + G) 
 
5.58 
- 
6.67 
37
 
 
 
(2) 
 
5.00 
- 
6.67 
33
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
SF
2 x 40.00 =
2 x 28.83 =
Add
Less
Ave. Elev.
Figure 6.7a 
Exterior Finishes Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES 
133
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 
2 of 2
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Exterior Finishes (Cont’d)
 
 40.00
 
4.00 
 44.00 
 
 
 
 
 
4" EAVES GUTTER  
2 
44.00 
- 
- 
88 
LF
 2.50
 8.00
 3.00
 13.50
3" DOWN SPOUTS  
2 
13.50 
- 
- 
27 
LF
 40.00 x 28.83
 4.00 x 
4.00
 44.00 x 32.83
210 lbs ASPHALT SHINGLES 
1.054 
44.00 
- 
32.83 
1,523
 
 
 
(Starter Strip) 
2 
44.00 
- 
1.00 
88
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1,611 
SF
RIDGE CAP 
 
44.00 
- 
- 
44 
LF
4" WIDE DRIP-EDGE FLASHING  
2 
44.00 
- 
- 
88 
LF
7'-0" x 3'-6" PRECAST 
 
1 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
CONC. STEP 
 
7'-0" x 3'-6" GALV. IRON 
 
1 
- 
- 
- 
1 
No.
CANOPY COVER 
STAIN CEDAR DECK 
 
 
15.75 
5.58 
- 
88 
SF
STAIN CEDAR RAILINGS 
 
 
27.67 
- 
3.33 
92 
SF
2 x 2.00 =
Figure 6.7b 
Exterior Finishes Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

134 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES
Comments on the Exterior Finishes Takeoff
 
1. The measurement of exterior fi nishes begins at the foundations and proceeds 
up to the roof fi nish.
 
2. On this house, the fi nishes consist of asphalt damp proofi ng on the founda-
tions below grade, parging on the exposed foundations, and vinyl siding on 
the framed walls, all of which are measured in square feet. No deductions are 
made for openings less than 40 square feet of damp proofi ng and parging or 
for openings less than 1 square foot of siding.
 
3. The damp proofi ng extends around the perimeter of the basement, so the 
takeoff begins with a calculation of the outside perimeter.
 
4. Sand/cement parging is to be applied to the exposed top of the concrete foun-
dation wall. Parging will extend from the bottom of the siding (which lines up 
with the bottom of the fl oor joists) down to 6" below grade. The grade is not 
constant, though, so fi rst we calculate the average elevation of grade around 
the building that is found to be 97.52'. The elevation of the top of the fl oor 
is 100.00', so the distance from grade to the fl oor is 2.48'. Next, we deduct 
the height of joist and fl oor deck, which is 0.83', and fi nish the calculation by 
adding 0.5'. This is the depth that the parging extends below grade, so the full 
height of the parging works out to be 2.15'.
 
5. The siding is applied over the joist headers but only up to the eaves soffi t, 
which gives a height of 8'-1".
 
6. The area of all openings (over 1 square foot) are deducted from the siding 
but not from the building wrap since only openings over 40 square feet are 
deducted from building wraps, vapor barriers, and the like.
 
7. The exterior of windows and doors is to be painted. Note that there are no 
deductions for the glass from the window areas measured.
 
8. Eave gutters and down spouts are not shown on the drawings but are al-
lowed for here. 
 
9. The quantity of roof shingles is left in square feet here because this is a small 
area. But roofi ng is usually measured in squares that are areas of 100 square 
feet with no deduction for openings of less than 40 square feet.
 
10. Precast concrete steps are taken off here although they are not strictly exte-
rior fi nishes.
 
11. Eave soffi ts, fascias, and trim are all prefi nished, otherwise painting would 
have to be measured here.
Measuring Notes—Interior Finishes
Flooring 
 
1. Measure fl ooring in the following categories:
 
a. Floor treatment
 
b. Resilient fl ooring
 
c. Carpet 
 
d. Fluid-applied fl ooring
 
e. Specialty fl ooring 
 
2. Describe base, treads, nosings, risers, feature strips, and the like, and measure 
these items in linear feet.
 
3. Describe and measure separately fl ooring with decorative patterns, boarders, 
game courts, etc. 
 
4. Fixing in place, cutting, fi tting around obstructions, edging, threshold strips, 
etc., are all deemed to be included.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES 
135
Gypsum Wallboard and Plaster 
 
5. Measure gypsum wallboard and plaster in the following categories stating 
whether applied to walls or ceilings:
 
a. Gypsum wallboard (sheetrock)
 
b. Furring and lathing
 
c. Gypsum plaster
 
d. Portland cement plaster
 
6. Describe and measure separately gypsum wallboard and plaster to columns, 
pilasters, beams, bulkheads, ducts, and the like.
 
7. Describe coves, cornices, bases, moldings, and suchlike and measure in linear 
feet.
 
8. Enumerate column bases and caps to columns.
 
9. Corner beads, joint and strip reinforcement, holes, notches, etc., in wallboard 
are all deemed to be included; that is, these items are not measured but they 
will be allowed for when the work is priced.
Tile Finishes 
 
10. Measure tile fi nishes in the following categories stating whether applied to 
fl oors, walls, or ceilings:
 
• Ceramic tile
 
• Quarry tile
 
• Stone tile
 
• Glass mosaics
 
• Plastic tile
 
• Metal tile
 
• Acoustic tile
 
• Mirror tile
 
11. Do not deduct for areas more than 1 square foot.
 
12. Describe and measure separately tiles to columns, pilasters, beams, bulk-
heads, ducts, and the like.
 
13. Measure round-edged tiles, internal and external angle tiles, coved base tiles, 
and suchlike in linear feet.
 
14. Enumerate tiles forming letters and numbers. 
Paint and Coatings 
 
15. Measure paint and coatings in the following categories stating whether ap-
plied to fl oors, walls, or ceilings:
 
a. Paint work
 
b. Stains and transparent fi nishes
 
c. Laminated plastic coatings
 
d. High-performance coatings
 
16. Measure separately exterior and interior work in the above categories.
 
17. The contact area of the surface to be fi nished is the area that is measured.
 
18. Describe and measure separately special decorative work such as striped col-
ors or scratched or patterned work.
 
19. Measure windows and doors overall, both sides; make no deductions for 
glass areas.
 
20. Measure balustrades, railings, fencing, and similar items overall, both sides.
 
21. Measure handrails and similar items in linear feet.
 
22. Measure open-wed steel joists overall, both sides.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

136 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES
 
23. Enumerate painted letters and numbers.
 
24. Preparation, covers, protection, and cleanup are deemed to be included.
Example of Interior Finishes Takeoff
Comments on Interior Finishes Takeoff, Figure 6.8a and Figure 6.8b
 
1. Flooring, drywall wallboards, insulation, vapor barriers, paint, and other fi n-
ishes are measured in square feet with no deductions for openings less than 
40 square feet.
 
2. The main fl oor of the house is carpeted except for the kitchen, bathrooms, 
and front entrance (including the closet by the front entrance). These areas 
are to be fi nished with vinyl fl ooring.
 
3. The stairs down to the basement are to be carpeted. Generally the area of the 
stairs is included in the main fl oor area, but 3.33' 3 2.00' has to be added 
because these stair treads show up in the basement and are not part of the 
main fl oor plan.
 
4. Also, the area of the stair risers is added because it too is not captured in the 
measurement of the main fl oor area.
 
5. A carpet-edging strip is required where the carpet meets the vinyl fl ooring by 
the kitchen and at the bathroom doorways.
 
6. The wallboard ceiling is treated with a textured fi nish.
 
7. Loose insulation is spread in the attic space above the ceiling with a vapor 
barrier between the drywall ceiling and the insulation.
 
8. Insulation stops are installed under the roof between the tails of the trusses to 
maintain a space for ventilation above the insulation over the eaves. Divide 
the length of the roof (40 feet) by the spacing of the trusses (2 feet) to deter-
mine the number of stops on each side of the roof.
 
9. The exterior wall of the basement is insulated and fi nished with pained 
wallboards.
 
10. The length of the drywall required for the main fl oor (446 feet) is obtained 
from the previous takeoff of the baseboard, and the length of the basement 
drywall corresponds to the interior perimeter of the basement.
 
11. Paint is measured on both sides of doors and on the top and bottom of closet 
shelves.
 
12. Painting railings and balustrades is measured in square feet calculated by 
multiplying the length of the railing by the height.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES 
137
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 
1 of 2
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Interior Finishes
- Floors
 
CARPET  
 
 
40.00 
28.92 
- 
1,157 
 
 
 
(Stairs) 
 
 
3.33 
2.00 
- 
7
 
2.00 
 
(Stair Risers) 
 
14 
3.33 
0.58 
- 
27
 
7.25 
 
(Kitchen) DDT 
 
11.25 
8.67 
- 
(98)
 
2.00 
 
(Bathrooms) DDT 
 
15.34 
7.59 
- 
(116)
 11.25 
 
(Front Entrance) DDT 
 
9.16 
4.17 
- 
(38)
 
1.75 
3.50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
938 
SF
 
2.92 
3.33
 
2.92 
2.33
 
7.59 
9.16
VINYL FLOORING 
(Kitchen) 
 
11.25 
8.67 
 
98
 
 
 
(Bathrooms) 
 
15.34 
7.59 
 
116
 
 
 
(Front Entrance) 
 
9.16 
4.17 
 
38
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
252 
SF 
CARPET EDGING STRIP 
 
 
6.00 
 
 
6
 
 
 
 
2 
2.33 
 
 
5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 LF
1/2" DRYWALL CEILING 
 
 
40.00 
28.92 
 
1,157 SF
TEXTURED CEILING FINISH  
 
- 
- 
- 
1,157 SF
R35 LOOSE INSULATION 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
1,157 SF
6mil POLY V.B. 
 
 1,157 SF + 10%  
- 
1,273 SF
INSULATION STOPS 
 
2 
20 
 
 
40 No.
40.00 / 2 = 20
 
13.67
1.67
15.34
Figure 6.8a 
Interior Finishes Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

138 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 
2 of 2
JOB: 
House Example 
 
DATE:
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
 
 
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
Exterior Walls
 
R20 BATT INSULATION 
 
137.66 
- 
8.00 
1,101 
SF
6mil POLY V.B. 
 
 
1,101 SF + 10%  
 
1,211 
SF
 137.66 
Outside Perimeter
 (5.33)
 132.33 
Inside Perimeter
R12 BATT INSULATION 
 
 
 
132.33 
- 
8.00 
1,059 
SF
(Basement)
6mil POLY V.B. 
 
 
 
1,059 SF + 10%  
 
1,165 
SF
All Walls
1/2" DRYWALL WALLS 
(Main) 
 
446.00 
- 
8.00 
3,568
 
 
 
(Basement) 
 
132.33 
- 
8.00 
1,059
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4,627 SF
PAINT WALLS 
 
 
as above 
 
 
4,627 SF
PAINT DOORS 
(3) 
2 x 2 
2.33 
- 
6.67 
62
 
 
 
(4) 
2 x 4 
2.50 
- 
6.67 
133
 
 
 
(6) 
2 
2.83 
- 
6.67 
38
 
 
 
Bifold (7) 
2 
2.00 
- 
6.67 
27
 
 
 
Bifold (8) 
2 x 3 
4.00 
- 
6.67 
160
 
 
 
Bifold (9) 
2 
3.00 
- 
6.67 
40
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
460 SF
PAINT WOOD RAILINGS 
 
 
9.33 
- 
3.44 
32 SF
PAINT SHELVES 
 
2 x 3 
6.00 
1.25 
 
45
 
 
 
 
2 
4.00 
1.25 
 
10
 
 
 
 
2 x 4 
2.25 
1.25 
 
23
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78 
SF
 
 
-4 x 2 x 0.67 =
Figure 6.8b 
Interior Finishes Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES 
139
SUMMARY
■ Masonry work includes construction with clay bricks, concrete bricks and 
blocks, clay tiles, and natural and artifi cial stone.
■ A thorough knowledge of masonry construction is required to prepare a de-
tailed estimate of this trade.
■ First the surface area of the masonry is measured in square feet in the takeoff 
process, then a factor is applied to convert these measurements to number of 
pieces such as bricks or blocks required to complete the work.
■ A number of other items associated with unit masonry are also measured in 
the takeoff including mortar, wire “ladder” reinforcement to joints, metal ties 
used between walls, and extra work and materials involved in control joists, 
sills, lintels, and arches.
■ Masonry estimators need to be familiar with the defi nition of the scope of 
work for the masonry trade in their geographical location.
■ The main factors affecting the measurement of brick masonry are the size of 
the brick units, the size of the joints between bricks, the wall thickness, and 
the pattern of brick bond utilized.
■ Where bricks are required to be laid in a different pattern than the other bricks 
in a wall, such as a soldier course or a brick-on-edge course, they should be 
measured separately from the regular bricks.
■ There are fewer variables to consider with concrete blocks than with clay 
bricks, but blocks do come in different sizes and the thickness of joints be-
tween blocks can vary, which will affect the value of the factor used to calcu-
late the number of blocks per square foot of wall area. 
■ Different types of blocks such as those used for bond beams and copings, 
together with any other non-standard block, are measured separately from 
standard blocks.
■ Various publications provide information about conversion factors to calculate 
such items as the number of blocks per square foot or square meter of wall. 
■ Conversion factors are also available to enable the estimator to calculate the 
volume of mortar required per 1,000 bricks or blocks of different sizes.
■ Given the size of masonry units and the thickness of the mortar joints be-
tween them, estimators can calculate their own conversion factors.
■ Mortar is measured in cubic yards and any add mixtures are described.
■ Bricks shall be enumerated describing the type and dimensions of bricks.
■ Concrete block masonry units shall be enumerated stating the type and size 
of blocks.
■ A manual takeoff of masonry work for a house is demonstrated.
■ The estimator needs to follow a systematic method of measuring exterior and 
interior fi nishes work in order to prepare an accurate takeoff.
■ Exterior and interior fi nishes are generally measured in square feet.
■ Exterior fi nishes include: 
• Damp proofi ng and waterproofi ng
• Insulation and vapor barriers
• Siding 
• Roofi ng 
• Flashings and sheet metal work
• Roof specialties and accessories
■ A manual takeoff of exterior fi nishes for a house is demonstrated.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

140 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES
■ Interior fi nishes include:
• Flooring
• Gypsum wallboard and plaster
• Tile fi nishes
• Paint and coatings
■ A manual takeoff of interior fi nishes for a house is demonstrated.
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
  Information 
 
Web Page Address
 
■ National Concrete  
 
http://www.ncma.org/
Masonry Association
 
■ Taylor Concrete Products 
 http://www.taylorconcrete.com/
default./asp
 
■ Brick Industry Association 
http://www.brickinfo.org/
 
■ Western States Clay Products Association 
http://brick-wscpa.org/
 
■ Architectural Engineering Information 
 http://www.aecinfo.com/index
.html
 
■ Dow Building Solutions—Building Wrap 
 http://building.dow.com/na/en/
products/housewrap/
 
■ Owens Corning 
http://www.owenscorning.com/
• Siding  • Roofi ng  • Insulation 
index.asp
 
■ FloorBiz—Flooring 
http://www.fl oorbiz.com/
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. Which two variables, apart from brick or block size, have an appreciable effect 
on masonry material usage and mortar consumption?
 2. Describe the usual method of calculating quantities of bricks or blocks in a ma-
sonry takeoff.
 3. State the standard brick size adopted by the Common Brick Manufacturer’s 
Association.
 4. List three sources that could be referred to in order to obtain information about 
the number of bricks and amount of mortar required for different brick sizes.
 5. How are special brick courses (such as soldier or brick-on-edge courses) dealt 
with in a masonry takeoff?
 6. Openings greater than what area are deducted from masonry wall areas?
 7. How are scaffolding and hoisting operations accounted for in a masonry work 
estimate?
 8. How is insulation to masonry work measured?
 9. What are the units of measurement for each of the following items measured 
with fi nishes?
a. Waterproofi ng
b. Loose insulation material
c. Plastic fl ashings
d. Splash pads
e. Roof hatches
f. Rubber base
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES 
141
g. Carpet edging strip
h. Paint to railings
 10. Describe a systematic method of measuring the exterior fi nishes of a house.
 11. What is parging, and where is it often found?
 12. What are insulation stops, and how are they measured in a takeoff?
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
 1. How many custom bricks size 3" 3 3" 3 11" are there per 100 square feet of 
wall area when the mortar joint is ¼"?
 2. How many custom bricks size 4" 3 4" 3 15" are there per 100 square feet of 
wall area when the mortar joint is ½"?
 3. If brick ties are spaced 16" 3 24", how many ties are required for a wall that is 
40'–0" long 3 8'–0" high?
 4. If brick ties are spaced 18" 3 20", how many ties are required for a wall that is 
140'–0" long 3 12'–0" high?
 5. If decking consists of 2 3 6 boards laid out diagonally at 6" on center, how 
many linear feet are required for a deck that measures 26'–6" 3 10'–4"?
 6. If decking consists of 2 3 3 boards laid out diagonally at 3" on center, how 
many linear feet are required for a deck that measures 44'–8" 3 12'–2"?
 7. Take off the masonry work for the building shown in Figure 6.9. 
 
 Additional Notes:
• Walls are 10"-wide regular concrete blocks.
• 6.5 cubic feet of mortar is required per 100 square feet of blocks.
• Include 10" ladder reinforcement in every second course.
• Fill block cavities with loose perlite insulation.
• 39 cubic feet of insulation material is required per 100 square feet of blocks.
• Include damp proofi ng to the exterior of these walls.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

142 
CHAPTER 6—MEASURING MASONRY AND FINISHES
Figure 6.9 
Foundation Plan
78'-8"
42'-2"
12'-0"
62'-6"
11'-0"
112'-0"
10" Masonry Wall
6'-0" High (typ.)
Plan Area
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

143
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be 
able to:
■ Explain why it is useful for the building estimator to be able to prepare a takeoff 
of plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning (HVAC), and electrical work.
■ Explain why it is useful for the building estimator to be able to make sketches of 
plumbing, HVAC, and electrical requirements for a project.
■ Describe how plumbing, HVAC, and electrical work are measured in a takeoff.
■ Explain how the builder’s estimator can price the plumbing, HVAC, and electrical 
work.
■ Explain the use of quick methods of estimating plumbing, HVAC, and electrical 
work.
■ Describe the cost per fi xture method of estimating plumbing.
KEY TERMS 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
7
ESTIMATING PLUMBING, 
HEATING, VENTILATING, AND 
AIR CONDITIONING (HVAC), 
AND ELECTRICAL WORK
backfl ow preventer
duplex houses
electrical estimating
heat exchangers
HVAC
plumbing
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

144 
CHAPTER 7—ESTIMATING PLUMBING, HVAC, AND ELECTRICAL WORK
Introduction
Plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning (HVAC), and electrical work are in-
variably performed by subcontractors on residential projects, but these trades rep-
resent a signifi cant part of a project, usually accounting for more that 30 percent of 
the total project cost. It is, therefore, useful for the builder’s estimator to be able to 
check trade quotes to ensure that they cover the full scope of work for that trade.  
Certainly estimates of large and/or complicated projects call for the expertise of spe-
cialists in these trades. Like any other estimators, those working on plumbing, HVAC, 
and electrical work need a thorough knowledge of how the work is done in that trade 
before they can assemble accurate quotes for the work. To be accurate, the prices for 
these quotes will have to be estimated using the same meticulous method used by build-
ing estimators with their work. That is, fi rst prepare an accurate takeoff of the work 
items, then, by means of unit prices, calculate the anticipated cost of these items of work.
The ability to compile a takeoff of plumbing, HVAC, and electrical work can 
also be a useful skill for the builder’s estimator who sometimes needs to put together 
a quick price for these trades on a small project. Indeed, some builders like to de-
velop their own cost estimate for each trade’s scope of work to ensure that the quotes 
received are reasonable; takeoff skills are defi nitely an asset if this analysis is to be 
done properly. Below we have identifi ed the main items of work and how they are 
measured in a takeoff for each of these trades. 
Plumbing Work Generally
On small residential projects, such as single houses and duplex houses, it is unusual 
to see much information about the plumbing system on the project plans other than, 
perhaps, the location of the main plumbing vent and basement fl oor drains. Lacking 
details from the plans, the estimator often has to draw sketches to be able to assess 
the plumbing layout for a house. These sketches can then help the estimator evaluate 
measurements such as the length of pipes for water supply and sewers on the project.
Measuring Notes—Plumbing Work
Water Distribution 
 
1. Enumerate connections of water lines to the main.
 
2. Describe and measure hot water and cold water pipes in linear feet.
 
3. Describe and enumerate fi ttings and valves.
 
4. Describe and enumerate hangers and supports for pipes.
Sanitary Sewer Pipes and Fittings
 
5. Describe and measure pipes in linear feet to 5 feet from the building.
 
6. Describe and enumerate backfl ow preventers, cleanouts, fl oor drains, roof 
drains, valves, and fi ttings.
 
7. Describe and enumerate hangers and supports for piping.
Fixtures and Equipment 
 
8. Describe and enumerate fi xtures and equipment, including:
 
a. Water meters
 
b. Gas meters
 
c. Water pressure reducing valves
 
d. Water heaters
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 7—ESTIMATING PLUMBING, HVAC, AND ELECTRICAL WORK 
145
 
e. Pumps 
 
f. Lavatory basins 
 
g. Water closets
 
h. Bidets
 
i. Sinks
 
j. Laundry tubs 
 
k. Bath tubs
 
9. Describe and enumerate separately equipment supplied by the builder and 
installed by the plumber, including:
 
a. Refrigerators
 
b. Garbage disposal equipment
 
c. Dishwashers
Gas Lines 
 
10. Describe and measure in linear feet gas line piping from the gas meter to all 
terminal points.
 
11. Describe and enumerate fi ttings and valves.
 
12. Describe and enumerate hangers and supports.
Miscellaneous Plumbing Items 
 
13. Describe and enumerate permits for the work.
 
14. Describe pipe insulation and measure in linear feet.
 
15. Describe and enumerate pressure testing of lines.
 
16. Describe and enumerate cutting, drilling, and patching required for this work.
 
17. Measure cleanup resulting from this work as an item.
HVAC Work Generally
Often the only HVAC information provided on plans of small residential projects is 
only the location of the furnace. So, before the estimator is able to takeoff this work, 
she/he needs to determine the position of heating ducts, air outlets and inlets, and 
thermostats. An outline of the location of ductwork sketched on the fl oorplans is 
useful for this purpose.
Measuring Notes—HVAC Work
Ductwork and Venting 
 
1. Describe ductwork, stating the size and measure in linear feet.
 
2. Describe range, cooktop, laundry, and bath venting stating the size and mea-
sure in linear feet.
 
3. Describe transitions and measure in linear feet stating the size at each end.
 
4. Describe elbows stating the size and enumerate.
 
5. Describe “Y” fi ttings stating the size and enumerate. 
 
6. Describe fi ttings, hangers, and sleeve frames stating the size and enumerate 
these items.
Mechanical Equipment 
 
7. Describe and enumerate mechanical equipment items, including:
 
a. Air handling units
 
b. Furnaces
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

146 
CHAPTER 7—ESTIMATING PLUMBING, HVAC, AND ELECTRICAL WORK
 
c. Heat exchangers
 
d. Heat pumps
 
e. Refrigeration compressors
 
f.  Refrigerant condensing units
 
g. Water coolers
 
h. Humidity control equipment
 
i. Floor-heating and snow-melting equipment
HVAC Controls 
 
8. Describe control wiring and measure in linear feet.
 
9. Describe low-voltage wiring and measure in linear feet.
 
10. Describe and enumerate electric and electronic controls.
 
11. Measure both testing and balancing as items.
Miscellaneous HVAC Items 
 
12. Describe and enumerate permits for the work.
 
13. Describe duct insulation and measure in square feet.
 
14. Describe and enumerate fi re stops and fl ashings.
 
15. Describe and enumerate cutting, drilling, and patching required for this 
work.
 
16. Measure cleanup resulting from this work as an item.
Electrical Work Generally
Residential plans generally show the location of light fi xtures, switches, and at least 
some of the wiring. The location of duplex receptacles is also noted on the drawings, 
however, the layout of power wiring is seldom shown. Sketches, especially with colored 
pens, can here again be a great help to the estimator measuring the work of this trade.
Measuring Notes—Electrical Work
Wiring 
 
1. Describe wire, cable, and conduits and measure in linear feet.
 
2. Describe cable tray and bus duct systems and measure in linear feet.
 
3. Describe and enumerate hangers, sleeves, and supports.
Electrical Equipment, Fittings, and Fixtures
 
4. Describe and enumerate electrical equipment, fi ttings, and fi xtures, including:
 
a. Fire alarm systems
 
b. Security systems
 
c. Communication systems
 
d. Medium-voltage switching equipment
 
e. Low-voltage switching equipment
 
f. Electrical panels and sub-panels
 
g. Junction boxes
 
h. Outlet receptacles
 
i. Switches
 
j. Light fi xtures
 
k. Door bells
 
l. Fans
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 7—ESTIMATING PLUMBING, HVAC, AND ELECTRICAL WORK 
147
 
m. Range hoods
 
n. Smoke detectors
 
5. Describe and enumerate installing appliances, including:
 
a. Cooktops
 
b. Microwave ovens
 
c. Built-in ovens
 
d. Range hoods
Miscellaneous Electrical Items 
 
6. Describe and enumerate permits for the work.
 
7. Describe and enumerate fi re stops and fl ashings.
 
8. Describe and enumerate cutting, drilling, and patching required for electrical 
work.
 
9. Measure testing and hot checking entire system as an item.
 
10. Measure cleanup required as a result of this work as an item.
Pricing the Work
Materials can be priced in the usual manner using supplier quotes for the items 
involved. However, because the builder does not perform this work with their own 
forces, there will be no in-house historic cost information available to use to estimate 
the cost of labor and equipment for this work. The builder’s estimator will, therefore, 
have to rely on productivities and prices obtained from subtrades if they are willing 
to share this information. Otherwise, the estimator will have to resort to publica-
tions such as RSMeans Plumbing Cost Data,1 RSMeans Electrical Cost Data, and 
so on for prices. 
Estimating Shortcuts
Instead of compiling a full takeoff on the smaller projects, many plumbing, HVAC, 
and electrical estimators use shortcuts to compute their prices for this work. Building 
estimators who need quick budget prices for these trades can also make use of these 
time-saving methods.
For the plumbing, HVAC, and electrical trades, a price per square foot of gross 
fl oor area could be used to provide at least a rough estimate of the cost of that trade. 
Often, though, especially for bid estimates, something that gives a more accurate 
price is called for.
Cost Per Fixture Plumbing Estimate
A quick estimate for plumbing work can be obtained by means of a unit price for 
each plumbing fi xture on the project. The cost of all necessary piping and any other 
required work is allowed for in each of these unit prices. So, enumerating the fol-
lowing fi xtures and multiplying by the applicable price for each fi xture will give the 
estimated price for the complete plumbing work:
 
a. Floor drains 
 
b. Water heaters
 
c. Lavatory basins
 
d. Water closets
1. R. S. Means Company Inc., Kingston, MA
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

148 
CHAPTER 7—ESTIMATING PLUMBING, HVAC, AND ELECTRICAL WORK
 
e. Sinks
 
f. Laundry tubs
 
g. Bath tubs
Additional prices may be required for installing appliances, special fi xtures, and 
any out-of-the-ordinary plumbing work requirements.
Plumbing Example
Suppose you are considering adding a three-fi xture bathroom to a home design and 
you would like to know roughly what the plumbing price would be. The plumber 
can quickly estimate the price based on the number and type of fi ttings involved and 
all-inclusive price for these fi ttings.
EXAMPLE 7.1
Estimate of plumbing price for a 3-fi xture bathroom:
1 bathtub 72" 3 36" 
$2,500
1 water closet 
$1,485
1 lavatory basin 19" 3 16" 
$1,160
 
$5,145
Extra for pipe and fi ttings 30% 
$1,544
Total 
$6,689
Quick Estimates of HVAC Work
The cost of HVAC work can be estimated quite quickly by using a combination of prices 
per unit area and unit prices for items of equipment. The overall cost of ductwork includ-
ing ducts and all fi ttings is proportional to the fl oor area of the house. A fairly accurate 
price per square foot, therefore, can be obtained from the analysis of projects that have 
been completed in the past. Thus, to estimate the total cost of ductwork for a house, 
multiply the unit price from a past project by the gross fl oor area of the new house. 
The estimator can also compile all-inclusive equipment item prices for each item 
of equipment used in the HVAC system. An item price would include the cost of pur-
chasing the item of equipment, installing the item, and any further costs necessary to 
complete its installation. So, to compile a full HVAC estimate, determine how many 
of the following equipment items are required, and multiply by the appropriate item 
price for each:
 
a. Furnaces
 
b. Heat exchangers
 
c. Refrigeration compressors
 
d. Refrigerant condensing units
 
e. Water coolers
 
f. Humidifi ers
 
g. Kitchen and bathroom vents
HVAC Example
To quickly calculate the heating and ventilating price for a house, we can use a price 
per unit area and add the cost of non-standard fi xtures. So, if the proposed house is 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 7—ESTIMATING PLUMBING, HVAC, AND ELECTRICAL WORK 
149
2,200 square feet of fl oor area and a special humidifi er and exhaust fan are required, 
this would be the estimate:
EXAMPLE 7.2
Quick heating and ventilating price:
Basic HVAC 2,200 SF at $5.50/SF 
$12,100
Humidifi er 
  $2,500
Exhaust fan 
     $350
 
$14,950
Quick Estimates of Electrical Work
The cost of electrical work can also be estimated quickly by means of a combination 
of prices per unit area and prices for items of equipment and fi xtures:
 
1. To estimate the full price of wiring for lighting, multiply gross fl oor area by 
the inclusive unit price per square foot.
 
2. To estimate the full price of power wiring and fi ttings, multiply the number 
of power outlets by inclusive price per outlet.
 
3. To estimate the price of equipment and fi xtures, multiply the number of each 
item by unit price for that item, including:
 
a. Electrical panels 
 
b. Subpanels
 
c. Light fi xtures
 
d. Doorbells
 
e. Fans
 
f. Range hoods
 
g. Smoke detectors
 
h. Cooktops
 
i. Microwave ovens
 
j. Built-in ovens
 
k. Range hoods
Electrical Example
To quickly calculate the electrical price for a house, we can use a price per unit area 
and add the cost of non-standard fi xtures. So, if the proposed house is 2,200 square 
feet of fl oor area and a security system with motion detectors is required, this would 
be the estimate:
EXAMPLE 7.3
Quick electrical price:
Basic electrical 2,200 SF at $8.50/SF 
$18,700
Security system 
  $3,500
 
$22,200
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

150 
CHAPTER 7—ESTIMATING PLUMBING, HVAC, AND ELECTRICAL WORK
SUMMARY
■ It is customary to perform plumbing, HVAC, and electrical work by subcon-
tractors on residential projects.
■ Because plumbing, HVAC, and electrical work accounts for so much of the 
total price of a project, it is useful for the building estimator to be able to 
check the subtrade quotes for these trades.
■ Because building estimators sometimes estimate these trades on small proj-
ects, the ability to compile takeoff of this work can be useful to them.
■ Very little information about plumbing, HVAC, and electrical work is found 
on drawings for small residential projects, so estimators often need to prepare 
sketches of this work.
■ Plumbing pipes and gas lines are measured in linear feet in a takeoff.
■ Plumbing fi ttings and equipment are enumerated.
■ HVAC ductwork is measured in linear feet for each size of duct.
■ HVAC fi ttings and items of equipment are enumerated.
■ Electrical wiring, cables, and conduit are measured in linear feet.  
■ Electrical equipment, fi ttings, and fi xtures are enumerated.
■ Installation of appliances is enumerated.
■ The builder’s estimator will generally have to rely on publications such as 
Means Plumbing Cost Data in order to price plumbing, HVAC, and electrical 
work.
■ Costs of plumbing, HVAC, and electrical work can be quickly estimated using 
the price per unit area estimating method.
■ A quick estimate of plumbing work can be assembled using the cost per 
plumbing fi xture method.
■ A combination of price per unit area and unit prices per item of equipment 
can be used to generate a quick HVAC cost estimate.
■ A combination of price per unit area and unit prices per item of equipment 
can also be used to generate a quick electrical work estimate.
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
Information  
Web Page Address
 
■ R.S. Means publishes specialized estimating  
http://www.rsmeans.com/
texts for plumbing, HVAC, and electrical
work. 
 
■ Information on the latest estimating software
can be obtained with keywords: Plumbing,
HVAC, and Electrical Estimating on your 
web search engine. 
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. What portion of the total cost of a residential project does plumbing, HVAC, 
and electrical work together account for?
 2. Why it is useful for a building estimator to be able to prepare a takeoff of HVAC 
work?
 3. How much information about the plumbing system is usually provided on hous-
ing plans?
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 7—ESTIMATING PLUMBING, HVAC, AND ELECTRICAL WORK 
151
 4. To what distance outside the house are sanitary sewer lines measured in a plumb-
ing takeoff?
 5. How is piping insulation measured?
 6. Describe how you would measure bathroom venting in an HVAC takeoff.
 7. How is testing and balancing of an HVAC system measured?
 8. If a cooktop is required for a kitchen, its cost is included in the builder’s work, 
so why is it measured again as part of the electrical scope of work?
 9. Wiring or conduit passing through walls sometimes requires fi re stops or fl ash-
ings. How are these items measured?
 10. Describe a quick method for estimating the cost of HVAC work.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
 1. Calculate a quick plumbing price for a four-fi xture bathroom based on the fol-
lowing data: Fixtures: 1 bathtub at $2,450; 1 shower unit at $1,000; 1 WC at 
$1,400; and 1 Lavatory basin at $850. Also include an additional 30 percent for 
pipe and fi ttings.
 2. Calculate quick plumbing, HVAC, and electrical prices for a 3,100-square-foot 
home based on the following data: Plumbing is expected to be $6.50 per square 
foot; HVAC $4.25 per square foot; and electrical work $6.75 per square foot.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

153
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be able to:
■ Defi ne general expenses.
■ Identify general expense requirements for a project and explain how general ex-
pense requirements are assessed.
■ Describe how general expense prices are calculated.
■ Calculate general expense items for a residential project.
■ Identify general expense items that are calculated as add-ons.
■ Complete the pricing of general expenses of a house project.
KEY TERMS 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
8
PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES
add-ons
bar-chart schedule
British Thermal Units 
(BTUs)
green building certifi cation
hoardings
markup and fee
new home warranty
payroll additive
small tools and 
consumables 
specifi cations
Introduction
The cost of labor, material, equipment, and subtrades expended on the items mea-
sured in the quantity takeoffs is usually referred to as the direct costs of the work. 
The general expenses of a project comprise all of the additional, indirect costs neces-
sary to facilitate the construction of the project. These indirect costs are sometimes 
referred to as project overheads. 
There are many possible general expense items on a project. The General Expenses 
Sheet presented in Figure 8.1 provides a summary of some of the more common items 
of general expenses associated with residential construction. On a small- to medium-
sized project, this General Expenses Sheet can be used as a checklist that allows the 
estimator to choose those items that are required on the particular project under 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

154 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES
PROJECT:
LOCATION:
DATE:
ESTIMATOR:
GENERAL EXPENSES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elu
d
e
h
c
S
 
Design
Project Superintendent 
Assistant Superintendent
Stakeout  
Survey and Plot Plan 
Safety and First Aid 
Rentals: 
 
 
– office trailer
 
 
– office equipment
 
 
– office supplies
 
 
– storage 
 
 
– tool lockups
 
 
– toilets 
Permanent Connections:
 
 
– Sewer Connection
 
 
– Underground Wiring
Municipal Charges 
Temporary Site Services:
 
– Water services 
 
– Electrical services
 
– Telephone 
 s
dlo
ff
a
c
S
 s
g
nid
r
a
o
H
Temporary Heating 
Temporary Fire Protection
Site Access 
Site Security 
Equipment Rentals 
Truck Rentals 
Dewatering Excavations
Cleanup:  
Collecting/Sorting Recyclables
 
– General site cleanup
 
– Final site cleanup
 
– Cleaning the furnace
 
– Cleaning windows
 
– Move-in cleanup 
Snow Removal 
Photographs
Project Signs 
Soils Testing 
Green Building Certification 
New Home Warranty 
 
 
TOTALS TO SUMMARY: 
 
Quantity 
Unit Rate 
Labor 
Unit Rate 
Material 
Unit Rate 
Equip. 
Subtrade 
Total
         Unit 
Labor 
$ 
Material 
$ 
Equip. 
$ 
$ 
$
Figure 8.1 
General Expenses Sheet
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES 
155
consideration. The selected items can then be priced either by inserting the prices and 
calculating the total costs manually, or by setting up the general expenses summary 
on a computer spreadsheet and allowing the computer to perform the applicable 
calculations. On larger projects, a more comprehensive list of items may be required. 
Because most general expense items are not usually referred to in the project 
drawings and specifi cations, the estimator needs some construction knowledge and 
experience to fi rst of all identify which general expense items are required for the 
project and, second, to accurately price these requirements. The price of general ex-
penses can be a substantial component of the bid amounting to 15 percent more of 
the total price in some cases. Accurate assessment of general expenses can be critical 
to the competitiveness and fi nancial success of the venture, so many estimators, in-
cluding highly experienced veterans, consider it benefi cial to consult with other staff 
about the general expense demands of a project. 
Job superintendents, construction managers, and other senior company personnel 
can usually help with the appraisal and pricing of general expenses, especially when spe-
cial site facilities and equipment are being considered. There are often several alternative 
ways of providing general expense facilities on a project, and discussions can sometimes 
yield solutions that are more competitive or more effective than those elicited by the 
estimator working alone. Some companies go so far as to make it a policy that a team 
of senior staff meet and consider the general expense needs of all major projects.
General expense requirements are assessed by examining the plans and specifi ca-
tions and by considering the amount of work involved in the project as measured 
in the takeoff process. Therefore, the task of estimating general expense prices can 
begin only when the quantity takeoffs are complete. However, some general ex-
penses cannot be priced until the total price of the work is determined. These items 
are separated from the other general expense items and are priced at the end of the 
estimate as add-ons. Figure 8.2 contains a list of some general expense add-on items.
Project Schedule
It is useful to have a realistic schedule of the project work at the time of the estimate 
because one of the principal variables that determine the cost of general expense 
Figure 8.2 
General Expense Add-ons
GENERAL EXPENSE ADD-ONS
METHOD OF
CALCULATION
DESCRIPTION
Small Tools and Consumables 
Percentage 
Total Labor
Payroll Additive 
Percentage 
Total Labor
Sales Tax 
Percentage
Building Permit 
Percentage or Step Rate
Insurance – Builder’s risk 
– Liability
Percentage 
Total Bid
Total Bid
Total Materials
Markup and Fee 
Interest Charges
Percentage or Lump Sum
Value Added Tax 
Percentage 
Percentage 
Percentage 
Total Bid
Total Bid
Total Bid
Total Bid
BASED ON
$
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

156 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES
items is the duration of the project. Also, owners often take into account the project 
duration specifi ed by homebuilders competing to build a custom home. If the owner 
is looking for the shortest possible project duration, the builder with a better sched-
ule may win over a lower-priced bidder.
Because builders usually have only a short time to prepare their estimate and sub-
mit their proposal for the construction of a custom home, it is not practical to prepare 
a detailed schedule using such techniques as critical path method. Consequently, more 
approximate methods are employed for schedules at the time of the estimate.
One approach taken by many homebuilders is to simply search previous job 
records for a project of similar size and construction to the one being estimated 
and use the actual duration of the past project as a guide to the duration of the new 
project. When a homebuilder repeatedly builds projects of a similar nature, this tech-
nique can produce quite accurate results. If detailed information has been kept about 
the time taken to complete the work of each of the various trades involved in previ-
ous projects, a fairly sophisticated schedule of the future project can be produced.
Even when the new project is of a different type of construction or size from the 
homebuilder’s previous projects, an approximate schedule in the form of a bar chart 
of the major activities can often still be drafted. From the information contained in 
the plans, together with details from the takeoffs of the amount work involved in the 
project, veteran supervisors can usually put together at least a rough schedule based 
on their experience on past jobs. 
An example of a bar-chart schedule prepared for an estimate is depicted in Fig-
ure 8.3. This kind of schedule can be roughed out in just a few minutes using a com-
puter spreadsheet template that has been previously set up for this purpose. The fi rst 
draft of the estimate schedule can be based on mere guesswork, but the durations of 
key tasks such as foundations, framing, and fi nishes can be updated as information 
becomes available from subcontractors.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Obtain Building Permit
Foundations
Floor Framing
Wall and Roof Framing
Exterior Enclosure
Roofing
Exterior Doors and Windows
Basement Slab
Interior Finishes
Mechanical
Electrical
Landscaping
Final Cleanup and Move-In
June 
July 
August 
September October
6 
5 
1 
5 
3
Dates:
Weeks:
ACTIVITIES
PROPOSED SCHEDULE
Custom Home
Figure 8.3 
Sample Project Schedule
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES 
157
General Expenses
Project Supervision
The cost of project supervision is considered to be part of company overhead by 
some homebuilders, so they do not incorporate this expense into the general ex-
penses of a project. Where a company does include the cost as a general expense, 
the price of this item is calculated by multiplying the monthly payroll cost of the 
supervisor(s) by the number of months they are required to be on the project. When 
a number of projects under construction at the same time are under the direction of 
a single supervisor, the cost of supervision is shared by all projects. 
Other personnel may be required on the project in addition to a project supervisor. 
For example, a helper may be needed when the building is staked out or, when many 
homes are under construction, an additional assistant superintendent may be required. 
The wages used to price project staff may or may not include payroll burden 
(the cost of fringe benefi ts). Estimators should follow a standard practice regarding 
payroll burden. If it is not fi rmly established whether net wages or gross wages are 
used in the pricing process, it will be very easy to make an overpricing or underpric-
ing error. In the examples below, net wage amounts are used to price site personnel, 
and the total amount for site personnel is added to the rest of the labor cost of the 
estimate. An allowance for payroll burden is subsequently added to the total labor 
amount at the end of the estimate.
Safety and First Aid
In this item, we consider the cost of meeting general safety and fi rst aid requirements 
at the site. Safety requirements for a project may include one or more of the follow-
ing expenses:
 
1. The cost of worker’s time when attending safety meetings
 
2. The cost of workers’ time when engaged in other safety related activities
 
3. The provision of safety awards on the project
 
4. The provision of safety supplies at the site
The homebuilder often needs to complete additional work on a project in order 
to comply with safety regulations. This is usually measured in the takeoff process 
together with the rest of the work. Examples include cutting back excavation em-
bankments and providing shoring to the sides of deep trenches which is taken off 
and priced with the excavation work, and using scaffold systems that meet safety 
codes which adds to the cost of the scaffold system. In addition, there may be ac-
tivities associated with the project that are purely safety related and are not part of 
any particular work item. Workers’ time spent attending safety meetings or taking 
safety courses are examples of this kind of safety activity. The estimator, generally by 
reviewing records of previous projects, has to anticipate how much labor time will 
be spent on these safety matters.
Safety supplies such as hard hats, lifelines, special safety clothing, and suchlike 
are expended during the course of construction activities. Some companies include 
the cost of these items in the “Small Tools and Consumables” item in the add-ons, 
whereas other companies prefer to estimate these costs separately. The estimator 
should determine company policy and work accordingly.
First aid expenses can be divided into two basic categories:
the cost of providing on-site fi rst aid supplies, and
the cost of labor engaged in administering fi rst aid services at the site.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

158 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES
OSHA regulations require construction sites to have fi rst aid kits suffi cient to 
meet the needs of the project. It is necessary to estimate the cost of supplies used 
up over the course of the work. This is usually done by investigating the amounts 
expended on fi rst aid supplies on past jobs from project records. 
Regulations also call for persons qualifi ed to administer fi rst aid to be present 
on construction sites. On projects up to a certain size,  this requirement is met by 
having a number of the trade’s people and site staff obtain fi rst aid qualifi cations. 
When a carpenter with a fi rst aid ticket spends an hour providing fi rst aid to a fellow 
worker, the cost of that hour will rightly be charged to the project fi rst aid budget, so 
an estimate of the total number of hours administering fi rst aid is required in order 
to establish the budget. 
In order to properly estimate the cost of these fi rst aid provisions, the estimator 
needs to be familiar with the particular OSHA regulations that apply at the site of 
the project. 
Temporary Ofﬁ ces, Site Storage, and Sanitary Facilities
Offi ce accommodation is seldom required when only one or two homes are to be 
constructed. Supervisors are usually able to work out of a pickup truck in these situ-
ations. However, with larger developments where many units are to be constructed 
over a period of years, sales offi ces (and possibly also construction offi ces) may be 
required for such a development. 
Facilities provided to meet the needs of a development vary in scope from a 
small rental trailer up to an elaborate building that is constructed at the beginning 
of construction and removed when work is fi nally completed and all units are sold.  
A large sales offi ce, which may include mock-ups of suites, is sometimes constructed 
for multi-unit projects. In these cases, a full estimate of building, servicing, and later 
removing the structure will be required. 
Rental of temporary site facilities usually includes one or more of the following 
items:
 
1. Rentals:
• Offi ce trailers
• Storage trailers
• Tool lockups
• Toilets
 
2. Costs to move in and move out trailers
 
3. Computers, printers, and related offi ce equipment
 
4. Offi ce supplies
 
5. Heating costs
On renovation projects, the owner may be able to provide facilities that meet the 
storage space and sanitary facility needs of the homebuilder. It is important to de-
termine whether the homebuilder or the owner will pay heating, utilities, and other 
such expenses in connection with the use of these spaces.
There will often be Health Department rules to comply with regarding tempo-
rary site sanitary facilities. Homebuilders frequently use portable chemical toilets to 
meet these needs, however, in some situations, toilets connected to the sewer system 
and equipped with adequate plumbing may be necessary.  
Utilities and Site Services
Utilities and site services requirements are going to vary a great deal depending on 
the type of project to be constructed. Where a new home is to be built on a serviced 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES 
159
lot in a city, site services will almost certainly be in place and will normally be avail-
able for temporary use during the construction of the project. 
When the house is to be constructed is in a new subdivision, there may or may 
not be services available at the time of construction. The estimator will have to 
investigate this and may have to include in the estimate the cost of such items as 
temporary generators. 
In contrast, there will be a far greater amount of work needed and, therefore, 
higher costs to build a house for the fi rst time on a large acreage. Here utilities will 
probably have to come in from some distance, and special facilities such as a septic 
tank and sewage disposal fi eld may have to be constructed.
Utilities—Permanent Connections
Here we allow for the municipal charges for the permanent connections to sewer 
systems, natural gas, and electrical systems. In some locations, the municipality per-
forms the work for a fee. In other areas the homebuilder’s subtrades make the con-
nections but there may still be additional municipal charges to pay. The estimator 
needs to determine what is required for the particular project under consideration 
and obtain details of the fees likely to be charged by the municipality involved.
Utilities—Temporary Site Services
A number of temporary site services are often required in order to pursue construc-
tion operations on a project. Site services include the following items:
■ Water services
■ Electrical services for power and lighting
■ Telephone services
In each case, there is usually an installation cost to extend the particular service 
to the site and a cost for the resources consumed during the course of construction 
operations. Installation costs vary widely according to how far the services have to 
be brought to reach the site. The information about which services are available on 
site and which have to be brought in from afar may be provided in the bid docu-
ments for custom homes. This data is usually only obtainable from a thorough inves-
tigation of the site. See Chapter 2 for a discussion of site investigations.
The largest consumption cost of all of these items will probably be for electrical 
power used on the project. Electricity consumption for items that are heavy users of 
electricity (such as temporary hoists) should be calculated separately from the gen-
eral electrical consumption on the project. 
The cost of the electricity used to meet the general power and lighting needs of 
the job is most often estimated by once again resorting to the technique that consists 
of using the historic costs of the item on previous projects as a basis for making a 
prediction about future expenses on this item. 
This method of using cost records to predict future costs is also often used to 
assess the amount of phone charges on a project. Project supervisors generally use 
cell phones since they spend much of their time on the move rather than in a fi xed 
offi ce location. A phone line may, however, be required if a sales offi ce is to be set up 
at the site of the development. 
If a phone line is to be installed, contact the phone company to obtain infor-
mation about installation charges and estimate monthly charges from the costs in-
curred on previous projects remembering to include for past and possible future rate 
increases.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

160 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES
Scaffolds, Hoardings, and Temporary Enclosures 
Scaffolds, hoardings, and temporary enclosures are constructed on a project in re-
sponse to specifi c project needs, or the owner may call for particular items such 
as dust curtains, which are often needed on renovation projects. This is another 
situation where the estimator is advised to consult with experienced construction 
personnel in her/his company to assess requirements since there are a wide variety of 
different temporary structures that could possibly be needed on a project, including:
 
1. Fences or barricades set up around the perimeter of work areas
 
2. Temporary scaffolds for work on exterior walls or roof 
 
3. Temporary enclosures built to provide security and/or allow a space to be 
heated
 
4. Temporary covers to the exterior openings of buildings to improve security 
or to allow the building to be heated
 
5. Temporary partitions or dust curtains erected in or around a work area to 
confi ne the debris and noise of construction operations
 
6. General protection of existing structures on or adjacent to the work site
In each case, the total cost of work includes the cost of materials, labor, and any 
necessary equipment required to erect the structures involved, plus the cost of taking 
down and removing the materials from the site after their use.
Figure 8.4 shows the sketch of a temporary enclosure erected over a construc-
tion work area to provide a heated space in winter conditions. Lightweight joists are 
supported on 2 3 4 stud walls around the exterior all covered with reinforced plastic 
sheets. Materials will be used many times over, so unit costs will be low and the joists 
will be rented only for the time they are required for use on the enclosure.
42' - 0" x 36' - 6"
Temporary
2 x 4
Stud Walls
Lightweight Joists
               3' - 0" on center
Reinforced
Plastic
Covering
8' - 0"
Figure 8.4 
Temporary Enclosure
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES 
161
Figure 8.5 shows takeoff of the work involved in this enclosure together with 
prices for materials and labor to erect and dismantle the items involved. 
Temporary Heating
Temporary heating can be divided into three categories:
 
1. Heating provided in localized areas to allow operations like masonry to con-
tinue in cold weather
 
2. Heating a temporary enclosure
 
3. Heating the house to allow the fi nishing trades to complete their work
Categories 1 and 2 are usually achieved by the use of portable space heaters that 
are oil, gas, or propane fuelled. This type of heater may also be used for item 3, or 
the homebuilder may be allowed to use the building’s permanent heating system if 
it is operational. 
Two costs need to be estimated when pricing these items: the rental rate or own-
ership costs of the portable space heaters used and the cost of fuel consumed, both 
of which depend upon the duration of the heating period and the amount of heat 
required. There will also be labor costs for maintenance and operation of heaters, 
but this cost should be considered with the other site personnel expenses considered 
previously. 
If the homebuilder proposes to use the permanent heating system of a building 
as a source of temporary heating during construction, the estimator needs to calcu-
late the fuel cost up to the time the owner takes possession of the house.
Figure 8.5 
Temporary Enclosure Estimate
Takeoff
Lightweight Joists: (42.00/3.0) + 1 = 15 Joists               
= 
15 No.
 
Stud Walls: 
2 x 42.0 x 8.0 
= 
672
 
 
2 x 36.5 x 8.0 
= 
584 
= 
1,256 SF
 Plastic Covering: Walls: 
 
1,256 
 
 Roof: 42.0 x 36.5 
= 
1,533 
= 
2,789
 
 Add 10% for laps:  
 
 
279
 
  
 
 
 
3,068 SF 
 
 
 
U/Rate 
Labor 
U/Rate Materials 
Total
ITEMS 
Quantity 
Unit 
Lab. 
$ 
Matl. 
$ 
$
Lightweight Joists  
15 
No. 
$40.00 
600 
$50.00 
   750 
1,350
Stud Walls 
1,256 
SF 
$0.80 
1,005 
$0.30 
377 
1,382
Plastic Covering 
3,068 
SF 
$0.06 
184 
$0.08 
245 
429
          Total Price: 
 
 
 
1,789 
— 
1,372 
3,161
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

162 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES
Figure 8.6 shows the calculation of the temporary heating expenses to provide 
heat for a period of 30 days to the temporary enclosure detailed in Figure 8.4. This 
estimate is based on a heat consumption rate of 100 British Thermal Units (BTUs) 
per CY of space heated per hour, which is an estimate of the amount of heat required 
to maintain acceptable working conditions inside the enclosure. The actual heating 
rate encountered on the project can vary over a wide range of possibilities depending 
on the quality of the enclosure, the air temperature outside the enclosure, and wind 
conditions. These conditions are all diffi cult to accurately predict. Because of this 
uncertainty, there is a large amount of risk attached to estimates of heating costs. The 
estimator and the homebuilder’s management should be aware of this risk.
Site Access and Storage Space
Consideration of site access and storage space is grouped together because the two 
are often interconnected. For instance, a city lot may have excellent accessibility but 
little or no storage space on site, whereas more than adequate storage space may be 
available on an out-of-town job but access to the site may be limited to a dirt road. 
Notes:
1. A temporary enclosure of size: 42'-0" x 36'-6" x 12'-0" is to be heated for a period of 30-days.
2. Heating is required to be continuous 24-hours per day at the rate of 100 BTUs per CY per hour.
3. Heating is to be provided by propane heaters with an output of 70,000 BTUs per hour.
4. Heaters are rented for $75.00 per week, and propane is available for $1.05 per gallon.
5. A gallon of propane provides 90,000 BTUs of heat.
Calculation:
ts
o
C
 
 
 
 
 
$
 
 
 
 
 
 Volume to Be Heated: 42.0 x 36.5 x 12.0 
= 
18,396 cu. ft.
= 
681.33 cu. Yds.
  Heat Required = 681.33 CY x 100 BTUs per hour 
= 
68,133 BTUs/hour
 Heater Rental Cost:  
= 
1 Heater x $75.00/week x 4 weeks 
= 
300.00
Propane Consumption: 68,133 x 30 days x 24 hours 
= 
49,056,000 BTUs
 
 Propane Cost: 49,056,000 x $2.05   
= 
1,117.39
90,000
    
Total Heating Cost: 
 1,417.39
  
Figure 8.6 
Temporary Heating Calculation
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES 
163
These items need to receive careful attention on the site visit if an accurate assess-
ment of access and storage problems is to be made.
An access road may be in place for a new home in the country, but the cost of 
maintaining this road for the duration of construction may need to be estimated. 
Gravel roads must be graded from time to time, and paved roads may require clean-
ing or even repairs if they are seriously soiled or damaged by traffi c to and from the 
project. 
Municipal bylaws in some localities have imposed liability on builders regarding 
cleanup and restoration of city pavements affected by construction operations. The 
estimator should check into the regulations that apply to the project since the cost 
of cleaning up roads can be expensive after trucks have left long trails of mud from 
a wet site.
The problem of lack of space on congested sites for trailers, storage, and parking 
can be diffi cult to solve. Homebuilders have sometimes been able to utilize space on 
the streets next to the site with municipal approval and upon payment of the neces-
sary fees. Alternative solutions may include renting space on a vacant lot adjacent to 
or at least near to the site, but whatever the planned solution, the problem has to be 
confronted at the time of the estimate so that the price of the plan can be determined 
and included in the bid price.
Site Security
On renovations and custom homes, the owner’s requirements may spell out their secu-
rity needs for the job. These can vary anywhere from the provision of a site fence to an 
elaborate continuous surveillance system incorporating personal identifi cation cards 
for site personnel and security checks on all persons working on the project. Require-
ments for the average residential project include site fencing, temporary covers to door 
and window openings, and possible after-hours surveillance by a security organization. 
Where there are no owner-specifi ed security requirements, the homebuilder will 
have to decide what measures are to be taken in this regard for the project. In some 
cases there is a trade off between the cost of losses and the cost of security. Instal-
lation of an inexpensive alarm system on storage trailers may be suffi cient, or just 
common sense precautions taken by supervisors and workers during the course of 
the work may be all that is necessary on certain projects. 
Aside from owner requirements, the homebuilder may have to consider the 
wishes of its insurance company and the recommendations of local law enforcement 
agencies when reviewing site security needs. But whatever the situation is, decisions 
have to be in place before the estimator can put a price on them.
Equipment Rentals
The equipment used on the project is priced in three different sections of the estimate 
using three different pricing methods:
 
1. Major items of equipment used in excavation and concreting operations are 
priced under the recaps of that work. This category of equipment includes 
items such as excavators, bulldozers, graders, rollers, concrete buggies, and 
concrete pumps. As we have seen in Chapter 9 and Chapter 10, these items 
are priced using rental rates or ownership costs against the hours the equip-
ment is used on site.
 
2. Hand tools and other items of equipment valued at less than $1,000 each are 
priced at the end of the estimate as a percentage of the total labor price of the 
estimate. See “Small Tools and Consumables” that follows.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

164 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES
 
3. Items of equipment kept at the site, sometimes for extended periods, and 
used only intermittently during its time on site. This category of equipment 
is priced with the general expenses, and it is this equipment that we will con-
sider here.
Some of the more common items of site equipment include:
■ table saws
■ radial-arm saws
■ plate compactors
■ jumping jack compactors
■ air compressors
■ pneumatic tools and attachments
■ generators
■ concrete vibrators 
■ surveying instruments
■ welders
■ hoists and cranes
■ cement and mortar mixers
■ forklifts 
From the homebuilder’s list of site equipment, the estimator selects the pieces 
required for the job and prices each item by multiplying its price rate by the length of 
time the item is to be assigned to the project. An amount may also be added to cover 
the cost of fuel and maintenance expenses on this equipment.
Dewatering Excavations
Dewatering expenses refer to the costs of removing water from excavations and, in 
some cases, from the fi nished basements of projects under construction. The usual 
method of dewatering makes use of submersible electric pumps and hoses operating 
from sumps excavated below the bottom of the basement.   
The amount of dewatering required for a project  is yet another area of uncer-
tainty for the estimator. On projects where a large amount of pumping is expected, 
very little may ultimately be needed and, where little or no moisture was antici-
pated on a job, extensive dewatering can turn out to be necessary. These errors in 
judgment are possible even after diligent investigations of the site, previous condi-
tions encountered in the vicinity of the work, and careful study of all available soils 
reports.
Green Building Provisions
There can be a number of additional expenses associated with green building. See 
the discussion of green building in Chapter 1. The cost of collecting and sorting 
waste materials for recycling is an expense that might be incurred by a contractor as 
part of its green building program. An estimate of this cost is added to the general 
expenses.
There could also be fees to pay if the contractor is applying to have the proj-
ect certifi ed under initiatives such as the NAHBGreen program. Again, such fees 
would be added to project general expenses. To offset the cost of green building, 
some municipalities and government agencies offer incentives that might be in the 
form of tax benefi ts or reductions in building permit fees; the estimator needs to 
investigate these possibilities and make reductions to the project price where they 
apply.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES 
165
Cleanup
Cleanup on a housing project can be divided into fi ve categories: 
 
1. General site cleanup
 
2. Final site cleanup
 
3. Cleaning the furnace
 
4. Cleaning windows
 
5. Move-in cleanup 
The general daily cleanup expenses include the cost of renting garbage containers 
for most projects plus the cost of constructing temporary garbage chutes on some 
renovation projects. Expenses include the labor cost of the ongoing cleanup required 
in connection with the work of the project. However, the cost of cleaning up after 
specifi c trades such as concrete work should be included in the cost of the concrete 
work and, under the terms of subcontracts, subtrades are usually responsible for the 
cleanup of any garbage resulting from their own work. That cost is to be included in 
that subtrade’s price for its work.
The fi nal site cleanup includes all the costs involved in readying the worksite 
for handing over the fi nished project to the owner. Removal of temporary garbage 
chutes and garbage containers will be required together with the general tidying up 
of the work site.
When a forced-air furnace is used on a house, the ductwork attached to the 
furnace is usually installed quite early on the project. It can subsequently become 
clogged with dust and construction debris as the rest of the project work is com-
pleted. This is especially true when other trades use the ductwork for (unoffi cial) 
garbage disposal. Consequently, it is considered to be good customer service to have 
the ductwork cleaned by a specialist company before move in occurs.  
When the job approaches the time when the new owner is about to take pos-
session, the move-in cleanup will occur. This involves cleaning carpets and other 
fl ooring, cleaning windows, bathroom and kitchen fi xtures, and dealing with any 
spills or splashes that might spoil the appearance of the new home. The work is often 
subcontracted to a company that provides this cleaning service on the basis of a price 
per square feet of gross fl oor area.
Other General Expenses
Other items of general expense that may be required for housing projects include:
 
1. Stakeout—This is an allowance for the cost of the survey work involved in 
setting out the lines and levels of the project.
 
2. Survey and Plot Plan—A survey of the site, together with a plot plan certifi ed 
by a land surveyor, may be required on some projects. Include the surveyor’s 
fees for this service here. 
 
3. Snow Removal—Homebuilders operating in northern areas fi nd this can be 
a signifi cant expense when a project is required to be completed in the winter 
months. 
 
4. Saw Setup—When there is a large amount of carpentry work to be completed 
at the site, the homebuilder may build a temporary enclosure for the main table 
saw or radial-arm saw to protect it from the weather and provide a secure 
lockup for this expensive piece of equipment. The cost to build and later remove 
the enclosure, together with any other expense to set up the saw, is priced here.
 
5. Photographs—In their contract with the homebuilder, the owner of a custom 
home may call for offi cial progress photographs to be taken over the course 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

166 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES
of the project. In cases such as this, it may be necessary to include the price of 
professional photographers who will perform this work or photographs taken 
by the project supervisor may be acceptable. If it is not a contract require-
ment, the builder may still wish to keep a photographic record of construction. 
Whatever the case, an estimate of the cost of photography may be required. 
 
6. Project Signs—The signs displayed outside the site of a project can vary from a 
small advertisement of the name of the homebuilder to large, elaborate placards 
on multi-family developments. The latter often includes an artist’s rendering of 
the fi nished development along with a list naming all the major participants in 
the project. Site signs will normally be specifi ed in the contract documents out-
lining in detailed or general terms the owner’s requirements. Sign painters are 
usually hired to produce the signs that are then installed by the homebuilder. 
 
7. Soils Testing—It is sometimes necessary to test the soil-bearing capacity 
when poor soil conditions are encountered. An engineering company is usu-
ally hired to do this work and make recommendations about how to deal 
with the problem.
 
8. New Home Warranty—Home building contracts often include warranty pro-
visions that call for the homebuilder—at no extra expense—to perform all 
remedial or maintenance work required on the project over a defi ned time 
period. Homebuilders usually contribute to an insurance agreement that pro-
vides the required warranty.
 
9. Temporary Fire Protection—This is normally the cost of providing fi re extin-
guishers on site during the construction period. The estimator should be care-
ful to note any more elaborate protection requirements (such as the provision 
of fi re hydrants) since this can be an expensive item. 
 
10. Wind Bracing Masonry—In many places, the masonry trade does not in-
clude in the scope of their work the temporary wind bracing. Shoring or 
scaffolding may be necessary to support masonry work while it is under 
construction. When this is required and not included in the masonry quote, 
the homebuilder should allow for the cost of this work.
 
11. Municipal Charges—There are many possible municipal charges that a 
homebuilder may be liable to pay in connection with any construction proj-
ect. In addition to building permit fees (discussed later), fees may be payable 
for the use of city streets for unloading, storage or parking, the construction 
of city sidewalk crossovers, municipal business taxes, or homebuilder license 
fees to name but a few. Estimators should be familiar with the requirements 
of their own city, and on out-of-town jobs they must investigate the munici-
pal charges in vicinities that are new to them.
 
12. Financing Charges—With an accurate forecast of the cash fl ow of a project, 
an estimator would be able to calculate the interest charges on the home-
builder’s running overdraft which is required to fi nance the project. How-
ever, precise forecasts of the infl ow and outfl ow of cash on a construction 
project, even when detailed schedules are available, are extremely diffi cult to 
produce. Here again the estimator usually has to fall back on previous job 
records with necessary adjustments for changes in interest rates to determine 
the probable fi nancing charges on a future project. 
Add-Ons
Add-ons are calculated as a percentage of other amounts in the estimate. For in-
stance, the add-on may be a percentage of material or equipment prices (many taxes 
are calculated in this way). Some add-ons, such as payroll burden, are calculated as 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES 
167
a percentage of the price of labor in the estimate.  Still further add-ons are calculated 
as a percentage of the total estimate.
Taxes  
There are as many ways of accounting for taxes in an estimate as there are ways of 
applying taxes to the price of construction work, and, because the substance of a tax 
can vary widely from place to place, there is no single formula for dealing with taxes. 
How a tax is calculated depends upon the particulars of how the tax is assessed. For 
instance: 
 
a. Where a sales tax applies to materials but varies from one material to an-
other, the tax has to be calculated separately on each individual material 
price.
 
b. Where a uniform sales tax applies to all project materials, an add-on can be 
set up at the end of the estimate to add the necessary percentage to the value 
of the total material content of the estimate.
 
c. Payroll taxes that apply to the total labor price of the estimate can also be 
handled with an add-on. This is the case with the payroll additive add-on 
discussed below.
 
d. A European and Canadian-style value-added tax, which applies to the prices 
of all the components of an estimate, can be set up as a percentage add-on 
calculated on the very last line of the estimate so that the applicable rate ap-
plies to the fi nal complete estimate price.
Labor Add-Ons
The following general expense items are proportional to the total labor cost of a 
project, so the dollar value of these items can only be calculated when the total 
estimated labor cost has been determined. This point is reached in the estimating 
process when the homebuilder’s own work, the subtrade work, and the other general 
expenses have been priced. See Figure 12.1 for the location of these add-ons on a 
typical Estimate Summary Sheet.
Small Tools and Consumables
In this expense item, the cost of hand tools and equipment valued at less than $1,000 
per piece is priced together with miscellaneous supplies used in the construction pro-
cess. These supplies would include such items as replacement drill bits, saw blades, 
chalk lines, batteries, and all the other incidental components consumed in connec-
tion with the work of a construction project.
Payroll Additive
The labor component of the estimate has so far been priced using the base wage rates 
for the trades involved. Every employer also makes a variety of contributions in rela-
tion to its total payroll in response to federal, state, and municipal requirements and 
company policies. Payroll additive may account for any or all of the following items:
 
1. Social Security Tax—This is a federal government requirement to provide 
retirement benefi ts to persons who become eligible.
 
2. Unemployment Compensation Tax—This is a state tax that is gathered to 
provide funds to compensate workers in periods of unemployment.
 
3. Workers’ Compensation and Employer’s Liability Insurance—As required 
by state regulations, contributions are collected to provide a fund from 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

168 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES
which workers who are injured while working or as a result of working are 
compensated.
 
4. Public Liability and Property Damage Insurance—This insurance protects 
the employer against claims by the public for injuries or damage sustained as 
a result of the work activities of an employee.
 
5. Fringe Benefi ts—This includes a number of items that could be contained in 
a contract of employment or a union collective agreement. Examples include 
health care insurance, pensions, and disability insurance.
These contributions vary from place to place and from company to company. 
The task of the estimator is to ascertain the rates of contributions that apply to the 
project labor force and allow for them in the estimate. 
Permits
Most municipalities levy a building permit fee on all home building projects whether 
they are new home developments or merely renovation jobs. Permit fees are usually 
calculated as a percentage of the total construction cost, but there may be minimum 
charges for small projects. Check with the local planning department to determine 
the current fees for building permits and include them in the estimate. There are 
often additional permits and associated fees for plumbing, mechanical, and electri-
cal work. If the subcontractors do not include these amounts in their prices for the 
job, the estimator needs to investigate what is required and include the applicable 
amounts in the estimate.  
Insurance
Sometimes the owner will provide insurance coverage for the builder they hire but 
more often, and especially on the larger projects, the builder will be required to ob-
tain insurance. The basic insurance policies for a building project include:
■ Property insurance including fi re and vandalism
■ Liability insurance to cover liability claims arising from the project
■ Vehicle and equipment insurance for units used in connection with the work
Sophisticated owners will usually have specifi c insurance requirements. The 
estimator is advised to consult their company insurance agent to be sure that the 
standard policies they use meet these requirements. There may be additional pre-
miums for special coverage, which the estimator needs to include in the price of 
the job.
Markup and Fee
The markup and fee on a job is often calculated as a percentage of the total estimate 
price. Markup and fee considerations are discussed in Chapter 12.
Example of General Expenses Pricing
Figure 8.7 shows the general expenses for the sample house project.
Comments on General Expenses Shown in Figure 8.7
 
1. This project is expected to take 4 months to complete based on the duration 
of previous projects of a similar type and size. There is no need to prepare a 
detailed schedule for this project.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES 
169
PROJECT:
LOCATION:
DATE:
ESTIMATOR:
GENERAL EXPENSES
 
 
 
Quantity 
Unit Rate 
Labor 
Unit Rate 
Material 
Unit Rate 
Equip. 
Subtrade 
Total
 
 
 
         Unit 
Labor 
$ 
Material 
$ 
Equip. 
$ 
$ 
$
 
—
 
elu
d
e
h
c
S
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0 
 
—
 
Design
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0 
Project Superintendent 
4 Mo. 1,250.00 
5000 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
5000
Assistant Superintendent 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
Stakeout  
1 No. 
300.00 
300 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
300
Survey and Plot Plan 
1 No. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
200 
200
Safety and First Aid 
1 No. 
— 
— 
35.00 
35 
— 
— 
— 
35
Rentals: 
 
 
– office trailer 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
 
 
– office equipment 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0 
 
 
– office supplies 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
 
 
– storage 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
 
 
– tool lockups 
4 Mo. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
75.00 
300 
— 
300
 
 
– toilets 
4 Mo. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
150.00 
600 
— 
600
Permanent Connections: 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
 
 
– Sewer Connection 
1 No. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
960 
960
 
 
– Underground Wiring 
1 No. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
165 
165
Municipal Charges 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
Temporary Site Services: 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
 
– Water services 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
 
– Electrical services 
1 No. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
500 
500
 
– Telephone 
4 Mo. 
— 
— 
75.00 
300 
— 
— 
— 
300
 
—
 s
dlo
ff
a
c
S
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
 
—
 s
g
nid
r
a
o
H
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
Temporary Heating 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
Temporary Fire Protection 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
Site Access 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
Site Security 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
Equipment Rentals 
1 No. 
See Calculations 
— 
— 
— 
750 
— 
750
Truck Rentals 
4 Mo. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
150.00 
600 
— 
600
Dewatering Excavations 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
Cleanup:  
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
Collecting/Sorting Recyclables
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
 
– General site cleanup 
4 Mo. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
125.00 
500 
— 
500
 
– Final site cleanup 
1166 
sf 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
292 
292
 
– Cleaning the furnace 
1 No. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
185 
185
 
– Cleaning windows 
1166 
sf 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
82 
82
 
– Move-in cleanup 
1 No. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
 100 
100
Snow Removal 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
Photographs 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
Project Signs 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0
Soils Testing 
1 No. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
110 
110
Green Building Certification 
New Home Warranty 
1 No. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
300 
300
 
 
TOTALS TO SUMMARY: 
 
5300 
— 
335 
— 
2750 
2893 
11278
House Example
Townsville
ABF
Figure 8.7 
Priced General Expenses Sheet
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

170 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES
 
2. Because this is such a small project, the cost of site supervision is shared with 
other projects, so only a portion of the total cost of this item is included in 
this estimate. 
 
3. The price of labor to stake out the lot is based on the cost of a helper to assist 
the superintendent with the surveying and setting out work.
 
4. The survey amount is for a land surveyor to provide a reference point for the 
superintendent to use for setting out the project.
 
5. The amount shown against Safety and First Aid is an allowance for fi rst aid 
supplies consumed during the course of the work. This is based on the aver-
age amount spent on this item on previous projects.
 
6. There is no offi ce trailer required for this project, but there is an allowance 
for the rental of a lockup for tools and for a chemical toilet facility at the site.
 
7. Sewer Connection and Underground Wiring Connection amounts are for the 
municipal charges to make these permanent connections.
 
8. Charges for the Temporary Electrical services are based on the historical re-
cord of the cost of electricity consumed on similar projects in the past.
 
9. The superintendent’s cell phone expenses are also based on historic costs. 
These charges are shared by a number of projects, so only a portion of the 
total amount is shown here.
 
10. Equipment to be used on this project would be listed and priced on the back 
of the General Expenses Sheet. The note: “SEE CALCULATIONS” is direct-
ing the reviewer of this estimate to consult a supplementary calculation sheet 
usually located on the back of the General Expenses Sheet. The equipment 
list for this project is as shown in the following example:
EXAMPLE 8.1
1 Compressor 
- 2 months 3 $165.00   
5   330.00
2 Concrete Vibrators 
- 2 days 3 $25.00   
5   100.00
1 Crane (hoisting steps)  
- 1 day 3 $170.00   
5   170.00
 
 
      600.00
 
Allowance for fuel and maintenance: 
 150.00
                                       
Total:  
 750.00
 
11. The fuel and maintenance allowance above is calculated as 25 percent of the 
rental rate for these items.
 
12. The Trucking amount allowed is the portion of the cost of the superinten-
dent’s pickup truck on this project.
 
13. The General site cleanup amount is a contribution to the cost of renting a 
garbage container for the site.
 
14. The amounts for Final site cleanup, Cleaning the furnace, Cleaning windows 
and Move-in cleanup are the prices charged by a subtrade to complete this 
work to ready the house for handing over to the owner. 
 
15. A sum is included for testing the soil-bearing capacity under the footings.
 
16. A new home warranty is provided to the purchaser of this home, so the pre-
mium for this service is included here.
 
17. Add-on amounts are not included on this General Expense Sheet since add-
ons cannot be calculated until the Summary is completed. Add-ons that apply 
to this job can be found at the end of the Summary Sheet shown in Fig-
ure 12.9 in Chapter 12.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES 
171
SUMMARY
■ General expenses or project overheads comprise the indirect costs expended 
on a construction project.  
■ It is usually the builder’s responsibility to assess and price the general ex-
penses on a construction project. 
■ Because there are so many possible general expense items, estimators usually 
make use of a checklist when general expenses are priced. 
■ General expense requirements are assessed by examining the plans and speci-
fi cations and considering the amount of work involved in the project as mea-
sured in the takeoff process. Job superintendents and project managers can 
help the estimator defi ne general expense requirements for a project.
■ Some general expense items are calculated as a percentage of the estimate or 
as a percentage of some part of the estimate. These items are included as add-
ons at the end of the estimate.
■ Many general expense items are calculated as a function of the duration of the 
project so at least a rough schedule is required before these items can be evaluated.
■ Major items to consider when pricing general expenses include:
• Site personnel
• Safety and fi rst aid
• Travel and accommodations
• Temporary site offi ces
• Temporary site services
• Hoardings and temporary enclosures
• Temporary heating
• Site access and storage
• Site security
• Site equipment
• Trucking
• Dewatering
• Site cleanup
■ General expenses calculated as add-ons include:
• Taxes
• Small tools and consumables
• Payroll additive
• Building permits
• Insurance
• Markup and fee
■ Pricing the general expenses for the house example is demonstrated.
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
Information  
Web Page Address
 
■ Occupational Health and Safety  
http://www.osha.gov/
Administration
 
■ Scaffolding safety 
http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/scaffolding/
 
■ Masonry scaffolding information 
http://www.masonrymagazine.com/
 
 
8-02/scaffolding.html
 
■ Example of a new home warranty  
http://www.blueribbonhomewarranty.com/
program in Colorado 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

172 
CHAPTER 8—PRICING GENERAL EXPENSES
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. Explain what the general expenses of a project are.
 2. How can the total duration of the construction work of a project be determined 
in the short time available in the estimating process?
 3. List the three temporary site services that are usually required on a residential  
project, and describe how each service is priced.
 4. List three possible ways of dealing with the problem of limited storage space on 
a downtown site.
 5. List the fi ve categories of site cleanup that have to be considered in a housing 
estimate. 
 6. What are the homebuilder’s fi nancing charges on a project, and how is the cost 
of fi nancing charges estimated?
 7. Describe how “add-ons” are calculated.
 8. Describe two basic insurance policies that a builder is often required to obtain 
for a project.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
 1. Estimate the cost of temporary heating of a house size 45 feet 3 30 feet 3 
20 feet high. The space is to be heated at the rate of 75 BTUs per CY per hour for 
a period of two weeks (14 days), 24 hours per day. 75,000 BTU propane heaters 
can be rented for $25.00 per week. The cost of propane is $0.90 per gallon and 
assumes 1 gallon provides 90,000 BTUs of heat.
 2. Estimate the cost of heating a temporary enclosure for a house size 50 feet 3 
40 feet 3 12 feet high. The space is to be heated at the rate of 100 BTUs per 
CY per hour for a period of one week (7 days), 24 hours per day. 90,000 BTU 
propane heaters can be rented for $35.00 per week. The cost of propane is 
$1.20 per gallon and assumes 1 gallon provides 90,000 BTUs of heat.
 3. Use the prices given in Figure 8.7 to estimate the general expense charges for 
a new 2,500 square feet home that is expected to take 5 months to construct. 
This home is to be built to NAHBGreen standards, so there are two additional 
expenses to consider:
a. Collecting and sorting waste materials for recycling is expected to cost $250 per 
month.
b. Green building certifi cation fees will be $500.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

173
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be 
able to:
■ Describe the pricing process using the homebuilder’s standard trade breakdown.
■ Explain estimating risk and why project costs may exceed estimated prices for the 
work.
■ Explain the infl uence of risk, job factors, and labor and management factors on 
pricing.
■ Describe how materials are priced in an estimate.
■ Describe how bills of material are compiled.
■ Explain how a subcontractor’s work is priced.
■ Complete the pricing of a residential project including a bill of materials.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
9
PRICING THE WORK
Introduction
With non-computer estimating (in other words, preparing an estimate by hand rather 
than by computer), the process of pricing an estimate can be divided into two stages. 
The fi rst stage consists of processing the takeoff for pricing by sorting and listing all 
takeoff items, usually into a trade-by-trade breakdown. This sorted list is referred to 
as the recap. The second stage consists of pricing the items on this list. The reason 
for preparing the recap is to bring together all work of a similar nature so that the 
estimator can concentrate on the needs of one trade at a time. Also, when the recap 
KEY TERMS 
bill of materials
compaction factor
cost-plus contract
order units and order 
quantities
recap
royalty
swell factor
takeoff units and takeoff 
quantities
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

174 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
is complete, prices of each trade will be presented in summary form that facilitates 
easier evaluation of the estimate. If items were not recapped into trades but, instead, 
the takeoff priced directly, it would be far more diffi cult to answer questions such as 
what is the total amount in the estimate for rough carpentry materials?
The format of the recap breakdown varies from one homebuilder to another de-
pending on what information they wish to obtain from the priced estimate.  Frequently 
the breakdown refl ects a company’s coding system for cost accounting where items of 
work are assigned cost codes often in no particular order. Estimators prefer a more 
orderly breakdown, usually divided into trades, listed in the order of construction. 
This makes it easier for the estimator to see if there are any gaps in the estimate, 
whereas a random list of items is far more diffi cult to evaluate for defi ciencies.
A standard trade breakdown consists of the following items:
 
1. Excavation and backfi ll work
 
2. Concrete work
 
3. Formwork
 
4. Rough carpentry work
 
5. Finish carpentry work
 
6. Exterior fi nishes
 
7. Interior fi nishes
 
8. Plumbing
 
9. HVAC
 
10. Electrical
In Chapter 2 we recommended measuring assemblies. These often contain a mix-
ture of different trades. For instance, a foundation assembly may include excavation, 
concrete work, and carpentry. Some estimators takeoff each of the recap trades sepa-
rately which makes the preparation of the recap much easier, but this approach has few 
devotees for the reasons discussed in Chapter 2. So, where the work is not taken off 
trade by trade, the estimator has to prepare a recap. This means the entire takeoff has 
to be scanned for each of the trades listed on the breakdown. The estimator will fi rst 
scan for all the items of Excavating and Fill and list these in the recap, then she/he will 
scan for all the Concrete items, etc. The process will be repeated until the takeoff is fully 
recapped. This procedure has to be performed with great care, and a system of checking 
off items as they are carried to the recap is essential to confi rm that all items that were 
in the takeoff have indeed been processed and are now included in the recap. 
In computer estimating systems, the process of recapping takeoff items is han-
dled automatically. In most systems, a numerical code is applied to takeoff items 
which enables the computer to classify items and list them under the appropriate 
trade section for pricing. Depending on the system used, takeoff items can also be 
priced automatically as part of this same process. This demonstrates a signifi cant 
advantage of using a computer in the estimating process because not only does the 
computerized system eliminate the time an estimator otherwise would have to spend 
recapping items, but it also ensures all takeoff items will be accounted for. There is 
very little chance of a takeoff item being overlooked and not priced once it has been 
entered into the computer.
Returning to the manual process, once the recap is prepared, the pricing proce-
dure can commence. In pricing a construction estimate, there are fi ve price categories 
that need to be considered:
 
1. Labor
 
2. Equipment
 
3. Materials
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
175
 
4. Subcontractors
 
5. Job overheads
We will consider the particular factors that affect the level of prices in each of these 
categories, but there is one factor that impacts upon all the above categories: risk.
Homebuilder’s Risk
In Chapter 12, we suggest that the homebuilder, when considering the amount of 
markup to add to an estimate for a new home, should assess the risk the builder will 
be assuming if they are awarded a contract to construct the home. In essence, the 
risk we are contemplating here is the risk of the builder losing money on the project. 
This usually results from situations where the actual cost of construction exceeds 
the estimated cost. The precise nature and value of this risk on any given project is 
not simple to evaluate. First we have to consider the nature of the contract that the 
homebuilder enters into with the owner, for it is from the terms of this contract that 
much of the builder’s risk emerges. 
For example, the contract could state “The builder will be reimbursed all project 
costs by the owner plus an added amount for profi t.” This arrangement is known as 
a cost-plus contract. (See Chapter 1 for a discussion of various contract types.) With 
a cost-plus contract the builder’s risk will be reduced to a minimum. A negligent 
homebuilder who fails to accurately keep track of all costs could still lose money 
under these terms, but the majority of builders will fi nd cost-plus contracts profi t-
able since most of the risk of price increases is borne by the owner rather than the 
builder.
If the contract is an agreement to build a house for a fi xed price, the type of ar-
rangement used on most homebuilding projects, the builder agrees to build the house 
for an agreed price. In this situation, if the cost of the work is more than the agreed 
price, the builder will lose money. Only where the owner changes the contract will 
the contract price change, so, if the work costs more than the amount of the builder’s 
price, the extra costs will have to be paid by the builder.
There are three general reasons why actual costs may exceed estimates on a 
project:
 
1. Takeoff quantities are too low
 
2. Actual productivity does not meet anticipated productivity
 
3. Subcontractors or material suppliers fail to meet obligations
Inaccurate Takeoffs
The possibility of inaccuracy in the measurement of takeoff quantities is a risk that 
is fundamental to the estimating process. The principal objective of following the 
systematic methodology of preparing a quantity takeoff outlined in preceding chap-
ters is to minimize the possibility of the error in the results. But even the most careful 
estimator can make a mistake in the takeoff—a fact that every experienced estimator 
will admit—and although computer systems can help reduce this risk, they cannot 
eliminate the risk. Consequently, senior estimators should review their colleagues’ 
takeoffs to try to identify anything that may have been done in error.  
Time and cost restraints usually make it impossible for a second estimator to 
check every single step that was taken in the preparation of a takeoff, but veteran 
estimators develop an ability to make broad assessments of takeoffs that can often 
enable them to detect defi ciencies. This assessment, nevertheless, is not perfect. Inevi-
tably some errors will still go undetected. Consequently, there is always some takeoff 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

176 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
risk that needs to be addressed when the project fee is considered and the bid price 
is fi nalized.
Pricing Labor and Equipment
Most homebuilders hire subcontractors to perform the work of the project. This 
means the subtrade will assume the risk of any cost over-runs resulting from failure 
to meet productivity targets. For instance, the subtrade may assume a productivity 
rate of 50 cubic yards per hour for excavating a basement. So, if the size of the base-
ment is 500 cubic yards, the estimated time for excavating will be 10 hours and the 
price of the work will be based on this duration. If, for any reason, it takes longer to 
complete the work, it will cost more than the estimated price and the subtrade will 
have to bare the loss. 
However, some builders like to perform at least some of the work using their 
own labor and also, sometimes, their own equipment. Each of the categories needs 
to be assessed and priced in an estimate. The most common method of pricing labor 
and equipment makes use of unit prices that are applied to listed takeoff quantities 
to calculate the total labor or equipment price for the work involved.
Apart from the risk of not meeting anticipated productivity rates, there are also 
risks involved with the wage rates and equipment rates used in pricing the builder’s 
work.
Wage Rates
The unit prices for labor are derived from the base wage rates of the workers in-
volved. Wage rates can vary from state to state, and even from place to place within 
a state. Thus, before the labor costs of an estimate can be priced, the estimator has 
to ascertain the craft wage rates that apply at the project location. 
In addition to the base wage rates, employers also have to consider such items 
as social security tax, unemployment tax, workers’ compensation insurance, liability 
insurance, and fringe benefi ts. The amount of these additional contributions, re-
ferred to as payroll additive below, is calculated on the Estimate Summary Sheet as 
a percentage of the total labor content of the bid price. 
While a single wage rate can be used for each trade over the course of a project 
of short duration, the estimator has to predict how wage rates will change over the 
term of larger multi-unit projects that may stretch over longer time periods. This as-
sessment can never be done with total certainty because wage rates or benefi ts may 
be subject to sudden changes that are diffi cult to foresee. 
Faced with the prospect of a long duration project, historical trends can be stud-
ied to help predict the level of future wages. The usual procedure is to examine the 
shape of the graph of actual wage rates plotted over a number of years and, from this 
graph, determine the average rate of wage increment. The analyst can proceed to ex-
trapolate along the graph line to arrive at the projected wage rates for the term of the 
project.  However, no matter how scientifi cally this process is accomplished, estimat-
ing future wage rates from previous trends amounts to little more than guesswork. 
With small, single dwelling projects of relatively short duration, these complica-
tions should not apply.
Equipment Rental Rates
Accurate predictions of future hourly costs of construction equipment can be just as 
diffi cult to evaluate as future wage rates. Ownership costs of a builder’s own equip-
ment can be analyzed with some certainty (see Chapter 10 for examples), but even 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
177
these calculations are based on assumptions about such things as life expectancy, 
maintenance costs, and salvage values, all of which can vary from expectations. 
Rental rates of equipment can also be diffi cult to tie down because they fl uctu-
ate in response to a number of variables including the level of economic activity in 
the construction industry, interest rates, taxes, import duties, and even construction 
labor wage rates. (Steeply rising wage rates cause managers to substitute equipment 
for labor wherever possible; this increases the demand for equipment and can raise 
rental rates.) 
If the estimate is prepared some time before the work begins, rental rates paid 
for the work can be quite different from rates forecast at the time of the estimate. 
The risk of rate increases can be managed to some extent by procuring guaranteed 
price quotations from rental companies for major equipment on some projects, but 
these fi rm price agreements are not always obtainable. 
In addition to the risk of rate increases, there are a number of other questions the 
estimator should consider regarding equipment rentals, including:
 
1. What is the age and condition of the equipment being offered?
 
2. Is the cost of an operator included in the rates quoted?
 
3. (On longer rentals) Do the rates include the cost of necessary maintenance of 
the equipment?
 
4. Is the cost of fuel included in the rental?
 
5. Is there a minimum rental fee or a minimum rental duration that translates 
into a minimum rental fee?
 
6. Will there be additional charges for delivery?
 
7. Are there any accessories needed to operate the equipment? If so, at what 
price are they available?
 
8. What taxes and/or license fees over and above the rental fee are applicable? 
 
9. What insurance coverage is included in the rental agreement?
 
10. Are there any special qualifi cations needed before the builder can legally op-
erate the equipment? In some jurisdictions, some proof of operator training 
is required before certain equipment can be legally used. 
Productivity of Labor and Equipment
The productivity of labor and equipment is infl uenced by a large number of factors 
that can differ according to the time and place of a project. These factors can be clas-
sifi ed into two main groups: job factors and labor and management factors.
Examples of job factors would include:
■ Weather conditions expected at the site
■ Access to and around the site
■ Site storage space
■ Project character, its size, and complexity
■ Distance from materials and equipment sources
■ Wage and price levels at the job location
Examples of labor and management factors would include:
■ Quality of job supervision
■ Quality of subtrades
■ Motivation and morale of workers
■ Type and quality of tools and equipment
■ Experience and records of similar projects in the past
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

178 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
Job Factors
The builder has very little infl uence, if any, over the job factors that prevail on an in-
dividual project, but the nature of these factors should be carefully investigated since 
they can have a major impact on the rates of productivity and thus the cost of work 
done. Each of the job factors listed can vary over a wide range of possible conditions. 
The estimator has to learn to determine the implications of the particular conditions 
expected on the project with regard to their impact upon job factors. Below are some 
observations on the method of investigating job factors and examples of some situ-
ations that may be encountered on different projects.
If the estimator is unfamiliar with the prevailing weather conditions at the lo-
cation of the job, weather records may be obtainable from a weather-monitoring 
agency in the vicinity of the site. Particular attention should be paid to data about 
the extreme and average summer and winter temperatures, together with informa-
tion regarding expected rainfall and snowfall amounts at the site location. Poor 
weather conditions at a site can make it impossible to attain the productivity levels 
obtained on previous projects at other locations. On projects away from the home-
builder’s home territory, a little investigative work about the prevailing weather con-
ditions there can help to avoid over optimistic production forecasts. 
The quality of site access can affect productivity in many ways. Poor access to some 
sites may restrict the size of equipment that can be used for the work so that smaller, less 
effi cient machines have to be used rather than those of a more appropriate size. Because 
large trucks are not able to get close to a site due to restricted access, they may have to 
unload some distance away and then have the material moved some time later to the 
work area. This double handling of materials can signifi cantly raise the cost of work.
 Cramped storage space at a site can also necessitate double handling of materi-
als where materials have to be temporarily stored at one location then moved on 
site some time later. “Just-in-time” delivery of materials in accordance with a precise 
schedule can be used to avoid this kind of double handling, but working to this kind 
of schedule requires extensive and careful management of operations that is not 
always available.
On large multi-unit projects where there is a signifi cant amount of repetitive 
work, the builder may obtain increased productivity from work improvements at-
tained because operations are repeated. Studies have shown that when a relatively 
complex work activity is repeated, there is an opportunity to improve production 
rates because those involved in the work learn to perform it more effi ciently. How-
ever, situations where a certain operation is performed just once or only a few times 
exclude the builder from the benefi ts of a learning rate achieved in repetitious op-
erations. Even on large projects the work may be too diverse to enable the builder’s 
crews to achieve a signifi cant learning rate.
Labor and Management Factors
Like job factors, some of the labor and management factors are also beyond the 
control of the builder. Over the long term, a builder may be able to develop effective 
supervisors and workers inside the company but because of the cyclical nature of the 
construction business, homebuilders often fi nd it diffi cult to maintain enough em-
ployment to retain these good workers. Consequently, the staffi ng of larger projects 
requires the builder to hire many workers from outside the company, consequently 
the quality of supervision and the labor available for the project often depends most 
upon the economic climate at the time of the work. In a strong economy where there 
is plenty of construction work underway and builders are busy, the better supervi-
sors and workers will already be fully employed, and so the builder may have to 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
179
make do with lower quality personnel for the next job. In a weak economy, good 
workers are far easier to fi nd.
Some labor and management factors can, however, be infl uenced by the builder. 
Efforts can be made to cultivate high morale and motivate workers, and a builder 
can try to ensure that projects are equipped with high-quality, well maintained tools 
and equipment to pursue the work. The concepts of “total quality management” 
have been embraced by a number of homebuilders who endeavor, through a process 
of constant improvement, to develop their personnel into a highly productive work 
force. These builders are convinced that these efforts will improve their company’s 
competitive edge, which will ensure their future success in the industry.
Use of Cost Records
If an estimator had a range of accurate historic prices for the labor or equipment 
requirements of each work item on a project, then by accounting for all the factors 
and variables associated with that project, he would be able to determine the price 
of each item with some confi dence. But how does an estimator come by such a range 
of prices? What is required is a database of information on the precise cost of work 
items over a variety of past jobs that were completed under carefully monitored con-
ditions. From this painstakingly gathered historic data, a range of realistic prices for 
each work item of an estimate can be established. This then allows the estimator to 
assess the cost of any particular work item on the range and, thus, arrive at a reason-
able prediction of the cost of that item. 
In order to be effective, an historic cost database used for estimating has to be 
assembled systematically; a haphazard collection of previous project costs gathered 
using different systems of measurement and costing will be more of a hindrance to 
good estimating than a help. A satisfactory cost database can only be developed from 
an accurate and consistent cost reporting system that is pursued in four key processes:
 
1. The priced takeoff items on the estimate are coded to produce the project 
budget. Some of the estimate takeoff items may be combined to provide a 
simpler breakdown that is easier to use than a detailed estimate in the cost 
recording system.
 
2. As the work is performed on the project, labor hours and equipment hours 
expended are coded to the applicable work items of the budget. It is advis-
able that project supervisors perform this coding function since they are in 
the best position to determine exactly which work item their work crews are 
working on. 
 
3. The quantity of work done in each of the work items underway is mea-
sured in accordance with the same rules of measurement followed by the 
estimators. 
 
4. Company accountants apply wage rates and equipment prices to the hours 
coded. This determines the labor cost and equipment cost for each work 
item. These costs are then combined with the work quantities to generate the 
actual unit costs of the project work items.
Figure 9.1 shows an example of a selection of items that may be found in a cost 
report prepared in this way. The cost record shows the budget amounts and budget 
unit prices in the form of an estimate summary. Next, the amounts that have been 
spent on each of the items in the current month are shown together with the unit 
costs calculated from the quantity of work done on each item. The amount spent to 
date and the unit costs to date are then shown. Finally, based on the rates of produc-
tivity realized to date, projections of the fi nal costs are indicated.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

180 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNDER/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNDER/ PROJECTED UNDER/
ITEM 
QUANT. 
LABOR 
EQUIP. 
MATL. 
SUB. 
TOTAL 
QUANT. 
LABOR 
EQUIP. 
MATL. 
SUB. 
TOTAL 
(OVER) 
QUANT. 
LABOR 
EQUIP. 
MATL. 
SUB. 
TOTAL 
(OVER) 
TOTAL 
    (OVER)
 
  
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
— 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
  
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
 
Stakeout Building 
1 No. 
250.00 
— 
— 
— 
  250.00 
 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
**1 No. 
230.00 
— 
— 
— 
  230.00 
   $20 
   $230 
  $20
Rentals: Tool Lockups 
4 Mo. 
— 
200.00 
— 
— 
  200.00 
1 Mo. 
— 
50.00 
— 
— 
    50.00 
$0 
2 Mo. 
— 
100.00 
— 
— 
  100.00 
     $0 
   $200 
    $0
 
unit price 
  
— 
  50.00 
— 
— 
    50.00 
  
— 
50.00 
— 
— 
    50.00 
$0 
  
— 
  50.00 
— 
— 
    50.00 
$0.00
Excavation 
 
1 No. 
— 
— 
— 
4520.00 
4520.00 
0 No. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
      0.00 
$0 
**1 No. 
— 
— 
— 
4520.00 
4520.00 
     $0 
$4,520 
    $0
Concrete Footings 
 
10 CY 
200.00 
  50.00 
1100.00 
— 
1350.00 
0 CY 
    0.00 
  0.00 
      0.00 
— 
      0.00 
$0 
**10 CY 
    0.00 
    0.00 
      0.00 
— 
      0.00 
     $0 
$1,329 
  $22
 
unit price 
  
  20.00 
    5.00 
  110.00 
— 
  135.00 
  
 
 
 
— 
 
 
  
  18.00 
    4.85 
  110.00 
— 
  132.85 
$2.15
Concrete Walls 
 
30 CY 
750.00 
225.00 
3300.00 
— 
4275.00 
10 CY 
280.00 
79.50 
1100.00 
— 
1459.50 
   ($35) 
20 CY 
580.00 
161.00 
2200.00 
— 
2941.00 
    ($91) 
$4,412 
($137)
 
unit price 
  
  25.00 
    7.50 
  110.00 
— 
  142.50 
  
  28.00 
  7.95 
  110.00 
— 
  145.95 
($3.45) 
  
  29.00 
    8.05 
  110.00 
— 
  147.05   ($4.55)
Concrete Slabs 
 
20 CY 
700.00 
170.00 
2100.00 
— 
2970.00 
10 CY 
320.00 
82.50 
1020.00 
— 
1422.50 
      $63 
10 CY 
320.00 
  82.50 
1020.00 
— 
1422.50 
   $63 
$2,845 
$125
 
unit price 
  
  35.00 
    8.50 
  105.00 
— 
  148.50 
  
  32.00 
  8.25 
  102.00 
— 
  142.25 
   $6.25 
  
  32.00 
    8.25 
  102.00 
— 
  142.25 
$6.25
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
** Completed
ESTIMATE SUMMARY
CURRENT MONTH
TOTAL TO DATE
COST REPORT
Figure 9.1 
Cost Report
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
181
Project Cost Information from Cost Reports
A carefully and systematically prepared cost report is necessary to obtain accurate 
data for estimating purposes, but it is not suffi cient. Before the data from a cost re-
port can be used effectively, two basic questions must be answered:
 
1. Why did the estimator choose the original unit price for an item?
 
2. Why did the actual unit price for the item vary from the estimated unit price?
While it is not the objective of the estimating process to predetermine the exact 
cost of every item of the work, it is useful to learn why the actual cost of an item of 
work did vary from the estimated cost of that item. If the quality of estimating is to 
improve, some feedback of information about actual results is necessary. The unit 
prices used in the estimate could have been inappropriate because of an estimating 
problem, because of a production problem, or simply due to unfortunate circum-
stances. We need to know which.
EXAMPLE 9.1
Figure 9.1 shows the actual costs of what we will refer to as Job #1. On this 
report, the unit cost of labor for Concrete Walls in the TOTAL TO DATE column 
is $29.00. An estimator may conclude that the original estimate unit price 
($25.00/CY) was an error and decide to use a unit price of $29.00 per cubic 
yard in the estimate for the future Job #2. However, the actual price of $29.00 
may have been attained because of some special circumstances encountered 
as the work was performed. This would make it inappropriate to use $29.00 on 
Job #2 unless these same special circumstances are anticipated for this job.
If the estimator of Job #1 is the same person as the estimator now considering 
Job #2 and Job #1 was constructed quite recently, then this estimator will be 
aware of the factors determining the unit prices of Job #1. He will probably have 
a good idea of the reasons why the fi nal unit costs varied from the unit prices, in 
which case good use can be made of the cost information contained in the cost 
record for Job #1. But if the estimator of Job #1 is no longer around, or if Job 
#1 took place some time ago, the information necessary to properly evaluate 
the Job #1 cost record may be lacking. Also, if an estimator works on more than 
thirty estimates per year and numerous projects are underway all generating 
cost records, it can be diffi cult to keep track of all the information involved with 
the result that, when the cost record of a particular project is studied, the esti-
mator may be uncertain of the actual circumstances surrounding that project.
To ensure that the needed project information is available to future estimators, 
the fi nal cost report on a project should be accompanied by two commentaries, one 
from the project estimator describing the basis of the unit prices (at least for the 
substantial items of the estimate). A second record should come from the project su-
pervisor or the estimator if he has been closely observing the progress of the job. This 
record should describe the actual conditions that precipitated the unit costs realized. 
Armed with this information, the estimator is far more likely to obtain appropriate 
unit prices when estimating subsequent projects.
We can add that there are additional benefi ts that may be obtained from hav-
ing estimators write a commentary on the unit prices they chose for a project. By 
performing this task, the estimator is disciplined to seriously think about the factors 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

182 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
affecting unit prices rather than just picking a price for vague (if any) reasons. The 
mere process of writing out their justifi cations often contributes to clearer thinking 
in estimators. Certainly, an estimator who has prepared detailed notes can provide 
a far more coherent explanation when questioned about unit prices at the manage-
ment review of his estimate.
Bid Pricing Strategies
When a builder uses its own forces, labor, and equipment on a project, they need 
a strategy in order to produce a competitive bid for the work. One pricing strategy 
that could be used for a custom home or a multi-unit project consists of adjusting 
unit prices for job factors and management factors that are relatively certain and 
then being optimistic with all the other factors. For example, the estimator may 
know that access to the site is good, the job is uncomplicated, and supervision and 
labor at the site will be good quality. In a case such as this, the item prices are ad-
justed to refl ect the effect of these factors. However, for weather conditions, worker 
morale, and other factors where there is uncertainty, the estimator makes optimistic 
assumptions that keep the prices inexpensive. The total dollar value of these “op-
timistic” assessments is calculated and, when the fee for the job is determined, the 
appraised risk factor is accounted for. 
 
There is certainly some danger involved in this strategy, but whether or not 
the strategy is adopted, estimators should always be encouraged to take time to try 
to identify the estimating risks because this information is needed to properly com-
plete a bid. Quantifying and subsequently dealing with the project risk is studied 
later when we consider the process of completing the bid in Chapter 15.
Preparing Bill of Materials
A bill of materials is a list of all the materials required for the construction of a 
project sorted into trades. See Figure 9.2 for an example of the bill of materials 
format.
In order to prepare a bill of materials from the completed takeoff, list all the 
materials required for excavation operations, then the materials associated with the 
concrete work, and so on for each of the following categories:
■ Excavation materials—gravels and suchlike
■ Concrete materials
■ Masonry materials
■ Rough carpentry materials
• Floors systems
• Wall systems
• Roofi ng systems
■ Finish carpentry materials
• Doors
• Windows 
■ Other miscellaneous materials
The quantities listed on the bill of materials are expanded to include waste fac-
tors, and the units of measurement are converted from takeoff units to order units, 
which often differ from takeoff units. For example, fl oor sheathing is measured 
in square feet in the takeoff, but the order units are sheets of plywood. Standard 
sheets of plywood measure 4 feet by 8 feet, so the area of a sheet is 32 square feet. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
183
BILL OF MATERIALS 
Page No.
JOB ................................................................  DATE .........................
ESTIMATED ...................................................
 ITEM 
 
TAKEOFF 
WASTE 
ORDER 
UNIT
 NO. 
DESCRIPTION 
QUANTITY FACTOR QUANTITY PRICE 
TOTAL
Figure 9.2 
Bill of Materials
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

184 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
Here is the calculation for the fl oor sheathing for the house example taken off in 
Chapter 5:
EXAMPLE 9.2
¾" T & G fl oor sheathing 
1166.0 sq. ft. (as measured in the takeoff)
Add 10% waste 
5 116.6
 
5 1282.6 sq. ft.
Divide by 32 sq. ft. 
5 
40 sheets
The full bill of materials for the house example is included at the end of this 
chapter.
Pricing Materials Generally
There should be less risk involved in pricing materials than there is with labor and 
equipment pricing. Once the work item quantities are established in the takeoff pro-
cess, the estimator should be able to obtain fi rm prices from material suppliers for 
the supply and delivery of materials, which will minimize the homebuilder’s risk. 
Simply using a catalog price for materials may be acceptable for pricing minor 
items, but where signifi cant quantities are involved, the estimator should ask suppliers 
for fi rm prices for the supply of materials that meet the project requirements. Volume 
discounts may be obtained for large orders, and obtaining fi rm quotes will reduce the 
risk of having to pay more if prices rise between the time of the estimate and the time 
of construction. Homebuilders who complete many projects over a year may be able 
to negotiate with suppliers to provide all the materials of a certain type at fi xed prices 
for the year. This simplifi es the pricing process for the estimator since the same price 
can then be used for these materials on all projects over the term of the agreement.
There are a number of questions that should be answered before material prices 
are used in an estimate:
■ Do the materials offered by the supplier comply with the specifi cations? If an 
owner has selected a certain type of kitchen cabinet, for instance, the estima-
tor should ensure that the supplier is quoting a price for cabinets that meet 
the owner’s requirements.
■ Do the prices quoted include for the delivery of the materials to the site or are 
delivery charges extra?
■ Can the homebuilder rely on the supplier’s prices to remain fi rm until the time 
when the materials are purchased for the job? 
■ Does the supplier’s price include state and/or city sales taxes? Materials may 
be quoted exclusive of taxes then, where applicable, state and city taxes are 
added to the item prices for materials used in the estimate. 
■ Will there be any storage or warehousing requirements for the materials? 
On-site storage is sometimes required for construction materials before they 
are incorporated into the structure. The estimator should ensure that storage 
space will be available at the site. If not included, temporary storage of mate-
rials off the site may be necessary which can have signifi cant costs associated 
with it. 
■ What are the supplier’s terms of offer? Almost all price quotations received 
from material suppliers will have terms and conditions attached to them. 
Later in this chapter we will examine a concrete materials quote and the 
terms and conditions attached to this quote. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
185
Pricing Backﬁ ll and Gravel Materials
Whenever it is possible, the builder will use the material excavated at the site for backfi ll 
requirements and, thus, eliminate the need to pay for buying materials for this purpose.  
For instance, if a basement is to be excavated and backfi lled, the excavator will leave 
suffi cient excavated material next to the basement so that when the basement is con-
structed this material can be used to backfi ll around the fi nished basement as required. 
In this case, there will be just two items to price: Excavation of the basement (including 
the cost of removing surplus material) and Backfi ll around the basement using the exca-
vated material. However, where it is impossible to use the excavated material for backfi ll 
because it is not suitable for some reason, a third item has to be priced on the estimate: 
Supply of basement backfi ll material. This item may be priced in two ways: 
 
1. Obtain a quote from a supplier to deliver material to the site at a price per 
cubic yard; or, especially if large quantities of fi ll are required, 
 
2. Calculate the cost of obtaining suitable material from a pit or quarry. (The 
full price of this will include the cost of loading and transporting the material 
to the site plus the payment of a royalty to the owner of the pit.) 
An example of pricing the supply of gravel by the second method is shown 
below.
Swell and Compaction Factors
Before we can calculate a price for supplying gravel, we must consider the effect of 
material compaction because, no matter which method of pricing the supply of fi ll 
material is used, the estimator has to account for the swell or compaction factors 
applicable to that material. Swell and compaction factors are discussed in Chapter 3 
where the measurement of excavation work was addressed. However, these factors 
are not applied at the time of the takeoff since bank measure excavation and backfi ll 
quantities are not modifi ed when they are measured. Therefore, the necessary adjust-
ments now have to be made for swell and compaction. 
Recall that when soil or gravel is excavated, the resulting material is less dense 
than it was in the ground before it was disturbed, thus the same material occupies 
more volume. The increase in volume is known as the swell factor. Similarly, backfi ll 
material that is compacted will be denser than before it is compacted; so, to fi ll a 
certain volume with compacted material, a larger volume of loose material will be 
required. The compaction factor is an allowance for the extra material required to 
fi ll volumes with compacted material rather than loose material.
EXAMPLE 9.3
When a supplier quotes a price of $16.00 per cubic yard (loose) for wet sand, 
the bank measure takeoff quantity has to be increased by a compaction fac-
tor. In addition to the extra material required for compaction, there will also 
be some wastage of material in the operations. It is, therefore, convenient 
to also add a wastage factor to the compaction factor. In the example below, 
the compaction factor for wet sand is 13 percent and wastage is a further 
10 percent. This gives a combined total of 23 percent to be added for wast-
age and compaction of the wet sand. Where a quantity of 1000 cubic yard 
(bank measure) of Sand Bedding had been taken off, the price of materials is: 
1000 cu. yds. 1 23% 5 1230 cu. yds. (loose) 3 $16.00
 
5 $19,680
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

186 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
Calculating Trucking Requirements
Sometimes the estimator has to determine the number of trucks required to trans-
port excavated materials and gravels. When there is a large quantity of material to 
be transported, the following formula can be used to calculate the optimum number 
of trucks to use. The formula is based on the premise that it is desirable to have suf-
fi cient trucking capacity to ensure that the excavation equipment is able to operate 
continuously and not have to waste time waiting for trucks. Clearly, three trucks 
will be required if it takes 10 minutes to load a truck and 20 minutes for that truck 
to unload and return for another load because while the fi rst truck is away, two 
further trucks can be loaded. From this intuitive analysis, the following expression 
is obtained:
Number of Trucks Required 5  x  Unloading Time 
 
_______________ 
 
Loading Time   c 1 1
Where: Unloading Time 5 Round-trip Travel Time 1 Time to Off-load the Truck
and:
Loading Time  5   Truck Capacity 
 
______________ 
 
Loader Output  
(Both the truck capacity and the loader output have to be measured in the same 
units, usually compacted cubic yards.)
The number of trucks obtained from this calculation should always be rounded 
up no matter how small the decimal. This is because rounding down even a small 
fraction may result in a shortage of truck capacity. Most estimators consider it better 
to have over rather than under capacity so that the excavator is kept occupied.
Example of Gravel Supply Price Calculation
Calculate a price of obtaining gravel from a pit located 6 miles from the site where 
there is a pit royalty of $2.50 per cubic yard using a track loader at the pit to load 
the gravel at a rate of 50 cubic yards (bank measure) per hour and 10 cubic yard 
(bank measure) dump trucks to transport the gravel to the site. The rental rate of 
the loader is $450.00 per day (8 hours), and dump trucks rent for $275.00 per day. 
EXAMPLE 9.4
Where the supply of fi ll material is quoted as a price per ton, the estimator 
has to use the unit weight of the compacted material to determine the price 
per cubic yard bank measure. For instance, a price of $15.00 per ton may be 
offered for the supply of pit run gravel. If the weight of compacted pit run gravel 
is 3,650 lbs per cubic yard, the price per cubic yard can be calculated as:
Price per cubic yard 5 Price per ton 3 8 compacted cu. yds. (lbs)
 
 
 
 
2000 lbs per ton
So, in this case:
Price per cu. yd. (bank measure) 5 $15.00 3 3650
 
 
 
 
 
2000
 
 
 
 
  5 $27.38
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
187
The labor crew for this operation consists of one equipment operator at $24.00 per 
hour and truck drivers at $18.00 per hour. In this case, the dump trucks travel at 
an average speed of 20 miles per hour and take 5 minutes to unload the material 
at the site.
Given this data, the fi rst step in the calculation is to determine how many 
trucks are required for the operation. So, making use of the formula previously 
described:
EXAMPLE 9.5
Number of Trucks Required 5  x  Unloading Time 
 
______________ 
 
Loading Time  c 1 1
Where, in this case:
Unloading Time  5  Round Trip 
__________ 
Speed  1 5 mins
 
5   
2 3 6 miles 
 
__________________________ 
 
 
20 miles per hour 3 60 mins  1 5 mins
 
5 36 1 5
 
5 41 minutes
Loading Time 
5  Truck Capacity 
 
_____________ 
 
Loader Output  
 
5  
10 cu. yds. 
 
____________________________ 
 
 
50 cu. yds. per hour 3 60 mins  
 
5 12  minutes
Number of Trucks 5  x  Unloading Time 
 
______________ 
 
Loading Time  c 1 1
 
5 41
 
 
12 1 1
 
5 3.42 1 1
 
5 4.42
Therefore, fi ve trucks are required.
 
Equipment 
Labor
Gravel Supply Price: 
$ 
$
Track Loader ($520.00/8 hours) 
65.00
Operator 
 
32.00
Trucks   5 3 ($300.00/8 hours) 
187.50
Drivers  5 3 $23.00 
 
115.00
 
252.50/hour 
147.00/hour
Price per cubic yard: (divide by output 50 cu. yds./hour)   
 
5 5.05/cu. yd.    
 2.94/cu. yd. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

188 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
Pricing Concrete Materials
Prices for ready-mixed concrete are obtained from local suppliers who are interested 
in quoting the supply of all concrete required for a project. Most suppliers maintain 
a current price list of concrete, but it is always advisable to secure a price quotation 
specifi cally for the project being estimated for several reasons: discounts may be 
available, prices for concrete that meets the specifi cations are required and, perhaps 
most importantly, fi rm prices are required. The prices on a current price list are ex-
actly that, (i.e., prices in effect at this time), but the concrete for the project being 
estimated may not be required until some time in the future. So what the estimator 
needs is the price that will be charged for the concrete when it is used on the project, 
in other words, a price offer that when it is accepted by the builder will bind the sup-
plier to the prices quoted for the full duration of the project. This is what is referred 
to as a “fi rm price.”
Price quotations obtained from ready-mix concrete suppliers usually have a 
large number of conditions and extra charges attached to them. Some of the issues 
that the estimator has to carefully consider when pricing concrete materials include:
 
1. Does the concrete described in the quote meet the specifi cations? The estima-
tor should be aware of the strength of concrete required for the project. 
 
2. What are the extra charges for supplying special cements like sulfate-resisting 
or high-early cements? When using cements other than ordinary Portland 
Type I cement, concrete prices are invariably increased by a stipulated sum 
per cubic yard of material supplied.
 
3. What are the extra charges for air entrainment, calcium chloride, or any 
other concrete additives required to meet specifi cations?
 
4. Are there additional charges for cooling concrete in hot weather or heating 
concrete in cold weather to account for? In some areas, the cost of heating 
and/or cooling will be charged automatically for all concrete delivered in 
certain months of the year. 
 
5. If small quantities of concrete are required on a project, what are the premi-
ums charged on small loads of concrete?
 
6. If delays are anticipated in unloading the concrete at the site, what will the 
charges be for keeping the delivery trucks waiting?
 
7. What are the additional charges when concrete is delivered outside of normal 
working hours?
Waste Factors
Recall that the quantities of concrete taken off are the unadjusted net amounts 
shown on the drawings. Allowance for waste and spillage of this material can be 
made by increasing the takeoff quantities or by raising the price by the percentage 
factor considered necessary. In the examples that follow, the concrete material quan-
tities have been increased as noted to account for wastage.
The value of waste factors usually lies between 1 percent and 5 percent for 
concrete placed in formwork and can be as much as 10 percent for concrete placed 
directly against soil. 
Example of Pricing Concrete Materials 
The example of a quotation for the supply of ready-mix concrete shown in Fig-
ure 9.3 is used to price the following concrete material requirements for work to be 
completed on a project between December and February:
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
189
Figure 9.3 
Concrete Material Quote
EXAMPLE 9.6 
1. 2000 psi concrete, type I cement:
 
Basic concrete price 
$  97.00
 
Extra for winter heat 
9.00
 
 
106.00
 
Sales tax 
7% 
7.42
 
Total Price 
113.42
2. 2500 psi concrete, type V cement, air entrained:
 
Basic concrete price 
99.00
 
Extra for winter heat 
9.00
 
Extra for type V 
5.25
 
Extra for air entrainment 
4.00
 
 
117.25
 
Sales tax 
7% 
8.21
 
Total Price 
125.46
(continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

190 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
Pricing Carpentry Materials
Building code requirements for lumber used in carpentry operations often defi ne the 
species of lumber required and its use classifi cation within that species. The grade of 
lumber required can also be specifi ed. This is important where the lumber is to be 
used structurally. 
Softwood lumber rather than hardwood is more commonly used for rough car-
pentry in most of North America, and species used in the construction industry 
include Douglas fi r, balsam fi r, Pacifi c Coast hemlock, Eastern hemlock, Sitka spruce, 
white spruce, southern pine, white pine, lodge pole pine, western larch, and various 
cedars and redwoods. Softwood lumber is classifi ed by use into three groups:
 
1. Yard Lumber—Lumber used for general building purposes
 
2. Structural Lumber—Lumber of at least 2" nominal width that will be ex-
posed to structural stresses
 
3. Factory and Shop Lumber—Lumber selected for remanufacturing use
Softwood lumber is also classifi ed according to the extent of processing in its 
manufacture:
 
1. Rough Lumber—Sawn lumber that has not been surfaced
 
2. Surfaced (Dressed) Lumber—Lumber that has been surfaced by a planer to 
provide a smooth fi nish on one or more sides. It is referred to as S1S if one 
side is dressed, S2S if two sides are dressed, etc.
Worked Lumber—In addition to being surfaced, worked lumber has been fur-
ther shaped to produce such products as tongue and grooved boards.
The size of lumber is stated in accordance with its nominal size, which is the 
dimension of the cross section of the piece before it has been surfaced. Thus, 2 3 
4-sized pieces were approximately 2" 3 4" in cross section before they were sur-
faced but now that have a cross section of 1 1/2" 3 3 1/2" after the lumber is 
dressed. Softwood lumber is further classifi ed according to its nominal size:
 
1. Boards—Lumber less than 2" in thickness and 2" or more in width
 
2. Dimension—Dimension lumber is from 2" up to, but not including, 5" in 
thickness and 2" or more in width
 
3. Timber—Lumber which is 5" or over in its least dimension 
Lumber Lengths and Waste Factors
Lumber is generally available in lengths that are multiples of two feet. Studs, however, 
can be obtained pre-cut to the required length. When taking off joist quantities, the 
estimator will usually allow for length of the joists used even though the span may 
EXAMPLE 9.6 (continued)
3. 3000 psi concrete, type V cement, air entrained, fi ber reinforced:
 
Basic concrete price 
102.00
 
Extra for winter heat 
9.00
 
Extra for type V 
5.50
 
Extra for air entrainment 
5.00
 
Extra for fi ber reinforcing 
18.00
 
 
139.50
 
Sales tax 
7% 
9.77
 
Total Price 
149.27
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
191
not be a multiple of 2 feet. For example, if the span of the joists is 12'-6" the estimator 
will takeoff 14-foot joists. If this is not done, a waste factor of 12 percent (14-12.5 4 
12.5) should be allowed on the material for these joists in the pricing process. 
Even where the 2-foot multiple lengths are allowed for in the takeoff, a waste 
factor is still required because components such as plates, beams, headers, etc., usu-
ally require some cutting and there has to be allowance for some poor quality lum-
ber and error. This waste factor is usually between 5 percent and 15 percent.
Engineered joists can be obtained pre-cut to required lengths, so there is no need 
to round up to the nearest 2 feet in the takeoff.
Lumber Grades
Within lumber’s use classifi cation, lumber is graded in order to provide information 
to users so that they can assess its ability to meet requirements.
Yard lumber is graded as being either Selects or Commons, where Selects are pieces 
of good appearance and fi nishing qualities suitable for natural or painted fi nishes, and 
Commons are pieces suitable for general construction and utility purposes.
Structural lumber is stress graded in order to specify the safe working stresses 
that can be applied to it. Tables are published that list the allowable stresses for 
structural lumber in each of the following use categories, including:
 
1. Light Framing
 
2. Structural Light Framing
 
3. Structural Joists and Planks
 
4. Appearance Framing 
 
5. Decking
 
6. Beams and Stringers
 
7. Posts and Columns
Within each of these categories there are one or more grades. Allowable stresses 
are specifi ed according to species of lumber and grade within each of the above cat-
egories. Light Framing, for example, is divided into Construction Grade, Standard 
Grade, and Utility Grade for each species of lumber used in this capacity. Structural 
Light Framing generally has fi ve grades for each species:
 
1. Select Structural
 
2. No. 1
 
3. No. 2
 
4. No. 3
 
5. Stud Grade
A full specifi cation for structural lumber would call for a certain category, grade, 
and species of lumber to be used. For instance, a specifi cation may state: “All load- bearing 
stud walls shall be framed using Structural Light Framing graded lumber of No. 2 or 
better Hem-Fir.” More often, abbreviated versions of such a specifi cation are found 
calling merely for “No. 2 or better.” The task of the estimator, as usual, is to ensure that 
the lumber prices used in the estimate refl ect the specifi cation requirements for lumber.
An example of a lumber company price list is shown on Figure 9.4. This price 
list will be used for pricing lumber in the examples that follow.
Pricing Rough Hardware
Rough hardware for lumber mostly consists of nails, but other fasteners and such 
items as joist hangers may also be required. Many estimators allow for rough car-
pentry by keeping track of hardware costs of previous jobs in terms of a percentage 
of total carpentry materials costs, and then by applying this historical rate to the 
estimated cost of lumber for future jobs. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

192 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
An alternative method of estimating hardware costs, which is perhaps more 
precise, is to takeoff the quantity of specifi c items of hardware required and/or es-
timate the quantity of nails required and then price these quantities. For example, 
the amount of nails required for rough carpentry may be estimated by allowing 
7 pounds of nails for every 1000 board feet of lumber and 10 pounds of nails for 
every 1000 square feet of sheathing.
Pricing Subcontractor’s Work
On the face of it, the process of pricing subcontract work would appear to be quite 
simple. Subtrades calculate prices for the work of their trade on a project and submit 
quotes to the homebuilder. The homebuilder then evaluates the quotes received from 
subtrades and customarily selects the subtrade with the lowest price for each trade. 
Once subtrades are selected, their prices are incorporated into the homebuilder’s 
estimate for the project. By subcontracting the work, the risk of cost over-runs is 
XYZ LUMBER INC.
DOUGLAS FIR AND LARCH S4S 
P.W.F. LUMBER (.50 LBS. CU. FT.)
Dimension and Timbers: 2x4 & 4x4 (Std. & Btr.)
 
2x6, 4x6 and wider (#2 & Btr.)
 SIZES 
LENGTH “GREEN” 
“DRY”
 2x4 
8 - 14' 
 
$650.00
 
 
16 - 20' 
$650.00 
$700.00
 2x6 
8 - 14' 
 
$650.00
 
 
16 - 20' 
 
$700.00
 2x8 
8 - 16' 
$590.00
 
 
18' 
$630.00
 
 
20' 
$650.00
 2x10 
8 - 16' 
$630.00
 
 
18 - 20' 
$750.00
PLANKS AND TIMBERS
 
S4S 
4x4 
$530.00
 
S4S 
4x6 
$550.00
 ROUGH 
6x6 
$470.00
 ROUGH 
8x8 
$610.00
 ROUGH 
3x12 
$750.00
“S-DRY SPRUCE”
 
2x3 - 925/8" Studs 
 
$510.00
 
2x4 - 925/8" Studs 
 
$510.00
 
2x6 - 925/8" Studs 
 
$510.00
 
2x3 
8' - 12'  
 
$510.00
 
 
14' - 16'  
 
$530.00
 
2x4 
8' - 12'  
 
$530.00
 
 
14' - 16'  
 
$550.00
 
 
18' - 20'  
 
$580.00
 
2x6 
8' x 12'  
 
$530.00
 
 
14' - 16'  
 
$550.00
 
 
18' - 20'  
 
$570.00
 
2x8 
8' x 12'  
 
$550.00
 
 
14' - 16'  
 
$580.00
 
 
18' - 20'  
 
$650.00
 
2x10 
8' - 20'  
 
$700.00 
 2x4 
8 - 14' 
$670.00
 
 
16' 
$700.00
 2x6 
10 - 14' 
$670.00
 
 
16' 
$700.00
 2x8 
10 - 14' 
$670.00
 
 
16' 
$700.00
STRAPPING - BRIDGING 
Per LF
 1x1 
Spruce 
$0.10
 1x2 
Spruce 
$0.12
 1x3 
Spruce 
$0.20
 1x6 
Spruce 
$0.32
 2x2 
D. Fir 
$0.30
Bridging 2x2 pre-cut for
2x8, 2x10 at 16" on
   center per length 
$0.40
 
 
STD. FIR SELECT
 
 
FIR 
FIR
 
 
PER 
PER
 SHEATHING 
SHEET 
SHEET
 
3/8" 
$17.30 
$19.80
 
1/2" 
$23.10 
$25.50
 
5/8" 
$27.80 
$31.35
 
3/4" 
$33.30 
$37.10
 
5/8" T & G 
$29.70 
$32.25
 
3/4" T & G 
$35.15 
$37.95
Figure 9.4 
Lumber Quote
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
193
shifted to the subtrade who agrees to perform the work of their trade for the fi rm 
price they quote. However, the process is not quite as straightforward as it appears. 
Some of the problems associated with pricing subcontractors’ work are listed here:
■ Not all subtrades offer lump-sum bids; many trades bid unit prices for work. 
For instance, a subcontractor may quote a price of so much per foot to sup-
ply and install eaves trough. In this case, the builder will need to takeoff the 
length of eaves trough required for the project then apply the unit price to the 
quantity obtained.
■ Some subtrades offer prices on an hourly basis. Excavation trades may pres-
ent a price per hour for the use of operated excavation equipment. In cases 
such as this, not only will work quantities have to be taken off, but an assess-
ment of a probable productivity rate of this crew will also be needed before a 
complete price for the work can be calculated.
■ The subtrade’s interpretation of what is and what is not part of the work of 
their trade may differ from the homebuilder’s interpretation. This problem 
usually occurs when the design of a house calls for something new and dif-
ferent. The homebuilder’s estimator has to ensure that all the work she/he 
expects a subtrade to perform is, in fact, covered in the subtrade’s bid.
■ The subcontractor whose price is used in the estimate is unable to perform 
the work. The most common reason for failure to perform is the fi nancial 
collapse of the subtrade. While legal action against the defaulting subtrade is 
possible, suing a bankrupt is a fruitless endeavor. Regular assessments of the 
fi nancial health of major subtrades can reduce this risk.
■ These points will be examined in more detail in Chapter 11: Subcontracting 
Work.
Example of Subtrade Price to Supply and Place Concrete
The contractor simply calls a subtrade to get a price for the supply and placing of 
concrete in walls: This means the subtrade has to cost out this work to determine a 
price for the contractor:
EXAMPLE 9.7
Concrete material price:
 
2000 psi concrete 
$97.00
 
Extra for type V cement 
$5.00
 
Extra for air entrainment 
$3.00
 
Winter heat 
$9.00
 
Environmental fee 
$3.00
 
 
$117.00
 
Taxes 
7% 
$8.19
 
5 
$125.19/cu. yd.
Equipment:
 
Pump rental: 2 hours 3 $116.00 
5 
$232.00
 
2 Vibrators:   2 3 2 hours 3 $9.00 
5 
  $36.00
 
Transport equipment 
 
$100.00
 
 
 
$368.00/25 cu. yds.
 
 
5 
  $14.72/cu. yd.
(continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

194 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
EXAMPLE 9.7 (continued)
Crew:
 
1 Labor foreman 
2 hours 3 $26.00 
5 
  $52.00
 
5 Laborers 
5 3 2 hours 3 $23.00 
5 
$230.00
 
1 Cement fi nisher 
2 hours 3 $27.00 
5 
  $54.00
 
1 Equipment operator 2 hours 3 $32.00 
5 
  $64.00
 
 
$400.00
 
Payroll burden 
30% 
$120.00
 
 
$520.00/25 cu. yds.
 
 
5 
  $20.80/cu. yd.
 
 
$160.71
Overheads and profi t 
40% 
5 
  $64.28
 
 
$224.99/cu. yd.
Example of Recap and Pricing for House Example
Figure 9.5a, Figure 9.5b, Figure 9.5c, and Figure 9.5d show the recap and pricing for 
the sample house project.
Comments on Recap and Pricing Shown in Figure 9.5a, Figure 9.5b, Figure 9.5c, 
and Figure 9.5d 
 
1. We have modifi ed the pricing sheet because, in this example, materials are 
priced separately on a bill of materials and subtrades will perform all work. 
Therefore, there is no need for labor, materials, or equipment columns on this 
recap.
 
2. All takeoff items associated with a particular trade are listed below that 
trade; any work not included for in the subtrade quote will be priced 
separately. For example, the excavation subtrade includes excavation and 
backfi ll of the basement, but gravels and drilled holes are not included. 
Gravels are priced on the bill of materials, and drilling holes is an addi-
tional charge.
 
3. Concrete is priced on the bill of materials because the material supplier will 
supply and place concrete for the prices they quote.
 
4. The rough carpentry framing subtrade will frame the fl oor, walls, and roof of 
the house for $2.65 per square foot based on the fl oor area; so the total price 
for this house is 1063 square feet 3 $2.65 5 $2,817.00.
 
5. It is important to determine exactly what each subtrade includes for in 
their quote. Here the framing subtrade includes for installing the stairs, but 
the railing around the stair opening is not included and has to be priced 
separately.
 
6. The exterior deck and the canopy over the entrance are also extra charges 
that have to be added because they are not included in the basic framing 
package.
 
7. “Supply and Install” indicates that the subtrade will supply and install their 
work, so there will be nothing listed on the bill of materials for these items.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
195
Figure 9.5a 
Recap and Pricing Example
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

196 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
Figure 9.5b 
Recap and Pricing Example
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
197
Figure 9.5c 
Recap and Pricing Example
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

198 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
Figure 9.5d 
Recap and Pricing Example
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
199
Example of Bill of Materials
Figure 9.6a and Figure 9.6b show the bill of materials for the sample house project.
Comments on Bill of Materials Shown in Figure 9.6a and Figure 9.6b
 
1. Appropriate waste factors are applied to takeoff quantities to determine 
order quantities.
 
2. In the case of gravels and sand, the waste factor also includes for compaction 
of this material.
 
3. On this job, concrete in contact with the soil (which includes footings, walls, 
and columns) requires sulphate-resisting cement Type V. Normal Type I con-
crete can be used for the slab-on-grade.
 
4. The wall forms subtrade includes for materials in their quote, so there is no 
need for a form materials price here.
 
5. Note that curing compound is measured in square feet on the takeoff but 
the material is priced per gallon, so the conversion factor of 400 square feet 
per gallon is used to calculate the number of gallons required. The resulting 
quantity is rounded up to the nearest whole gallon.
 
6. Material for damp proofi ng also has to be converted to gallons using a con-
version factor.
 
7. The 2 3 6 material specifi ed for the fl oor system is Standard or better spruce-
pine-fi r lumber.
 
8. The 2 3 6 material specifi ed for the wall plates is #2 or better spruce-pine-fi r 
lumber.
 
9. Sheathing material is ½" thick oriented strand board. 
 
10. An allowance is made for rough hardware used in the rough carpentry 
work. The amount is calculated as 1 percent of the total price of carpentry 
materials. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

200 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
Figure 9.6a 
Bill of Materials for House Example
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
201
Figure 9.6b 
Bill of Materials for House Example
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

202 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
SUMMARY
■ Pricing an estimate consists of fi rst sorting and listing all takeoff items ac-
cording to the required trade breakdown (the recap) and second, applying 
prices to this sorted list of items.
■ If computer estimating is used, the process of sorting into a recap is auto-
mated using a numerical item coding system in the takeoff.
■ There are fi ve price categories considered in the pricing of an estimate:
• Labor
• Equipment
• Materials
• Subcontractors
• Job overheads
■ There are three general reasons why project costs may exceed estimated prices:
• Takeoff quantities are too low
• Actual productivity does not meet anticipated productivity
• Subcontractors or material suppliers fail to meet obligations
■ The estimator’s work is usually reviewed in order to reduce the risk of takeoff 
errors.
■ There are two main components to consider when pricing labor and equip-
ment, both of which may be diffi cult to predict:
• The hourly wage rate of labor or hourly cost of equipment
• The productivity of labor or equipment
■ In order to price labor, the estimator has to determine the wage rates that apply 
to the project and predict how these rates will change over the life of the project.
■ Equipment rates depend on ownership costs or rental rates, both of which 
can be diffi cult to predict for a project.
■ The productivity of labor and equipment is governed by two groups of factors:
• Job factors that have to do with the nature and location of the particular 
project under consideration
• Labor and management factors that mainly relate to the quality of supervi-
sion and the skills of workers on the project
■ The builder will have little, if any, infl uence over job factors but must care-
fully examine these factors before pricing the work, including:
• Probable weather conditions
• Site access
• Repetitive work
■ A database of accurate historic labor and equipment costs is a useful source 
of information when pricing an estimate. This is generally obtained from pre-
vious project cost reports.
■ It is also benefi cial to have information about why the fi nal cost of work 
shown on a cost report varied from the estimated costs.
■ There is less risk of cost over-runs with material estimates since fi rm prices 
can be obtained from suppliers for the supply of materials.
■ Quantities of materials measured in order units are often calculated because 
the units that materials are packaged in often differ from takeoff units.
■ Add a waste factor and a swell factor to takeoff quantities of gravel to deter-
mine order quantities of this material.
■ The optimum number of trucks required for transporting excavation material 
is calculated from the following variables:
• Haul distance
• Speed of trucks 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK 
203
• Capacity of trucks
• Output of loaders
■ The price of concrete depends mainly upon the strength required; it is also 
subject to a number of additional charges including:
• Type of cement
• Air entrainment
• Summer cooling and winter heating
• Different aggregate sizes
• Fiber reinforcement
• Cement additives
• Environmental fees
■ Lumber prices vary with species, grade, and the type of lumber processing 
involved.
■ While pricing subcontract work may appear to be straightforward, the 
subtrade estimates the price of their work and submits the price to the 
homebuilder. In practice there can be many problems associated with pric-
ing this work. This includes concern about the subtrade’s ability to perform 
the work and the problem of overlap or gaps in the coverage of subtrade 
work.
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
Information  
 
Web Page Address
 
■ For quick quotes on any type of  
http://www.get-a-quote.net/
construction work
 
■ For pricing information, RSMeans  
http://rsmeans.reedconstructiondata.com/
is a comprehensive source  
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. Describe the two stages involved in pricing an estimate.
 2. Describe how computers can help with the fi rst stage included above.
 3. List ten items often found on a homebuilder’s standard trade breakdown.
 4. What is the “builder’s risk,” and how does it relate to the type of construction 
contract to be used on a project?
 5. List three general reasons why actual costs may exceed estimated costs on a 
lump-sum contract.
 6. What strategy do most homebuilders use to reduce the risk of over-runs on the 
cost of labor and equipment on a project?
 7. What ten questions should be considered regarding equipment rental rates?
 8. Why should an estimator be on the lookout for situations where construction 
operations are repetitive on a project?
 9. How does site access affect the price of work?
 10. How are cost records used by an estimator?
 11. Before an estimator can use the data from a cost record effectively, what two 
questions have to be answered?
 12. Give three reasons why pricing subcontracted work may not be as straightfor-
ward as it appears to be.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

204 
CHAPTER 9—PRICING THE WORK
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
 1. Use the conversion factor on the sample bill of materials to calculate the num-
ber  of gallons of damp proofi ng material required for an order quantity of 
2300 square feet.
 2. If the takeoff area of fl oor sheathing is 5000 square feet and the waste factor is 
10 percent, what is the order quantity measured in sheets of material?
 3. From the concrete quote in Figure 9.3, calculate the price of 2000 psi concrete 
with sulphate-resisting cement place in winter months.
 4. Develop a subcontractor’s price per cubic yard to supply and place 2500 psi 
concrete in slabs-on-grade based on Example 9.7 and the concrete quote in Fig-
ure 9.3. Assume that the crew can place 30 cubic yards of concrete in 2 hours.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

205
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be 
able to:
■ Describe how equipment is usually priced in an estimate.
■ Explain under what circumstances it can be fi nancially benefi cial to own rather 
than rent construction equipment.
■ List and describe the types of expenses that should be accounted for when calcu-
lating the ownership cost of equipment.
■ Determine the complete hourly ownership cost of an item of equipment.
■ Calculate the rental rate for an item of equipment.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
10
PRICING EQUIPMENT
company overhead costs
depreciation
equipment operator 
costs
fi nancing expenses
fuel and lubrication 
costs
insurance costs
maintenance and repair 
costs
straight-line depreciation
tire depreciation
KEY TERMS 
Introduction
Pricing Builder-Owned Equipment
Equipment used in the process of constructing a building is usually priced in an 
estimate by multiplying unit prices by the period of time the equipment is used on 
the project. This time period may be expressed in terms of hours, weeks, or even 
months, whichever is appropriate. In the situation where the builder’s equipment is 
rented, the unit prices used will be the rental rates obtained from equipment rental 
companies. Where the equipment is owned by the builder, unit prices will have to 
be calculated from ownership costs as detailed below, but this raises the question: 
should a builder rent or own construction equipment? 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

206 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT
Renting or Purchasing Equipment
For the builder who is new in the construction business, the decision whether to rent 
or purchase equipment is usually quite easy to make because, lacking surplus cash 
and without a well-established credit rating, the only viable alternative is renting. 
For the more mature construction business, the decision may be a great deal more 
diffi cult. This builder, who is more likely to have funds and credit sources available, 
has to determine if equipment investments are justifi ed. The builder should buy con-
struction equipment only when the investment offers additional benefi ts to those 
obtained from renting equipment. 
A builder does not necessarily have to own any construction equipment in order 
to carry on business. In most parts of the country there are many companies in the 
construction equipment rental business offering competitive rental rates on a large 
selection of equipment, and there can be distinct advantages to renting equipment, 
including:
■ The builder does not have to maintain a large inventory of specialized plant 
and equipment where individual items are used infrequently.
■ The builder has continuous access to the newest and most effi cient items of 
equipment available.
■ There is little or no need for equipment warehouse and storage facilities.
■ There is a reduced need for the builder to employ maintenance staff and oper-
ate facilities for their use.
■ Accounting for equipment costs can be simpler when equipment is rented.
■ There may be signifi cant savings on company insurance premiums when a 
builder is not maintaining an inventory of plant and equipment.
However, the cost of owning equipment can be considerably less than rental 
costs when the equipment is heavily used. If an item of equipment is used only oc-
casionally by a builder, it is generally most cost effective to rent the item. However, 
if this item is used every week on one job after another over a long period, signifi -
cant savings can be obtained from owning this equipment. Builders may gain fur-
ther advantage from equipment ownership due to the perception that these builders 
are more fi nancially stable and committed than those that own no equipment. The 
builder’s company name is often displayed on its equipment; this adds to the view 
that this is a solid, well-established organization.
Where a comparison of equipment ownership with the rental alternative strictly 
on the basis of cost is needed, the full cost per unit of time of owning an item of 
equipment has to be determined. To estimate the full ownership cost, the following 
aspects of equipment ownership have to be considered:
■ Depreciation expense
■ Maintenance and repair costs
■ Financing expenses
■ Taxes
■ Insurance costs
■ Storage costs
■ Fuel and lubrication costs
Depreciation
In everyday usage, the term depreciation refers to the decline in market value of an 
asset. To accountants, the term has a more narrow meaning having to do with allo-
cating the acquisition cost of an asset over its useful life. The amount of depreciation 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT 
207
calculated may or may not refl ect the true loss of market value of the piece of equip-
ment over its life; more often than not, it does not. Also, the depreciation amounts 
considered here are not related to tax considerations. For tax purposes, a completely 
different depreciation schedule may be adopted. 
In our appraisal of depreciation, some factors are explicit while other factors 
have to be estimated. Generally what we know is that the item of equipment costs a 
certain amount to acquire (the initial cost), it will be used for a number of years (the 
useful life), and this item will be sold at the end of this period for a sum of money 
(the salvage value). There is, however, some uncertainty about the exact duration of 
the useful life of the equipment and about the precise amount of salvage value that 
will be realized when it is disposed of. Each of these values, therefore, has to be esti-
mated when assessing depreciation. 
The process of allocating the cost of an item over its useful life is known as 
amortization. There are several calculation methods available to determine amor-
tization values but, because it is not diffi cult to calculate and it offers other advan-
tages, here we will adopt the straight-line method.
Straight-Line Depreciation
The straight-line method is a commonly used method of calculating depreciation 
generally. Most estimators use this method when calculating equipment rental rates 
in particular. Depreciation on a straight-line basis is allocated equally per year over 
the useful life of the asset, thus the annual depreciation amount is constant and is 
equal to the cost of the asset minus any salvage value divided by the years of life of 
the asset:
Annual Depreciation 5  Initial Cost 2 Estimated Salvage Value 
 
 
 
__________________________________ 
 
 
Estimated Useful Life (years) 
 
EXAMPLE 10.1
The total initial cost of a hydraulic crane is $105,000; the useful life is ex-
pected to be 5 years, and the estimated salvage value at the end of this 
period is $55,000:
Annual Depreciation 5  $105,000 2 $55,000 
 
 
____________________ 
 
5 
 
 
5 $10,000 per year
Figure 10.1 shows the depreciation schedule based on straight-line depreciation over 
the life of this compressor.
Although the straight-line method of depreciation does not refl ect the fact that 
depreciation usually occurs at an accelerated rate in the early years of the life of 
an asset, the method of calculation used here makes some allowance for this as 
 explained below. There are alternative methods of depreciation that try to address 
the defi ciencies of the straight-line method, but they are beyond the scope of this 
text. 
Rubber-Tired Equipment
Because the life expectancy of rubber tires is generally far less than the life of the 
equipment they are used on, the depreciation rate of tires will be quite different from 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

208 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT
the depreciation rate on the rest of the vehicle. The repair and maintenance cost of 
tires as a percentage of their depreciation will also be different from the percentage 
associated with the repair and maintenance of the vehicle.
Consequently, when considering the depreciation of a rubber-tired vehicle, the 
cost of a set of replacement tires should be deducted from the initial cost of the ve-
hicle and the depreciation on the tires and the depreciation on the vehicle, without 
the tires should each be calculated separately. The repair and maintenance of the 
vehicle and of the tires can then also be calculated separately.
Maintenance and Repairs
The cost of maintenance and repairs is a signifi cant part of equipment ownership 
costs. Builders who own equipment agree that good maintenance, including periodic 
wear measurement, timely attention to recommended service, and daily cleaning 
when conditions warrant it, can extend the life of equipment and actually reduce the 
operating costs by minimizing the effects of adverse conditions. All items of equip-
ment used by a builder will require maintenance and probably also some repairs 
during the course of their useful life. A larger company that owns many items of 
equipment usually sets up facilities with workers qualifi ed to perform the necessary 
maintenance operations on equipment. Smaller companies will generally have their 
equipment serviced and repaired at specialty shops. Whatever the case, the costs that 
are calculated are added into the total ownership costs of equipment. 
Construction operations can subject equipment to considerable wear and tear, 
but the amount of wear varies enormously between different items of equipment 
used and between different job conditions. The rates used in the following examples 
are based on the average costs of maintenance and repair, but since these costs do 
vary so much, the builder formulating equipment operating prices should adjust the 
rates for maintenance and repairs according to the conditions the equipment is to 
work under. As with many estimating situations, good records of previous mainte-
nance costs will much improve the quality of the estimator’s assessment of probable 
future maintenance costs.
Maintenance and repair costs are calculated as a percentage of the annual depre-
ciation costs for each item of equipment. When depreciation is calculated using the 
straight-line method as in the examples that follow, the result is a constant amount 
Straight-Line Depreciation
 
End of 
Depreciation 
Book
 
Year 
for the Year 
Value
 
 
$ 
$
 
0 
0 
105,000
 
1 
10,000 
95,000
 
2 
10,000 
85,000
 
3 
10,000 
75,000
 
4 
10,000 
65,000
 
5 
10,000 
55,000
Figure 10.1 
Depreciation Schedule
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT 
209
being charged yearly for depreciation and then a second constant amount is allowed 
for maintenance and repairs. Realistically, depreciation will be high in the early years 
of ownership, while actual maintenance and repair costs in these years should be 
low. The relative values of yearly depreciation and maintenance costs will gradu-
ally reverse until, in the later years, low depreciation will be accompanied by high 
maintenance and repair bills. Using a constant amount yearly for these two expenses, 
therefore, is reasonable because at any point in time one factor will be too high but 
it will be compensated for by the other factor, which will be too low at that time.
Some examples of maintenance rates expressed as a percentage of the deprecia-
tion costs are shown below:
Portable Compressors 
 
 83%
Generators  
 
 
100%
Self-Propelled Roller  
 
120%
Fork Lift Trucks 
 
 
100%
Hydraulic Lifting Cranes 
 
120%
Hydraulic Backhoes  
 
100%
Telescopic Boom Excavators  
100%
Front-End Loaders  
 
110%
Dump Trucks 
 
 
130%
Financing Expenses
Whether the owner of construction equipment purchases the equipment using cash 
or whether the purchase is fi nanced by a loan from a lending institution, there is 
going to be an interest expense involved. The interest expense is the cost of using 
capital, whether it is your money or borrowed. Where the builder’s own cash is used, 
it is the amount that would have been earned had the money been invested else-
where. When the purchase is fi nanced by a loan, the interest expense is the interest 
charged on the loan. In both cases, the interest expense is calculated by applying an 
interest rate to the owner’s average annual investment in the unit. The average an-
nual investment is the value approximately midway between the total initial cost of 
the unit and its salvage value. Thus:
Average Annual Investment 5  (Total Initial Cost 1 Salvage Value) 
 
 
 
_______________________________ 
 
2 
 
The interest rate used to calculate the fi nancing expense will vary from time to 
time, from place to place, and also from one company to another depending mostly 
on their credit rating and how good a deal they can secure from the lender. In the 
examples that follow, we will use a rate of 6 percent.
Taxes, Insurance, and Storage Costs
Just as with investment expenses, variations can be expected in the cost of the an-
nual taxes, insurance premiums, and storage costs together with fees for licenses 
required and other fees expended on an item of equipment. Where these expenses 
are known, they should be added into the calculation of the annual ownership costs 
of the equipment. In the case where information on these costs is not available, they 
may be calculated as a percentage of the average annual investment cost of the piece 
of equipment. 
The interest expense rate and the rate for taxes, insurance, and storage costs are 
often combined to give a total equipment overhead rate. Below we will use an equip-
ment overhead rate of 11 percent that comprises 6 percent for the investment rate 
and 5 percent to cover taxes, insurance, and storage costs.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

210 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT
Fuel and Lubrication Costs
Fuel consumption and the consumption of lubrication oil can be closely monitored 
in the fi eld. Data from these fi eld observations will enable the estimator to quite 
accurately predict future rates of consumption under similar working conditions. 
However, if there is no access to this information, likely fuel consumption informa-
tion may be obtained from equipment manufacturers. 
As a guide to fuel consumption, a gasoline engine operating under normal con-
ditions will consume approximately 0.06 gallons of fuel for each horsepower-hour 
developed. A diesel engine is slightly more effi cient at 0.04 gallons of fuel for each 
horsepower-hour. These rates of fuel consumption apply when the engine is oper-
ating at full throttle. To account for times when the engine is idling or there is a 
break in the work, an operating factor is introduced. This operating factor is an 
assessment of the load under which the equipment engine is operating. An engine 
continually producing full-rated horsepower is operating at a factor of 100 percent. 
Construction equipment never operates at this level for extended periods, so the 
operating factor used in calculating overall fuel consumption is always a value less 
than 100 percent. 
The operating factor is yet another variable with a wide range of possible val-
ues responding to the many different conditions that might be encountered when 
the equipment under consideration is used. In the examples that follow, the specifi c 
operating factors used can be no more than averages refl ecting normal work condi-
tions. Here again, there is no good substitute for hard data carefully obtained in the 
observation of actual operations in progress.
EXAMPLE 10.2
If the hydraulic crane mentioned in Example 1 was equipped with a diesel 
engine rated at 106 hp operating at a factor of 50%, the fuel consumption 
can be determined:
Fuel Consumption 5  (106 3 0.04 3 50) 
 
__________________ 
 
100 
 
 
 5 2.12 gallons/hour
The amount of lubricating oil consumed will vary with the size of the engine, 
the capacity of the crankcase, the condition of the engine components, the frequency 
of oil changes, and the general level of maintenance. An allowance in the order of 
10 percent of the fuel costs is used as an average value in the following examples.
Equipment Operator Costs
Whether a builder decides to rent equipment or own the equipment used on its 
projects, the cost of labor operating the equipment has to be considered. In some 
situations, rentals may be available that include an equipment operator as part of 
the rental agreement. This variety of rental agreement is sometimes available for ex-
cavation equipment, and it can be a preferred alternative when the rental company 
offers a high-caliber operator who is familiar with the particular excavation unit and 
is capable of high productivity.
Some equipment is rented without an operator. So, just as in the case where 
the builder is using company-owned equipment, the labor costs for operating the 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT 
211
equipment have to be calculated and added to the estimate. The usual way to price 
these costs is to apply the operator’s hourly wage alongside the equipment hourly 
rate, and then use the expected productivity of the equipment to determine a price per 
measured unit for labor and a price per measured unit for equipment. Example 10.3 
on page 211 illustrates this method of pricing equipment and operator’s costs. 
EXAMPLE 10.3 
Where the hourly cost of an excavator is $84.00, the wage of an operator 
for this equipment is $32.00 per hour, and the expected productivity of the 
excavator is 50 cubic yards per hour, the unit prices for labor and equipment 
would be calculated as:
 
EQUIPMENT 
LABOR 
 
 $84.00 
_______ 
50   
 $32.00 
_______ 
50  
 
5 $1.68 per cu. yds. 
5 $0.64 per cu. yds.
These unit prices can now be applied to the total quantity of excavation that this 
equipment is expected to perform in accordance with the takeoff.
Company Overhead Costs
Where the equipment ownership costs calculated in accordance with this chapter are 
to be used as a basis of rental rates charged by the builder to others for the use of 
the builder’s equipment, the full rental rates should include an amount for company 
overhead costs and an amount for profi t. Company overhead costs are basically the 
fi xed costs associated with running a business. They may include the cost of main-
taining a furnished offi ce, offi ce equipment, and personnel, together with all the 
other costs of business operation.
Since the rental rate quoted by a builder to another party for the use of the 
builder’s equipment is, in a sense, a kind of bid, the same considerations should be 
applied to the markup on the rental rate as are applied to markup on any of builder’s 
bids. Markup, comprising an amount for company overhead costs and an amount 
for profi t, is dealt with in some detail in Chapter 13 where the markup included in 
a bid price is discussed.
Examples
EXAMPLE 10.4
Calculate the ownership cost per hour for a generator powered by a 20-hp 
gasoline engine based on the following data:
Engine:  
 
 
20 hp gasoline
Operating Factor: 
 
75%
Purchase Price:  
 
$20,000
Freight Charges:  
 
$600
(continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

212 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT
Estimated Salvage Value: 
$4,000
Useful Life: 
 
 
6 years
Hours Used per Year: 
 
1,000
Maintenance & Repairs:  
100% of Annual Depreciation
Equipment Overhead Rate: 
11%
Fuel Price: 
 
 
$3.80 per gallon 
First, preliminary calculations are made to determine the average annual 
 investment and the fuel consumption rate:
Average Annual Investment 5  Total Cost 1 Salvage Value 
 
 
________________________ 
 
2 
 
 
5  ($20,000 1 $600 1 $4,000) 
 
 
___________________________ 
 
2 
 
 
5 $12,300
Fuel Consumption 
5 20 3 0.06 3 75% gallons/hour
 
5 0.90 gallons/hour
The annual cost of depreciation, maintenance and repairs, and equipment 
overheads can now be calculated:
Annual Costs:
Depreciation 
5  Initial Cost 2 Estimated Salvage Value 
 
 
 
__________________________________ 
 
 
Estimated Life (years) 
 
 
5  $20,600 2 $4,000 
 
__________________ 
6 
  
5 $2,767
Maintenance and Repairs 5 100% of Annual Depreciation 
5 $2,767
Equipment Overheads 
5 11% 3 Average Annual Investment 
 
5 0.11 ($12,300) 
5 $1,353
 
Total Annual Costs: 
   $6,887
Now the hourly costs can be calculated, including the cost of fuel and lube 
oil required:
Hourly Costs:
Vehicle Cost 
5  Total Annual Cost 
 
___________________ 
 
Hours Used per Year  
 
5  $6,887 
_______ 
1,000  
5   $6.89
Fuel Cost 
5 Fuel Consumption 3 Cost of Fuel
 
5 0.90 gallons 3 $3.80 per gallon 
5   $3.42
Lube Oil 
5 10% of Fuel Cost
 
5 0.1 3 $3.42 
5   $0.34
 
Generator Cost per Hour: 
   $10.65
EXAMPLE 10.4 (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT 
213
Whenever this generator is used on a project, it will be charged to that project at 
a price $10.65 times the number of hours it is used.
The item of equipment considered in the next example is a rubber-tired front-
end loader. In this case, the depreciation cost of the tires has to be calculated sepa-
rately from the depreciation cost of the rest of the vehicle.
EXAMPLE 10.5
Calculate the ownership cost per hour for a front-end loader powered by a 51 
hp diesel engine based on the following data:
Engine:  
 
 
51 hp diesel 
Operating Factor: 
 
60%
Purchase Price:  
 
$50,000 (including tires)
Frieght Charges:  
 
$2,000
Estimated Salvage Value: 
$9,000
Useful Life: 
 
 
7 years
Hours Used per Year: 
 
1,600
Maintenance & Repairs:  
110% of Annual Depreciation
Tire Cost: 
 
 
$1,000
Tire Life: 
 
 
2,000 hours
Maint. & Repairs (Tires):  
15% of Tire Depreciation
Equipment Overhead Rate: 
11%
Fuel Price: 
 
 
$4.00 per gallon 
First, preliminary calculations are made to determine the average annual in-
vestment and the fuel consumption rate:
Average Annual Investment 5  Total Cost 1 Salvage 
 
___________________ 
 
2 
 
 
5  $50,000 1 $2,000 1 $9,000 
 
 
___________________________ 
 
2 
 
 
5 $30,500
Fuel Consumption  
5 51 3 0.04 3 60% gallons/hour
 
5 1.22 gallons/hour
The annual cost of depreciation, maintenance and repairs, and equipment 
overheads can now be calculated:
Annual Costs:
Depreciation 
5  Initial Cost 2 Tire Cost 2 Salvage Value 
 
 
 
____________________________________ 
 
 
Life (years) 
 
 
5  $50,000 1 $2,000 2 $1,000 2 $9,000 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
 
7 
 
 
 
5   $6,000
Maintenance and Repairs 5 110% of Annual Depreciation 
5   $6,600
Equipment Overheads 
5 11% 3 Average Annual Investment
 
5 0.11 ($30,500) 
5   $3,355
 
Total Annual Costs—Vehicle: 
   $15,955
(continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

214 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT
Now the hourly costs can be calculated, including the cost of fuel and lube 
oil required:
Hourly Costs:
Vehicle Cost 
5  Total Annual Cost 
 
___________________ 
 
Hours Used per Year  
 
5  $15,955 
________ 
1,600  
5   $9.97
Tire Depreciation  5  Cost of Tires 
 
____________ 
 
Life in Hours  
 
5  $1,000 
_______ 
2,000  
5   $0.50
Tire Maintenance 5 15% of Tire Depreciation
 
5 0.15 3 $0.50 
5   $0.08
Fuel Cost 
5 Fuel Consumption 3 Cost of Fuel
 
5 1.22 gallons 3 $4.00 per gallon 
5   $4.88
Lube Oil 
5 10% of Fuel Cost
 
5 0.1 3 $4.88 
5   $0.49
 
Loader Cost per Hour: 
   $15.91
EXAMPLE 10.5 (continued)
EXAMPLE 10.6
What would the estimated unit prices for backfi lling basements using the 
loader described in Example 5 be, together with an operator at a wage of 
$20.00 per hour when the expected productivity of this unit is 15 cu.yds./hr.?
 
 
EQUIPMENT 
LABOR
Unit Prices 5 
  $15.91 
_________ 
15 cu. yd.  
  $32.00 
_________ 
15 cu. yd.  
 
5 
$1.06 per cu. yd. 
$2.13 per cu. yd.
EXAMPLE 10.7
What would the hourly charge-out rates (rental rates) for the above loader and 
operator be based on the following overheads and profi t requirements?
The company overhead on equipment is 20%
The company overhead on labor is 50%
The required profi t margin is 10%
(continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT 
215
Use of Spreadsheets
Because of the repetitive nature of the calculations involved, a computer spreadsheet 
program is very useful for calculating equipment ownership costs. Use of computer 
spreadsheet applications is particularly benefi cial where it is necessary to calculate 
the ownership costs of large numbers of equipment items. Also, the process of up-
dating the data on which the ownership cost calculations are based can be accom-
plished far more conveniently when the original calculations are stored in the form 
of spreadsheet calculations.
A spreadsheet template is set up to provide the basic format of the calculation 
process. The data applicable to the specifi c item of equipment is then inserted to gen-
erate the ownership cost of that item. This process can be repeated for any number 
of equipment units, thereby enabling the estimator to calculate their ownership costs 
in a matter of minutes. Figure 10.2 shows the format of a spreadsheet template for 
this use. Figure 10.3 and Figure 10.4 show the computer calculations of the owner-
ship costs of the items of equipment considered in Example 10.4 and Example 10.5 
above.
Charge-Out Rate for Excavator
Excavator Cost per Hour  
 
5 $15.91
Company Overhead: 
 
20% 
5 $ 3.18
 
 
 
Subtotal: 
 
   $19.09
Profi t Margin: 
 
 
10% 
5 $ 1.91
 
Charge-Out Rate—Loader: 
 
   $21.00
Charge-Out Rate for Operator
Operator Cost per Hour  
 
5 $32.00
Company Overhead: 
 
50% 
5 $16.00
 
 
 
Subtotal: 
 
   $48.00
Profi t Margin: 
 
 
10% 
5 $ 4.80
 
Charge-Out Rate—Operator: 
 
   $52.80
So the total charge-out rate for this loader and operator would be $73.80 per 
hour.
EXAMPLE 10.7 (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

216 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT
EQUIPMENT OWNERSHIP COSTS
 
Equipment Item: 
 
Operating Factor: 
 
Purchase Price: 
 
Freight: 
 
Salvage Value: 
 
Life Expectancy: 
 
Hours per Year: 
 
Maintenance and Repairs: 
 
Tire Cost: 
 
Tire Life: 
 Maintenance & Repairs on Tires: 
 
Equipment Overhead: 
 
Fuel Cost: 
 
Average Annual Investment: 
 
 
= 
 
 
Fuel Consumption: 
 
 
= 
ANNUAL COSTS:
 
   Depreciation on Equipment: 
 
= 
 
Maintenance and Repairs: 
 
= 
 
Equipment Overhead: 
 
= 
 
                       Total Annual Cost  
 
= $ 
HOURLY COST:
 
Equipment Cost: 
 
= 
 
Tire Depreciation: 
 
= 
 Maintenance & Repairs on Tires: 
 
= 
 
Fuel Cost: 
 
= 
 
 
Lube Oil Cost: 
 
= 
 
 
 
TOTAL COST PER HOUR 
 
 
= $ 
Figure 10.2 
Equipment Ownership Template
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT 
217
Figure 10.3 
Generator Ownership Cost Calculation
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

218 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT
Figure 10.4 
Front-End Loader Ownership Cost Calculation
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT 
219
SUMMARY
■ Construction equipment is usually priced in an estimate by multiplying unit 
prices by the time the equipment is used on the project.
■ Advantages of renting equipment:
• The builder does not have to maintain a large inventory of specialized plant 
and equipment where individual items are used infrequently.
• The builder has continuous access to the newest and most effi cient items of 
equipment available.
• There is little or no need for equipment warehouse and storage facilities.
• There is a reduced need for the builder to employ maintenance staff and 
operate facilities for their use.
■ Accounting for equipment costs can be simpler when equipment is rented.
■ There may be signifi cant savings on company insurance premiums when a 
builder is not maintaining an inventory of plant and equipment.
■ There are fi nancial advantages to owning equipment when a builder can 
 provide steady use of the equipment.
■ The following expenses should be considered when determining the full 
 ownership cost of material:
• Depreciation 
• Maintenance and repair 
• Financing 
• Taxes
• Insurance 
• Storage 
• Fuel and lubrication 
■ When straight-line depreciation is used, the amount of depreciation from 
 initial cost to salvage value is distributed equally each year over the life of the 
asset.
■ With rubber-tired vehicles, the tire depreciation is calculated separately from 
the vehicle depreciation.
■ Maintenance and repair costs on construction equipment vary considerably 
depending on the type of equipment and the job conditions encountered.
■ Whether an equipment purchase is fi nanced by loans or by use of the builder’s 
cash, interest charges will apply. These are calculated as a percentage of the 
average annual investment amount.
■ Taxes, insurance charges, and storage costs vary over a wide range of values 
depending on particular circumstances. An allowance for these costs is also 
calculated as a percentage of the average annual investment amount.
■ Fuel costs depend upon the type of engine and are proportional to the  engine’s 
horsepower rating. An operating factor that is always less than 100 percent 
is also introduced to account for the fact that the engine does not operate 
continuously at full throttle.
■ Examples of calculating the hourly ownership costs of various items of equip-
ment taking into account all of the above factors are provided.
■ An allowance for company overheads and profi t should be added to hourly 
ownership costs of an item of equipment when quoting a price for the rental 
of the item.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

220 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
  Information 
Web Page Address
 
■ General information and equipment prices  
http://enr.construction.com
(Engineering News Record web page)
 
■ Use a Web search engine and key words: 
http://www.ironplanet.com
“equipment prices” to obtain vendors’ prices
of new and used equipment. Example: Iron
Planet of Pleasanton, California
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. Describe how equipment is usually priced in an estimate.
 2. When deciding whether to rent or buy construction equipment, what factors 
should a builder consider?
 3. What are the advantages and disadvantages to the builder of renting rather than 
buying equipment? 
 4. Why is the “straight-line method” an unsatisfactory way to calculate deprecia-
tion on construction equipment?
 5. Why is tire depreciation calculated separately from vehicle depreciation?
 6. How is the amount for maintenance and repairs on equipment usually calculated?
 7. Explain the term operating factor in connection with fuel cost.
 8. What factors should be considered when estimating the ownership costs of 
equipment?
 9. What is included in equipment overheads?
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
 1. Calculate the ownership cost per hour for a crawler-type hydraulic crane pow-
ered by a 350 hp diesel engine based on the following data:
Engine: 
 
 
 
350 hp diesel
Operating Factor: 
 
 
60%
Purchase Price: 
 
 
$570,000
Freight Charges: 
 
 
$2,500
Estimated Salvage Value: 
 
$350,000
Useful Life:  
 
 
5 years
Hours Used per Year: 
 
2,000
Maintenance & Repairs: 
 
120% of annual depreciation
Equipment Overhead Rate:  
11%
Diesel Fuel Price: 
 
 
$1.80 per gallon 
 2. What would the hourly charge-out rates (rental rates) for the above crane and 
operator be based on the following overheads and profi t requirements?
• The operator’s wage is $20.00 per hour
• The company overhead on equipment is 20%
• The company overhead on labor is 50%
• The required profi t margin is 10%
 3. Calculate the ownership cost per hour for a mobile compressor unit powered by 
a 60 hp gasoline engine based on the following data:
Engine: 
 
 
 
60 hp gasoline 
Operating Factor: 
 
 
45%
Purchase Price: 
 
 
$25,000 (including tires)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 10—PRICING EQUIPMENT 
221
Freight Charges: 
 
 
$1,500
Estimated Salvage Value: 
 
$7,500
Useful Life:  
 
 
8 years
Hours Used per Year: 
 
1,700
Maintenance & Repairs: 
 
83% of annual depreciation
Tire Cost: 
 
 
 
$1,000
Tire Life: 
 
 
 
5,000 hours
Maint. & Repairs (Tires):  
 
15% of tire depreciation
Equipment Overhead Rate:  
11%
Gasoline Fuel Price:  
 
$2.50 per gallon
 4. A homebuilder is trying to decide whether it is cheaper to lease or buy a pickup 
truck. With all the miles she fi gures, she is going to put on the truck each month 
the lease works out to $4.25 per hour. How does the ownership cost of the same 
vehicle compare based on the following data? You can ignore maintenance, tire, 
and fuel costs as these will be the same in both cases. 
Engine:  
 
 
 
248 hp diesel
Purchase Price:  
 
 
$30,440
Freight Charges:  
 
 
$1,000
Estimated Salvage Value:  
 
$15,000
Useful Life:   
 
 
5 Years
Hours Used per Year:  
 
2,000
Equipment Overhead Rate:   
11%
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

223
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be able to:
■ Describe how subtrade work is estimated, and explain the role of the builder’s 
estimator in this process.
■ Identify potential problems with subcontractors on a project, and describe what 
can be done at the time of the estimate to minimize these problems.
■ Explain how the competency of subtrades can be evaluated, and list what should 
be considered in this evaluation.
■ Explain how surety bonds may be used to help manage subtrades.
■ Describe subtrade pre-bid proposals, and explain their use with subcontractor 
quotes.
■ Describe how subtrade quotes are evaluated, and identify scope-of-work prob-
lems associated with subcontractor quotes.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
11
SUBCONTRACTOR WORK
Introduction
Subcontractors often perform 80 percent or more of the work on residential proj-
ects. Often all of the on-site work is put in place by subtrades, which leaves the 
builder to merely coordinate the activities of the subtrades as construction manager. 
Outwardly, this would appear to simplify the work of the estimator, since each of 
the subtrades quoting the job will normally be responsible for estimating their own 
portion of the work. In theory, all that is left for the builder’s estimator to do is fi nd 
the subtrades with the best prices for each trade and then gather the trade prices to 
determine the total price of the work. However, in reality it may not be quite that 
bid closing time
bonding of subtrades
hoardings
pre-bid subtrade 
proposals
scope of work
unknown subtrades
unsolicited subtrade 
bids
KEY TERMS 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

224 
CHAPTER 11—SUBCONTRACTOR WORK
simple. There can be serious problems with the practice of subcontracting for a num-
ber of reasons, including:
 
1. Unreliability of some subcontractors
 
2. Errors in subtrade quotes 
 
3. Overlap or gaps in the work subcontracted
 
4. Conditional quotes from subcontractors
 
5. Congestion at the time of bid closings
Unreliable Subcontractors
When an estimator is preparing a price for an project, she or he places a great deal 
of trust in subtrades to deliver the quotes they have promised so that they can be 
incorporated into the overall bid price. Further trust will be placed in the subtrade 
whose quote is accepted to go on to complete their work on time and in an accept-
able manner. While most subtrades can be relied upon to provide the quotes they 
have promised to submit and at least try to meet their contractual obligations, there 
are still too many occasions when subcontractors break their agreements leaving the 
builder in much diffi culty. 
Subcontractor defaults can occur in numerous ways and at various stages in 
the construction process. When a builder is preparing a price for a custom home, a 
subtrade may be late with their quote or completely fail to prepare the price they had 
indicated they would be submitting. After a bid has been submitted to the owner, a 
subtrade may try to withdraw their quote that the builder used in the overall price 
for the project. A subtrade may not show up when their work is required to begin, 
or a subtrade may simply fail to perform their work in accordance with their con-
tractual obligations.
There can sometimes be legal recourse against a defaulting subtrade, but this 
often provides little compensation to the builder who has suffered the consequences 
of the default. An estimator may be called upon to assess the reliability of a sub-
contractor and the risk of their default. This assessment is considered later under 
“Evaluating Subcontractors.”
Errors in Subtrade Quotes
One of the reasons for the defi cient performance of subtrades is the occurrence of 
errors in the estimates prepared by the subtrades. Accepting a subtrade bid that 
contains a mistake can lead to endless trouble for a builder, so the estimator has to 
make every effort to ferret out subtrade bids that contain errors if the consequential 
problems are to be avoided. When a quote is received from a subtrade and is obvi-
ously out of line with expectations, it is advisable for the estimator to contact the 
subtrade before the builder uses the price. There is usually no need to discuss details 
with this subtrade; merely indicating that they should check their quote for errors 
should be suffi cient warning to them.
Overlap and Gaps in the Subcontracted Work
Ensuring that subtrades properly cover all the work of the project can be diffi cult 
since it is easy for a section of work to be excluded from the subtrade’s scope and be 
overlooked in the estimator’s takeoff. Similarly, discovering that some work has been 
covered more than once in the estimate is also possible. These cases where there are 
gaps or overlap in coverage occur when work is not clearly defi ned as being part of 
the scope of a single subcontractor’s work. Avoiding these problems calls for a great 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 11—SUBCONTRACTOR WORK 
225
deal of investigative work by the estimator. This topic is further discussed under 
“Scope of Work.”
Conditional Subtrade Bids
The estimator’s task becomes far more complicated when subtrades attach condi-
tions to their bids. Where all of the subtrades quoting a certain trade base their bids 
on the same scope of work and comply with the same set of specifi cations, selecting 
a subtrade price should not be diffi cult. But when each subtrades has a different set 
of bid inclusions and exclusions and each expects the builder to supply a variety of 
different items, or the subtrades bid according to various alternative specifi cations, 
selecting a subtrade can become a horrendous task for the builder’s estimator.
Congestion at Bid Closing
Where a builder is in a bid competition to obtain a contract for a custom home or a 
multi-unit project, the owner usually requires bids be submitted by a certain time on a 
certain date—the bid closing time. The builder notifi es subtrades of this and asks for 
subtrade quotes be submitted in time for the builder to compile its bid for the owner. 
However, instead of sending in their quotes one or two days before the time of the 
owner’s bid closing, subtrades tend to hold onto them until just before the bid closing. 
This happens mostly because subtrades are afraid that their prices will be disclosed 
which would enable a competitor to underprice them. Consequently, most of the sub-
trade bids arrive at the builder’s offi ce, usually by fax, within an hour of the bid closing 
time. This puts the estimator under great pressure: fi rst sorting the faxes into trades, 
then interpreting the quotes and any conditions attached, and fi nally, trying to decide 
which quote or combination of quotes provide the best price for the work. 
Managing Subcontract Pricing Procedures
The problems we have described can be controlled only where the builder applies 
effective management practices throughout the estimating process. The underlying 
objective of the subcontract pricing procedures detailed below is to provide a well-
organized system of dealing with subtrades in the estimating process. Following this 
system allows the builder fi rst to clearly identify the subtrade needs for the project 
being estimated and second, to ensure that the subtrades selected to perform the 
work are capable of meeting their contractual obligations.
List of Subtrades for a Bid
As soon as drawings and specifi cations are obtained for a competitive bid project 
and the estimator has reviewed the documents, a list of the subtrades required for 
the project should be prepared. This list is compiled and subtrades are notifi ed early 
in the estimating process to give the subtrade bidders as much time as possible to put 
together their estimates. Many of the design questions raised in the estimating pro-
cess relate to subtrade work, so subtrades have to be encouraged to make an early 
start on their takeoffs so that the problems they encounter can be properly dealt with 
in the time period when estimates are being prepared.  
The list of subtrades required should not vary too much from one project to 
another so that a standard list can be maintained by the estimator to use on each 
project. The estimator then checks off the subtrades required for this project from the 
standard list of subtrades. Figure 11.1 is an example of the kind of checklist of trades 
estimators use to indicate the particular trades needed on a project. However, every 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

226 
CHAPTER 11—SUBCONTRACTOR WORK
 
Project: 
Estimator:
 Bid Closing Date:
 
  
Required 
Comments
Demolition
Earthwork
Landscaping
Paving and Surfacing
Concrete
Precast Concrete
Damp proofing
Parging
Formwork
Reinforcing Steel
Masonry
Structural Steel
Metal Decking
Miscellaneous Metals
Carpentry Framing
Engineered Joists
Glue-Lam Construction
Finish Carpentry
Cabinets
Bathroom Accessories
Appliances
Siding
Stucco
Insulation
Roofing
Soffit and Fascia
Eaves Trough
Doors
Windows
Flooring
Drywall
Tile Work
Painting
Plumbing
HVAC
Electrical
SUBTRADE LIST
Figure 11.1 
Subtrade Checklist
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 11—SUBCONTRACTOR WORK 
227
project seems to have at least one aspect that is different from others so the estima-
tor needs to carefully examine the project specifi cations and drawings for any items 
that are out of the ordinary; especially items that call for a specialized subtrade. Extra 
trades are then added to the subtrade list to meet specifi c requirements of a project.
The subtrade list is fi rst used to determine which trades have to be contacted 
for bid requests on the project. The list can later be incorporated into the estimate 
summary and used to ensure that all subtrade work necessary for the project is duly 
priced as required.
Contacting Subtrades
Once the subtrade needs of a project have been defi ned, the next task is to inform 
subcontractors that the builder is going to prepare a bid for the project and that bids 
for their trade will be required. Most builders maintain a directory of the subtrades 
they prefer to deal with. These trades are usually alerted by e-mail that a price is 
required for a new project.
One way to organize this process is to have a subtrade checklist like the one 
shown on Figure 11.1 set up on a computer spreadsheet, and then proceed as follows:
 
1. The estimator checks off the trades required for the project and adds any 
required trades that are not on the basic list.
 
2. A copy of this checklist is e-mailed to all the subtrades on the builder’s mail-
ing list. 
 
3. Each subcontractor is asked to return the checklist with their name against 
all the trades on the checklist that they are prepared to submit prices for.
Subtrades are quickly notifi ed of a project, and the estimator promptly deter-
mines if all the subtrade prices necessary for a project are going to be obtained from 
the subcontractors who normally work for that builder.
When the builder’s subtrade directory does not cover all the trades necessary for 
the job or where prices from additional subtrades are needed to improve competi-
tion, soliciting prices by advertising in trade publications or newspapers may have 
to be considered. This, however, introduces the problem of receiving bids from un-
known subcontractors.
Unknown Subtrades
Having to award contracts to companies from outside their select group of preferred 
subtrades can be a stressful experience for some builders. It may, however, be neces-
sary for a number of reasons. For instance, having to fi nd a subtrade to perform some 
specialized work may compel a builder to deal with an unknown subcontractor. 
Unsolicited Subtrade Bids
More commonly, a builder will be faced with an unfamiliar subtrade when a low 
price is received for a trade from a company who is not known to the builder. This 
can put the builder in a diffi cult position: on one hand, the builder may need to use 
the low price to maintain a competitive bid and, on the other hand, the builder may 
be hesitant to accept the risk of using an unknown subcontractor. Legal and ethical 
considerations also impact upon this situation. One course of action that has been 
adopted by some builders faced with this decision is to use the low price in the bid 
but not commit to using the subtrade who submitted the price. This solution, as 
well as being ethically questionable, may also be contrary to bid conditions. In most 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

228 
CHAPTER 11—SUBCONTRACTOR WORK
major contract bids, the builder will be required to name its subcontractors on the 
bid document. Failure to properly comply with such bid requirements can put the 
builder into a vulnerable legal position.   
The problem a builder faces when it receives an unsolicited low bid can be fur-
ther aggravated by time constrains. While there is no sure recipe that can be followed 
to avoid all the potential problems a builder can have with a subcontractor, there are 
certain precautions (outlined below) that the prudent builder can take to minimize 
the risk. But when a builder is confronted with a low price from an unknown sub-
trade just hours or even minutes before the bid to the owner is due to be submitted, 
there is little or no time available to make effective inquiries about the subtrade.
This problem of time constraints can be avoided to some extent if the estimator 
takes some precautions earlier in the estimating process. First, the estimator must 
try to learn which subtrades are planning to bid on a project. This information can 
sometimes be obtained from the builder’s own subtrades. They frequently hear from 
their own industry contacts details about which of their competitors intend to bid 
on a job. If new subtrade names come to the attention of the estimator during the 
course of these inquiries, investigation and evaluation of the unfamiliar subtrades 
can begin in a timely fashion.
Evaluating Subcontractors 
The builder’s two main concerns when considering an unfamiliar subtrade are fi rst, 
is the subtrade capable of meeting the quality and schedule requirements of its work? 
And second, does the subtrade have the fi nancial capability required?
The estimator or another member of the builder’s team should evaluate poten-
tial subcontractors in these two areas so that an assessment of risk can be made 
before a subtrade is named in a bid. Carrying an unknown subtrade in a bid without 
carefully considering the consequences is asking for trouble.
An effective evaluation of subtrade companies would involve an investigation of 
a number of factors including:
 
1. The general reputation of the company
 
2. The quality of previous work performed by the company
 
3. The quality of the company’s management
 
4. The company’s disposition in terms of their general cooperativeness and the 
ease in dealing with company site and offi ce personnel
 
5. The fi nancial status of the company
This kind of information can be obtainable from several sources. The company 
itself may be willing to supply general details about the number of years it has been 
in business, the number of people it employs, and it might offer references, especially 
if it is eager to secure contract work. Examining a list of the equipment that is owned 
by the company can sometimes make an assessment of the stature of a subtrade. 
A company’s status may also be gauged from whether and how long it has been a 
member of a trade association. Construction companies who have previously hired 
the subtrade may be willing to comment on their experience with the subtrade and 
other industry contacts, such as material suppliers, who have had contact with the 
subtrade may offer their opinions about the company. 
When investigating the fi nancial condition of a subtrade, a useful source of in-
formation can be bonding companies. If the subtrade wishes to bid on larger value 
projects, it must be able to obtain surety bonds. The builder’s own bonding  company 
which is usually concerned about the business health of the builder can be approached 
to share any fi nancial information they may have about the subtrade. The builder’s 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 11—SUBCONTRACTOR WORK 
229
bank can also be a source of fi nancial data on the subtrade. Lastly, the builder 
may be able to pick up a fi nancial report on the subtrade, for a fee, from a credit- 
reporting agency.
The reader should note that subcontracting problems are not exclusive to the 
subtrades new to the contractor. Even subtrades that a builder has worked with over 
many years can be the source of problem or two, so some of the inquiries previously 
suggested for unfamiliar subtrades may also be appropriately applied from time to 
time in an effort to ensure that the regular subtrades remain reliable.
Bonding of Subtrades
Under the terms of the contract it has with the owner, the builder is always held 
responsible for the performance of the work including the performance of the work 
done by subcontractors. If a subtrade fails to perform as required, the prime builder 
will have to cope with the problem within the project budget. Certainly there will be 
no additional funds available from the owner to rectify the defaults of a subtrade.  
Just as the owner, in an effort to manage the risk of a non-performing builder, 
may require the builder to obtain surety bonds to guarantee contract performance, 
so, too, can the builder require major subtrades to provide such bonds to guarantee 
the performance of their work. 
There has been much discussion in construction management texts about the 
advantages and disadvantages of surety bonds as a means of managing construction 
risk; suffi ce it to state here that some builders do consider it worthwhile to require 
subcontractor surety bonds even where it can add more than 1 percent to subtrade 
prices. Builders who demand bonded subtrades will impose a bid condition on sub-
trades specifying that the subtrade shall obtain a performance bond that names the 
builder as obligee. Then, should the subtrade default on its contractual obligations, 
the builder will be able to look to the bonding company to fi nance the due perfor-
mance of the subtrade’s work.
Subtrades may also be required to provide bid bonds. A subtrade bid bond 
would give the builder the right to damages from the bonding company in the event 
that a subtrade fails to execute the subcontract after the builder has properly ac-
cepted their bid.
When subtrade bonds are requested on a project, subtrades may be instructed 
to include the cost of bonding in their bid prices, or the bid conditions may call for 
the price of the bonding to be stated separately from the bid price. The second al-
ternative informs the builder of the cost saving of waiving the bonding requirement, 
an option that might be considered with a low-risk, well-established subcontractor.
Pre-Bid Subtrade Proposals
Most subcontractors now prefer to submit their bids by e-mail, but there are still 
some who fax their quotes to the builder. These quotes provide a hard copy of the 
subtrade’s quote before the builder’s bid goes to the owner, but conditions attached 
to the quotes often vary from subtrade to subtrade. This makes bid analysis diffi cult 
to pursue especially, as mentioned above, when many of the subtrade quotes are 
received just before the builder’s bid is due to go to the owner. 
Subcontractors generally cannot be persuaded to submit their bids earlier, but 
some time has to be available if any analysis of subtrade bids is to be possible. 
A  practical solution to this dilemma is to have subtrade bidders submit pre-bid 
 proposals so that the builder’s estimator has the opportunity to examine subtrade 
bids and make comparisons where a number of bids are received for the same work. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

230 
CHAPTER 11—SUBCONTRACTOR WORK
A pre-bid proposal is a copy of the subtrade’s bid without prices but complete in 
all other details including the conditions the bidder wishes to attach to the bid. 
Figure 11.2 shows an example of a pre-bid proposal from a glass and windows 
subcontractor.
Analyzing Subtrade Bids
The estimator has to ensure that all of the work required from a trade, as defi ned by 
the project drawings and specifi cations, is included in the subtrade bid. One problem 
is that individual subtrades may have different interpretations about the scope of 
work of their trade. For example, a subtrade bidding masonry work may include in 
their quote the insulation under the brickwork, while another may not. Taking into 
WWW WINDOWS INC.
 
  
Date:
 To: XYZ Construction Inc.
 Re: Custom Home
 
 Townsville
We propose to supply and install the following materials for the above-named
project:
 
1. Aluminum casement windows including glass and glazing
 
2. Glazing to wood interior partitions: (separate price)
 
3. Bathroom mirrors: (separate price)
Note: If we are awarded items 1, 2, and 3 above, we offer a discount of 10%
 
 on the prices quoted.
EXCLUSIONS:
 
1. Final cleaning
 
2. Breakage by others
 
3. Scaffolding and hoisting
 
4. Heating and hoarding
 
5. Flashings
 
6. Any other glass or glazing not listed above
 
7. Temporary enclosures 
PRICE QUOTATION 
Figure 11.2 
Subtrade’s Pre-Bid Proposal
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 11—SUBCONTRACTOR WORK 
231
account all the subtrades on a project, the number of possible combinations of trades 
and part trades is endless.
When a bid proposal has been obtained from a subtrade, it should list inclusions 
that detail all the work that bidder is offering to do for the price quoted. However, 
this list may or may not coincide with the inclusions listed by other subcontractors 
bidding the same trade. Meaningful bid comparisons can only be made where the 
bidders are offering to perform the same work. Excluded items should also be listed 
on the subtrade’s proposal. Most exclusions are items of work that, by standard 
practice, are always omitted from the work scope of the trade. Exclusions from one 
trade are sometimes covered elsewhere in the estimate by other trades or by the 
builder in its work. The estimator has to be constantly on the lookout for items ex-
cluded from the work of a trade and not priced anywhere else in the estimate.
The subtrade in the Figure 11.2 example has listed all the work items it intends 
to price. Note that fl ashings are listed on this quote as an exclusion; this is typical of 
the kind of item that is excluded by one trade but may not be included by any other 
subtrade on the project. If this is the case here, the estimator will have to make sure 
an additional price is obtained to cover the cost of these fl ashings. 
Subtrade bids can be further complicated by multiple trade bids and discounts 
that are sometimes offered. Subcontractors frequently offer prices for a number of 
different trades on a project. They may state on their quote that they are only in-
terested in a contract for the entire group of trades they have included in their bid. 
Alternatively, the bidder may allow the builder to pick and choose which trades 
it wishes to award contracts for, but, as an inducement, the subtrade may offer a 
discount if they are awarded a contract for all of the trades they submitted bids on. 
In the example in Figure 11.2, if the builder accepts all the subtrade’s prices, a price 
reduction of 10 percent is offered. 
To facilitate subtrade bid analysis, a spreadsheet like the one shown in Figure 11.3 
can be set up from the information obtained in pre-bid proposals for each of the 
trades required for the estimate. Each spreadsheet is compiled sometime before the 
bid closing day and lists the names of bidders together with the items of work to be 
included in their bids so that, when prices are received, they can be easily inserted onto 
the spreadsheet to provide a speedy bid analysis. Note that in this example a combina-
tion of prices from the various bidders gives the least total price for this trade.
Scope of Work
In the residential sector, the scope of work covered by a particular trade is usually 
determined from local trade practices. It is important for an estimator to become 
familiar with trade defi nitions that outline the scope of work of each trade. Asking 
many questions and learning from the experience of dealing with local subtrades is 
the only way to gain this knowledge. 
Trade scope defi nitions are sometimes available from local bid depositories for 
commercial projects, but they seldom apply to residential construction. However, 
these defi nitions could be useful to a residential estimator as a guideline to a trade’s 
scope of work. For instance, such a scope could be used as a checklist for asking a 
subtrade what is and is not included in their quote. Adopting this practice can make 
commercial scope defi nitions a valuable aid in the process of analyzing subtrade 
bids. 
The following is an example of the trade scope defi nitions for the masonry trade. 
The reader is cautioned that this defi nition is provided for illustrative purposes only; 
it is not intended to be complete, and specifi c trade rules may vary from location to 
location.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

232 
CHAPTER 11—SUBCONTRACTOR WORK
Example—Masonry Scope of Work
The following items shall be included in the work of the masonry trade:
■ Brickwork
■ Concrete blocks, glazed blocks, and glass blocks 
■ Building in of miscellaneous metals (supplied by others) in masonry 
■ Built-in metal fl ashing—supplied by others 
■ Caulking (other than fi restopping), masonry to masonry
■ Cavity wall fl ashings behind masonry
■ Wall insulation complete with adhesives, anchors, etc., behind masonry where 
masonry is the last component to be installed
■ Clay fl ue lining 
■ Clay tiles
■ Cleaning masonry 
■ Clear waterproofi ng of exterior masonry 
■ Concrete and grout fi ll in masonry only 
■ Masonry anchors and ties
■ Damp-proof course in masonry 
■ Expansion and control joints in masonry or masonry to other materials, 
 including caulking where it forms part of the expansion or control joint
 
SUBTRADE ANALYSIS
Project: Laboratory Building - Townsville 
Page No:
TRADES: 
8500 Metal Windows 
Date:
 
  
8800 Glazing
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASE
 
Casements Glzg. Wood Bathroom 
 
 
BID
SUBTRADES 
& Glzg. 
Partitions 
Mirrors 
Flashings Discounts 
TOTAL
WWW WINDOWS INC. 
$20,000 
$900 
$180 
NIC 
($2,108) 
$19,372
 
 
 
 
     $400 (SMITH)    
(With
 
 
 
 
 
 
discount)
XXX WINDOWS INC. 
$19,500 
inc. 
inc. 
$250 
no 
$19,750
YYY WINDOWS INC. 
$18,900 
$500 
$220 
$375 
no 
$19,995
ZZZ WINDOWS INC. 
$18,400 
$850 
$180 
$290 
no 
$19,720
Combination: 
ZZZ 
YYY 
ZZZ 
XXX 
= 
$19,330
Figure 11.3 
Subtrade Bid Analysis
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 11—SUBCONTRACTOR WORK 
233
■ Guarantee 
■ Hoisting 
■ Inspection 
■ Installation only of precast concrete band courses, copings, sills, and heads 
which fall within masonry cladding, including supply and installation of 
 insulation and vapor barrier behind these items 
■ Loose fi ll or foam insulation in masonry 
■ Mortar 
■ Non-rigid and fabric fl ashing when built into masonry 
■ Parging of cavity masonry walls only when specifi ed 
■ Protection of other trades’ work from damage by this trade 
■ Reinforcing steel placed only in masonry—supplied by others to the job site, 
clearly tagged, and identifi ed as to end use 
■ Scaffolding 
■ Shop drawings 
■ Stone (natural and artifi cial), granite, terra cotta facing over 2" thick, includ-
ing anchorages 
■ Testing of material of this trade where specifi cally called for in the masonry 
specifi cations
■ Trade cleanup
■ Weep hole and venting devices
■ Wire reinforcing to mortar joints
The following items shall be excluded from the work of the masonry trade:
■ Anchor slot
■ Demolition
■ Fabrication and tying of reinforcing steel
■ Fire stopping
■ General and fi nal cleanup
■ Hoardings
■ Installation of frames
■ Lateral support devices on top of masonry walls
■ Temporary heat (including mortar shack), light, power, sanitation, and water 
■ Temporary support and shoring for lintels
■ Welding
■ Wind-bracing
SUMMARY 
■ Subcontractors often perform 80 percent or more of the work on residential 
projects.
■ Subtrades will normally be responsible for estimating their own portion of 
the work which would appear to make it easy for the general contractor to 
price subtrade work, but in reality it may not be quite that simple.
■ Problems with subtrade bids can result from:
• Unreliable subcontractors
• Errors in subtrade bids
• Overlap or gaps in the scope of work subcontracted
• Conditional subtrade bids
• Bid closing congestion
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

234 
CHAPTER 11—SUBCONTRACTOR WORK
■ Effective management practices are required to deal with subcontractors in 
the estimating process. This includes:
• Listing required subtrades
• Contacting prospective subtrades
• Ensuring subtrade requirements are covered
■ Problems can also develop when the subtrade with the low price is unknown 
to the general contractor.
■ Contractors need to evaluate subtrades by asking:
• Is the subtrade capable of meeting the quality and schedule requirements of 
its work?
• Does the subtrade have the fi nancial capability required? 
■ The evaluation of a subcontractor needs to consider:
• The general reputation of the company
• The quality of previous work performed by the company
• The quality of the company’s management
• The company’s disposition in terms of their general cooperativeness and 
the ease of dealing with company site and offi ce personnel
• The fi nancial status of the company
■ One possible way to manage the risk of non-performing subtrades is to have 
subtrades provide performance bonds.
■ Another tool in subtrade management is the pre-bid subtrade proposal. This 
outlines for the contractor’s estimator the terms of the subtrade bid in good 
time before the subtrade releases its price at the last minute.
■ The builder’s estimator needs to carefully analyze subtrade bids to ensure that 
all of the work required from a trade, as defi ned by the project drawings and 
specifi cations, is included in the subtrade bid price.
■ Estimators need to be familiar with the scope of work covered by local resi-
dential sector subtrades. 
■ Scope of work defi nitions that are available for subtrades on commercial 
projects can help in analyzing residential subtrade quotes.
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
 Information 
Web Page Address
 
■ Free copies of subcontractor forms and 
http://www.allaboutforms.com
many other contract documents are 
available at the web site: all about 
forms.com
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. What should an estimator do when a bid is received from a subcontractor with 
a very low price that suggests that the subtrade has made an estimating error?
 2. Discuss overlap and gaps in subcontracted work and the problems associated 
with each condition.
 3. Why are conditional bids from subtrades undesirable?
 4. How can the problem of bid closing congestion associated with receiving 
 subtrade bids be reduced?
 5. What are the general contractor’s two main concerns when a low bid has been 
received from a subcontractor who is new to the general contractor?
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 11—SUBCONTRACTOR WORK 
235
 6. What are the advantages and disadvantages to a general contractor of having 
subtrades provide surety bonds?
 7. What is a pre-bid subtrade proposal, and of what benefi t is it to the contractor’s 
estimator?
 8. Why should a residential estimator take an interest in local building trade 
practices?
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
 1. Use a spreadsheet to calculate which of the following three bids (or combination 
of bids) for masonry work on a house offers the best price to the contractor:
 
 Bid from Subtrade A
 
 Included: Brick facings $13,900; Brick chimney $6,750; Brick fi replace $4,000
 
 Excluded: Weatherproofi ng; Flashings to openings; Scaffolding
 
 Bid from Subtrade B
 
 Included: Brick facings $15,808; Flashings to openings $1,795; Brick chimney 
$4,900; Brick fi replace $2,500; Weatherproofi ng as specifi ed $1,200
 
 Note: We offer a discount of $3,000 if we are awarded all of this work.
 
 Excluded: Scaffolding
 
 Bid from Subtrade C
 
 Included: Brick facings $15,900; Brick chimney $5,120
 
 Note: If we are awarded both the facings and the chimney, we can offer a 10% 
discount.
 
 Excluded: Brick fi replace; weatherproofi ng; fl ashings to openings; scaffolding
 2. Use the spreadsheet shown in Figure 11.4 to determine the best combination of 
prices for structural and miscellaneous metals on this project.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

236 
CHAPTER 11—SUBCONTRACTOR WORK
Figure 11.4 
Subtrade Price Evaluation
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

237
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be 
able to:
■ Describe the last steps in the estimating process including summarizing prices, 
markup considerations, and determining the total price. 
■ Explain the use of different summary formats, and distinguish between a  summary 
for the sales price of a home and a bid summary.
■ Describe the items that are addressed in the advance stage of the bid process. 
■ Explain why bid clarifi cations are sometimes required.
■ Explain how bid markup is calculated including an assessment of risk. 
■ Outline the tasks that should be addressed after bids are submitted.
■ Complete an estimate to determine the sales price of a home and a bid estimate 
using manual methods.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
12
ESTIMATE SUMMARIES 
AND BIDS
allowances
alternative prices 
(alternates)
bid bond
bid clarifi cations
bid closing
bid markup
bid runner
bid summary
company overheads
consent of surety
instructions to bidders
post-bid review
profi t margin
qualifi ed bids
KEY TERMS 
Introduction
In this chapter we consider the last stage of the estimate process when all of the 
component prices are gathered together in a summary and the builder considers the 
amount of markup to add to the price. The format of the summary depends on what 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

238 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS
the estimate is to be used for; an estimate used for calculating the sales price of a 
home will be summarized differently from an estimate used to prepare a bid.
Builders use the summary to show all the constituent prices of an estimate in-
cluding the price of the builder’s own work, subtrade work, general expenses, over-
heads, and the fee. This is usually displayed on standard summary sheets. When the 
estimating process is complete, the summary will present total amounts for each part 
of the estimate, but the summary sheet can also be used at the start of an estimate to 
identify the items that will later have to be priced in the estimate. Estimators often 
begin the estimating process by checking off on a standard summary sheet the trades 
that will be completed by “own forces” and those that will be subcontracted. Later, 
this document becomes a gathering place for subtrade prices as prices are obtained 
for each trade.
Summary Formats
Figure 12.1 shows an example of a summary sheet format suitable for use in calcu-
lating the sales price of a new home. 
A builder may use a number of different summary formats on a project for dif-
ferent users of the information. For example, there could be a summary format for 
the job superintendent showing the budget in a way that is useful in the construction 
process. Another summary could be set up for company accountants showing proj-
ect prices in a format that is more useful for accounting purposes. Many different 
formats can quite easily be generated using computer estimating programs.
The purchaser of the new home is another possible user of the estimate sum-
mary. The builder may wish to show the homebuyer a summary in the form of 
a price breakdown. This can be useful to the builder, especially with semi-custom 
homes where there are a large number of price changes for modifi cations to a stan-
dard design. This summary would not need to be as detailed as the estimator or 
superintendent’s summary, and the builder would probably not want to list the add-
ons on this document. Instead, add-on amounts can be distributed to all the other 
amounts in the summary. This would increase these other prices slightly, but the 
overall price of the estimate will remain the same. This process, which is sometime 
referred to as allocating add-ons, can be done automatically and far more quickly 
when using some of the more advanced computer estimating software.
Figure 12.2 shows an example of a summary format suitable for the purchaser 
on a semi-custom home. 
Bid Summary
On the bid summary shown on Figure 12.3, prices of the builder’s own work are 
entered at the top of the sheet so that subtotal 1 provides an estimate of direct cost 
of the builder’s work. It is useful to know this amount because some add-ons may be 
calculated from it. Subtrade prices and the price of general expenses are recorded on 
the summary as they become available until the bid total at the foot of the summary 
is fi nally established. This total can then be transferred to the bid documents. 
To successfully prepare a bid that is free from errors and complete in all es-
sentials, the estimating process has to be carefully planned and organized from the 
point when the bid documents are fi rst reviewed up to the last act in the process, 
which is the bid submission. The busiest period, and the period when the process is 
most error prone, is the last few hours before the fi nal price is determined. Every task 
that can possibly be accomplished before bid closing day has to be out of the way 
so that these last few hours can be devoted to those activities that can only occur at 
this time. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS 
239
 
 
 
LABOR 
MATL. 
EQUIP. 
SUBTRADE   OTHER 
   TOTAL
 No. 
DESCRIPTION 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
  $ 
   $
 
 
SUBCONTRACTORS
 1.0 
Excavate and Backfill Basement
 2.0 
Excavate & Backfill Service Trenches
 3.0 
Concrete
 4.0 
Form Footings
 5.0 
Form Walls and Columns
 6.0 
Damp Proof Walls
 7.0 
Rough Carpentry Framing
 8.0 
Deck
 9.0 
Canopy Over Entrance
 10.0 Finish Carpentry
 11.0 Cabinets (Supply and Install)
 12.0 Bathroom Accessories (Supply and Install)
 13.0 Appliances (Supply and Install)
 14.0 Soffit and Fascia (Supply and Install)
 15.0 Siding (Supply and Install)
 16.0 
1/2" Parging (Supply and Install)
 17.0 Paint Exterior Windows and Doors
 18.0 4" Eaves Gutter (Supply and Install)
 19.0 3" Downspouts (Supply and Install)
 20.0 Roofing (Supply and Install)
 21.0 7'-0" x 3'-6" Precast Concrete Steps
 22.0 Flooring (Supply and Install)
 23.0 Drywall Finishes (Supply and Install)
 24.0 Interior Painting (Supply and Install)
 25.0 Plumbing - Rough In
 26.0 Plumbing - Finish
 27.0 Heating - Rough In
 28.0 Heating - Finish
 29.0 Electrical - Rough In
 30.0 Electrical - Finish
 31.0 Light Fixtures
 
 
 
Subtotal 1:
 
 
MATERIALS
 32.0 Excavation & Gravel Materials
 33.0 Concrete Materials
 34.0 Carpentry Materials
 35.0 Finish Carpentry
 
 
 
Subtotal 2:
 36.0 GENERAL EXPENSES
 
 
 
Subtotal 3:
 
 
ADD-ONS
 37.0 SMALL TOOLS
 38.0 PAYROLL ADDITIVE
 39.0 BUILDING PERMIT
 40.0 INSURANCE
 41.0 FEE
 42.0 ADJUSTMENT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOTAL PRICE
          Price per S.F. =
PROJECT:
GROSS FLOOR AREA:
LOCATION:
DATE:
ESTIMATOR:
ESTIMATE SUMMARY
Figure 12.1 
Sales Price Estimate Summary
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

240 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS
HOUSE PLAN
LOCATION:
PURCHASER:
DATE:
PRICE BREAKDOWN
 
 
 
BASE PRICE ADJUSTMENT 
TOTAL
 No. 
DESCRIPTION 
$ 
$ 
$
 
 
   SUBCONTRACTORS
 
 
Excavation and Backfill
 
 
Concrete Work
 
 
Rough Carpentry Framing
 
 
Finish Carpentry
 
 
Cabinets
 
 
Bathroom Accessories
 
 
Appliances
 
 
Siding and Soffit
 
 
Paint Exterior Windows and Doors
 
 
Roofing
 
 
Flooring
 
 
Drywall Finishes
 
 
Interior Painting
 
 
Plumbing
 
 
Heating
 
 
Electrical
 
 
Light Fixtures
 
 
 
Subtotal 1:
 
 
   BILL OF MATERIALS
 
 
Excavation and Gravel Materials
 
 
Concrete Materials
 
 
Carpentry Materials
 
 
Finish Carpentry
 
 
 
Subtotal 2:
 
 
   GENERAL EXPENSES
 
 
 
TOTAL PRICE:
Figure 12.2 
Sales Price Breakdown for Purchaser
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS 
241
 
 
 
LABOR 
MATL. 
EQUIP. 
SUBS. 
OTHER 
TOTAL
 
 
DESCRIPTION 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$
 
 
OWN WORK: 
 
 
Excavation & Fill
 
 
Concrete Work
 
 
Formwork
 
 
Miscellaneous
 
 
Masonry
 
 
Rough Carpentry
 
 
Finish Carpentry
 
 
Exterior Finishes
 
 
Interior Finishes
 
 
 
Subtotal 1:
 
 
SUBCONTRACTORS
 
 
Demolition
 
 
Landscaping
 
 
Piling
 
 
Reinforcing Steel
 
 
Precast
 
 
Masonry
 
 
Structural and Misc. Steel
 
 
Carpentry
 
 
Millwork
 
 
Roofing
 
 
Caulking and Damp Proofing
 
 
Doors and Frames
 
 
Windows
 
 
Resilient Flooring
 
 
Carpet
 
 
Drywall
 
 
Acoustic Ceiling
 
 
Painting
 
 
Specialties
 
 
Plumbing
 
 
Heating and Ventilating
 
 
Electrical
 
 
Cash Allowances
 
 
 
Subtotal 2:
 
 
GENERAL EXPENSES
 
 
 
 
 
Subtotal 3:
 
 
ADD-ONS 
 
 
Small Tools
 
 
Payroll Additive
 
 
Building Permit
 
 
Performance Bond
 
 
Insurance
 
 
Fee
 
 
Adjustment
 
 
 
 
 
 
  BID TOTAL:
PROJECT:
GROSS FLOOR AREA:
LOCATION:
DATE:
ESTIMATOR:
ESTIMATE SUMMARY
Figure 12.3 
Bid Summary
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

242 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS
In Advance of Bid Closing 
A residential construction bid is compiled in three stages: the advance stage, the review 
stage, and the closing stage. The following tasks are performed in the advance stage, 
which should be concluded at least two workdays before the day of the bid closing:
 
1. Complete the quantity takeoff, the recaps, the general expenses, and the sum-
mary sheet, except for the subcontractor prices.
 
2. Calculate all required unit prices and alternative prices relating to the 
 builder’s work.
 
3. Obtain bid bonds, consent of surety forms, and any other documents re-
quired to accompany the bid.
 
4. As far as possible at this stage, fi ll out the bid forms and have them signed by 
company offi cers, witnessed, and sealed.
 
5. Make duplicate copies of all bid documents for retention.
 
6. Prepare an envelope for delivery of bid documents.
 
7. Have a senior estimator hold on to all bid documents and the bid envelope 
until the day of the bid closing.
 
8. Prepare a plan for the delivery of the bid. Ensure that the bid runner (the per-
son who delivers the bid) is carefully briefed about their role and how they 
are to enter the fi nal items onto the bid forms if this is required of them.
 
9. Brief the offi ce staff regarding their roles on bid closing day.
 
10. Check all fax machines, computers, and telephones to ensure that they will 
be operational for closing day. Backup fax machines and computers may be 
required for large multi-unit project bids.
Many estimators prepare a checklist of the items that have to be completed dur-
ing the entire estimating process to ensure that all needs are taken care of in good 
time. See Figure 12.4.
There are few things more frustrating and more liable to trigger panic amongst 
the estimators closing the bid than learning moments before the bid is to be submitted 
that an item required for the bid, such as a bid bond or a signature on a key document, 
is missing. Those of us who have been involved in numerous closings can attest to the 
truth of Murphy’s Law: “Whatever can go wrong, will go wrong” in these situations.
The Bid Form
The bid, which may sometimes be called a tender or a proposal, can generally be pre-
sented in any form the builder chooses. Figure 12.5 shows an example of a simplifi ed 
bid form that could be used by a homebuilder on smaller projects. The builder may 
wish to attach terms and conditions to this document, in which case it may be wise 
to seek the advice of a lawyer when drafting the bid form.
Standard bid forms, obtainable from many construction associations, can also 
be used for this purpose. Sometimes, especially when the owner is a public agency, 
the instructions to bidders may specify that bidders have to use the bid forms pro-
vided by the owner; these are usually found in the project specifi cations package.
In all cases, the bid form should contain certain basic information:
■ The name and address of the project 
■ The identity of the owner
■ The identity of the bidding builder
■ A description of the work to be done
■ A list of the bid drawings and specifi cations
■ The bid price
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS 
243
■ The duration or completion date of the project
■ The signatures of the bidders where they are not incorporated, or the corpo-
rate seal where the bidder is a corporation, all duly witnessed 
■ The time, date, and place of the bid
These items are generally considered to be the essential ingredients of a bid, but 
many bids have been written in an informal style omitting one or more of the items 
listed above. The lack of some detail in a bid may have no effect on the course of 
the contract, but owners and builders alike have sometimes wished the bid had been 
more explicit so that a problem might have been avoided.
In addition to the basic bid information, the bid form may also have a number 
of other items attached to it, including:
■ A list of unit prices for pricing changes in the work
■ Alternative prices
■ Separate prices
■ Bid security
■ Verifi cation that the contractor is licensed (required in some states)
■ Certifi cation that the owner owns the property
■ Payment terms
■ Interest rate on late payments
PROJECT:
LOCATION:
DATE:
ESTIMATOR:
CHECKLIST
 
 
TASK 
COMPLETED
 
 
Obtain Bid Documents
 
 
Notify Subtrades
 
 
Prepare Summary Sheet
 
 
Takeoff Own Work
 
 
Visit Site
 
 
Price Own Work
 
 
Price General Expenses
 
 
Price Subtrades
 
 
Calculate Unit Prices
 
 
Alternate Prices
 
 
Cash Allowances
 
 
Obtain Bid Bond
 
 
Fill Out Bid Forms
 
 
Prepare Bid Envelope
 
 
Assign Bid Runner
 
 
Review Estimate
 
 
Bid Closing
Figure 12.4 
Estimator’s Checklist
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

244 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS
■ A note that the price is based on certain soil conditions. If conditions vary, the 
contract price may be adjusted
■ Other bid conditions
If they are not mentioned in the bid, many of these issues will be dealt with 
under the terms of the contract between the owner and the contractor. A copy of 
the proposed contract with all its provisions should be included in the specifi cation 
package for the project.
BID FORM
Bid Number:________________________  Date: ____________________
Project Name: _________________________________________________
Project Address: _______________________________________________
City: ________________________ 
State:__________  Zip: __________
Project Work:__________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
Drawings:_______________________________  Dated:______________
Specifications: ___________________________  Dated:______________
Design Consultant: _____________________________________________
Submitted To:
Owner:_______________________________________________________  
Address: _____________________________________________________
City: ________________________ 
State:__________  Zip: __________
Telephone:_________________________  Fax: _____________________
Work to Begin:_________________________________________________
Work Completed By: ____________________________________________
To provide all materials, equipment, and labor required to complete the
project as described in the drawings and specifications noted above for
the sum of:
_____________________________________ dollars. ($ ____________ )
Builderʼs Name: ________________________________________________
By: __________________________________________________________
Witness:______________________________________________________
Builderʼs License Number: _______________________________________
Address: _____________________________________________________
City: ________________________ 
State:__________  Zip: __________
Telephone:_________________________  Fax: _____________________
Figure 12.5 
Sample Bid Form
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS 
245
Alternative Prices
Alternative prices are quoted for proposed changes in the specifi cations. The builder 
normally bids a price for the project as specifi ed, then quotes alternative prices to 
perform the work in accordance with the different requirements called for in the al-
ternates. For instance, if the specifi cations indicate that 26-ounce carpet is required, 
this type of carpet will be priced in the base bid. Then the owner may request an al-
ternative price to substitute 32-ounce carpet; the extra cost of supplying the heavier 
carpet will be calculated and quoted separately in the bid. Alternative prices are usu-
ally expressed as additions to or deletions from the base bid and are often referred 
to as alternates. In this example, the alternate submitted with the bid may state: “To 
substitute 32-ounce carpet for 26-ounce carpet, add $45,000.”
Bid documents call for alternative prices where owners or their design consul-
tants wish to provide some price fl exibility in the bid. This allows them to substitute 
lower-priced alternatives where the bid price exceeds the owner’s budget and vice 
versa. A few alternative prices can be reasonably expected on a bid, but in some cases 
several dozen prices have been required. This puts the estimator under added pres-
sure on bid closing day since many of the alternatives involve subtrades so alternates 
cannot be priced until information is received with the subtrade bids that arrive in 
the last few hours of the estimating period. 
Alternates can be extremely complex, indeed alternative prices have been re-
quested for the deletion of entire sections of a building comprising several fl oors in 
some cases. This kind of alternate will impact upon the prices of most of the sub-
trades on the project. When an alternate involves a signifi cant number of trades, the 
estimator is advised to set up a spreadsheet in advance to streamline the process of 
pricing the alternate when subtrade bids are received. 
Figure 12.6 shows a template for pricing some example alternates on a custom 
home. This kind of spreadsheet can be set up early in the estimating process with 
the spaces for prices left blank until the pricing information is obtained for the 
subtrades. 
Alternative prices may also be introduced into the bid on the builder’s own 
initiative. These alternatives are invariably offers to perform the work for a reduced 
price on the condition that certain changes are made to the design or specifi cations. 
They can be in the form of a simple substitution of a product of equal quality but 
lower cost for the one specifi ed, or the alternative may consist of offering a com-
pletely different design for the project. 
Allowances
Builders can be instructed to include in their bid a stipulated sum of money that is 
to be expended on a specifi c work item on the project. These sums, which are usu-
ally referred to as cash allowances, are not normally required to be listed on the bid 
documents like alternate prices, but they are to be included in the bidder’s price. 
The instructions to bidders could say, for example, “Allow $2,000 for the fi nish 
hardware as specifi ed.” Contract conditions will normally go on to describe how the 
cash allowances are to be disbursed. Instructions usually state that the cash allow-
ance shall include the actual supply cost of the goods required for the work but shall 
not include for the builder’s markup. The builder is required to include the profi t that 
applies to the cash allowance work elsewhere in its bid price.
A second type of allowance, often called a “contingency sum,” differs from that 
previously described in that the funds are to be made available for a broader pur-
pose. A bidder may be instructed to include a contingency sum of $10,000 in its bid 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

246 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS
BID ALTERNATES 
 
PROJECT: ___________________
 
LOCATION: ___________________
 
DATE: ___________________
 
ESTIMATOR: ___________________
 
 
 
ADD 
DEDUCT
 NUMBER 
ALTERNATIVE PRICES 
$ 
$
 
ALT. 1 
To substitute cedar shingles for
 
 
asphalt system as specified 
10,000 
—
 
ALT. 2 
To reduce attic insulation as specfied 
— 
5,000
 
ALT. 3 
To add air conditioning unit as specified 
15,674 
—
 
ALT. 4 
To delete basement development:
 
 
 
— Partitions and doors 
— 
4,500
 
 
 
— Floor finishes 
— 
3,005
 
 
 
— Drywall 
— 
2,256
 
 
 
— Painting 
— 
982
 
 
 
— Washroom accessories 
— 
350
 
 
 
— Plumbing and heating 
— 
3,850
 
 
 
— Electrical 
— 
1,900
 
 
 
TOTAL DEDUCTION 
— 
16,843
Custom Home 0619
ABF
Figure 12.6 
Bid Alternates Spreadsheet
price for extra work authorized on the project, in which case the cost of extra work 
will be paid out of this sum.
When the estimator fi rst reviews the bid documents at the start of the estimating 
process, any allowances specifi ed should be highlighted. Many estimators set up the 
summary sheet for the estimate at this time and enter details of the bid cash allow-
ances on the sheet at once so that they are not later forgotten. 
Bid Security
Sometimes, especially on larger projects, the builders are required to include bid 
security with their bids. This can be in the form of a bid bond or could consist of a 
certifi ed check or other form of negotiable instrument. The purpose of the security 
is to guarantee that if the bid is accepted within the time specifi ed for acceptance of 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS 
247
bids, the builder would enter into a contract and furnish satisfactory contract bonds 
to the owner, otherwise the bid security is forfeited.
Bid bonds are issued by surety companies and are favored by builders over other 
forms of bid security since their use does not require large sums of money to be tied 
up for extended time periods. Certain owners, especially government bodies, require 
surety bonds be drafted in a particular form, in which case the estimator has to en-
sure that the bonds obtained do comply with these specifi cations. Requests for bonds 
should be placed as soon as the bonding provisions of a project are determined.
The face value of a bid bond is usually set at 10 percent of the bid price, but a 
5 percent value has been specifi ed for some projects. A second form of bid security, 
called a Consent of Surety, is also frequently required to accompany bids. A Consent 
of Surety is a written statement made by a bonding company indicating that they 
will provide surety bonds as required by the contract to the builder named in the 
statement. The estimator should be able to collect this document at the same time 
and from the same source as the bid bond.
Owner’s Bid Conditions
The owner often lists on the bid forms certain conditions that are imposed on bid-
ders. The list of owner’s conditions has been known to run to many pages on some 
bid forms, but some of the more usual examples included declarations that:
 
1. The bidder has examined all of the contract documents and addenda as listed 
by the bidder on the bid
 
2. The bidder has inspected the site of the work and is familiar with all of the 
conditions relating to the construction of the project 
 
3. The bidder agrees to provide all labor, materials, equipment, and any other 
requirements necessary to construct the complete project in strict accordance 
with the contract documents
 
4. The bidder agrees to give the owner 30 days to consider the bid (the accep-
tance period)
 
5. If, within 12 days after the bid is accepted, the bidder whose bid is accepted 
within the specifi ed acceptance period refuses or fails, to either (1) enter into 
a contract with the owner or (2) provide contract performance security or 
both, the bidder shall be liable to the owner for the difference in money be-
tween the amount of its bid and the amount for which the contract is entered 
into with some other person
 
 (Note that the bid security is in place to guarantee this last condition.)
Many of the conditions found in the bid documents are placed there to shift 
a risk factor from the owner to the builder. The estimator should highlight these 
conditions and bring them to the attention of their company managers so that the 
consequence of assuming the risk involved can be assessed. It is important for the 
estimator to ensure that all risks imposed by both bid and contract conditions have 
all been addressed in the estimate.
The Pre-Bid Review
The objectives of the pre-bid review are threefold: to ensure that there are no obvious 
omissions from the bid, to consider ways of improving the competitiveness of the bid 
price, and to consider an appropriate fee for the project. While the estimators involved 
in preparing the bid will have previously considered all three of these elements during 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

248 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS
the estimating process, the additional experience and different viewpoints contributed 
by other people at the review meeting can often be of great benefi t.
Ideally, a pre-bid review meeting will take place at least two workdays before 
the bid closing day.  This gives the estimator time to take action on the decisions that 
arise from the meeting and allows suffi cient time for a brief follow-up meeting when 
it is necessary. 
At least the project estimator and his supervisor, who is usually the chief estima-
tor, will attend the pre-bid meeting. Whether other participants are present depends 
upon both the size of the organization and the size of the project to be bid. In a 
small company, the estimator and supervisor may be the only people involved with 
bids. In contrast, when a large project bid is closed at the offi ces of a major builder, 
a company vice president or even the president may attend, together with a regional 
general manager, an operations manager, a project manager, the project estimating 
team, and the company’s chief estimator.
Before the review, the takeoff of the builder’s work should be complete and 
priced, the general expenses should have been priced as far as possible, and pre-bid 
subtrade proposals should have been obtained from the major subcontractors on the 
project. By the time of the meeting, the chief estimator should have looked over the 
bid documents and discussed the estimate generally and the prices specifi cally with 
the estimator. It is also advisable for everybody else attending the review to examine 
the drawings and, at least, glance over the other bid documents before the meeting 
commences, otherwise much of the meeting time will be taken up “enlightening” 
these attendees about the basic characteristics of the project. 
The principal topics discussed at the pre-bid review, together with typical ques-
tions raised about these subjects, are listed below:
 
1. The nature and scope of the project work: Is it clear what is involved in the 
project? Does the estimate address all of the constituent parts that it should?
 
2. The construction methods proposed for the project: Can more effective or 
more effi cient methods be used? If so, what will the effect be on the price of 
the work?
 
3. The supervisory needs of the project: What key positions will need to be fi lled 
on the project? Will there be company personnel available when these posi-
tions have to be fi lled?  
 
4. The labor resources required for the project: What will be the project labor 
demands? Are any problems anticipated in meeting these demands?
 
5. The equipment needs of the project and availability of key items: What are 
the main items of equipment required? Will there be any problems meeting 
these requirements?
 
6. The prices used in the estimate: Is there agreement regarding the prices of key 
labor and equipment items used in the estimate? 
 
7. The project risks: Which of the takeoff is considered to be risky, and how 
much has been allowed to cover the risk involved?
 
8. The general expense prices: What has been allowed for in the key items of 
general expenses? Can anything be done to improve the competitiveness of 
the prices used?
 
9. The response from subcontractors: Will prices be forthcoming for all the trades 
involved in the work? What problems have been identifi ed by subcontractors?
 
10. The markup fee to be added to the estimate: What is the exposure to risk 
contained in this bid? What is an appropriate fee to include in the bid price? 
(See Bid Markup)
 
11. Clarifi cations to be submitted with the bid: Is it necessary to include a state-
ment about the basis of the builder’s price with the bid? (See Bid Clarifi cations)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS 
249
All of these items—and any others that affect the bid—should be discussed in an 
open and mutually supportive climate at the bid review meeting. It should be made 
clear that the object of the meeting is not to criticize the work of the estimators, but 
rather to discuss what can be done to maximize the quality of the bid. Good bid 
reviews are infused with team spirit that can restore the confi dence of an estimator 
who is suffering from doubts and the feeling of aloneness that can torment even the 
best of the profession.
Important decisions can be reached in many of the areas discussed at the meet-
ing, but two topics especially (the bid markup and the need for bid clarifi cations) 
require careful consideration.
Bid Markup
A markup or fee is added to the estimated price of a project. This has two compo-
nents: company overheads and profi t margin.
Company Overheads
Company overheads encompass all the expenses, apart from the project costs, in-
curred in operating a building company. Some expenses are diffi cult to distinguish 
as either company overheads or project expenses, but any company expenditure that 
is not the direct cost of project work or a part of the general expenses of a project is 
normally considered to be company overhead. Company overheads usually include 
the following expenses:
 
1. The cost of providing a single or multiple company offi ce premises including 
mortgage or rent costs
 
2. Offi ce utilities
 
3. Offi ce furnishings and equipment
 
4. Offi ce maintenance and cleaning
 
5. Executive and offi ce personnel salaries and benefi ts
 
6. Company travel and entertainment costs
 
7. Accounting and legal consultant’s fees
 
8. Advertising
 
9. Business taxes and licenses
 
10. Interest and bank charges
The amount of company overhead establishes the minimum fee a builder needs 
to obtain from each project. 
EXAMPLE 12.1
In the case where a company has an annual overhead of $1,000,000 and the 
revenue obtained from completed projects per year is estimated to be $10 mil-
lion, the minimum fee is calculated as: 
 
 $1,000,000
 
$10,000,000 = 10%
Proﬁ t Margin
Profi t margin, defi ned as the amount of money remaining after all project expenses 
and company expenses have been paid, can be assessed in two ways in a building 
business: as a return on the investment, or as compensation for the risk assumed by 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

250 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS
the company owners. Owners who have extensive investments in their company, 
usually in the form of housing lots, may wish to analyze their profi ts in terms of a 
percentage of the amount they have invested in the business. An option these owners 
always have is to sell all the assets of the company and invest the funds elsewhere. 
Many building company owners, however, have relatively small amounts invested in 
the operation. For these owners, the risk assessment is far more relevant. 
Spec Housing Risk
For the speculative builder, the risk lies in the time it takes to sell its homes. When de-
termining the markup to include in a house price, the question these builders have to 
consider is: What level of markup is suffi cient to compensate for this risk involved? 
Keep in mind that much of the company overhead will be incurred whether houses 
are being sold or not. Returning to the fi gures previously quoted, if the builder has 
a bad year and annual sales slip from $10 million down to $5 million, company 
overheads will probably still remain at $1 million; this would mean that 20 per-
cent of revenue would now have to go to pay overheads. Unless sales prices can be 
raised, profi t margins will be squeezed. In fact, when sales are slow, some builders are 
tempted to reduce prices in order to improve their competitive position. This strategy 
will only serve to reduce profi t margins even further.
Risk in Bid Work
In the case of builder obtaining work from bid competitions, the question of risk is 
considered from the beginning of the pricing process, and possibly before this in the 
takeoff section of the estimate. For example, a certain item of work may possibly 
require additional materials. Here the risk-averse estimator will include the extra 
material in the takeoff just in case it is needed.
It is diffi cult to deny the claim that every price in the estimate for a bid has an 
element of risk attached to it, but some items in the estimate are more risky than 
others. As outlined in the discussion on risk in Chapter 9, the items that hold the 
most risk for the builder are those where the price depends upon the productivity 
of the builder’s workforce or upon the duration of the project. The value of these 
items (the risk component) is equal to the sum of the labor and equipment prices of 
the estimate plus the price of time-dependent general expense items. This amount is 
considered to be the risk component of the estimate.
Once the value of the risk component is established, the amount of fee to be 
included in a bid price can be calculated as a percentage of this risk component. The 
percentage amount used in the fee calculation is determined by a large number of 
factors, many of which where touched upon in items discussed in the pre-bid review 
listed above, but the factors affecting the fee markup can be summarized into three 
main categories:
 
1. The residential construction market and the level of competition expected
 
2. The builder’s desire for and capacity to handle more work
 
3. The desirability of the project under consideration
However, calculating the project fee as a percentage of the value of risk in a 
bid has a certain danger attached to it. The reasons for applying a low fee to a bid 
(high competition, the builder’s need for work, or a desirable project) can also infl u-
ence the estimator into pricing the estimate optimistically. This can then produce a 
compounding effect since the low prices used in the estimate will lead to a low-risk 
component that will have a low percentage fee applied to it. The complete reverse of 
this is also possible: high prices, or a high risk factor resulting in an excessively high 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS 
251
bid price. To avoid these extremes, the estimators need to be impartial in the pricing 
process and try to avoid undue optimism or pessimism.
Bid Clariﬁ cations
The instructions to bidders, especially on public projects, will frequently state that 
qualifi ed bids, or bids that have conditions attached to them, will be considered 
invalid and these bids may be rejected. One of the reasons why it is important to 
obtain clear answers to the questions raised in the estimating process is that it is not 
advisable to state on the bid that it is based on this or that interpretation since the 
presence of such a statement can cause the bid to be rejected. 
However, a situation occasionally arises where some aspect of the bid is still 
not perfectly clear even after explanations are received from the designers and the 
builder wishes to avoid the consequences of confl icting interpretations of the con-
tract documents. In such a case, the group gathered together at the pre-bid review 
has to weigh the risk of these consequences against the risk of having the bid re-
jected. Sometimes the anticipated dangers are large enough to justify attaching the 
condition to the bid and risking rejection. 
The Bid Closing
The process of closing a bid is a time of great excitement in the builder’s offi ce. From 
the fi rst day the project drawings and specifi cations arrived in the offi ce, the  estimator 
has been keenly aware of the bid deadline; fi rst the days are seen to slip by, then the 
hours are noted, and fi nally the minutes tick away to bid closing time. Those esti-
mators who enjoy the thrill of a bid closing may approach the fi nal day with eager 
anticipation, but there are some estimators who approach it with dread. 
After the bid has been reviewed, the amount of fee set, and the estimator has 
made the changes to the bid that were decided upon in the review process, all that 
remains to be done is add in the subtrade prices and complete the bid documents. 
This is what some estimators refer to as the crazy part of the process.
On a project with more than thirty subtrades when, over a period of just a few 
hours, as many as ten bids can be received for each separate subtrade, the activity 
level in the prime builder’s offi ce can reach frenzied proportions. Under these con-
ditions where each subtrade price can range up to $1 million or more and a single 
mistake can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars, the stress on estimators can be 
enormous. Cool heads and total control is essential if panic is to be avoided.
The computer can be a useful tool in the bid closing process and, if used effec-
tively, can reduce the strain on the estimators considerably. However, in the last stage 
of the bid, successful bidding, more than ever, depends upon good organization.  
Stafﬁ ng the Bid Closing
On small building projects with few subtrade prices involved, the bid closing may be 
handled comfortably by no more than the estimator and a single assistant. But when 
many subtrade prices are expected for a project, additional people will be required to 
assist in the process. The number of estimators and assistants engaged in a bid closing 
has to be suffi cient to deal with all telephone calls and gather all fax sheets promptly, 
leaving the project estimator and the chief estimator free to analyze the incoming bids 
and complete the pricing of the estimate. A team of six to eight people is usually suf-
fi cient to cope with the task, but on very large projects or in situations where several 
projects close at the same time, this number may need to be further increased.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

252 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS
Where the bid is to be hand delivered, which is the case with many bids, an ad-
ditional person has to be added to the bid closing team for any size of project. This is 
the bid runner, the person who is to physically deliver the bid. Whether the place of 
the bid closing is just across town or in another city many miles away, the bid runner 
will usually have to write on the bid documents the fi nal bid information. This may 
consist of merely the fi nal bid price, but many other items of information can be un-
determined when the bid runner leaves the offi ce with the bid documents. Subtrade 
names, alternative, separate, and breakdown prices are just a few of the possible 
items that may need to be completed on the documents by the bid runner.
The bid runner will be equipped with a cellular phone so that, once he or she 
reaches the location of the bid closing and fi nds a place nearby to complete the docu-
ments, they can establish contact with the offi ce and receive the fi nal bid details. Cer-
tain subtrades, being aware of this arrangement, will deliberately withhold their price 
until the last moment to avoid the possibility of a builder disclosing their bid to other 
subtrades. Sometimes, therefore, the builder can still receive bids in the last few minutes 
before the closing. If care is not taken at this point, a disastrous situation can develop 
where the bid is delayed until just after the closing time and is disqualifi ed for being 
too late.
Some builders have found it necessary to set a policy and inform all subtrades 
that no bid will be accepted after a stipulated time. This can be set at one hour or 
even half an hour before the owner’s bid closing time. The builder then has time to 
handle the last arriving bids and the bid runner has time to complete the bid and 
hand it in before the time for accepting bids expires.
Receiving Subtrade Bids
As we have previously stated, the subcontractor’s preferred method of submitting 
bids is usually by means of e-mail, but some bid prices are sent by fax or even over 
the telephone. Apart from the price for the work, the person in the builder’s offi ce 
receiving the bid has to ensure that all required information is obtained from the 
bidder, including:
 
1. The name of the subtrade bidding
 
2. The trade being bid
 
3. The name of the person submitting the bid
 
4. The telephone number where this person can be contacted
 
5. The base bid price
 
6. Whether or not the bid is based on plans and specifi cations and whether 
everything required of this trade is covered by the bid price
 
7. Alternative, unit, and separate prices if required
 
8. The taxes applicable to this item and whether they have or have not been 
included in the price
 
9. Any conditions attached to the bid
 
10. The time and date the bid was received
 
11. The name of the person receiving the bid
Figure 12.7 shows a standard form that is used for logging this information 
when telephone bids are received. This form provides a checklist that the person 
receiving the bid can follow to ensure that no details are lacking.
Although it is unusual for a telephone to malfunction, computers are far 
more prone to problems. It is a good idea to have a contingency plan in the offi ce 
to deal with a situation where computer problems occur just as subtrade bids are 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS 
253
TELEPHONE BID
Trade Classification:
 
Date:
Project:
Bidder: 
By:
Address: 
Phone:
BASE BID:
TAXES: 
— State 
Included 
Excluded
 
— Federal 
Included 
Excluded
REMARKS:
ALTERNATES:
Taken By:
Figure 12.7 
Telephone Bid Form
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

254 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS
due to be received. This may require you to inform all bidders that they direct 
their bids to an alternative e-mail address or submit their bids, for now, just by 
telephone.
Subtrade Conditions
In Chapter 11 we discussed the problems that result from subcontractors submit-
ting conditional bids; the estimator closing a bid should be reminded to examine 
the terms of subtrade bids carefully. Where a subcontractor’s bid has conditions 
attached, the estimator needs to evaluate the consequences of accepting those condi-
tions. For example, if the subtrade excludes some work that is normally performed 
by that trade, the estimator will have to calculate the cost of the exclusion and add 
it to the subtrade’s bid price. 
Sometimes the condition imposed by the subtrade is something the builder needs 
to discuss with the owner. For instance, the subtrade may offer a price on the condi-
tion that they have the use of a certain sized storage space at the site. If the builder 
is aware of the condition early enough, the question can be raised with the owner’s 
design consultant and confi rmation of whether or not the required space is available 
obtained before the bid closing. But when the builder is made aware of this condition 
only an hour or so before the bid closing time, there is no time to discuss the matter. 
This is the kind of situation where the benefi t of pre-bid subtrade proposals is most 
appreciated.
Naming Subcontractors
Compiling a list of proposed subcontractors can be yet another diffi cult task for 
the bidder. The owner and/or the consultant may ask the bidder to list for their ap-
proval all the subtrades the builder is going to use on the project. Because of time 
constraints, because of subtrade bid conditions, and because of the overwhelming 
need to put together the most competitive price, the fi nal list of subcontractors may 
not be available until moments before the bid is to be handed in. Often having just 
a few more minutes after the bid is submitted would be useful to the builder for 
sorting out exactly whose prices were used in the last-minute scramble to fi nish off 
the bid. 
While a number of owners and their design consultants are sympathetic about 
the builder’s diffi culties and allow builders to submit subtrade lists after the bid clos-
ing, others point out, with some justifi cation, that to allow even a short time after 
the bid for builders to make their list of subtrades invites bad practices. It makes it 
easier for the unscrupulous builder to engage in bid shopping of subtrade prices. The 
required list of proposed subcontractors, therefore, can be expected to remain as a 
pre-bid condition on most contracts.  
Bid Breakdown
To further complicate the task of the estimator who is trying to close out a bid, some 
owners call for a cost breakdown to be attached to the bid documents. This break-
down is often required in a form similar to the estimate summary where a price is 
indicated for each of the trades involved in the work. The information is generally 
requested to provide a basis for evaluating monthly progress payments on the proj-
ect. More reasonable contract requirements usually state that the bidder awarded 
the contract shall submit this breakdown to the owner within a stated time of the 
contract award date. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS 
255
Preparation of this information at the time of the bid is a major chore for the 
estimator because the prices stated have to include profi t and overhead amounts, 
and many of these prices will not be available until the day of the bid closing, 
sometimes only minutes before the closing. In some cases, bidders just “rough out” 
the breakdown and submit the approximate values with the bid. In a few cases, 
builders have risked having their bids disqualifi ed for failing to include the break-
down with their bid. These builders may state on their bid that the breakdown is 
not available at this time but will be forwarded to the owner within 24 hours of 
the bid closing time.
Computerized Bid Closing
Computer programs are available to perform all the calculations and price compila-
tions that are necessary in the closing stages of an estimate. Merely having the bid 
summary set up on a computer spreadsheet provides a great advantage over manual 
methods. When a subtrade price is changed on the summary, the computer can be 
preprogrammed to automatically recalculate all consequential amounts and imme-
diately display the revised bid price. There are software packages especially designed 
for bid closing situations that offer a number of useful additional features.
Estimating staff may still be required to man the computers and telephones to 
collect the subtrade prices but, with bid-closing software operating on a computer 
network, prices can be constantly inputted into the system from any of the comput-
ers on the network. The estimator compiling the bid is then able to continually ana-
lyze the incoming prices and make selections from the combined input from all the 
estimators situated at their own terminals. 
Bid-closing software is normally compatible with other estimating software so 
that prices estimated on one system can also be used as input into the bid-closing 
system and changes made in material, labor, or equipment prices in one part of the 
estimate will automatically be refl ected in the bid price. 
After the Bid
Once the bid is submitted and the bid-closing time passes, those who were involved 
in the estimate, after perhaps sharing a moment of euphoria in the knowledge that 
the process is fi nally at an end, turn their attention to the bid results. A different ex-
citement now grips the team from the one they felt in the fi nal stages of the bid. The 
offi ce scene is now calm after the chaos of the bid closing, but there is an underlying 
tension, fi rstly about the position of the bid: Was it low? Was it high? And, secondly, 
about the bid itself: Was everything covered? Were there any mistakes?
Many owners these days open the bids in public shortly after the closing, in 
which case the anxieties of the estimators will soon be relieved or, in the case of 
a very low bid, they may be multiplied. Whatever the results, a review of the bid 
should be undertaken and all the loose ends left by the estimating process need to 
be tidied up.
After the bid, the items which need to be attended to include:
 
1. Tabulation of the bid results—Figure 12.8 shows a typical bid results table. 
Copies of the bid results table are usually distributed to senior manage-
ment personnel and to all of the people who were present at the bid review 
meeting.
 
2. Compile the bid documents—Drawings, specifi cations, and other documents 
provided by the design consultants for the bid are gathered together.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

256 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS
 
3. Return bid documents—If the bid is not one of the three low prices, the bid 
documents are returned to the design consultants and the deposit left for 
these documents is claimed.
 
4. Store bid documents—If the bid results have not been made public or if the 
bid is one of the three low bids, the bid documents are retained pending the 
award of contract. Should a contract be awarded to this builder, these docu-
ments will provide evidence of the basis of the bid so the builder should hold 
them in safe storage. In no circumstances should these documents be sent 
back either to the designer or the owner.
 
5. Compile and store the estimate fi le—All the price quotations from mate-
rial suppliers and subcontractors should be collected together with all 
other estimate documents in an estimate fi le. This will be the principal re-
source used in the review process described below. Afterwards, whatever 
the outcome of the bid, this fi le should be kept in safe storage for future 
reference.
 
6. Contact subcontractors—How builders deal with subcontractors at this 
stage is a matter of individual company policy. Immediately after the bid 
closing, some builders are willing to disclose whether a subtrade’s price was 
or was not used by the builder in its bid. Some builders will disclose this 
information to subtrades at a later stage when the bid results are made pub-
lic, while other builders refuse to even provide this information. These last 
builders, if they are awarded the contract, will notify only those subtrades 
that they intend to award contracts to, otherwise subcontractors will not be 
contacted. 
BID RESULTS
 
PROJECT: _____________________
 
FLOOR AREA: _____________________
 
LOCATION: _____________________
 
DATE: _____________________
 
ESTIMATOR: _____________________
The Parks Home
2750 SF
Townsville
ABF
 
  
Bid Price 
Per SF
 
  
$ 
$
 1. Builder ABC 
375,694 
136.62 
1.00
 2. Builder DEF 
388,279 
141.19 
1.03
 3. Builder GHI 
397,239 
144.45 
1.06
 4. Builder JKL 
426,754 
155.18 
1.14
 5. Builder MNO 
572,156 
208.06 
1.52
 6. Builder PQR 
582,000 
211.64 
1.55
Figure 12.8 
Tabulation of Bid Results
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS 
257
Post-Bid Review
If possible, the group of people who attended the pre-bid review should return for 
the post-bid review. Depending upon the bid results, there will often be many ques-
tions that arise after the bid is submitted. In general terms, if the bid was not success-
ful, the prime consideration will be: What needs to be done in the estimating process 
to improve the success of our bids? Clearly, if mistakes were made, action needs to 
be taken to try to avoid repeating the same mistakes again. If problems were encoun-
tered in the estimating process, the group needs to consider what can be done on 
future bids to prevent these problems from recurring. If a bid was extremely high or 
low, the major component prices of the bid should be examined to try to determine 
why the overall price was so extreme.
Sometimes, after all the prices used in the bid have been poured over and all 
kinds of alternative approaches and possible lower subtrade prices have been con-
sidered, the builder fi nds that the price of low bid can be reached only if the estimate 
was to be priced below cost with no fee included. In this situation, the most feasible 
explanation seems to be that the low bid contains an error and this builder is con-
soled only by the notion that the successful builder will lose so much money on the 
project that it will not be around too much longer to cause any further problems. 
Summary Example of House Project
Figure 12.9 shows the summary of prices for the sample house project.
Notes on Summary Shown in Figure 12.9
 
1. This is a summary to determine the sales price of a spec home.
 
2. All of the work of this project is to be performed by subtrades, so the own 
work section at the top of the summary has been removed.
 
3. The price for supplying and placing concrete is included in the bill of materi-
als, so there is no price against concrete in the subcontractor’s section.
 
4. The prices for plumbing, heating, and electrical work are divided into rough 
in and fi nish prices to refl ect the way these trades are paid.
 
5. The price of general expenses is entered from the general expense sheet.
 
6. The add-on for payroll additive is calculated as 25 percent of the total value 
of labor: 
 
 25% 3 $5,300 5 $1,325.00
 
7. The remaining add-ons, except for the fee that is a lump sum, are calcu-
lated as a percentage of the bid total. A trial-and-error method is used to 
estimate the total price. First an approximate value is used for the bid total 
and the summary completed. The resulting bid total is compared with the 
value used to calculate the add-ons. If there is a large error, the process is 
repeated until the margin of error is within acceptable limits. These are the 
fi nal calculations:
 
 a. Building Permit  
0.7% 3 $150,854 5 $1,056.00 
 
 b. Insurance 
 
2.5% 3 $150,854 5 $3,771.00
 
8. The cost per square foot is calculated at the end of the summary sheet by 
dividing the bid total by the gross fl oor area of the project that is listed at 
the top of the page. This provides a check on the accuracy of the bid total—
an SF cost, that appears too high or too low would sound a warning to the 
estimator.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

258 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS
Figure 12.9 
House Example Summary
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS 
259
SUMMARY
■ This chapter considered the last stages in summarizing and completing an 
estimate. 
■ Various summary formats may be required for different purposes:
• To determine the sales price of house
• To use in supervising the construction work
• To use in accounting
• To provide a price breakdown for a purchaser
• To determine a bid price
■ A residential construction bid is assembled in three stages:
• Advance stage
• Review stage
• Closing stage
■ To be concluded successfully, the bid process has to be carefully planned and 
organized.
■ As much of the estimate as possible is fi nalized in the advance stage; also, a 
plan for the delivery of the bid is formulated here.
■ In addition, the builder has to address the following items in the advance 
stage:
• Completion of bid forms
• Calculation and listing of unit prices
• Alternative prices (alternates)
• Separate prices
• Allowances
• Bid security—bid bonds and deposits
• Bid conditions
■ Standard bid forms that address essential requirements are available from 
construction associations.
■ Builders are sometimes instructed to use owner-supplied bid forms. 
■ A pre-bid review meeting will usually take place at least two workdays before 
the bid-closing day. This review is conducted for three main reasons:
• To ensure that there are no obvious omissions from the bid
• To consider ways of improving the competitiveness of the bid price
• To consider an appropriate fee (bid markup) for the project
■ The bid markup has two components: a contribution to cover company over-
heads and a profi t margin that is generally assessed as compensation for the 
risk taken by the builder.
■ Company overheads are all the expenses incurred in operating the company.
■ Builders sometimes need to include a clause with the bid to explain the basis 
of the bid. These bid clarifi cations can be dangerous since they may give the 
owner grounds to disqualify a formal bid.
■ A bid closing can be a period of hectic activity in a builder’s offi ce with a large 
number of competing subcontractors submitting bids for often more than 
thirty different trades.
■ The bid closing needs to be properly staffed and organized on large project 
bids to deal effectively with all the fax and telephone bids received over a 
relatively short time period.
■ Having to name subcontractors and provide price breakdowns can compli-
cate a bid.
■ A number of tasks follow the bid submission, including:
• Tabulate bid results
• Gather together all documents
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

260 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS
• Return bid drawings and specifi cations
• Store bid documents
• Compile an estimate fi le
• Handle subcontractor inquiries
• Conduct a post-bid review
■ Manually summarizing and concluding an estimate to determine the selling 
price of a house is demonstrated.
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
  Information 
Web Page Address
 
■ Bid forms can be purchased from 
http://www.thecontractorsgroup.com/
The Contractor’s Group 
form-bid-proposal.htm
 
■ United States Small Business 
http://www.sba.gov/category/
Administration explains surety bonds 
navigation-structure/loans-grants/
 
bonds/surety-bonds
 
■ Information about bidding software
can be obtained by entering the
key words: Bidding Software into
your Internet search engine
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. Describe four different uses for an estimate summary.
 2. Explain why custom home builders sometimes provide price breakdowns to the 
home purchaser.
 3. At which point in the bid processes are errors most likely to occur? Explain why.
 4. Why is the planning of the delivery of a bid an important part of the advance 
stage of the bidding process?
 5. Why do owners sometimes call for alternative prices to be quoted with bids for 
custom homes?
 6. If a “cash allowance” for fl oor fi nishes was specifi ed in the contract documents 
of a project, what action would the estimator who is preparing a bid on the 
project have to take?
 7. What is the most common form of bid security for large project bids?
 8. What is the purpose of bid security?
 9. What are the objectives of and who should attend the pre-bid review?
 10. Describe the fi nancial risks taken by a spec homebuilder.
 11. Why do some builders include “bid clarifi cations” with their bid even when they 
risk having their bid rejected by doing this?
 12. Why is a list of subtrades sometimes required, and why do bidders sometimes 
fi nd it diffi cult to compile the list?
 13. How can computer-estimating software help with bid closings?
 14. What is the purpose of a post-bid review?
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
 1. Complete the Bid Alternatives Chart in Figure 12.10 to determine the Total Addi-
tion to or Total Deduction from the contract price based on the following changes:
a. To substitute Menalta facing bricks for the specifi ed Glengary bricks, deduct 
$7,250
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS 
261
BID ALTERNATES
 
PROJECT: ___________________
 
LOCATION: ___________________
 
DATE: ___________________
 
ESTIMATOR: ___________________
 
 
 
ADD 
DEDUCT
 NUMBER 
ALTERNATIVE PRICES 
$ 
$
 
Figure 12.10 
Practice Problem #1
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

262 
CHAPTER 12—ESTIMATE SUMMARIES AND BIDS
b. To substitute aluminum frame windows for wood frames, deduct $1,222
c. To reduce the size of the living room and master bedroom as discussed,  deduct 
$7,190
d. To fi nish the basement, add the following amounts:
 
i. Replace stairs 
$4,800
 
ii. Partition walls 
$1,400
 
iii. Passage doors 
$560
 
iv. Hardware 
$450
 
v. Floor fi nishes 
$2,725
 
vi. Wall fi nishes 
$1,082
 
vii. Increase furnace capacity 
$1,500
 
viii. Electrical 
$2,100
 2. A homebuilder anticipates that he will build 50 homes next year and sell them 
at an average price of $385,000 each. What is the minimum markup he can add 
to the price of these homes if the company overheads for next year are as listed 
in Figure 12.11?
Figure 12.11 
Company Overheads
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

263
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be 
able to:
■ Describe how the remodeling business differs from the housing construction 
business.
■ Explain how an accurate remodeling estimate is compiled.
■ Describe how demolition and other remodeling work is measured.
■ Explain the importance of making sketches, both in scope defi nition and in the 
takeoff process.
■ Describe how an on-site takeoff can be prepared in a systematic manner.
■ Describe how remodeling work is priced.
■ Prepare a complete bid estimate including general expenses and summary for a 
remodeling project.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
13
ESTIMATES FOR
REMODELING WORK
Introduction
The remodeling business is different from home building in a number of ways. The 
remodeling contractor deals far more closely with the customer in a way similar to 
the direct-sales retail business. There are generally no architects or designers between 
the homeowner and the remodeler and, consequently, no drawings to inform the 
builder what is required. The remodeler is mostly dealing with structures that are in 
place rather than ideas that are expressed in plans and specifi cations. This has posi-
tive and negative aspects: positive in that much of what is required can be seen and 
physically measured, but negative in that some items are concealed and, therefore, 
bill of materials 
cost plus contract
combination contracts
lump sum contract
on-site takeoff
unit price contract
KEY TERMS 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

264 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK
cannot be properly assessed until the work begins. There is often more uncertainty 
on remodeling projects; problems can easily arise because plans do not turn out to 
be quite what was expected.
For the remodeler to succeed, they have to sell their expertise, show that they 
can solve the project problems, and that they are going to provide the quality and 
service the home renovator is looking for. In this process, price may not be as impor-
tant as it is to the regular homebuilder, but the remodeler still has to make a profi t 
in order to stay in business. To achieve this, accurate estimating remains a priority.
Contracts for Remodeling Work
Lump Sum Contracts
The type and extent of estimating required for a project depends mostly upon the 
contract terms for the project. The most commonly used contract for remodeling 
work is the lump sum contract with a fi rm price. The builder is usually selected 
on the basis of low price following a bid competition. If the scope of work is well 
defi ned and the owner has no wish to become involved in the construction process, 
this is probably their best option. Their only concern might be that the builder meets 
their obligation to perform all work according to requirements, particularly with 
regard to quality and schedule. The form of contract also provides the builder with 
the advantage of independence free from the owner’s interference.
An accurate estimate is required for a builder to make a profi t on a lump sum 
contract because the risk of extra costs is mostly borne by the builder. But while the 
owner enjoys the benefi t of having a fi rm price for the job, a lump sum contract lacks 
fl exibility. If there are many changes to the design during construction, the work will 
be disrupted and the builder will usually charge high prices for the changes. This 
will result in a project that neither meets the budget nor the schedule. When design 
changes are anticipated or when there is insuffi cient time to fi nalize a design before 
work begins, it may be preferable to use a cost plus form of contract.
Cost Plus and Management Contracts
Under the terms of a cost plus contract, the builder will be reimbursed for the costs 
incurred while doing the work and will also receive a fee for the job. As discussed 
in Chapter 1, the fee may be a percentage of the costs, a fi xed amount, or a variable 
amount with incentives for effi ciency. This arrangement allows the owner to make 
virtually any changes they wish; they can even design the project as it is built if they 
choose. Builders can still compete for the project, in this case on the basis of fee 
rather than total price. Once they have been awarded the contract, however, they 
will be guaranteed a profi t on the job. There is less of a need for an accurate estimate 
with a cost plus contract, but owners often call for a rough estimate before work 
begins in order to provide them with a target budget or, possibly, to determine the 
maximum price that they want the builder to complete the work for. 
A variation on the cost plus contract is a construction management contract. Here 
the builder is hired as a professional construction manager to oversee the project for 
an agreed fee. The cost of the work including labor, materials, equipment, subtrades, 
and overheads are paid directly by the owner. Budget estimating is commonly used 
with management contracts in an attempt to control costs, but the fl exibility of a cost 
plus and management contracts does, however, come at a price for the homeowner. 
Homeowners will undoubtedly pay more for the job under these terms than they 
would have done had they taken the time to set up a lump sum agreement.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 
265
Unit Price Contracts
Unit price contracts are used when the amount of work required on a project is 
uncertain for some reason. This situation occurs from time to time with remodeling 
contracts. For instance, when there are underground features to be removed, such 
as old cables, pipes, footings, and so on, no one can be altogether certain how much 
there is or how deep you will have to excavate to reach these items. If a unit price 
contract is adopted, the builder will quote a series of unit prices for the type of work 
involved in the job and be paid for the actual quantities of work completed multi-
plied by the applicable unit prices.
Estimating unit prices can be complicated, especially where the prices have to 
include for the builder’s overheads and profi t, and they may be further complicated 
if the owner wishes to use the same price for both added and deleted work on the 
project. The way to proceed is to work out what it would cost to complete a certain 
amount of work including all required overheads and profi t. Then determine the unit 
price by dividing this total price by quantity of the work. 
Combination Contracts
On larger projects, the contract arrangements may consist of a combination of con-
tract types. On one job, for example, the builder was to complete the main part of 
the work for a fi xed lump sum amount, all underground work was paid for at the 
unit prices in the contract, and any extra work was paid for at cost plus at an agreed 
percentage. In this way, the owner sets out to take advantage of the strengths of each 
form of contract on a single project.
The Remodeling Estimate
Budget estimating and preliminary estimating techniques are discussed in Chapter 1. 
These techniques are often used on remodeling jobs in the initial stages just as they 
are on housing projects. But what if a more accurate estimate is required in order to 
quote a fi rm price bid for a remodeling job? There are three key steps in preparing 
an accurate estimate for this kind of project when a lump sum price is called for:
 
1. Clearly identify all the work to be done
 
2. Measure the work to be done
 
3. Price the work
The most important and usually the most diffi cult to achieve of these steps is the 
fi rst. Good estimating procedures, as described in the other chapters of this text, will 
take care of steps 2 and 3, but if the work has not been properly defi ned, no amount 
of good estimating practice will improve a bad estimate. The estimator has to be able 
to ascertain what work is required to achieve the results the homeowner is looking 
for. This fi rst calls for good communication with the owner; the estimator has to ask 
many questions to the homeowner, show the owner, by means of sketches and de-
scriptions, what they plan to do and, perhaps most importantly, obtain the owner’s 
approval of these plans. This process also calls for a certain discipline. The estimator 
has to keep in mind that they are there to build the project the owner wants, not 
what the estimator or the remodeling contractor wants.
Once the project goal is confi rmed, the estimator next has to establish what 
exactly is in place before work begins, then go on to decide what has to be done 
to the existing structure to achieve the desired end results. This, above all, relies 
upon the estimator’s knowledge and experience. Perhaps even more than on housing 
jobs, the remodeling estimator needs to be very familiar with construction practices 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

266 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK
and have a wealth of experience in this work in order to deal with the many prob-
lems that arise on remodeling projects. Making sketches showing the existing build-
ing and the size and shape of features to be changed will help. The estimator will 
often also need to consult with designers, engineers, and trades such as plumbers and 
electricians to receive their input when putting an estimate together.
At the end of this fi rst step in the estimate, the estimator should have:
 
1. A clear outline of what the owner wants in the fi nished project (this is usually 
detailed on sketches and in notes that are approved by the homeowner)
 
2. A detailed analysis of the existing building with sketches and notes of what 
is now in place
 
3. A detailed plan of what has to be done and how it is to be done to build the 
fi nished project
Measuring the Work
Remodeling work may include any or all of the trades required for homebuilding:
■ Excavation and backfi ll
■ Concrete work
■ Masonry work
■ Metal work
■ Rough carpentry
■ Finish carpentry
■ Interior fi nishes
■ Exterior fi nishes
■ Plumbing work
■ HVAC work
■ Electrical work
We have discussed the methods of measurement for these trades in previous 
chapters with regard to homebuilding estimates. The same methods are followed in 
a remodeling takeoff. There is, however, one further trade that is often involved with 
remodeling work that has not been considered previously: demolition work. 
Measuring Demolition Work
Once again, for consistency and to enable a takeoff prepared by one estimator to be 
easily understood by another, it is advisable to follow some generally accepted rules 
of measurement:
 
1. Measure demolition work in the same way and using the same units as new 
work is measured.
 
2. Where information is lacking, the estimator shall specify any assumptions made.
 
3. Describe dust curtains, temporary partitions, and suchlike, and measure in 
square feet.
 
4. Include loading and disposal of garbage in the price of demolition materials.
 
5. Measure in square feet fi nishes to fl oors, walls, ceilings, roofs, etc., if they are 
to be removed separately from what they are attached.
 
6. Enumerate doors and windows if they are to be separately removed from 
walls; otherwise, they are included in the price of wall demolition.
 
7. Describe cutting openings in slabs and walls, and measure in square feet.
 
8. Describe stating size of concrete strip footings to be removed and measure in 
linear feet.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 
267
 
9. Describe concrete pad footings and irregular-sized footings to be removed 
and measure in cubic feet.
 
10. Describe stating thickness of concrete walls to be removed and measure in 
square feet.
 
11. Describe stating thickness of concrete slabs to be removed and measure in 
square feet.
 
12. Describe other concrete items to be removed and measure in cubic feet.
 
13. Describe stating thickness of masonry walls to be removed and measure in 
square feet.
 
14. Describe other masonry items to be removed and measure in cubic feet.
 
15. Describe and enumerate structural steel items to be removed.
 
16. Describe and enumerate miscellaneous steel items to be removed.
 
17. Describe carpentry fl oor systems to be removed and measure in square feet.
 
18. Describe carpentry wall systems to be removed and measure in square feet.
 
19. Describe carpentry roof systems to be removed and measure in square feet.
 
20. Describe other items of carpentry to be removed and measure in the same 
units as the installation of these items.
 
21. Describe items of fi nish carpentry and millwork to be removed and measure 
in the same units as the installation of these items.
 
22. Describe items of plumbing to be removed and measure in the same units as 
the installation of these items.
 
23. Describe HVAC items to be removed and measure in the same units as the 
installation of these items.
 
24. Describe electrical items to be removed and measure in the same units as the 
installation of these items.
 
25. Describe items of equipment to be removed and measure in the same units as 
the installation of these items.
 
26. Necessary cleanup is deemed to be included in the price of demolition items.
The Remodeling Takeoff
All the comments regarding takeoffs found in Chapter 2 apply as much to remod-
eling takeoffs as they do to regular house takeoffs but, because detailed plans and 
specifi cations are seldom available on remodeling projects, certain elements of the 
takeoff become more important than they were. 
We have already referred to the use of sketches in defi ning what exists before 
work begins and also what is to be done on the job. In the takeoff process, these 
sketches show where the work dimensions come from and also clarify what the esti-
mator is measuring in the takeoff.
Specifi cation notes are also useful to indicate what has been allowed for in the 
takeoff. Items such as the strength of concrete, the grade of lumber, the type of fl oor 
fi nish, the type of paint, and many more should all be defi ned so that anyone who 
reviews the estimate can see what has been allowed for in the price. It is important to 
inform the homeowner about the basis of the price that you quote for the work: spell 
out precisely what you are going to do for the price you quote and what materials 
you are going to use. It might even be worthwhile to describe how you propose to do 
the work, especially if you anticipate some temporary inconvenience or disruption to 
the owner and their property.
The takeoff will generally follow the order of construction, but on larger jobs 
where there are many rooms or even multiple buildings to be considered, it is best 
to proceed on a building-by-building than room-by-room basis. All the work that is 
needed in one room is measured before passing on to the next room. Then, once the 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

268 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK
work in one building is all measured, you can move on to the next building. Estima-
tors sometimes use a simple checklist to ensure all aspects are considered for each 
room on the project. See Figure 13.1 for an example of such a checklist.
On-Site Takeoff
Much of the information required for a remodeling takeoff will be obtained from the 
site of property that is to be remodeled. If good notes, measurements, and sketches 
are made on site, the takeoff will be much easier to complete. In fact, a good portion 
of the takeoff can be done at the site of the work, leaving only the fi nal calcula-
tions and the pricing to be completed back at the offi ce. Electronic tape measures 
with built-in calculators can be used to speed up the process of measuring on site. 
Inexpensive versions of these tools are available that use sound waves to measure 
distances, but if more accuracy is required, especially when distances exceed 40 feet, 
the more expensive laser models may be required.
To ensure that everything that needs to be measured and noted on site is done, 
the estimator has to proceed in a systematic fashion such as this:
Exterior Work
■ North elevation
■ South elevation
■ East elevation 
■ West elevation
■ Roofi ng
■ Outbuildings 
■ Site surfaces
■ Fences 
■ Landscaping 
 
1 Floors
 
2 Baseboards
 
3 Walls
 
4 Partitions
 
5 Windows
 
6 Doors
 
7 Bifolds
 
8 Hardware
 
9 Ceilings
 10 Cabinets
 11 Plumbing
 12 HVAC
 13 Electrical
 14 Other Work
Takeoff Checklist:
Figure 13.1 
Room Takeoff Checklist
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 
269
Interior Work
■ Main Floor
 
 Garage
 
 Entrance hall
 
 Kitchen
 
 Living room
 
 Family room
 
 Bathroom 1
 
 Main stairway
■ Second fl oor
 
 Bathroom 2
 
 Bedroom 1
 
 Bedroom 2, etc.
■ Basement
 
 Basement stairway 
 
 Basement room 1
 
 Basement room 2, etc.
In each room, a checklist such as that shown in Figure 13.1 can be used to make 
sure that all the work required in that room is measured in the takeoff.
Pricing Remodeling Work
The process of pricing an estimate for a remodeling project is very similar to the 
process followed in an estimate for a residential project generally that is described in 
Chapter 9. The estimator will recap the takeoff items ready for pricing; a trade for-
mat is most often used. On a small project where there are few items in the takeoff, 
the estimator may choose to bypass the recap and price the takeoff items directly. 
Figure 13.2 shows a type of stationery that is designed for this purpose.
Pricing Labor and Equipment
Whereas in the home building industry most of the on-site work is done by sub-
trades, much of the work in the remodeling sector is completed by the builder’s own 
workers. Subcontractors are still employed, particularly for plumbing, HVAC, and 
electrical work, but on the smaller jobs, the builder may use its own personnel even 
for the work of these specialized trades. In order to price the work completed by its 
own forces, the builder has to calculate unit prices based on the anticipated produc-
tivity of its workers and the equipment they use.
As mentioned in Chapter 9, the productivity of labor and equipment depends 
upon two main factors: Job Factors and Labor and Management Factors.
Remodeling Job Factors
The job factors that are particularly important to productivity on remodeling proj-
ects include:
■ Weather conditions—especially with outside work such as roofi ng and 
landscaping
■ Access to and around the work area—poor access to the job may prevent the 
builder from using certain equipment, while a restricted workspace will usu-
ally reduce the effi ciency of workers
■ Size of the project—larger jobs, especially when there is repetition of activi-
ties, are generally more productive than smaller jobs 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

270 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK
■ Complexity of the tasks involved—clearly, complicated work will be less pro-
ductive than work that is more straightforward
■ Location of the job—are the required materials available locally, or do they 
have to be trucked in? This is one of the number of questions that can arise 
regarding job location
Remodeling Labor and Management Factors
The labor and management factors that are particularly important to productivity 
on remodeling projects include:
■ Quality of supervision—because much of the work is done by the builder’s own 
workers, good supervision is very important in order to attain high productivity
ESTIMATE SHEET 
Page No.
JOB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  DATE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
ESTIMATED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  EXTENDED . . . . . . . . . .  CHECKED . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 
 
No. 
DIMENSIONS 
  
Total 
UNIT 
 
UNIT 
 
UNIT
 No. 
DESCRIPTION 
Pieces 
 
Extension 
Quantity 
PRICE 
LABOR 
PRICE 
MATERIALS 
PRICE 
TOTAL
Figure 13.2 
Stationery for Combined Takeoff and Pricing
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 
271
■ Motivation and morale of the workers—high productivity is possible only 
with good workers
■ Good tools and equipment—productivity suffers if tools are too old or poorly 
maintained
■ Experience of supervisors and workers—if supervisors and workers lack 
 experience with remodeling jobs, high productivity will be diffi cult to 
achieve
The estimator needs to be aware of all these factors and make adjustments to 
productivity rates to take into account the particular circumstance of the project 
being considered.
Labor and Equipment Productivities
Records from past jobs are the best source of productivity information for accurate 
estimates. Some estimators keep track of the cost of operations on past jobs, they 
maintain a price book so that they can use the information to price estimates. There 
are at least two problems with this approach to pricing:
 
1. Without additional notes, the estimator may not know what the wage levels 
were when the price was calculated. For example, the price book may say it 
cost $15.00 per square foot for labor to construct a 4" slab-on-grade, but 
what were the wage rates at that time?
 
2. The composition of the crew that performed the work is also probably un-
known. For example, was the $15.00 per square foot price achieved with 
a crew of one foreman and two laborers, or was it one carpenter and four 
laborers?
Clearly, if wage rates have changed, or a different combination of workers is 
used, the unit price will probably be different, but perhaps more importantly, there is 
no easy way to adjust the price to take into account these changes.
When records are kept in the form of crew productivities, they are much easier 
to adapt to different situations. 
Where a contractor does not have its own productivity records available to use 
in estimating future projects, it can turn to publications such as Means Cost Data1 
that express crew productivity rates. However, there is no substitute for good his-
toric records of productivities established on a contractor’s own projects as discussed 
in Chapter 9. 
A summary chart of historic productivity rates can be prepared from these data 
records. This chart lists work operations, shows the typical crew constituents for 
each operation, and indicates its historic productivity range. A sample chart is shown 
on Figure 13.3a, Figure 13.3b, Figure 13.3c, and Figure 13.3d for the kind of work 
encountered on remodeling projects. The productivity rates on this chart are used in 
pricing the examples that follow.
Pricing Materials
A wide range of materials may be required for a remodeling job. These can be sum-
marized from the takeoff on a separate bill of materials or they may be priced with 
the labor and equipment on the recap all as described in Chapter 9.
1. Building Construction Cost Data, R. S. Means Company, Kingston, MA
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

272 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK
PRODUCTIVITIES
CREWS 
CREW MEMBERS 
CREWS 
CREW MEMBERS
CREW A 
1.0 Foreman 
CREW E 
1.0 Cement Finisher
 
2.0 Laborers 
 
 
CREW F 
1.0 Carpenter
CREW B 
1.0 Equipment Operator 
 
 
CREW G 
1.0 Foreman
CREW C 
1.0 Oarp. Foreman 
 
2.0 Bricklayers
 
2.0 Carpenters 
 
 
CREW H 
1.0 Foreman
CREW D 
1.0 Foreman 
 
2.0 Painters
 
2.0 Laborers 
 
1.0 Cement Finisher
 ITEM 
OPERATION 
CREW 
EQUIP. 
OUTPUT
 1.0 
Demolition
 1.1 
Remove 1'-0" x 2'-0" Conc. Footing 
A 
Jackhammers 
20 – 24 feet/hour
 1.2 
Remove Pad Footings 
A 
Jackahmmers 
6 – 8 cu. ft./hour
 1.3 
Remove 8" Concrete Wall 
A 
Jackhammers 
10 – 12 sq. ft./hour
 1.4 
Remove 8" Block Walls 
A 
Jackhammers 
50 – 60 sq. ft./hour
 1.5 
Remove Asphalt Shingles 
A 
Hand Tools 
150 – 250 sq. ft./hour
 1.6 
Remove 4" Conc. Slab-on-Grade (not reinf.) A 
Jackhammers 
35 – 40 sq. ft./hour
 1.7 
Remove Stud Partition 
A 
Hand Tools 
65 – 70 sq. ft./hour
 1.8 
Remove Kitchen Cabinets 
A 
Hand Tools 
10 – 15 feet/hour
 1.9 
Remove Countertop 
A 
Hand Tools 
25 – 30 feet/hour
 1.10 
Remove Vinyl Tiles 
A 
Hand Tools 
80 – 125 sq. ft./hour
 1.11 
Cut Openings in Stud Walls 
A 
Hand Tools 
10 – 20 sq. ft./hour
 2.0 
Excavation and Backfill
 2.1 
Strip Topsoil 
B 
Skid-Steer Loader 
50 – 100 cu. yd./hour
 2.2 
Excavate Trench 
B 
Small Backhoe 
12 – 20 cu. yd./hour
 2.3 
Excavate Pit 
B 
Small Backhoe 
8 – 12 cu. yd./hour
 2.4 
Backfill Trench 
A & B Backhoe & Compactors 10 – 14 cu. yd./hour
 2.5 
Backfill Pit 
A & B Backhoe & Compactors 
6 – 8 cu. yd./hour
 3.0 
Concrete Work
 
 
Forming:
 3.1 
Continuous Strip Footings 
C 
Hand Tools 
30 – 50 sq. ft./hour
 3.2 
2x4 Keyways 
C 
Hand Tools 
150 – 190 feet/hour
 3.3 
Isolated Footings and Pile Caps 
C 
Hand Tools 
32 – 43 sq. ft./hour
 3.4 
Foundation and Retaining Walls 
C 
Hand Tools 
27 – 35 sq. ft./hour
 3.5 
Columns — Rectangular 
C 
Hand Tools 
55 – 80 sq. ft./hour
 3.6 
10" Dia. Columns 
C 
Hand Tools 
12 – 15 feet/hour
 3.7 
Edges of Slab-on-Grade 
C 
Hand Tools 
27 – 33 sq. ft./hour
 3.8 
Edges and Risers of Stairs 
C 
Hand Tools 
20 – 27 sq. ft./hour
 3.9 
Edges of Sidewalks 
C 
Hand Tools 
27 – 33 sq. ft./hour
 3.10 
Stripping Forms 
A 
Hand Tools 
40 – 155 sq. ft./hour
 
 
Placing concrete in:
 3.11 
Continuous Strip Footings 
D 
Concrete Pump 
5 – 10 cu. yd./hour
 3.12 
Isolated Footings and Pile Caps 
D 
Concrete Pump 
3 – 6 cu. yd./hour
 3.13 
Foundation Walls 
D 
Concrete Pump 
5 – 7 cu. yd./hour
 3.14 
Slab-on-Grade 
D 
Concrete Pump 
6 – 11 cu. yd./hour
 3.15 
Slab Topping — Separate 
D 
Concrete Pump 
2 – 4 cu. yd./hour
 3.16 
Sidewalks 
D 
Concrete Pump 
8 – 12 cu. yd./hour
 
 
Placing rebar in:
 3.17 
Footings 
A 
Hand Tools 
390 – 400 lbs./hour
 3.18 
Walls 
A 
Hand Tools 
560 – 570 lbs./hour
 3.19 
Columns 
A 
Hand Tools 
280 – 290 lbs./hour
 3.20 
Placing Mesh in Slabs 
A 
Hand Tools 
400 – 500 sq. ft./hour
 3.21 
Finishing Slabs 
E 
Hand Tools 
60 – 80 sq. ft./hour
 3.22 
Install Anchor Bolts — 1/2 to 3/4" 
F 
Hand Tools 
40 – 80 no./hour
 3.23 
Rigid Insulation to Walls — 1" 
C 
Hand Tools 
200 – 250 sq. ft./hour
 3.24 
— 2" 
C 
Hand Tools 
180 – 225 sq. ft./hour
 3.25 
6mil Polyethylene Vapor Barrier 
C 
Hand Tools 
900 – 1000 sq. ft./hour
 4.0 
Masonry Work
 4.1 
8" Concrete Blocks 
G 
Hand Tools 
22 – 50 Blks/hour
 4.2 
Brick Facings 
G 
Hand Tools 
90 – 110 Brks/hour
 4.3 
Fireplace — Single Story 
G 
Hand Tools 
40 – 60 hours
 Figure 13.3a 
Renovation Work Productivities
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 
273
PRODUCTIVITIES
CREWS 
CREW MEMBERS 
CREWS 
CREW MEMBERS
CREW A 
1.0 Foreman 
CREW E 
1.0 Cement Finisher
 
2.0 Laborers 
 
 
CREW F 
1.0 Carpenter
CREW B 
1.0 Equipment Operator 
 
 
CREW G 
1.0 Foreman
CREW C 
1.0 Oarp. Foreman 
 
2.0 Bricklayers
 
2.0 Carpenters 
 
 
CREW H 
1.0 Foreman
CREW D 
1.0 Foreman 
 
2.0 Painters
 
2.0 Laborers 
 
1.0 Cement Finisher
 ITEM 
OPERATION 
CREW 
EQUIP. 
OUTPUT
 6.0 
Carpentry
 
 
Rough Carpentry
 6.1 
3" Diameter Telescopic Post 
C 
Hand Tools 
1.50 – 2.50 No./hour
 6.2 
2 x 3 Plates 
C 
Hand Tools 
50 – 54 BF/hour
 6.3 
2 x 4 Plates 
C 
Hand Tools 
63 – 68 BF/hour
 6.4 
2 x 5 Plates 
C 
Hand Tools 
90 – 95 BF/hour
 6.5 
2 x 3 Studs 
C 
Hand Tools 
79 – 92 BF/hour
 6.6 
2 x 4 Studs 
C 
Hand Tools 
100 – 115 BF/hour
 6.7 
2 x 6 Studs 
C 
Hand Tools 
110 – 125 BF/hour
 6.8 
2x8 in Built-Up Beam I 
C 
Hand Tools 
150 – 260 BF/hour
 6.9 
2x10 in Built-Up Beam 
C 
Hand Tools 
200 – 310 BF/hour
 6.10 
2x8 Joists 
C 
Hand Tools 
150 – 180 BF/hour
 6.11 
2x10 Joists 
C 
Hand Tools 
160 – 185 BF/hour
 6.12 
2x4 Blocking 
C 
Hand Tools 
20 – 35 BF/hour
 6.13 
Trusses 24'-40' Span 
C 
Hand Tools 
2 – 3 No./hour
 6.14 
2x2 Cross-Bridging 
C 
Hand Tools 
30 – 34 Sets/hour
 6.15 
1x3 Rafter Ties (Ribbons) 
C 
Hand Tools 
25 – 35 BF/hour
 6.16 
2x4 Rafters 
C 
Hand Tools 
60 – 110 BF/hour
 6.17 
2x6 Rafters 
C 
Hand Tools 
65 – 120 BF/hour
 6.18 
2x4 Lookouts 
C 
Hand Tools 
30 – 50 BF/hour
 6.19 
2x4 Rough Fascia 
C 
Hand Tools 
30 – 50 BF/hour
 6.20 
2x6 Rough Fascia 
C 
Hand Tools 
35 – 60 BF/hour
 9.21 
T & G Floor Sheathing 
C 
Hand Tools 
150 – 160 sq. ft./hour
 6.22 
Wall Sheathing 
C 
Hand Tools 
130 – 150 sq. ft./hour
 6.23 
Roof Sheathing 
C 
Hand Tools 
160 – 180 sq. ft./hour
 6.24 
1/2" Ply Soffit 
C 
Hand Tools 
40 – 60 sq. ft./hour
 6.25 
Aluminum Soffit 
C 
Hand Tools 
40 – 60 sq. ft./hour
 6.26 
1x6 Fascia Board 
C 
Hand Tools 
15 – 20 BF/hour
 6.27 
6" Aluminum Fascia 
C 
Hand Tools 
30 – 40 ft./hour
 
 
Finish Carpentry
 6.28 
3'-0" Wide Stair with 13 Risers 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.4 – 0.6 units/hour
 6.29 
2x2 Handrail 
C 
Hand Tools 
12 – 20 feet/hour
 6.30 
Wood Railings 
C 
Hand Tools 
8 – 12 feet/hour
 
 
Exterior Doors with Frame and Trim:
 6.31 
 
— 2'-8" x 6'8" x 13/4" 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.75 – 1.25 units/hour
 6.32 
 
— 3'-0" x 6'8" x 13/4" 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.65 – 1.00 units/hour
 
 
Interior Doors with Frame and Trim:
 6.33 
 
— 1'-6" x 6'8" x 13/8" 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.90 – 1.35 units/hour
 6.34 
 
— 2'-0" x 6'8" x 13/8" 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.85 – 1.30 units/hour
 6.35 
 
— 2'-6" x 6'8" x 13/8" 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.80 – 1.25 units/hour
 6.36 
 
— 2'-8" x 6'8" x 13/8" 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.75 – 1.20 units/hour
 
 
Bifold Closet Doors with Jambs and Trim:
 6.37 
 
— 2'-0" x 6'8" x 13/8" 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.85 – 1.00 units/hour
 6.38 
 
— 3'-0" x 6'8" x 13/8" 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.80 – 0.85 units/hour
 6.39 
 
— 4'-0" x 6'8" x 13/8" 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.70 – 0.90 units/hour
 6.40 
 
— 5'-0" x 6'8" x 13/8" 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.65 – 0.85 units/hour
 6.41 
Attic Access Hatch 
C 
Hand Tools 
1.00 – 2.00 units/hour 
 
 
 
Figure 13.3b 
Renovation Work Productivities (Continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

274 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK
PRODUCTIVITIES
CREWS 
CREW MEMBERS 
CREWS 
CREW MEMBERS
CREW A 
1.0 Foreman 
CREW E 
1.0 Cement Finisher
 
2.0 Laborers 
 
 
CREW F 
1.0 Carpenter
CREW B 
1.0 Equipment Operator 
 
 
CREW G 
1.0 Foreman
CREW C 
1.0 Oarp. Foreman 
 
2.0 Bricklayers
 
2.0 Carpenters 
 
 
CREW H 
1.0 Foreman
CREW D 
1.0 Foreman 
 
2.0 Painters
 
2.0 Laborers 
 
1.0 Cement Finisher
 ITEM 
OPERATION 
CREW 
EQUIP. 
OUTPUT
 6.0 
Carpentry
 
 
Finish Carpentry (Continued)
 
 
Finish Hardware to Doors:
 6.42 
 
— Passage Sets 
F 
Hand Tools 
1.0 – 1.5 No./hour
 6.43 
 
— Privacy Sets 
F 
Hand Tools 
1.0 – 1.5 No./hour
 6.44 
 
— Dead Bolts 
F 
Hand Tools 
0.8 – 1.3 No./hour
 6.45 
 
— Key-in-Knob Lock/Latch 
F 
Hand Tools 
0.5 – 1.5 No./hour
 
 
Window Trim
 
 
Windows: Installing Manufactured Units
 6.46 
 
— 3'-0" x 1'-0" 
C 
Hand Tools 
1.5 – 3.2 units/hour
 6.47 
 
— 2'-0" x 3'-6" 
C 
Hand Tools 
1.0 – 3.0 units/hour
 6.48 
 
— 4'-0" x 3'-6" 
C 
Hand Tools 
1.0 – 2.8 units/hour
 6.49 
 
— 6'-0" x 3'-6" 
C 
Hand Tools 
1.0 – 2.5 units/hour
 6.50 
 
— 4'-0" x 4'-0" 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.9 – 2.5 units/hour
 6.51 
 
— 4'-0" x 6'-0" 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.9 – 2.3 units/hour
 6.52 
 
— 4'-0" x 8'-0" 
C 
Hand Tools 
0.9 – 2.2 units/hour
 6.53 
Base Board 
F 
Hand Tools 
25.0 – 30.0 feet/hour
 6.54 
Floor Cabinets Not Including Countertop 
C 
Hand Tools 
6.0 – 8.0 feet/hour
 6.55 
1'-0" x 2'-6" Wall Cabinets 
C 
Hand Tools 
7.0 – 9.0 feet/hour
 6.56 
1-'0" x 1'-10" Wall Cabinets 
C 
Hand Tools 
7.5 – 9.5 feet/hour
 6.57 
2'-0" Wide Countertop 
C 
Hand Tools 
6.0 – 8.0 feet/hour
 6.58 
2'-0" x 2'-6" Bathroom Vanities 
C 
Hand Tools 
2.0 – 5.5 feet/hour
 6.59 
12" Wide Closet Shelves 
F 
Hand Tools 
8.0 – 14.0 feet/hour
 6.60 
16" Wide Closet Shelves 
F 
Hand Tools 
8.0 – 13.0 feet/hour
 6.61 
Adjustable Closet Rods 
F 
Hand Tools 
2.0 – 3.0 No./hour
 
 
Bathroom Accessories:
 6.62 
 
— Toilet Roll Holders 
F 
Hand Tools 
3.0 – 4.0 No./hour
 6.63 
 
— 2'-0" x 3'-0" Mirrors 
F 
Hand Tools 
1.5 – 2.0 No./hour
 6.64 
 
— Medicine Cabinets 
F 
Hand Tools 
1.0 – 1.5 No./hour
 6.65 
 
— Shower Curtain Rod 
F 
Hand Tools 
2.0 – 3.0 No./hour
 7.0 
Exterior Finishes
 
 
Sprayed Damp Proofing:
 7.1 
 
— 1 Coat 
A 
Paint Spray 
200 – 220 sq. ft./hour
 7.2 
 
— 2 Coats 
A 
Paint Spray 
120 – 140 sq. ft./hour
 7.3 
1/2" Parging 
E 
Hand Tools 
9 – 11 sq. ft./hour
 7.4 
Aluminum Siding 
C 
Hand Tools 
60 – 65 sq. ft./hour
 7.5 
Stucco 
E 
Hand Tools 
10 – 12 sq. ft./hour
 7.6 
Building Paper 
C 
Hand Tools 
850 – 900 sq. ft./hour
 7.7 
4" Wide Flashing 
C 
Hand Tools 
90 – 130 sq. ft./hour
 7.8 
5" Eaves Gutter 
C 
Hand Tools 
20 – 30 sq. ft./hour
 7.9 
3" Downspouts 
C 
Hand Tools 
30 – 48 sq. ft./hour
 7.10 
210# Asphalt Shingles 
C 
Hand Tools 
125 – 138 sq. ft./hour
 7.11 
Ridge Cap 
C 
Hand Tools 
90 – 100 sq. ft./hour
 7.12 
Drip-Edge Flashing 
C 
Hand Tools 
90 – 100 sq. ft./hour
 7.13 
6mil Poly Eaves Protection 
C 
Hand Tools 
800 – 900 sq. ft./hour
Figure 13.3c 
Renovation Work Productivities (Continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 
275
PRODUCTIVITIES
CREWS 
CREW MEMBERS 
CREWS 
CREW MEMBERS
CREW A 
1.0 Foreman 
CREW E 
1.0 Cement Finisher
 
2.0 Laborers 
 
 
CREW F 
1.0 Carpenter
CREW B 
1.0 Equipment Operator 
 
 
CREW G 
1.0 Foreman
CREW C 
1.0 Oarp. Foreman 
 
2.0 Bricklayers
 
2.0 Carpenters 
 
 
CREW H 
1.0 Foreman
CREW D 
1.0 Foreman 
 
2.0 Painters
 
2.0 Laborers 
 
1.0 Cement Finisher
 ITEM 
OPERATION 
CREW 
EQUIP. 
OUTPUT
 7.0 
Exterior Finishes (Continued)
 
 
Precast Concrete Steps:
 7.14 
 
— 2 Risers 
A 
Hand Tools 
0.4 – 0.6 No./hour
 7.15 
 
— 4 Risers 
A 
Hand Tools 
0.3 – 0.5 No./hour
 7.16 
Wrought-Iron Railing 
C 
Hand Tools 
2.0 – 4.0 feet/hour
 7.17 
Paint Iron Railing 
H 
Hand Tools 
10.0 – 14.0 feet/hour
 8.0 
Interior Finishes
 8.1 
32 oz. Carpet 
C 
Hand Tools 
180 – 230 sq. ft./hour
 8.2 
Vinyl Flooring 
C 
Hand Tools 
100 – 180 sq. ft./hour
 8.3 
1/2" Drywall Ceilings 
C 
Hand Tools 
90 – 95 sq. ft./hour
 8.4 
Textured Ceiling Finish 
H 
Hand Tools 
180 – 200 sq. ft./hour
 8.5 
R35 Loose Cellulose Insulation 
A 
Hand Tools 
150 – 160 sq. ft./hour
 8.6 
6 mil. Poly Vapor Barrier 
C 
Hand Tools 
850 – 900 sq. ft./hour
 8.7 
Insulation Stops 
C 
Hand Tools 
20 – 30 sq. ft./hour
 8.8 
R20 Batt Insulation 
C 
Hand Tools 
260 – 340 sq. ft./hour
 8.9 
R12 Batt Insulation 
C 
Hand Tools 
300 – 400 sq. ft./hour
 8.10 
1/2" Drywall Walls 
C 
Hand Tools 
110 – 120 sq. ft./hour
 8.11 
Spray Paint Walls and Ceilings 
H 
Hand Tools 
375 – 425 sq. ft./hour
 8.12 
Roller Paint Walls and Ceilings 
H 
Hand Tools 
150 – 300 sq. ft./hour
 8.13 
Paint Exterior Doors 
H 
Hand Tools 
40 – 45 sq. ft./hour
 8.14 
Stain Doors 
H 
Hand Tools 
50 – 55 sq. ft./hour
 8.15 
Paint Attic Access Hatch 
H 
Hand Tools 
3 – 4 No./hour
 8.16 
Paint Handrail 
H 
Hand Tools 
90 – 95 feet/hour
 8.17 
Paint Wood Railing 
H 
Hand Tools 
12 – 14 feet/hour
 8.18 
Paint Shelves 
H 
Hand Tools 
60 – 64 sq. ft./hour
Figure 13.3d 
Renovation Work Productivities (Continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

276 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK
Pricing General Expenses
The general expenses on a remodeling project will be similar to those on a housing 
job. The estimator should use the General Expense Sheet as a checklist and tick off 
the items required for the job as demonstrated in the example below, Figure 13.8.
The Summary and Bid
The estimate is summarized and the bid prepared in accordance with the principles 
discussed in Chapter 12. See Figure 13.9 for an example. 
Example of a Remodeling Estimate
The example estimate involves the remodeling of a kitchen. Assume that the estima-
tor has visited the site, and Figure 13.4 is a sketch of the kitchen layout as it exists 
before the work begins. Figure 13.5 shows the proposed layout of the new kitchen 
together with some notes on requirements obtained from the owner. The work com-
prises the following tasks:
■ Remove the wall on two sides of the kitchen.
■ Remove old cabinets and install new kitchen cabinets including a new island 
cabinet.
■ Replace the vinyl tile fl oor in the kitchen and also in the entrance hallway.
■ Install a new 4'-0" 3 3'-0" window to the outside wall of the kitchen.
■ The owner is going to keep the existing appliances but temporarily remove 
them to the adjacent garage for the duration of the work.
■ Repaint all walls and ceilings on the whole of the main fl oor of the house. 
The estimate begins with the takeoff of the work shown on Figure 13.6a and 
Figure 13.6b.
Comments on Remodeling Takeoff Shown in Figure 13.6a and Figure 13.6b
 
1. Moving appliances are enumerated. 
 
2. Note that part of the electrical work is adding a duplex outlet in the new 
location of the refrigerator.
 
3. Cabinets to be removed and new cabinets are enumerated, but the counter-
top is measured in linear feet.
 
4. The area of stud wall to be removed is measured over the two openings in the 
wall (no deductions).
 
5. The wall did not pass through the ceiling, but there will still be patching re-
quired where the wall was attached to the ceiling and to the walls.
 
6. A double 2 3 8 lintel has been allowed over the opening for the new 
window.
 
7. If the wall is neatly cut out, there will be little patching and repairs required.
 
8. An aluminum J-mold trim has been allowed around the window on the 
outside.
 
9. A quick method of calculating the interior wall areas is used. Wall areas 
are usually roughly three times the fl oor area. This approximation is close 
enough for assessing the painting area.
 
10. A subcontractor will do the electrical work on the project. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 
277
Refrig
Sink
S
S
Range
1
2
3
6
7
4
Opening
5'-41/4" x 6'-6"
2'-5"
2'-9"
4'-6"
Opening: 5'-10" x 3'-6"
10'-51/2"
10'-01/2"
Counter
Top
Cabs.
Below
2'-0"
(Hatch)
Wood
Shelf
10" Wide
Living
Room
(Carpet)
41/2"
Stud
Walls
Up To
Ceiling
2'-81/2"
V. Tile   Carpet
Entrance Hall
14'-0" x 3'-0"
2'-83/4"
Dishwasher
Under
5
Cabinets:
 
2'-2" x 2'-4" 
2'-9" x 1'-4"
 
2'-6" x 1'-4" 
2'-2" x 3'-4"
 
5'-0" x 2'-4" 
17'-0" x 3'-4"
 
3'-0" x 2'-4"
1
5
7
2
3
4
6
Notes:
Floor-Ceiling 8'-0"
Kit. Floor - Vinyl Tile
Walls & Ceiling - Paint
Main Floor - 36'-4" x 24'-0"
Project:  Smith Kitchen
Date:  Aug 5 / 06
Estimator:  ABF
Existing Layout
Alum. Siding
Ply Sheathing
2 x 6 Studs
— Outside —
Figure 13.4 
Existing Layout of Kitchen
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

278 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK
Figure 13.5 
New Layout of Kitchen
S
Range
1
2
3
8
7
V. Tile      Carpet
Dishwasher
Under
New Cabinets
 
2'-2" x 2'-4" 
2'-9" x 1'-4"
 
2'-6" x 1'-4" 
3'-0" x 2'-0" x 3'-4" Island
 
5'-0" x 2'-4" 
2'-2" x 3'-4"
 
2'-0" x 2'-4" 
9'-0" x 3'-4"
1
5
7
2
3
4
6
Notes:
Kitchen Floor - Vinyl Tile
and Entrance Hall
Paint Walls - Main Floor
 
 
36'-4" x 24'-0"
Paint Ceilings - Main Floor
New Carpet - By Owner
New Layout
New 4'-0" x 3'-0"
Window
Smith Kitchen
Sink
Relocate Switch
5
Refrig.
6
Island
Cabinet
New Duplex
Receptacle
8
4
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 
279
Figure 13.6a 
Remodeling Takeoff
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

280 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK
QUANTITY SHEET 
SHEET No. 
2 of 2
JOB: 
Kitchen Remodeling Example 
DATE: Aug 10 / 06
ESTIMATOR: ABF 
EXTENDED: 
EXT. CHKD:
DESCRIPTION 
 
 
DIMENSIONS
 
TIMES 
Length 
Width 
Height
PATCH CEILING 41/2" WIDE 
 
 
18.41 
— 
— 
18 
LF
PATCH WALL 41/2" WIDE 
 
 
— 
— 
8.00
 
 
 
 
— 
— 
8.00
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
LF
REMOVE VINYL TILE
FLOORING 
 
 
10.42 
10.42 
 
109
 
10.04 
DDT 
 
  2.71 
  2.42 
 
(7)
 
0.38 
(Entrance Hall) 
 
14.00 
30.00 
 
420
 
10.42 
 
 
 
 
 
522 
SF
NEW VINYL TILE FLOORING  
 
DITTO 
 
 
522 
SF
CUT OPENING 4-0 x 3-0 IN 
 
 
— 
— 
— 
1 
No.
EXTERIOR 2x6 STUD WALL
with ALUM SIDING
2 x 8 LINTEL 
 
2 
  4.25 
 
 
9 
LF
PATCH DRYWALL AROUND  
 
— 
— 
— 
1 
No.
 4-0 x 3-0 OPENING
NEW WINDOW 4-0 x 3-0 
 
 
— 
— 
— 
1 
No.
ALUM. J - MOLD 
 
4 
  4.00 
 
 
16 
LF
PAINT CEILINGS 
 
 
36.33 
24.00 
 
872 
SF
(Whole Main Floor)
PAINT WALLS 
 
3 
36.33 
24.00 
 
2,616 
SF
(Whole Main Floor)
ELECTRICAL WORK 
 
 
— 
— 
— 
SUB
Figure 13.6b 
Remodeling Takeoff (Continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 
281
Example of Remodeling Recap
Figure 13.7 shows the priced recap for the example. 
Comments on Remodeling Recap Shown in Figure 13.7
 
1. On this small project, the work is listed in just two categories: demolition 
work and new work, rather than listing each trade separately.
 
2. Relocating the range and refrigerator consists of just unplugging these ap-
pliances and moving them. Two laborers spending less than half an hour on 
each should be suffi cient time for this.
 
3. The dishwasher and the sink require plumbing work, which will take extra 
time to deal with.
 
4. Again, because this is such a small project, most of the productivity rates 
used are from the low end of the scale.
 
5. The productivity removing the cabinets for crew A is 10 linear feet per hour, 
so the cost is calculated in this fashion:  
 
 Crew A:  
1 Labor foreman @ $26.00  5 
$26.00
 
  
2 Laborers @ $23.00 
5 
$46.00
 
  
 
    $72.00 per hour
 
  
Per linear foot 
5   $72.00 
_______ 
10  
 
  
 
5  $7.20 per foot
 
6. The remaining demolition items use the same crew A with the following 
productivities:
 
 a. Remove countertop 
- 
25 linear feet/hour
 
 b. Remove 4½" stud wall 
- 
65 square feet/hour
 
 c. Remove vinyl tile 
- 
80 square feet/hour
 
 d. Cut opening 4'-0" 3 3'-0" 
- 
12 square feet/hour
 
7. Installing the 2 3 8 lintel is based on a productivity of 20 linear feet per hour 
for crew C:
 
 Crew C:  
1 Carpenter foreman @ $35.00 
5 
$35.00
 
  
2 Carpenters @ $30.00  
5 
$60.00
 
  
 
    $95.00 per hour
 
  
Per linear foot 
5   $95.00 
_______ 
20  
 
  
 
5  $4.75 per foot
 
8. The following new items use the same crew C with the following productivities:
 
a. 4'-0" 3 3'-0" Window  
- 
1 unit/hour
 
b. Aluminum “J” Mold 
 
- 
50 linear feet/hour
 
c. Cabinets: 1'-0" 3 2'-4" 
- 
8.5 linear feet/hour
 
 
     1'-0" 3 1'-4" 
- 
8.5 linear feet/hour
 
 
     2'-0" 3 3'-4" 
- 
7.6 linear feet/hour
 
d. Countertop 
 
 
- 
7.6 linear feet/hour
 
9. Patching the wall is based on a productivity of 50 linear feet per hour for 
crew A:
 
 Crew A:  
1 Labor foreman @ $26.00 
5 
$26.00
 
  
2 Laborers @ $23.00  
5 
$46.00
 
  
 
    $72.00 per hour
 
  
Per linear foot 
5 
 $72.00 
_______ 
50  
 
  
 
5 
$1.44 per foot
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

282 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK
Figure 13.7 
Remodeling Pricing Sheet
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 
283
 
10. The following items of new work use the same crew A with the following 
productivities:
 
a. Patch ceiling  
40 linear feet/hour
 
b. Vinyl tile 
 
100 square feet/hour
 
c. Paint ceilings  
150 square feet/hour
 
d. Paint walls 
 
150 square feet/hour
 
11. Little patching around the window opening will be necessary if the opening 
is cut neatly. The $25.00 amount is included as a contingency amount; it is 
available should it be required. 
 
12. Material prices are based on quotes from suppliers for the products specifi ed 
by the owner. It is important to identify the particular type of new window, 
cabinets, paint, and vinyl tiles selected by the owner and used as the basis of 
the estimate.
 
13. There are no equipment costs included in the estimate; all work is to be com-
pleted using hand tools that are priced on the summary sheet under a small 
tools allowance.
Example of Remodeling General Expenses
Figure 13.8 shows the priced general expenses for the example.
Comments on Remodeling General Expenses Shown in Figure 13.8
 
1. This is a very small project, so there are few items of general expenses to 
consider here.
 
2. There is nothing here for a superintendent or foreman; supervision costs are 
allowed for in the direct labor prices for the work.
 
3. An allowance is made for fi rst aid supplies consumed on this two-month project.
 
4. Telephone expenses are expected to be $65.00 per month.
 
5. The cost of a temporary dust partition has been included to isolate the work 
area from the rest of the house while the demolition work is in progress.
 
6. Final cleanup costs are estimated to be $0.15 per square foot of the main fl oor.
Example of Remodeling Summary
Figure 13.9 shows the summary of prices for the example.
Comments on Remodeling Summary Shown in Figure 13.9
 
1. The price of the builder’s own work and subtrade work is listed separately 
here, together with the general expense prices.
 
2. “Small tools” is an allowance for the cost of hand tools used in the work. 
This is based on the labor amount at the rate of 6 percent.
 
3. “Payroll Additive” is an allowance for the payroll costs paid by the employer; 
it includes items such as Social Security Tax and Unemployment Compensa-
tion Tax. It is also calculated as a percentage of the labor amount.
 
4. A building permit is required for the job at the rate of $7.00 per $1,000 of 
the job cost.
 
5. Insurance for the work includes property insurance and liability insurance; 
the price of insurance coverage in this example is 5 percent of the job cost.
 
6. The fee is the builder’s markup on the job.
 
7. A small adjustment is made to the fi nal price to make it an even $15,900.
 
8. The fi nal amount, $15,900, can now be entered onto the bid forms for the 
project.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

284 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK
Figure 13.8 
Remodeling Example of General Expenses
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 
285
Figure 13.9 
Remodeling Example of Bid Summary
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

286 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK
SUMMARY
■ The remodeling contractor has to deal more closely with the customer than 
the average homebuilder.
■ There are usually no architects or designers on remodeling jobs, so drawings 
and specifi cations are rarely available for this work.
■ Remodeling involves structures that are in place, so they can be physically 
measured in a takeoff. However, items that are concealed will be diffi cult to 
assess.
■ There are three main types of contract used in remodeling:
• Lump sum—these contracts are usually awarded on the basis of low bid 
price, so an accurate estimate is required.
• Cost plus—the builder is paid all costs plus a fee. An estimate may be re-
quired to determine a maximum price or provide a target budget.
• Unit price—used when the amount of work is diffi cult to predict on a proj-
ect. The builder quotes a series of unit prices that are used to price work 
once it is completed.
■ There are three key steps to preparing an accurate estimate for remodeling 
work:
• Clearly identify all the work to be done
• Measure the work to be done
• Price the work
■ It can be diffi cult with remodeling jobs to defi ne the scope of work; good 
communication with the owner and the use of outline sketches will help.
■ The estimator needs a thorough knowledge of construction methods to 
 prepare an estimate for remodeling projects.
■ Remodeling work can involve all the same trades as homebuilding plus 
demolition.
■ Demolition work is generally measured in the same way and using the same 
units as new work is measured.
■ Sketches and specifi cation notes should be prepared to indicate what has been 
allowed for in the takeoff.
■ Much of the takeoff can be compiled on site by measuring the existing 
structures.
■ An orderly takeoff sequence should be followed to ensure that all work items 
are included in the takeoff.
■ The estimate is usually recapped and priced following a trade breakdown.
■ Job factors that should be taken into account when pricing the work include:
• Weather conditions
• Access to and around the work area
• Size of the project 
• Complexity of the tasks involved
• Location of the job
■ Labor and material factors to account for include:
• Quality of supervision
• Motivation and morale of the workers
• Good tools and equipment
• Experience of supervisors and workers
■ The best sources of labor and equipment productivities are records from past 
projects.
■ Pricing materials, general expenses, and summaries on remodeling jobs fol-
low the principles discussed in previous chapters.
■ A complete estimate of a remodeling project is demonstrated.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 
287
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
 Information  
 
 
 
Web Page Address
 
■ There is a great deal of information on 
http://www.remodeling.hw.net/
the web for remodeling contractors. 
Remodeling Online is one example.
 
■ Remodelers have their own association: 
http://www.nari.org/
The National Association of the 
Remodeling Industry
 
■ Information about electronic tape
measures can be obtained by entering
the key words electronic tape 
measures into your Internet search 
engine.
 
■ Information about laser tape 
measures can be obtained by 
entering the key words laser tape 
measures into your Internet search 
engine.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. How does the remodeling business differ from the housing business?
 2. What is the most common type of contract used on remodeling projects, and 
what kind of an estimate is required for this type of contract?
 3. Under what circumstances would an owner choose a unit price contract to use 
on their remodeling project?
 4. What are the three key steps in the process of estimating a remodeling project?
 5. What should the estimator have at the end of the fi rst step in the estimating 
process?
 6. If a builder, as part of a renovation project, had to remove a basement consist-
ing of a concrete foundation wall on a concrete footing and a concrete slab-on-
grade, how should this work be measured?
 7. When can an estimator make use of sketches on a remodeling project?
 8. Describe some recent innovations that help when measuring work on site.
 9. Identify four major job factors that infl uence the price of remodeling work.
 10. What is the best source of information about work productivities?
 11. Why is it not recommended that the estimator keep a price book for pricing 
estimates?
 12. What recap format is most often used for remodeling estimates?
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
 1. Calculate a labor price and an equipment price to remove an 8-inch thick con-
crete wall 40 feet long and 8 feet high based on the following data:
a. Crew wages:  
Foreman $26.00 per hour
 
  
 
Laborers $23.00 per hour
b. Compressor and jackhammers: $200.00 per hour
c. Productivity is at the high end of the scale
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

288 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK
Figure 13.10 
Remodeling Pricing Sheet
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13—ESTIMATES FOR REMODELING WORK 
289
 2. Calculate a labor price to place concrete in a continuous footing for a new wall 
based on the following data:
a. Footing size is 110 feet long, 2 feet wide, and 1 foot deep
b. Crew wages as in question 1 plus cement fi nisher $27.00 per hour
c. Productivity is expected to be on the low end of the scale
 3. Figure 13.10 shows the pricing sheet for a renovation project that involves re-
placing an old detached garage. Complete the pricing sheet using the wage rates 
shown below and assuming the crews involved will have low outputs because 
the project is so small. 
 
 Crew wages: 
Labor foreman: 
$26.00 per hour
 
  
Laborer: 
$23.00 per hour
 
  
Cement fi nisher: 
$27.00 per hour
 
  
Carpentry foreman: 
$35.00 per hour
 
  
Carpenter: 
$30.00 per hour
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

291
OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter and completing the review questions, you should be 
able to:
■ Describe the process of estimating using ICE software.
■ Identify the fi ve steps in an ICE estimate.
■ Explain the function of the Project Information window.
■ Describe the four takeoff methods available with this software.
■ Use Construction Systems and Miscellaneous Items to prepare a takeoff.
■ Complete an estimate of a project using MC2 ICE software.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
14
COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Introduction
Many homebuilders now use specialized software to produce their estimates, so, 
to demonstrate the power of computer estimating, this chapter presents a complete 
 estimate of a small 4-unit building using one of these specialized estimating pro-
grams. The particular software we will be using is Interactive Cost Estimating (ICE) 
from MC2 and their Residential Knowledge Base, which has been prepared specifi -
cally for residential construction. Drawings for this example project are shown in 
Figure 14.1.
assemblies
construction systems
drill down navigation bar
estimate maintenance
estimate summary
ICE software
job information
mark fi eld
markups
miscellaneous items
primary quantity
project information
takeoff notes
unit price catalogue
wizards
KEY TERMS 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

292 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.1 
Fourplex Drawings
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
293
Figure 14.1 
Fourplex Drawings (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

294 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.1 
Fourplex Drawings (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
295
Figure 14.1 
Fourplex Drawings (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

296 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.1 
Fourplex Drawings (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
297
Estimating with ICE
There are fi ve steps in the ICE estimating process:
 
1. Setting up the estimate—Create the estimate from a template by imputing 
project information.
 
2. Performing the takeoff—Measure the work of the project by selecting build-
ing components and entering dimensions.
 
3. Reviewing the estimate—Make adjustments to quantities and/or prices in the 
estimate.
 
4. Printing reports—After adjusting the estimate, print one or more of the many 
different types of ICE reports.
 
5. Analyzing totals—Insert add-ons and markups to complete the estimate and 
prepare a bid price.
Setting Up the Estimate
With the MC2 ICE program installed on your computer, you begin an estimate by 
starting the program as described below in a step-by-step description of the process. 
Once the program begins, the software will load the Project Information window; 
to the left of this screen is a vertical menu bar offering Project Information, Miscel-
laneous Items, Add Item, and other options (see Figure 14.2). Because this menu bar 
contains options that can be easily accessed on the horizontal tool bar and menu bar 
at the top of the page, I usually switch off this feature to give more space to work 
within the window. To hide the navigation bar, click on the blank gray button to the 
top right of this feature.
The Project Information window contains many items beginning with General, 
followed by Rates, then Crews, and so on. At the beginning of an estimate, we can 
enter some general information, and later in the estimating process, we can return to 
this window to enter more data as the need arises.
The Job Information Window
Under the General heading in the list of items you will fi nd Job Information. In 
this category, the estimator can enter information about the project to be esti-
mated including location, project web page, date of the estimate, the name of the 
Figure 14.2 
Project Information Window
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

298 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
estimator, and so on. For this example, we will enter the names of the project and 
the estimator and identify the kind of estimate. Following this, we will go to the 
Specifi cations window to enter the project fl oor area. This particular informa-
tion is in the estimate summary to calculate the price per square foot of the fi nal 
amount.
The Takeoff Process
There are basically four methods of preparing a takeoff using ICE software:
 
1. Add Items (or Miscellaneous Items)—Take off one item at a time by either 
selecting an item from the database or compiling a completely new item. This 
is the simplest way to takeoff, but it is time-consuming and, thus, fails to take 
advantage of the full potential of computer estimating.
 
2. Construction Systems—Measure a complete component of the work by 
 entering dimensions and selecting specifi cations from a pre-set menu. This 
is the method of takeoff used most often in the estimating process; it allows 
the estimator to deal with a number of items all at once by sharing a set of 
dimensions with a group of work activities that relate to a particular compo-
nent of the project such as a footing, a wall, or a slab.
 
3. Assemblies—Use a preprogrammed function to measure a group of work 
items by entering the minimum amount of data in response to a set of 
prompts. This takeoff method has been especially useful for measuring the 
work of specialized trades such as plumbing and electrical work.
 
4. Wizards—Prepare a complete conceptual estimate by means of a prepro-
grammed function that uses a relatively small set of questions to define 
the work of the job. This technique can be employed before detailed 
drawings are available to obtain an approximate estimate for a proposed 
project.
Estimate Example
Here we will work through the process of estimating a bid price for a 2,271 square 
feet 4-unit bi-level project: the Fourplex.
Starting the Estimate
In ICE an estimate begins by creating an estimate fi le:
 
1. Start the ICE program and click on the New Estimate button. This is found 
on the left end of the tool bar.
 
a. The New Estimate window will now open to allow you to enter the fi le 
name: Fourplex. Be careful not to use characters other than letters, num-
bers, spaces, and underscores in your fi lename. See Figure 14.3.
 
b. When you click Open, the Create New Estimate window will open. See 
Figure 14.4. 
 
c. We will be using the Company Standard that comes with this software; 
this is the default selection on this window. The Company Standard con-
tains information such as wage rates, materials prices, crew make-ups, and 
many more items that are needed to produce an estimate.
 
d. You will also notice that the Default Unit Price Catalogue has been auto-
matically selected as the cost database for this estimate.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
299
Figure 14.3 
New Estimate Window
Figure 14.4 
Create New Estimate Window
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

300 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
 
2. Click OK to continue with the estimate.
 
a. The Project Information screen will now open ready for you to enter gen-
eral information, rates, crew information, and so on for this estimate. See 
Figure 14.5.
 
b. In this example, we will restrict ourselves to the basics, so at this stage we 
will access only the Job Information and Specifi cations screens.
 
3. Click on Job Information listed under the General heading on the left.
 
a. Enter the name of the project in the fi eld at the top of this screen. 
 
b. Identify yourself in the Estimator under Estimate toward the middle of 
this page. 
 
c. Against Estimate Type select Detailed document. See Figure 14.6. 
 
4. Click on Specifi cations, which is also listed under the General heading on the 
left.
 
a. Here we enter the area of the building, which is 55'-10" 3 40'-8" 3 
2 levels 5 4,541 square feet, as the Primary Quantity. This amount will 
be displayed on the Estimate Summary and will facilitate the calculation 
of amounts per square foot of gross fl oor area.
 
 
HINT: Often when windows are opened, they do not fi ll the whole 
screen; if you click on the maximize button (to the left of the X at the top 
right), you will fi nd it easier to work with the full window.
 
 
We can now close the Project Information window before starting the 
takeoff:
 
b. Click on the X (red) on the right above the Imperial Units label on the 
Project Information window.
Figure 14.5 
Project Information Window
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
301
Excavation Takeoff
 
1. The fi rst items in the takeoff are strip topsoil and basement excavation. 
 Because these are stand-alone items, we will use Miscellaneous Item takeoff 
for this part of the work:
 
a. On the toolbar, click on the down arrow just to the right of the Takeoff 
button and select Miscellaneous Items.
 
b. When the Miscellaneo us Items window opens, the curser will be on the 
Item Code cell. Click on the button with three dots to the right of this. 
This opens up the Unit Price Catalogue where we can pick the item we 
want to measure. After you have used the program for a while, you will 
get to know your way around this catalogue, but as a beginner, you can 
use a shortcut to fi nd an item.
 
c. Click on the Find button; it is the bottom of three buttons up on the right 
of this window. 
 
d. The fi rst item to measure is Strip Topsoil, so if we type the word topsoil 
here, the fi nd facility will list all the items that contain that word.
 
e. On your list should be the item Strip and haul away topsoil; this is what 
we need, so double click on this item.
 
f. The fi elds on the Miscellaneous Items window will prefi ll and the curser 
will be on the Quantity fi eld.
 
g. At this stage you need to calculate the quantity for this item (127.25 3 
49.25 3 0.5 divided by 27 5 116 CY).
 
h. Enter the 116 into the Quantity fi eld.  
Figure 14.6 
Job Information Window
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

302 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
 
i. Click on the Mark Field at the bottom of this window and type Strip Top-
soil. This is a note that helps identify what was measured in this item.
 
j. Now press enter to place the item into the estimate and your Miscella-
neous Items window will refl ect this. See Figure 14.7.
 
2. We propose to use a subcontractor to excavate and backfi ll the basement. To 
measure a one-off subtrade, we can again use the Miscellaneous Item takeoff. 
This time we will be adding an item to the database for this work, so we need 
to give it a new item code. 
 
a. Click on the button with three dots to the right of the Item Code fi eld. This 
opens the Unit Price Catalogue so that we can fi nd a suitable number for 
this new item. I like to list subtrades at the beginning of each section, so, 
as this item is to go into the Earthwork section of Division 2—Sitework, 
an appropriate number would be 2300.001.
 
b. Close the Unit Price Catalogue window, then back in the Miscellaneous 
Item window, type 2300.001 in the Item Code fi eld and complete the fol-
lowing fi elds:
 
c. Description: Excavation Subtrade
 
d. Unit of measurement: Lsum
 
e. Quantity: 1
 
f. Mark Field: Excavation & Backfi ll Subtrade
 
g. At the time of the takeoff, prices may not be available so leave the sub-
trade price fi eld blank at this time.
 
h. Press enter to complete this item. See Figure 14.8.
Figure 14.7 
Miscellaneous Item Entry
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
303
Figure 14.8 
Strip Topsoil Entry
The sitework takeoff is now complete; to see the status of the estimate so far, 
click the Estimate button on the toolbar. This takes you to the Estimate Mainte-
nance window (see Figure 14.9). As you can see on this page, the items we measured 
are now listed in the estimate, and labor, material, and equipment prices have been 
applied automatically. At any stage in the process, we could view the ongoing esti-
mate summary or print a report of what we have measured, but we will examine 
these options in more detail later.
Footings and Walls Takeoff
Figure 14.10 shows the hand notes that accompany this takeoff. The software we 
are using will record all the amounts that are entered such as lengths, widths, and 
so on. Many of these amounts have fi rst to be calculated, and because the fi gures 
entered into a calculator are lost, it is useful to have a record that shows where these 
amounts came from when they are not obtained directly from the drawings. There-
fore, we have made use of Takeoff Notes to facilitate this.
For the footings and walls takeoff, we will use a construction system from the 
Residential Contractor database:
 
1. On the toolbar, click on Takeoff and select construction system. 
 
a. Double click on Residential Contractor.
 
b. From the list of systems that pops up, double click on 03.200 Footings and 
Walls.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

304 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
 
 The construction system window is set up so that dimensions and/or quanti-
ties are entered on the left and specifi cations of how and what to measure 
with the dimensions are listed on the right of this window. 
 
2. Starting on the left, type 365.47 in the B dimension fi eld and, using your 
down key or your tab key, move down to dimension C. 
 
a. Enter 1.67 and tap the down key again. 
 
b. Enter 0.67 and tap the down key again. (Note that tapping the enter key 
at any stage will close off this window, so do not hit enter yet.)
 
c. Lastly, go to fi eld A and enter 1 as the quantity.
 
3. In the right-hand column, we enter the specifi cations that indicate how the 
dimensions we have entered are to be handled.
 
a. In fi eld 9, enter 1 to indicate that these are concrete footings.
 
b. In fi eld 8, enter 1 to indicate that 2,500 psi concrete is required.
 
c. The two vertical surfaces of this footing require formwork, so enter 3 into 
fi eld 7.
 
d. There are no excavations, wall fi nishes, reinforcement, or insulation, so all 
the remaining values are 0.
 
e. In the Mark Field type: Continuous Footing.
 
f. See Figure 14.11 for all the selections for this item.
 
4. Hit the enter key and the Takeoff Answers will be processed (see 
Figure 14.12).
Figure 14.9 
Estimate Maintenance Window
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
305
Figure 14.10 
Fourplex Takeoff Notes
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

306 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.11 
Continuous Footing Entry
Figure 14.12 
Takeoff Entry Answers
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
307
Figure 14.13 
Pad Footing Entry
 
5. If the answers look okay, press OK and you will be returned to the construc-
tion system window with the takeoff item you have just measured listed as 
sequence 3.
 
6. Because the footing keyway was not included in this takeoff, it needs to be 
added as a miscellaneous item. Using the fi nd facility as we did above, the 
item number is 02830.501, the quantity is 365.47 feet and in the Mark Field 
type: 2 3 4 Keyway.
Next we consider the pad footings.
 
7. Return to the Footings and Walls construction system to enter dimensions 
and specifi cations for the pad footings required to support columns in the 
units. Figure 14.13 shows the entries for this takeoff.
 
8. To measure the basement walls, we again use the Footings and Walls con-
struction system, so, in the construction system window, enter dimensions 
and specifi cations for the walls as shown in Figure 14.14, which shows the 
entries for this takeoff.
 
a. Note that the entry for rebar is 4.04, which is interpreted as 4 pieces of #4 
bars with length of B dimension. Over on the right, we select option 4 in 
cell 2 to indicate that the bars are measured by pieces.
 
b. Press enter when you have completed this item.
 
c. Press OK to accept the Takeoff Entry Answers.
 
d. The wall drops to the level of the landing at each corner, so adjustments 
have to be made to account for these cutouts. This can be done by mea-
suring the cutouts as a wall takeoff but using a negative quantity. See 
Figure 14.15 for the entries for these cutouts.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

308 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.14 
Concrete Walls Takeoff
Figure 14.15 
Adjustment for Cutouts
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
309
 
e. The drawings indicate a double sill plate cast into the top of the wall 
(ladder sill plate); this can be measured using miscellaneous item code 
06110.257. See Figure 14.16 for the data entries for this item.
 
f. Bulkheads are needed on the walls to form the corner cutouts. These bulk-
heads can also be measured using a miscellaneous item code 3111.412. 
See Figure 14.17 for the data entries for this item.
 
9. There is a weeping tile noted on the drawings to be placed in the backfi ll 
outside the footings. This is to be a part of the excavation subcontractor’s 
work; to ensure that they include this in their price, we can place a note 
on their takeoff item. To do this, on the estimate window click on the 2 
next to the item. A window will open allowing you to enter the note. See 
Figure 14.18.
This concludes the foundations takeoff; next is the slab-on-grade.
Slab-on-Grade Takeoff
 
1. Select a new construction system: 03.210 Slabs and Thickening Slabs.
 
2. See the takeoff notes in Figure 14.19 for the dimensions.
 
3. Enter the dimensions and specifi cations as shown in Figure 14.20. 
 
a. Press enter when you have completed this window.
 
b. Press OK to accept the Takeoff Entry Answers.
Figure 14.16 
Sill Plates Entry
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

310 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.17 
Wall Bulkheads Entry
Figure 14.18 
Adding a Note
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
311
Figure 14.19 
Fourplex Takeoff Notes (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

312 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Carpentry Floor System Takeoff
The carpentry takeoff begins with the fl oor system:
 
1. There is no construction system available for the kind of fl oor required here, 
so the components are taken off as miscellaneous items using quantities cal-
culated on the takeoff notes (Figure 14.19).
 
2. For the 4 3 4 posts, use a new code of 06111.099. Because this item is new 
to the database, you have to complete the fi elds on the Miscellaneous Item 
takeoff window for this item. See Figure 14.21 for entries.
 
3. The remaining miscellaneous items are all in the database, so use the follow-
ing data to complete the fl oor system:
 
 
Item 
Item Code 
Quantity
 
a. 2 3 10 in Beams 
6111.033 
47 BDFT
 
b. 2 3 10 Joists 
6111.132 
3,203 BDFT
 
c. 2 3 8 Joists 
6111.124 
256 BDFT
 
d. 5/8" Ply Floor Sheathing 
6160.127 
2,448 SQFT
 
e. 2 3 2 Bridging 
6110.103 
320 PCS
Carpentry Wall System Takeoff
The takeoff of the carpentry wall systems, including exterior walls and the partitions, 
begins with the basement walls. See Figure 14.22 for dimensions and other notes.
Figure 14.20 
Slab-on-Grade Entry
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
313
We use the construction system for partitions for the stud wall takeoff:
■ Figure 14.23 shows the entries for the pony walls to the corners of the basement.
■ In the record of the takeoff items, note that we moved the mark fi eld to just 
after the sequence number. This is done by clicking on the column heading 
(mark fi eld) and dragging it to the new location on the left. In this location, it 
is easier to keep track of multiple construction system pages.
■ Figure 14.24 shows the entries for the exterior walls in the basement.
■ Note that the stud spacing is entered as 12" rather than the true spacing of 
16". This provides a quick way of allowing for the extra studs to openings 
and corners.
■ Figure 14.25 shows the entries for the interior partitions in the basement.
■ Figure 14.26 shows the entries for the main fl oor exterior walls.
■ Figure 14.27 shows the entries for the party walls on the main fl oor.
■ Figure 14.28 shows the entries for the main fl oor partitions. 
Carpentry Roof System Takeoff
Dimensions and notes for the carpentry roof system takeoff are shown in Fig-
ure 14.29. For this roof system takeoff, we can use the Prefabricated Trusses Con-
struction System.
■ Figure 14.30 shows the entries for the roof system.
■ The remaining items listed in Figure 14.29 are entered using miscellaneous 
items. See Figure 14.31 for a summary of these items.
Figure 14.21 
Wood Posts Entry
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

314 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.22a 
Fourplex Takeoff Notes (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
315
Figure 14.22b 
Fourplex Takeoff Notes (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

316 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.23 
Basement Pony Walls Entry
Figure 14.24 
Exterior Basement Walls Entry
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
317
Figure 14.25 
Interior Basement Partitions Entry
Figure 14.26 
Main Floor Exterior Walls Entry
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

318 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.27 
Main Floor Party Walls Entry
Figure 14.28 
Main Floor Partitions Entry
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
319
Figure 14.29 
Fourplex Takeoff Notes (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

320 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.30 
Roof System Entry
Figure 14.31 
Roof System—Miscellaneous Items
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
321
Finish Carpentry and Exterior Takeoff
 
1. Dimensions and notes for the fi nish carpentry takeoff are shown in Fig-
ure 14.32. We start with the doors; these can be measured using the 08.100 
Residential Doors construction system.
 
a. Figure 14.33 shows the entries for the entrance doors.
 
b. The remaining doors listed in Figure 14.32 are entered in a similar fashion.
 
c. The attic access door is not listed in the construction system, so this item 
is measured using Miscellaneous Item 08310.010 Access Panel.
 
2. Measure windows using the construction system 08.200 Residential 
Windows.
 
a. Figure 14.34 shows the entries for the 48" 3 40" windows. Note that the 
size of the windows is entered as feet and inches. So this window entry is 
40.34 indicating 4'-0" 3 3'-4".
 
b. The remaining windows listed in Figure 14.32 are entered in a similar 
fashion.
 
3. Measure cabinets listed in Figure 14.32 using the construction system 11.100 
Residential Cabinets. See Figure 14.35.
 
4. Measure the stair using the construction system 06.160 Stairs. See Fig ure 14.36.
 
5. The iron railing, closet shelves, exterior siding, and the remaining items listed 
in Figure 14.32 are taken off using miscellaneous items. See Figure 14.37 for 
a summary of these items.
Finishes and Subcontractors Takeoff
 
1. Dimensions and notes for the fi nishes are shown in Figure 14.38. 
 
2. The Floor and Ceiling Joists construction system number 06.110 is used to 
measure the ceiling drywall. See Figure 14.39 for entries.
 
3. The ceiling, fl oor, and wall fi nishes are measured using miscellaneous items. 
We can also use this method to take off the remaining subcontractors for the 
site paving, plumbing, HVAC, and electrical work. See Figure 14.40 for a 
summary of these items.
 
4. You can close the miscellaneous items window now; the software should 
return you to the Estimate Maintenance window.
Pricing the Estimate
Most of the items measured in the takeoff processes using MC2 ICE software were 
automatically priced from the unit price catalogue as the takeoff proceeded. Any of 
the rates, prices, crews, and productivities that are priced using the default settings in 
the database can be modifi ed; here we will consider a number of ways these changes 
can be made. However, we added a number of new items using the Miscellaneous 
Item takeoff without entering their prices. We will enter prices for these below.
Labor Rates
The most effi cient way to make changes that apply to the entire estimate such as 
wage rates and material prices is to use the pricing codes found in the Project Infor-
mation window. 
 
1. In the Estimate Maintenance window, tap the General button on the toolbar 
to open the Project Information window. Here we are going to make the 
required changes starting with wage rates. 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

322 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.32a 
Fourplex Takeoff Notes (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
323
Figure 14.32b 
Fourplex Takeoff Notes (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

324 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.32c 
Fourplex Takeoff Notes (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
325
Figure 14.33 
Entry for Doors
Figure 14.34 
Entry for Windows
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

326 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.35 
Entry for Cabinets
Figure 14.36 
Entry for Stairs
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
327
Figure 14.37 
Finish Carpentry and Siding—Miscellaneous Items
 
2. From the menu on the left, under Rates click on Labor.
 
3. To see a list showing just the trades associated with the work you have taken 
off, check the box Rates Used.
 
4. We are going to add payroll burden as a percentage of labor on the estimate 
summary instead of allowing fringes here, so the fringe value in each case will 
be zero. Double click on the fringe amount, type 0, and press enter.
 
5. In the same manner, enter the required basic rates for each trade as shown in 
Figure 14.41.
Material Prices
Material prices can also be updated on the Project Information window:
 
1. Under Rates click on Material.
 
2. To change the price of 2,500 psi concrete to $107.00 per cubic yard, double 
click on the price displayed for this material and type in 107.00, then press 
enter (see Figure 14.42). Note that the date and time when the prices were 
updated are recorded against each item you have changed.
 
3. To return to the Estimate Maintenance window, on the toolbar click on Es-
timate. Here a message will appear asking you if you want to recost the esti-
mate; in order to apply the new prices to the estimate, you have to click yes, 
then click OK to confi rm that you want the changes made.
Using the Drill Down Navigation Bar
You can change many of the values shown on the Estimate Maintenance window by 
simply typing over the values shown in each cell. For example, to change the quan-
tity for washed gravel fi ll to 52.00 cubic yards, double click on the number shown, 
type in 52, and press enter. In the same way, you could change the labor unit price for 
an item, the crew selected for an item, the productivity rate, and so forth. 
This window is currently set up to show all the items measured in the takeoff. To 
review and make changes more effectively, it can be useful to focus on specifi c parts 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

328 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.38 
Fourplex Takeoff Notes (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
329
Figure 14.39 
Entry for Drywall Ceiling-Basement
Figure 14.40 
Finishes and Subtrades—Miscellaneous Items
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

330 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.41 
Wage Rates
Figure 14.42 
Material Prices
of the estimate; the pane on the left of this window with the heading Drill Down 
can be used to achieve this. Presently listed in the left window is CSI breakdown of 
the estimate. Here you can see Sitework from division 1, followed by Concrete, then 
Metals, and so on. If you want to specifi cally check on your concrete takeoff, you 
can obtain a summary of the concrete items by clicking on Concrete on the list in 
this window.
To obtain a different breakdown of the estimate, click on the Drill Down bar 
at the top of the left pane. This pane now shows a list of the miscellaneous items 
and construction systems used in the takeoff. For instance, if you want to review the 
items measured with the continuous footing construction system, you would click on 
Continuous Footings in this pane as shown in Figure 14.43. To return to the original 
CSI breakdown, click again on the Drill Down bar.
Adding Prices
A large number of pricing columns are displayed on the right-hand side of the Esti-
mate Maintenance window. We can set up another view of this window that shows 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
331
Figure 14.43 
Drill Down Data
only the columns in which we need to attach prices to the new items we added in 
the takeoff process. 
 
1. At the bottom of the Description column, there is a tab labeled “(Show 
All).” There is a slider next to this tab so that you can open a space. See 
Figure 14.44.
 
2. Right click in this space and select Add View from the menu. 
 
3. On the window that pops up, type Pricing as the name of this view.
 
4. Insert the following columns by double clicking on the name of the column 
in the list on the left:
 
a. ItemCode
 
b. Description
 
c. Quantity
 
d. UM
 
e. Labor$
 
f. Material
 
g. Subcontract
 
h. TotalCost
 
5. These choices will now be listed on the Columns To Show window. See Fig-
ure 14.45.
 
6. Click OK on this popup window. Now, back on the Estimate Maintenance 
window, there will be a new tab at the bottom of the Description column 
labeled Pricing.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

332 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
 
7. Click on the Pricing tab and only the selected columns will be displayed in 
this window.
 
8. It is now easy to see from the blank cells in these columns which items are 
still in need of pricing.
 
9. Enter the prices shown in Figure 14.46 into the appropriate blank cells.
 
10. This completes the pricing of the work, but we still need to consider the gen-
eral expenses for this project.
Figure 14.45 
Adding a View
Figure 14.44 
Slider Next to (Show All)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
333
Figure 14.46 
Pricing New Miscellaneous Items
Pricing General Expenses 
ICE software allows the estimator to assess and account for general expenses in 
many different ways. The simplest way is to select items required from the list that 
can be accessed in the Project Information window.
 
1. On the toolbar click on the General button to open the Project Information 
window. 
 
2. Click on General Conditions under the General heading of items. A list of 
general expense items will appear in the window. See Figure 14.47.
 
3. Enter a quantity against an item on this list by double clicking in the quantity 
fi eld to bring that general expense item into your estimate. See Figure 14.48 
for the items required for this estimate. (To generate a list that shows only the 
items you have selected, click on the Omit Zero Quantity box.)
 
4. To return to the full estimate window, click on Estimate on the toolbar and 
all the items of general expense for this project are now listed in the Esti-
mate Maintenance window. Prices can be adjusted here. For instance, the 
superintendent and the timekeeper may be working only part-time on this 
project, so the weekly amounts can be reduced to $750.00 and $400.00. See 
Figure 14.48.
Estimate Summary
All that remains to be done to complete the bid price for this project is to set up the 
markups in the summary. The MC2 ICE summary window is basically a spreadsheet 
that has been set up to show a recap of the dollar amounts in each of the estimate 
cost categories and to allow the estimator to insert markups (add-ons).
 
1. On the toolbar click the arrow to the right of General and choose Summary 
from the options listed. This will open the summary window. You can adjust 
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

334 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.48 
General Expenses
Figure 14.47 
General Conditions
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
335
Figure 14.49 
Adjusting Prices
the size of the Summary screen by accessing the Zoom button on the toolbar. 
See Figure 14.49.
 
 (Note: Markups are not set up by adding percentage values to cells in the 
Summary window.)
 
2. Click on the Factors button on the toolbar. Here the estimator can set up 
markups for the estimate. Enter the markups listed below and tap OK when 
all entries are complete.
 
Builder’s Risk (Insurance) 
0.60%
 
Labor Burden (Payroll Additive) 
25%
 
Materials Sales Tax 
12%
 
Miscellaneous 1 (Building Permit) 
0.70%
 
Overhead Labor (Small Tools) 
3%
 
Profi t (Overall) 
10%
 
3. Before we leave the Summary window, let us add labels to clarify a couple of 
markups we have set up:
 
a. In cell C22, type: Small Tools to explain what the Labor Overhead is for.
 
b. In cell A29, type: Misc. 1 – Building Permit.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

336 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
 
4. We can also use the data on this window to calculate the cost per SF of this bid:
 
a. In cell I5, type the formula: 5J35/I4
 
b. In cell I6, type: $/SF
 
5. See Figure 15.50 for the fi nished Summary window.
Printing Reports 
ICE software allows you to print many different types of reports in an almost unlim-
ited variety of formats. Here our choice of report is the Unit Cost Estimate report:
 
1. Close the Summary window and click on the Reports button that will now 
be listed on the toolbar.
 
2. The Estimate Report window will open; in the box on the top left of this 
window select: 11 - Est Detail - 198 - Unit Cost
 
3. Down the left of this window are a number of buttons that allow you to 
switch on or off features on this printout. Switch on the following:
 
a. Detail Report
 
b. Print Summary
 
c. Show Code and Desc
 
d. Combine by Sort Codes
 
(Leave all remaining buttons down the left blank.)
Figure 14.50 
Summary
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
337
Figure 14.51 
Estimate Reports
 
4. By default the Preview button will be checked (this allows you to review the 
printout before it is sent to the printer). See Figure 14.51.
 
5. Click on Print Report, and then at the top of the next window, click on the 
Print Setup tab. Here select Landscape and tap OK.
 
6. Review the printout; if it looks acceptable, print a copy. See Figure 14.52 for 
a copy of the printout.
Materials Reports 
Because this estimate is in an electronic format, it allows the estimator to quickly 
conduct many types of price analysis. For example, we may receive a quote offering 
a price to supply rough carpentry materials for this project. We can generate a special 
report showing the price of rough carpentry materials in the estimate so that we can 
make a comparison with the supplier’s quote:
 
1. With the Estimate Maintenance window open, click on the down arrow to 
the right of the Reports button on the toolbar and a menu of different reports 
will open.
 
2. Select MC2 Misc. Reports from this menu.
 
3. In the Miscellaneous Report window select: Material Detail.
 
4. Down the left of this window are a number of buttons that allow you to 
switch on or off features on this printout. Switch on the following:
 
a. Detail Report
 
b. Show decimal in Total Cost
 
c. Show Costs
 
d. Show Description only
 
e. Preview
 
Then, on the right, set the Primary Sort Sequence to Major Item Code.
 
5. If you look at the report now it would list all the materials required for the 
project, but here we are interested only in the rough carpentry, so we will 
restrict the scope of the printout to the range 6,100–6,200.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

338 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Figure 14.52a 
Estimate Printout
Estimate Detail - Fourplex Project
  Detail - Without Taxes and Insurance
Group 1: Major ItemCode Groups
  Estimator: DJP
  Project Size: 4541 SF
ItemCode Description
Quantity UM
Lab.Unit
Mat.Unit
Eqp.Unit
Sub.Unit
Other Unit
Tot.UnitCost
TotalCost
C:\Program Files\MC² Software\estfiles\Fourplex.est
Page 1 
7/12/2010 01:53 PM
01300.000 Administrative requirements
01310.110 Superintendent
20.00
Week
750.0000
750.000
15,000
01310.150 Timekeeper
20.00
Week
400.0000
400.000
8,000
* Total 01300.000 Administrative requirement
23,000
01500.000 Temporary facilities and controls
01510.110 Job telephone
5.00
Month
80.000
80.000
400
01520.120 Portable chemical toilet
5.00
Month
171.000
855
01520.140 First aid supplies
5.00
Month
64.500
64.500
323
01540.190 Air compressor
3.00
Month
293.000
879
01540.230 Generators
3.00
Month
1,220.000
3,660
01540.240 Pickup truck rental
5.00
Month
1,540.000
7,700
* Total 01500.000 Temporary facilities and controls
13,817
01700.000 Execution requirements
01740.100 Job clean up
4,541.00
Sqft
0.0550
0.002
0.057
259
* Total 01700.000 Execution requirements
259
02200.000 Site preparation
02230.052 Strip and haul away topsoil
116.00
Cuyd
1.3465
1.000
2.347
272
* Total 02200.000 Site preparation
272
02300.000 Earthwork
02300.001 Excavation Subtrade
1.00
Lsum
1,980.000
1,980.000
1,980
02324.060 Washed gravel fill @ slab
52.00
CUYD
13.3860
24.000
37.386
1,944
* Total 02300.000 Earthwork
3,924
02700.000 Bases, ballasts, and pavement
02700.001 Paving Subtrade
1.00
Lsum
5,250.000
5,250.000
5,250
* Total 02700.000 Bases, ballasts, and pavement
5,250
02800.000 Site improvements and amenities
02830.501 Footing keyways
365.47
LNFT
0.6057
0.253
0.859
314
* Total 02800.000 Site improvements and amenities
314
03100.000 Formwork
03111.142 Wall bulkheads
101.00
SQFT
4.6350
1.125
5.760
582
03114.200 Footing edge forms
826.94
LNFT
2.1300
0.234
2.364
1,955
03114.210 0' to 4' wall form
-514.93
SQFT
2.1300
0.576
2.706
-1,393
03114.212 6' to 8' wall form
4,519.52
SQFT
2.7000
0.704
3.404
15,385
* Total 03100.000 Formwork
4,831.53
SQFT
2.7601
0.661
3.421
16,528
03200.000 Concrete reinforcing
03210.972 #4 x 20' rebar @ footing
59.32
PCS
3.8080
5.344
9.152
543
* Total 03200.000 Concrete reinforcing
543
03300.000 Cast in place concrete
03315.100 2500 psi conc @ footing
16.93
CUYD
0.7560
107.000
107.756
1,825
03315.110 2500 psi conc @ wall
49.69
CUYD
9.7470
107.000
116.747
5,801
03315.120 2500 psi conc @ slab
25.43
CUYD
7.5060
107.000
114.506
2,912
03350.211 Trowel finish
2,080.68
SQFT
0.2970
0.297
618
* Total 03300.000 Cast in place concrete
11,155
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
339
Estimate Detail - Fourplex Project
  Detail - Without Taxes and Insurance
Group 1: Major ItemCode Groups
  Estimator: DJP
  Project Size: 4541 SF
ItemCode Description
Quantity UM
Lab.Unit
Mat.Unit
Eqp.Unit
Sub.Unit
Other Unit
Tot.UnitCost
TotalCost
C:\Program Files\MC² Software\estfiles\Fourplex.est
Page 2 
7/12/2010 01:53 PM
03400.000 Precast concrete
03420.001 Precast concrete steps
4.00
EACH
690.000
690.000
2,760
* Total 03400.000 Precast concrete
2,760
05500.000 Metal fabrications
05520.019 Metal railing
235.00
LNFT
3.1929
31.250
34.443
8,094
* Total 05500.000 Metal fabrications
8,094
06100.000 Rough carpentry
06110.103 2x4 bridging untreated, 24"
320.00
PCS
1.2124
0.501
1.713
548
06110.140 Nails and rough hardware
146.00
LBS
1.088
1.088
159
06110.180 Ramset shot
361.50
EACH
0.3480
0.375
0.723
261
06110.185 Anchor bolt
18.00
EACH
0.9717
0.448
1.420
26
06110.257 2x8 sill plates, wolmanized
445.00
LNFT
0.8700
2.520
3.390
1,509
06110.308 2x4x24 rafter
4.00
PCS
7.5518
6.126
13.678
55
06110.410 Half truss 3 /12 pitch 20'  "
48.00
EACH
69.6000
4.052
73.652
3,535
06110.412 Gablre End - 40'-8" Span
4.00
EACH
28.0000
190.000
218.000
872
06110.450 2x4x92-5/8" stud
1,170.43
PCS
1.7861
2.010
3.796
4,443
06110.460 2x6x92-5/8" stud
174.50
PCS
2.4617
3.040
5.502
960
06110.483 2x6x16 stud
8.50
PCS
5.1086
7.360
12.469
106
06110.510 2x4x16 plate
199.67
PCS
6.1173
4.020
10.137
2,024
06110.511 2x6x16 plate
47.35
PCS
6.8114
7.360
14.171
671
06110.530 2x6x16 header
15.58
PCS
14.2892
7.360
21.649
337
06110.532 2x10x16 header
12.66
PCS
15.2979
14.429
29.727
376
06110.566 1x4xRL blocking
112.00
BDFT
1.0735
0.375
1.449
162
06110.635 2x4xRL blocking
325.00
BDFT
0.9116
0.375
1.287
418
06111.033 2x10x14 beam
47.00
BDFT
0.3036
0.375
0.679
32
06111.099 4 x 4 x 8' Post
43.00
BDFT
0.2500
0.375
0.625
27
06111.124 2x8x16 joist
256.00
BDFT
0.2277
0.375
0.603
154
06111.132 2x10x12 joist
3,203.00
BDFT
0.2240
0.375
0.599
1,919
06160.100 ½" 4x8 CD plywood
8.00
SHTS
6.5153
13.440
19.955
160
06160.100 ½" 4x8 CD plywood
79.39
SHTS
6.5153
13.440
19.955
1,584
06160.101 5/8" 4x8 CD plywood
54.60
SHTS
7.4037
16.320
23.724
1,295
06160.127 5/8" T&G plywood @ subfloor
2,448.00
SQFT
0.2314
0.640
0.871
2,133
* Total 06100.000 Rough carpentry
23,767
06200.000 Finish carpentry
06220.131 1x10 cedar trim
209.00
LNFT
1.4130
3.162
4.575
956
06220.134 1x4 cedar trim
309.00
LNFT
1.1220
1.280
2.402
742
06270.130 Closet rod and shelf
96.00
LNFT
6.5250
8.961
15.486
1,487
* Total 06200.000 Finish carpentry
3,185
06400.000 Architectural woodwork
06410.030 Standard base cabinet
48.00
LNFT
7.5000
33.283
40.783
1,958
06410.060 Vanity base cabinet
16.00
LNFT
7.5000
33.283
40.783
653
06410.230 Standard upper cabinet
84.00
LNFT
7.5000
32.003
39.503
3,318
06410.410 Pantry cabinet
4.00
EACH
30.0000
192.019
222.019
888
06415.140 Formica kitchen countertop
48.00
LNFT
3.7500
8.001
11.751
564
06415.160 Formica vanity countertop
16.00
LNFT
3.7500
8.001
11.751
188
06430.123 2x10x14 stair framing
8.00
PCS
7.6629
12.625
20.288
162
06430.124 2x10x16 stair framing
9.00
PCS
8.7642
14.429
23.193
209
Figure 14.52b 
Estimate Printout (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

340 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Estimate Detail - Fourplex Project
  Detail - Without Taxes and Insurance
Group 1: Major ItemCode Groups
  Estimator: DJP
  Project Size: 4541 SF
ItemCode Description
Quantity UM
Lab.Unit
Mat.Unit
Eqp.Unit
Sub.Unit
Other Unit
Tot.UnitCost
TotalCost
C:\Program Files\MC² Software\estfiles\Fourplex.est
Page 3 
7/12/2010 01:53 PM
06430.140 1x8x12 stair framing
14.00
PCS
2.4565
2.457
34
06431.147 Wall rail
56.00
LNFT
6.4200
4.480
10.900
610
06450.150 Wood base board
3,458.00
LNFT
0.7959
2.230
3.026
10,464
* Total 06400.000 Architectural woodwork
19,048
07100.000 Waterproofing and dampproofing
07110.012 Dampproofing
2,002.29
SQFT
0.4200
0.128
0.548
1,097
* Total 07100.000 Waterproofing and dampproofing
1,097
07200.000 Thermal protection
07210.091 3½" batt insulation
4,168.00
SQFT
0.250
0.250
1,042
07210.092 6" batt insulation
1,747.12
SQFT
0.400
0.400
699
07210.095 12" batt insulation
2,240.00
SQFT
0.800
0.800
1,792
* Total 07200.000 Thermal protection
3,533
07300.000 Shingles, tiles, and roof coverings
07310.100 Asphalt shingles
25.40
SQS
33.9048
30.710
64.615
1,641
07310.140 15 lb felt 432 sqft roll
5.88
ROLL
16.0615
12.481
28.543
168
07310.800 Roofing nails
25.40
LBS
1.267
1.267
32
* Total 07300.000 Shingles, tiles, and roof coverings
1,842
07400.000 Roof and siding panels
07405.001 Aluminum Siding Subtrade
1.00
Lsum
7,450.000
7,450.000
7,450
07460.052 3/8" exterior grade plywood
181.00
SQFT
0.5090
0.360
0.869
157
07460.056 Aluminum vented soffit
423.00
SQFT
0.9532
3.260
4.213
1,782
07460.083 6" aluminum fascia
212.00
LNFT
0.7681
3.120
3.888
824
* Total 07400.000 Roof and siding panels
10,214
07500.000 Membrane roofing
07560.027 Neoprene deck
181.00
Sqft
2.1576
1.330
3.488
631
* Total 07500.000 Membrane roofing
631
07600.000 Flashing and sheetmetal
07620.020 .032 aluminum sheetmetal
328.00
LNFT
1.5250
1.344
2.869
941
* Total 07600.000 Flashing and sheetmetal
941
07700.000 Roof specialties and accessories
07710.020 4" galvanized gutter
127.66
LNFT
1.8374
1.651
3.489
445
07710.120 4" round galvanized downspout
28.00
LNFT
1.3627
1.216
2.579
72
* Total 07700.000 Roof specialties and accessories
518
08100.000 Metal doors and frames
08111.501 Insulated metal door
****
08111.502 3680RH,6", standard dr
4.00
EACH
185.619
185.619
742
08111.508 Side lite
4.00
EACH
113.931
113.931
456
08160.014 7484 sliding glass door
4.00
EACH
75.0000
232.983
307.983
1,232
* Total 08100.000 Metal doors and frames
8.00
EACH
37.5000
266.267
303.767
2,430
08200.000 Wood and plastic doors
08220.010 Flush masonite hollow core door
****
08220.011   1880,4",  door and frame
4.00
EACH
45.8571
79.368
125.225
501
08220.011   3080,4",  door and frame
20.00
EACH
45.8571
79.368
125.225
2,505
Figure 14.52c 
Estimate Printout (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
341
Estimate Detail - Fourplex Project
  Detail - Without Taxes and Insurance
Group 1: Major ItemCode Groups
  Estimator: DJP
  Project Size: 4541 SF
ItemCode Description
Quantity UM
Lab.Unit
Mat.Unit
Eqp.Unit
Sub.Unit
Other Unit
Tot.UnitCost
TotalCost
C:\Program Files\MC² Software\estfiles\Fourplex.est
Page 4 
7/12/2010 01:53 PM
* Total 08200.000 Wood and plastic doors
24.00
EACH
45.8571
79.368
125.225
3,005
08300.000 Specialty doors
08310.010 Access panel
4.00
EACH
47.5556
57.606
105.162
421
08350.060 Raised panel masonite bi-fold
****
08350.061 3672,4"     door and frame
8.00
EACH
61.1429
131.853
192.996
1,544
08350.061 4272,4"     door and frame
4.00
EACH
61.1429
131.853
192.996
772
* Total 08300.000 Specialty doors
16.00
EACH
57.7461
113.291
171.037
2,737
08500.000 Windows
08520.017 4028 Sliding DG aluminum window
4.00
EACH
82.474
82.474
330
08520.017 4034 Sliding DG aluminum window
4.00
EACH
103.093
103.093
412
08520.017 6228 Sliding DG aluminum window
4.00
EACH
127.148
127.148
509
08580.020 4028 Screen
4.00
EACH
25.261
25.261
101
08580.020 4034 Screen
4.00
EACH
31.577
31.577
126
08580.020 6228 Screen
4.00
EACH
38.944
38.944
156
* Total 08500.000 Windows
1,634
08700.000 Hardware
08710.010 Keyed entry lock
4.00
EACH
18.946
18.946
76
08710.030 Privacy lock
20.00
EACH
11.841
11.841
237
08710.040 Passage lock
4.00
EACH
8.321
8.321
33
08720.010 3680 aluminium threshold
4.00
EACH
15.1059
12.801
27.907
112
* Total 08700.000 Hardware
458
09200.000 Plaster and gypsum board 
09250.360 Drywall tape and joint cement
14,390.00 SQFT
0.3930
0.013
0.406
5,839
09250.401 ½" 4x12 gyp bd @ ceiling
47.30
SHTS
9.217
9.217
436
09250.410 ½" 4x12 gyp bd @ wall
267.63
SHTS
8.641
8.641
2,313
09250.411 5/8" 4x12 gyp bd @ wall
63.00
SHTS
10.753
10.753
677
09250.411 5/8" 4x12 gyp bd @ wall
32.17
SHTS
10.753
10.753
346
09250.500 Nails for gypsum board
166.60
LBS
0.768
0.768
128
09250.520 Hang gypsum board @ ceiling
2,270.45
SQFT
0.2453
0.245
557
09250.525 Hang gypsum board @ wall
14,390.00 SQFT
0.1897
0.190
2,730
09250.550 Finish gypsum board @ ceiling
2,270.45
SQFT
0.3505
0.351
796
09250.551 Finish gypsum board @ wall
14,390.00 SQFT
0.3067
0.307
4,413
* Total 09200.000 Plaster and gypsum board
18,235
09600.000 Floors
09650.065 Sheet vinyl floor
142.00
SQYD
9.950
9.950
1,413
09680.015 Carpeting
362.00
SQYD
13.000
13.000
4,706
* Total 09600.000 Floors
6,119
09900.000 Paints and coatings
09910.101 Paint gypsum board wall
13,832.00 SQFT
0.180
0.180
2,490
09910.110 Paint gypsum board ceiling
4,541.00
SQFT
0.190
0.190
863
09910.125 Paint posts and spindles
8.00
EACH
3.500
3.500
28
09910.130 Paint handrail
56.00
LNFT
0.500
0.500
28
* Total 09900.000 Paints and coatings
3,409
10670.000 Storage shelving
Figure 14.52d 
Estimate Printout (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

342 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
Estimate Detail - Fourplex Project
  Detail - Without Taxes and Insurance
Group 1: Major ItemCode Groups
  Estimator: DJP
  Project Size: 4541 SF
ItemCode Description
Quantity UM
Lab.Unit
Mat.Unit
Eqp.Unit
Sub.Unit
Other Unit Tot.UnitCost
TotalCost
C:\Program Files\MC² Software\estfiles\Fourplex.est
Page 5 
7/12/2010 01:53 PM
10670.050 Closet shelf unit
8.00
EACH
16.0615
28.803
44.865
359
* Total 10670.000 Storage shelving
359
15400.000 Plumbing fixtures and equipment
15400.001 Plumbing Subtrade
1.00
Lsum
24,975.000
24,975.000
24,975
* Total 15400.000 Plumbing fixtures and equipment
24,975
15700.000 HVAC equipment
15700.001 HVAC Subtrade
1.00
Lsum
22,705.000
22,705.000
22,705
* Total 15700.000 HVAC equipment
22,705
16000.000 Power distribution equipment
16000.001 Elecrical Subtrade
1.00
Lsum
20,500.000
20,500.000
20,500
* Total 16000.000 Power distribution equipment
20,500
Total Estimate
257,256
Figure 14.52e 
Estimate Printout (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
343
Estimate Summary
Bid date
Fourplex Project
Management Computer Controls
5100 Poplar Avenue, Suite 3400
4,541 SF
Memphis
70.56 $/SF
TN
Labor
Material
Equipment
Subcontract
Temp Matl
Equip Rental
Other
Totals
Direct Costs
%
Base labor
$77,931
$67,435
$0
$98,796
$0
$13,094
$0
$257,256
Labor burden
25.00%
$19,483
$19,483
Labor fringes
$0
$0
Labor manhours
1,307
Material sales tax
12.00%
$8,092
$8,092
Equipment Surcharge
0.00%
$0
$0
Temporary material markup
0.00%
$0
$0
Equipment rental markup
0.00%
$0
$0
Other markup
0.00%
$0
$0
Gross cost
$97,414
$75,527
$0
$98,796
$0
$13,094
$0
$284,831
Gross receipts tax
0.00%
$0
Builder’s risk insurance
0.60%
$1,922
Overall
       Small Tools
Overhead
0.00%
3.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
$0
$2,922
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$2,922
Profit
10.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
$28,483
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$28,483
Subcontract markup
0.00%
$0
Performance bond
$0
$0
Misc 1 - Building Permit
0.70%
$2,243
Miscellaneous 2
0.00%
$0
Total
$320,402
Cut/Add
$0
Project total
$320,402
Figure 14.52f 
Estimate Printout (continued)
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

344 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING
 
6. Switch on the Partial Rpt. button on the left and click on Specify.
 
7. Double click in the Begin Item cell and enter 6100.
 
8. Double click in the End Item cell, enter 6200 and then press OK.
 
9. Now, when you press print, only the prices of rough carpentry materials will 
be listed. See Figure 14.53.
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
 
 Information  
Web Page Address
 
■ Management Computer Controls, Inc.—The  
http://www.mc2-ice.com/
web page for MC2 provides information on ICE 
software and also lots of general estimating data. 
 
■ More information can be obtained on software 
for estimating by using the key works: computer 
estimating in Web Search Engines.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
 1. Identify the fi ve steps in the ICE estimating process.
 2. Where can you set up wage rates and crews in the estimate?
 3. What do you have to set up in order to have the computer calculate the cost per 
square foot on the summary?
 4. Explain the difference between a Miscellaneous Item takeoff and a Construction 
System takeoff.
 5. What is contained in the Company Standard?
 6. Where do you enter the name of the project and name of the estimator for an 
estimate?
 7. What is the function of the Mark Field in the takeoff?
 8. Explain the use of hand-written Takeoff Notes to accompany a computer 
estimate.
 9. How can you change the price of concrete in one place so that it updates that 
price of that concrete throughout the estimate?
 10. How can you set up the Estimate Maintenance window so that only a select 
number of columns are displayed?
 11. What is a simple way to take off general expense items for an estimate?
 12. Describe how markups are added to the estimate summary.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 14—COMPUTER ESTIMATING 
345
Material Detail - Fourplex Project
Estimator: DJP
Partial Report
Group 1: Major ItemCode Groups
Project Size: 4541 SF
Item Code
Description
Quantity
Cost
Quantity
Unit Price
Total
Material
C:\Program Files\MC² Software\estfiles\Fourplex.est
Page 1 
7/21/2010 08:59 AM
Rough carpentry
06110.103
2x4 bridging untreated, 24"
320 PCS
Lump Sum Price
0.501
160.32
06110.140
Nails and rough hardware
146 LBS
Lump Sum Price
1.088
158.86
06110.180
Ramset shot
362 EACH
Lump Sum Price
0.375
135.56
06110.185
Anchor bolt
18 EACH
Lump Sum Price
0.448
8.06
06110.257
2x8 sill plates, wolmanized
445 LNFT
Lump Sum Price
2.520
1,121.40
06110.308
2x4x24 rafter
4 PCS
Lump Sum Price
6.126
24.50
06110.410
Half truss 3 /12 pitch 20' "
48 EACH
Lump Sum Price
4.052
194.48
06110.412
Gablre End - 40'-8" Span
4 EACH
Lump Sum Price
190.000
760.00
06110.450
2x4x92-5/8" stud
1,170 PCS
M630 - 2x4x8' stud 
6273.50 BDFT
0.375
2,352.56
06110.460
2x6x92-5/8" stud
175 PCS
M635 - 2x6x8' stud 
1396.00 BDFT
0.380
530.48
06110.483
2x6x16 stud
9 PCS
M645 - 2x6    8'-16'
136.00 BDFT
0.460
62.56
06110.510
2x4x16 plate
200 PCS
M640 - 2x4    8'-16'
2140.44 BDFT
0.375
802.66
06110.511
2x6x16 plate
47 PCS
M645 - 2x6    8'-16'
757.64 BDFT
0.460
348.51
06110.530
2x6x16 header
16 PCS
M645 - 2x6    8'-16'
249.20 BDFT
0.460
114.63
06110.532
2x10x16 header
13 PCS
M655 - 2x10   8'-16'
338.28 BDFT
0.540
182.67
06110.566
1x4xRL blocking
112 BDFT
Lump Sum Price
0.375
42.00
06110.635
2x4xRL blocking
325 BDFT
Lump Sum Price
0.375
121.88
06111.033
2x10x14 beam
47 BDFT
Lump Sum Price
0.375
17.63
06111.099
4 x 4 x 8' Post
43 BDFT
Lump Sum Price
0.375
16.13
06111.124
2x8x16 joist
256 BDFT
Lump Sum Price
0.375
96.00
06111.132
2x10x12 joist
3,203 BDFT
Lump Sum Price
0.375
1,201.13
06160.100
½" 4x8 CD plywood
87 SHTS
Lump Sum Price
13.440
1,174.48
06160.101
5/8" 4x8 CD plywood
55 SHTS
M614 - 5/8" CD plywood
1747.12 SQFT
0.510
891.03
06160.127
5/8" T&G plywood @ subfloor
2,448 SQFT
Lump Sum Price
0.640
1,566.72
* Total Rough carpentry
$12,084
Total Estimate
$12,084
Figure 14.53 
Rough Carpentry Material Printout
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

347
A
P
P
E
N
D
I
X
A
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
A
add-on—An estimate item (usually related to general expenses) calculated as a per-
centage of some part or the total of an estimate.
apartment—A building that contains a number of separate suites. (See also low rise 
and high rise)
architect—A professional person or company who, in residential construction, is 
responsible for preparing a design and constructing a building that meets the needs 
of the owner. (See also prime consultant)
assembly—A component of a project that consists of a collection of takeoff items.
B
BTUs—British thermal units. These are a measure of heat. 
backfl ow preventor—A plumbing fi tting installed on a sewer line to prevent material 
fl owing back into a house from a sewer.
bank measure—A volume of excavation or backfi ll calculated using the actual di-
mensions of the hole to be excavated or fi lled with no allowance for swell or com-
paction of material.
bar-chart schedule—A graphic way of displaying a project schedule where tasks are 
represented by horizontal lines plotted against a time line.
bid bond—A form of guarantee issued by a surety company assuring the owner that 
the bidder who is awarded a contract will enter into the contract and provide the 
surety bonds required by the contract terms.
bid closing time—The time and date when all bids are required to be submitted on a 
project. Bids received after the specifi ed time are usually rejected.
bid runner—The person, usually a junior estimator, who delivers a bid. This task 
often involves completing the bid forms at the place of the bid closing in accordance 
with last-minute information received by cell phone.
bill of materials—A list of the materials required for a project obtained from a 
takeoff.
board measure—A cubic measure of lumber equivalent to 144 cubic inches calcu-
lated using the nominal dimensions of the lumber.
bond beam—A reinforced concrete beam contained within “U”-shaped concrete 
blocks.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

348 
APPENDIX A—GLOSSARY OF TERMS
brick ties—Sometimes referred to as “strap anchors” or “wall ties”; these are wire 
or sheet metal devices inserted at regular intervals into horizontal masonry (brick or 
block) joints to attach one masonry wall to another or to attach a masonry wall to 
another part of the structure. 
brick-on-edge course—A course of bricks laid down so that the brick ends are visi-
ble on the face of a wall and the long dimension of the end is vertical rather than 
horizontal, which is normally the case.
C
cash allowance—A sum of money included in a bid as an allowance for a certain 
project expenditure (sometimes called a PC Sum).
centerline—The length of a trench/footing/wall, etc., measured along its center rather 
than on the inside or on the outside.
compaction factor—An amount added to the volume of backfi ll material to account 
for the additional material required to increase the density of the backfi ll material 
when it is in place.
conceptual estimate—An estimate prepared when the project is no more than an idea 
under consideration; a time when very little specifi c detail is known about the design 
of the work involved.
condominium—An apartment building where residents own their apartments. (See 
also apartment)
consent of surety—A document issued by a bonding company asserting that the 
builder identifi ed on the document is able to meet contract bonding requirements.
construction manager—The person or company charged with responsibility for the 
on-site activities of a construction project.
contingency allowance—A sum of money included in a bid as an allowance for non-
specifi c project expenditures such as the cost of extra work in general.
cost-based pricing—Setting the price of a new home by fi rst estimating the cost to 
construct the home.
cost plan—An estimate of project expenditures prepared in the early (feasibility) 
stage of the project and expressed as a collection of budgets, one for each element or 
major component of the project.  
cost plus contract—A form of construction contract where the main terms allow for 
the builder to be paid all the costs incurred to complete the project plus an additional 
amount for profi t.
CSI Master Format—A master list of numbers and descriptions for organizing infor-
mation about construction requirements, products, and activities in specifi cations.
custom builders—Builders of custom homes. (Compare to production builders)
custom home—A house built to meet the owner’s design.  
D
depreciation—The allocation of the cost of an asset, such as an item of equipment, 
over the life of that asset. 
designer—A person or company who is responsible for preparing the design of a 
building.
design-build—A project delivery method whereby an organization undertakes to 
both design and construct a project for an owner.  
digitizer—Electronic device for measuring lengths, areas, and volumes directly from 
drawings. 
duplex—A building comprising two residences, usually one located above the 
other.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
APPENDIX A—GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
349
E
engineered joists—Manufactured wood joists that meet a consistent structural 
standard. 
extra over—The cost of providing an additional feature over and above the cost of 
the standard feature, for example, the extra cost of providing tinted glass rather than 
plain glass.
F
falsework—The temporary supports, scaffolding, and formwork required to carry 
concrete until it reaches suffi cient strength to support itself. 
fast tracking—Organizing a construction project so that the work begins before the 
design is complete in order to reduce the overall duration of the project.
feasibility estimate—A preliminary estimate prepared to assess the feasibility of a 
potential project.
fi rm price contract—A contract whereby a builder agrees to complete a project as 
defi ned in contract plans and specifi cations for a fi xed sum of money.
form ties—Metal wires or rods used to produce the desired amount of separation 
between the sheets of form material on each side of a wall formwork system, and also 
to resist the pressures that result from fi lling the form system with liquid concrete.
G
general contractor—A builder hired, usually after a bid competition, to complete the 
work of a project. This builder assumes responsibility for construction of the entire 
project although subcontractors may perform some or all of the work involved.
gross fl oor area—The area of all fl oors in a building measured to the outside of 
exterior walls. No deductions are made for openings inside the building such as 
stairways and elevator shafts. 
H
high rise—A building that has more than twelve fl oors above grade. 
hoardings—A temporary fence or wall to a project under construction built to pro-
vide security or to enable the workspace to be heated.
I
instructions to bidders—Usually found at the beginning of the bid documents, they 
describe the project in general terms and provide information such as the required 
time and place of the bid closing. They will usually also include a clause that calls for 
the bidder to leave the bid open for acceptance for a specifi ed period of time.
J
joist hanger—A metal device used to attach the end of a wood joist to a beam or a wall.
L
ladder reinforcing to masonry—This is a masonry wall reinforcing system that is laid 
in horizontal joints. It comprises two wires that run the length of the wall and short 
wires that pass between the two long wires at intervals so that the complete assembly 
resembles a ladder.
low rise—Building that has up to three fl oors above grade.
lump sum contract—A contract between an owner and a builder whereby the builder 
agrees to perform a defi ned scope of work for a stipulated sum. As a consequence, 
lump sum contracts are applicable only when the work can be well defi ned in the 
contract documents.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

350 
APPENDIX A—GLOSSARY OF TERMS
M
masonry ties—See brick ties.
medium rise—A building that is between four and twelve fl oors above grade.
mensuration—This is the science and principles of measurement. In this text, it 
applies to measuring lengths, areas, and volumes encountered in the estimating 
process.
method of measurement—A uniform basis for measuring construction work that 
provides rules relating to how work is described and measured in the estimating 
process.
N
net in place—Quantities of work measured using the dimensions obtained from 
drawings with no adjustment for factors such as waste.
O
order units and order quantities—The units of measurement used to order materials 
and the quantities of materials measured in these units. Order units often differ from 
the units of measurement used in the takeoff. (See takeoff units)
P
PC sum—Prime Cost Sum. (See cash allowance)
parallam beam—A manufactured wood component made by gluing together a num-
ber of thin boards to form a structural member bigger than the trees from which the 
boards were sawn.
pilaster—A column attached to a wall.
plot plan—The plan of the site showing the building location together with site to-
pography, landscaping, and existing structures.
pre-hung—This term applies to doors that have been installed in their frames in a 
factory so that they arrive on site as a door and frame unit ready for installation.
preliminary estimate—An estimate prepared in the early stages of a project when 
little detail is known about the specifi c design of the project.
prime consultant—Usually an architect who takes on the responsibility of designing 
and supervising the construction of a building.
production builder—A builder who builds production homes. (Compare to custom 
builder)
production home—One of a series of houses built to the builder’s standard design.
Q
qualifi ed bids—A bid that has a qualifi cation or some condition attached to it.
query list—A list of questions compiled by an estimator in the takeoff process. These 
are generally sent to the design consultants to obtain clarifi cation in the form of 
 addenda to bid documents.
R
R-value—This is a measurement of the resistance of a material to heat fl ow.
recap—A summary listing of takeoff items and quantities that gathers like items 
together in a prescribed order to facilitate ease of pricing.
row housing—Houses attached side by side.
royalty—A payment for the use of resources paid to the owner of those resources. 
running bond—A method of laying bricks where the bricks are laid in courses with 
their long edge exposed and vertical joints staggered from one course to the next.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
APPENDIX A—GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
351
S
semi-custom home—Starting with a standard home plan, buyers make changes and 
choices so that the house that is built meets the homebuyer’s needs.  
Système International d’Unités— This is the offi cial name adopted for the metric 
system of units of measurement (abbreviation SI).
slump—A measure of how liquid is a mix of concrete. This is determined in a 
standard test carried out with a conical mould 12 inches (300 mm) high. In the 
test, the mould is fi rst fi lled with concrete. The mould is then lifted free, and the 
height of the cone of concrete formed is measured to determine the amount it is 
lower than 12 inches (the slump). Thus, a large slump signifi es a more fl uid mix 
of concrete.
soldier course—A course of bricks laid side by side on their ends so that the long 
dimension of the brick edge exposed is vertical rather than horizontal.
spec builder—(Speculative builder)—A builder who builds spec homes. (Compare to 
custom builder)
spec home—(Speculative home)—A house built before the builder has found a buyer 
for the house.
specifi cations—A written description of the standard of quality required for project 
workmanship and components.
standard bricks—The Common Brick Manufacturers Association adopted a stan-
dard brick size with the nominal dimensions of 21/4" by 33/4" by 8".
superplasticizer—A concrete additive that reduces the amount of water needed for 
a concrete mix while at the same time producing a more fl uid concrete that fl ows 
more easily.
surety bond—A form of guarantee offered by a bonding company that states that the 
bonding company will accept liability in the event a contractor or subcontractor (the 
party bonded) defaults on their contractual obligations.
swell factor—The amount by which a volume of excavated material expands after it 
has been extracted from the ground in the excavation process.
T
taking off—The process of measuring construction work.
takeoff—A document that shows the measurements and quantities of construction 
work.
takeoff units and takeoff quantities—The units of measurement used in the takeoff 
process and the quantities obtained using these units.
telepost—Adjustable steel post used to support beams.
topsoil—The top layer of vegetable soil on a site.
truss reinforcing to masonry—This is a masonry wall reinforcing system that is laid 
in horizontal joints. It comprises two wires that run the length of the wall and a 
third wire that zigzags between the two straight wires so that the complete assembly 
resembles a truss.
U
unit price contract—A contract between an owner and a builder whereby the builder 
agrees to perform a defi ned scope of work on the basis of so-much-per-unit of work 
completed. For example, the builder may offer a price per cubic yard for trench ex-
cavation, a price per cubic yard for 3,000 psi concrete in footings, and so on. Subse-
quently, the builder is paid for the agreed quantity of each item completed multiplied 
by the unit price for that item.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

352 
APPENDIX A—GLOSSARY OF TERMS
V
value analysis—A systematic and creative method of obtaining the desired function 
from a component of a construction project for the least expenditure. In the process, 
the value of a component to the owner or the end user of a project is assessed, and 
an effort is then made to obtain the desired component at the best price.
value-based pricing—Setting the price of a new home by fi rst determining the market 
price for similar homes.
W
wall ties—See brick ties.
waterstops—A feature introduced into a concrete joint to prevent the fl ow of water 
through that joint.
weep holes—Gaps left in a course of a masonry wall (usually by omitting mortar 
from some of the joints in that course) to allow water to drain from the inside of 
the wall.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

353
A
P
P
E
N
D
I
X
B
THE METRIC SYSTEM 
AND CONVERSIONS
SI Units
These units belong to the International System of Units, which is abbreviated SI from 
the French Le Système International d’Unités. The SI is constructed from seven base 
units:
Base Units
Quantity 
Unit Name 
Symbol
length 
meter 
m
mass 
kilogram 
kg
time 
second 
s
electric current 
ampere 
A
amount of substance 
mole 
mol
luminous intensity 
candela 
cd
Units outside the SI that are acceptable for use with the SI
Unit Name 
Symbol 
Value in SI Units 
minute (time) 
min 
1 min 5 60 s
hour 
h 
1 h 5 60 min
day 
d 
1 d 5 24 h
liter 
L 
1 L 5 10–3 m3 (or 1 m3 5 103 L)
metric ton 
t 
1 t 5 103 kg
hectare 
ha 
1 ha 5 104 m2
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

354 
APPENDIX B—THE METRIC SYSTEM AND CONVERSIONS
Preﬁ xes
Multiplication Factor  
Prefi x Name 
Prefi x Symbol
 1 000 000 000 5 109 
giga 
G
 
1 000 000 5 106 
mega 
M
 
  1 000 5 103 
kilo 
k
 
     100 5 102 
hecto 
h
 
       10 5 101 
deka 
da
 
      0.1 5 10–1 
deci 
d
 
0.01 5 10–2 
centi 
c
 
  0.001 5 10–3 
milli 
m
 
0.000 001 5 10–6 
micro 
μ
 0.000 000 001 5 10–9 
nano 
n
Conversion Factors
Length
English Units → Metric Units 
Metric Units 
→ 
English Units
1 inch 
5 25.4 mm 
1 mm 
5 
0.039 inches
1 inch 
5 0.0254 m 
1 m 
5 
39.37 inches
1 foot 
5 0.305 m 
1 m 
5 
3.28 feet
1 yard 
5 0.914 m 
1 m 
5 
1.094 yards
1 mile 
5 1.609 km 
1 km 
5 
0.621 miles
Area
English Units → Metric Units 
Metric Units 
→ 
English Units
1 square foot 
5 0.093 m2 
1 m2 
5  10.764 square feet
1 square yard 5 0.836 m2 
1 m2 
5 
1.196 square yards
1 acre 
5 0.405 hectares 
1 ha 
5 
2.471 acres
1 square mile 
5 2.590 km2 
1 km2 
5 
0.386 square miles
Volume
English Units → Metric Units 
Metric Units 
→ 
English Units
1 cubic foot 
5 0.028 m3 
1 m3 
5 
35.315 cubic feet
1 cubic yard 
5 0.765 m3 
1 m3 
5 
1.308 cubic yards
1 quart (liquid) 5 0.946 Liters 
1 Liter 
= 
1.057 quarts
1 gallon  
5 3.785 Liters 
1 Liter 
5 
0.264 gallons
Mass
English Units → Metric Units 
Metric Units 
→ 
English Units
1 ounce 
5 28.350 grams 
1 gram 
5 
0.035 ounces
1 pound 
5 0.454 kg 
1 kg 
5 
2.205 pounds
1 ton (2000 lb) 5 907.185 kg 
1 kg 
5 
0.001 tons
1 ton (2000 lb) 5 0.907 metric tons 
1 t 
5 
1.102 tons
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

355
A
P
P
E
N
D
I
X
C
FORMULAE USED 
IN ESTIMATING
1.  Rectangle
2.  Parallelogram
3.  Trapezoid
4.  Triangle
Shape
Formulae
 
Perimeter = 2a + 2b
 
Area = a x b
a
b
 
Perimeter = 2a + 2b
 
Area = a x h
a
b
h
a
d
c
h
 
Perimeter = a + b + c + d
 
Area = ( a + b) x h
 
 
    2
h
c
 
Perimeter = a + b + c
 
Area = a x h
 
 ––––
 
 2
a
b
b
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

356 
APPENDIX C—FORMULAE USED IN ESTIMATING
5.  Quadrilateral
6.  Circle
7.  Pythagoras
a
c
d
b
 
Perimeter = a + b + c + d
 
Area = (divide into triangles)
r
 Circumference = 2 π r
 
Area = π r2
b
h
a
h2 = a2 + b2
Therefore, length h =     a
2 + b
2
 8. Pad Footing 
Volume 5 length 3 width 3 depth
 9. Column 
Volume 5 length 3 width 3 height
10. Perimeter Footing 
Volume 5 centerline length 3 width 3 depth
11. Trenches 
Volume 5 centerline length 3 average width 3 average depth
12. Volume of Basement 
Volume 5 average length 3 average width 3 average depth
13. Number of Trucks 
Number of Trucks Required 5 (
Unloading Time ) 1 1
 
 
 
                                   Loading Time
14. Unloading Time 
Unloading Time 5 Round-trip Travel Time 1 Time to Off-load the Truck
15. Loading Time 
Loading Time 5 Truck Capacity
 
 
                      Loader Output
16. Average Annual 
       Investment 
Average Annual Investment 5 Total Initial Cost 1 Salvage Value
 
 
 
 
                               2
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

357
A
P
P
E
N
D
I
X
D
SAMPLE 
HOUSE DRAWINGS
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

358 
APPENDIX D—SAMPLE HOUSE DRAWINGS
PROPERTY LINE
28I-10II
DECK
13I-1II
15I-9
II
97I-6
II
2I-0II
TOP OF SUB FLOOR 100I-0II
97
I-5
II
97
I-7
II
4
I-6II
14
I-8II
6
I-7II
6
I-0II
40
I-0
II
12
I-7II
17
I-5
II
97I-7
II
32I-0II
97
I-4
II
N
LOCATION OF U/G UTILITIES
26
I-0II
LOCATE AND SIZE 
CONC. STEPS
AS PER CONTRACTOR
97
I
120I-0II
PROPERTY LINE
15I-2II
PROPERTY LINE
70I-0
II
97
I-10
II
96I-10II
103I-7II
16496
PROPERTY
LINE
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
APPENDIX D—SAMPLE HOUSE DRAWINGS 
359
B
28'-10"
15'-9"
17'-6"
6'-11"
4'-5"
DECKING AS 
PER CONTRACTOR
6'-7"
3'-0"
3'-7"
WP
WP
DISHWASHER
RANGE
2'-0"
S S S
KITCHEN
FRIDGE
2'-4"
14'-18"
25'-9"
7'-3"
2'-0"
2'-0"
3'-4"
6'-5"
6'-8"
2'-0"
8'-3"
FUTURE FIREPLACE
2
s
r
DINING ROOM
8'-3"
12'-1"
3'-6"
3'-4"
B
4
A
F
TV
ICT
T
DEN
9'-5"
5'-3"
10'-1"
C
G
G
1
A-3
10'-1"
40'-0"
PRECAST CONC. STEP
& PRECAST CONC.
STEP BRACKETS (BELOW).
(AS PER MANUFACTURE SPECS.)
(SIZE & INSTALL AS PER
CONTRACTOR)
6X6 WOOD COLUMNS
SECURED TO PRECAST
CONCRETE STEP (TYP.)
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
WP
ENTRANCE
CLOSET
CLOSET
3 RISERS UP
11 RISERS DOWN
S S S
S
3
3
1
9
8
F
WOOD BANISTER
C/W CONTINUOUS
WOOD RAILINGS
SPACED 100
APART (TYPICAL)
LIVING ROOM
2X6 PLUMBING WALL
C/W VENT STACK.
C/W SOUND BATT INSULATE
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
10'-0"
13'-8"
1
A-3
4'-6"
2'-4"
1'-18"
C
9'-4"
5'-3"
C
A
B
B
4
BEDROOM
BEDROOM
4
8
10'-2"
S
S S
S S
S
3
3
S
CLOSET
CLOSET
8'-9"
ATTIC
HATCH
LINEN
3
7
C
BATHROOM
1'-9"
2'-11"
3'-4"
2'-2"
5'-5"
3'-0"
4'-9"
E
D
20'-10"
8'-10"
5'-5"
BATH
3
B
7'-7"
r
3'-3"
M.C.
F
R
R
S
M.C.
TV
F
13'-10"
10'-4"
MASTER BEDROOM
8
4
3'-4"
6'-8"
2'-5"
2'-5"
28'-10"
C
T
S
S S S
T
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

360 
APPENDIX D—SAMPLE HOUSE DRAWINGS
15'-9"
14'-5" (TO C/L OF PILSTER)
1'-4"
1'-4"
5'-7"
(TO C/L OF PILSTER)
3 PLY 2X8 #2 FIR
LARCH BEAM
2X8 #2 FIR/LARCH
JOISTS @ 16" O.C.
10' @ CONC. PILES
TO BELOW 
FROST LEVEL
6'-7"
6'-7"
E
HOSE BIB
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
12'-1"
4'-2"
1'-9"
4'-4"
D
PC
2X10 TJI FLOOR JOISTS (AS PER ENG. SPECS.)
JOISTS @ 16" O.C. (TYPICAL)
2X10 TJI FLOOR JOISTS (AS PER ENG. SPECS.)
JOISTS @ 16" O.C. (TYPICAL)
14'-8"
6'-3"
F
2 PLY 2X10 #2 FIR
DOUBLE JOISTS
(TYPICAL)
PC
6X10 
PARALAM BEAM 
(AS PER ENG. 
SPECS.)
32" X 32" C 8"
CONC. FOOTING
(TYPICAL)
ADJ. STEEL 
POST
(TYPICAL)
11 RISERS UP
3 RISERS UP
1
A-3
1
A-3
4'-6"
20'-2"
6
EXHAUST & FRESH AIR INTAKE (FURNACE)
DRYER EXHAUST
HOSE BIB (AS PER CONTRACTOR)
F
40'-0"
13'-7"
E
FUTURE
DRYER
FUTURE
WASHER
T.D.
S
H.W.
F.D.
S
PC
FURNACE
4X4 WOOD POST (TYP.)
ON CONC. FOOTING PADS
(24X24X8)
(TYPICAL)
9'-1"
8'-10"
40'-0"
10'-0"
7'-3"
F
F
14'-4"
7'-3"
14'-1" (TO C/L OF BEAM)
14'-9" (TO C/L OF BEAM)
28'-10"
S S
S
20'-10"
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
APPENDIX D—SAMPLE HOUSE DRAWINGS 
361
A
E
G
A
B
F
D
GRADE
12
4
32"X32"X8"
CONC. FOOTING
(TYPICAL)
4" DRAIN TILE
C/W DRAIN ROCK TO
INSTALL AROUND ENTIRE
FOUNDATION PARAMETER
TOP OF FOOTING
PRECAST CONC. STEP
& PRECAST CONC. STEP BRACKETS
(AS PER MANUFACTURE SPECS.)
GRADE
TOP OF FOUNDATION WALL
TOP OF SUB FLOOR
TOP OF WALL
TOP OF ROOF
GALV. IRON CANOPY COVER
ON 1/2" SHEATHING
ON 2 PLY 2X10 CANTILEVER
CANOPY BEAMS & FRAMING
C/W SOFFIT (FINISHED
AS PER CONTRACTOR)
ON 6X6 COLUMN
SECURED TO CONC. 
STEP BELOW.
7'-13/4"
1'-93/4"
8'-1"
5'-53/4"
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

362 
APPENDIX D—SAMPLE HOUSE DRAWINGS
1
G
G
C
C
C
B
2
2'-0"
DECKING AS PER CONTRACTOR
(AS PER A.B.C.)
(TYPICAL)
PILES TO
BELOW 
FROST
LEVELS
(TYPICAL)
ASPHALT SHINGLES
PROVIDE FLASHING AS REQUIRED
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
VERTICAL VINYL SIDING
8'X6" WOOD COLUMNS
FINISH TO MATCH
WINDOW TRIM
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
CONC. LANDING
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
PROVIDE SHUTTERS (TYPICAL AS SHOWN)
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
VINYL SIDING
PARGING
GRADE
ALUMINUM SIDING
SOFFITS & FASCIA
GRADE
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
APPENDIX D—SAMPLE HOUSE DRAWINGS 
363
F
F
D
F
F
F
PROVIDE FLASHING AS REQUIRED
(AS PER CONTRACTOR)
ASPHALT SHINGLES
(TYPICAL)
2'-0"
DECKING AS PER CONTRACTOR
(AS PER A.B.C.)
ALUMINUM SIDING
SOFFITS & FASCIA
GRADE
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

364 
APPENDIX D—SAMPLE HOUSE DRAWINGS
WINDOW SCHEDULE
 
UNIT: 
UNIT SIZING: 
R.O. (LXH):
 
 
NOT IN CONTRACT
 
 
36"X50" (F) 
42"X72"
 
 
36"X15" (A)
 
 
27"X30" (A-F) 
64"X37"
 
 
36"X30" (A-F) 
83"X37"
 
 
27"X22" (A) 
33"X29"
 
 
36"X24" (A) 
37"X13"
 
 
12"X6'4" (SEALED) LIGHTS 
67"X84"
 
UNIT: 
DOOR SCHEDULE 
LOCATION:
 
 
3'X6'8"X1" (C/W SIDE LIGHTS) 
F-ENTRANCE
 
 
5'X6'8" PATIO DOOR 
NOOK
 
 
2'4"X6'8"X1" 
ENSUITE & BATH
 
 
2'6"X6'8"X1" 
BEDROOMS
 
 
NOT IN CONTRACT
 
 
2'10"X6'8"X1" 
BASEMENT
 
 
2'0"X6'8" 
BI-FOLD
 
 
4'0"X6'8" 
BI-FOLD
 
 
3'0"X6'8" 
BI-FOLD
WHOLE DOOR FRAME
A
B
C X3
D
E
F X4
G X2 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
SINGLE POLE SWITCH
3-WAY POLE SWITCH
FURNACE SWITCH
DUPLEX CONVENIENCE OUTLET
ELECTRIC RANGE
ELECTRIC CLOTHES DRYER
RAZOR OUTLET
WEATHERPROOF OUTLET
CEILING LIGHT
PULL CHAIN LIGHT
WALL LIGHT
CEILING FAN
BATHROOM EXHAUST FAN
THERMOSTAT
SMOKE ALARM
INTERNET CABLE
TELEVISION OUTLET
TELEPHONE JACK
ELEC. LEGEND
T
SF
S 3
S
R
D
R
WP
PC
F
F
T
S
ICT
TV
EXTERIOR WALL CONST. (NEW & EXISTING)
(SIDING BY CONTRACTOR)
(BUILDING PAPER/SHEATHING MEMBRANE)
1/2" O.S.B. SHEATHING
2X6 WALL STUDS @ 16" O.C.
R20 BATT. INSUL. OR BETTER
6 MIL. POLY. VAP. BARR.
1/2" DRYWALL
ROOF CONSTRUCTION
ASPHALT SHINGLES ON
1/2" O.S.B. SHEATHING c/w "H" CLIPS
ENG. APPROVED FINK TRUSSES @ 16" O.C.
R12 BATT INSUL. OR BETTER
6MIL. POLY. VAP. BARR.
1/2" DRYWALL CEILING
PROVIDE INSULATION STOPS AT WALL (TYP.)
FLOOR CONSTRUCTION
FLOOR FINISH (AS PER CONTRACTOR)
UNDERLAY (WHERE REQUIRED AS PER CONTRACTOR)
3/4" T&G SUB FLOOR (GLUED & SECURED TO JOISTS)
2X10 TJI FLOOR JOISTS @ 16" O.C.
(OR AS PER ENG. SPECS.)
NOTE: INSTALL R12 INSULATION BATT.
 
@ TOP OF FOUNDATION WALLS
 
ALONG INSIDE FACE OF RIM JOISTS
 
C/W 6MIL. VAPOUR BARRIER
ALL STRAPPING & CROSS BRIDGING
(AS PER ENG. SPECS.)
W/ 1/2" GYPSUM BOARD (BASEMENT CEILING)
INTERIOR WALL CONST.
2X4 STUDS @ 16" o.c.
1/2" DRYWALL BOTH SIDES
INTERIOR BATHROOM WALL CONST.
2X4 STUDS @ 16" o.c.
1/2" WATERPROOF DRYWALL
(ALL AROUND TUB AREA
INCLUDING ANY MARKED
EXTERIOR WALLS)
BASEMENT FLOOR SLAB
(AS PER CONTRACTOR, APPROVED BY ENG.)
4" MIN. CONC. SLAB
C/W 6MIL. POLY VAP. BAR.
ON 8" MIN. COMPACTED GRAVEL FILL
(REBAR OR WIRE MESH AS REQUIRED)
FOUNDATION WALL CONST.
2X6 SILL PLATE (SECURED BY
LAG BOLTS INTO CONC. WALL,
C/W GASKETS TO MATCH) ON
8" WIDE CONCRETE WALL STRUCTURE:
C/W DAMPROOFING FROM ABOVE GRADE
ON OUTSIDE OF WALL
& PARGING ABOVE GRADE TO UNDER WALL SIDING
2-10MM REBAR TOP & BOTTOM
ON 16"X8" FOOTING (C/W KEYWAY)
W/ #4 REBAR TOP & BOTTOM
W/ WEEPING (DRAIN) TILE & ROCK
TO SURROUND EXTERIOR FACE OF FOOTINGS
(ENTIRE PERIMETER OF STRUCTURE)
.10MIL POLY MOISTURE BARRIER
 
(OUTSIDE FACE) TO ABOVE GRADE
C/W INTERIOR FURRING WALL CONSTRUCTION:
 
2X4 WALL STUDS @ 16" O.C.
 
(INCLUDING TOP & BOTTOM PLATES)
 
W/ R12 INSULATION
E
D
C
B
A
F
G
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

365
A
P
P
E
N
D
I
X
E
SAMPLE DRAWINGS FOR 
A 4-UNIT APARTMENT 
BUILDING
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

366 
APPENDIX E—SAMPLE DRAWINGS FOR A 4-UNIT APARTMENT BUILDING
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
APPENDIX E—SAMPLE DRAWINGS FOR A 4-UNIT APARTMENT BUILDING 
367
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

368 
APPENDIX E—SAMPLE DRAWINGS FOR A 4-UNIT APARTMENT BUILDING
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
APPENDIX E—SAMPLE DRAWINGS FOR A 4-UNIT APARTMENT BUILDING 
369
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

370 
APPENDIX E—SAMPLE DRAWINGS FOR A 4-UNIT APARTMENT BUILDING
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

371
INDEX
A
Access road, 163
Accuracy of measurement, 37
Add-ons:
allocating, 238
insurance, 168
labor, 167–168
markup and fee, 168
permits, 168
summary, 167–168
taxes, 167
Air barriers, 95
Air handling units, 145
Allowances, 245–246
Alternative brick exterior fi nish, 127
Alternative concrete block 
foundation, 125
Alternative prices, 245
example of, 245
subtrades, 245
template for, 245
Amortization, 207
Analyzing subtrade bids, 230–231
Annual depreciation, 207
Apartment, 10
Appliances, 147, 148
Architect:
as prime consultant, 12
role of, 1, 12
Architectural consultants, 3
Area formulas, 28, 30
Arithmetic and principles of measurement:
practice problems, 44
resources, 44
summary, 43
Assembly estimate, 10–11
Assembly, 37, 298
example of, 38
use of, 38–39
Average annual investment, 209
B
B4UBUILD.COM, 19
Backfi ll, volume of
around buildings, 73
material required, 49
Backfl ow preventers, 144
Backhoe, 49
Backings to facings, 123
Bank measure amounts, 48
Bank measure swell factor, 48
Bar-chart schedule, 156
Barge rafters, 106, 118
Basements, calculating volume, 284
backfi ll, 49, 52
excavation, 49, 52
formula for, 49, 52, 53
Basement excavation, example of, 53
Bathroom accessories, measuring notes, 96
Beams, 79, 94
build-up, 94
fl oor, 97
forms, 81
parallel, 97, 117
solid, 94
Bid alternates spreadsheet, 246
Bid analysis, 231
spreadsheet, 231
Bid bonds, 229, 242, 247
Bid breakdown, 254–255
of cost, 254
evaluating monthly progress payments, 254
preparation of, 255
Bid clarifi cations, 251
Bid closing, 251–252
after the bid, 255–256
advance tasks, 238, 242
bid runner, 242, 252
makeup of team, 251
offi ce equipment at, 252
review, 255, 256, 257
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

372 
INDEX
Brick Institute of America (BIA), 121
Brick masonry, 121, 124
volume, example of calculations, 123
Brickwork takeoff, 126, 128
Bridging, 93
British thermal units (BTUs), 162
Budget document, 8
form for, 9
Budget estimate, 2, 264
Builder Central, 19
Building-by-building basis, 268
Building cost estimates, 2
practice problems, 20
resources, 19
summary, 18–19
Building elevations, 15, 19
Building estimate, 1
Building Estimators Reference Book, The, 121
C
Cabinets, 96
Calculating area, 28–30
Calculating average annual investment, 209
Calculating bid prices, estimates for, 8
Calculating cost of temporary heating, 162
Calculating depreciation of rubber-tired vehicle, 208
Calculating equipment rental rates, 207
Calculating fuel consumption, 210
Calculating general expenses, 171
Calculating gravel supply price, 186–187
example of, 186–187
Calculating labor costs for operating 
equipment, 210–211
Calculating length, 23
example of, 23
Calculating number of items, 22–23, 298
examples of, 23
samples of, 23
Calculating perimeter, 24
centerline, 25, 27–28
circular wall, 28
examples of, 24
interior and exterior corners, 26
Calculating project fee, 250–251
Calculating trucking requirements, 186
Calculating value of risk component, 250
Calculating volume, 30, 33–34, 49
examples of, 49, 50
formulas for, 30, 33–34
Calculations:
area, 28–30
centerline, 27–28
cost per square foot, 257
cut and fi ll, 56
Bid closing (continued)
results, 255
software, 255
spreadsheet, 255
staffi ng, 251–252
stress, 251
telephone bid form, 252
Bid closing time, 251
Bid comparisons, 231
exclusions, 231
inclusions, 231
multiple trade bids, 231
Bid conditions, 247
examples of, 247
risk assessment, 247, 250–251
Bid documents:
compiling, 255
returning, 256
safe storage of, 256
Bid form, 242–244
basic information, 242
possible attachments to, 242
sample of, 243
Bid markup, 249–251
company overheads, 249
profi t margin, 249–250
risk, 250–251
Bid pricing strategies, example of, 182
Bid results, tabulation of, 256
Bid runner, 242, 252
Bid security, 246–247
bid bond, 229, 247
surety bond, 229
Bid shopping, 254
Bid summary, 238
document review, 238
form, 241
submission, 238
Bidding software, 260
Bills of material, 12, 182, 184
estimate, 12
example of, 199
categories, 12
comments on, 199
packages, 12
Blocking, 95
Board measure, 92
calculating, 92
dimension, 190
dressed lumber, 92, 190
form, 183
nominal size, 92, 190
preparing, 182, 184
Borehole procedures, 15
Bracing, 48
Brick-on-edge course, 121
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
INDEX 
373
Condiminiums, 2, 3
Congestion at bid closing, 225
Consent of surety, 247
Construction joints, 83
Construction management contract, 264
Construction systems, 298, 330
Contacting subtrades, 227
notifi cation, 227
receiving bids, 227
Contingency sum, 4, 245–246
Contracts:
types of, 2, 264–265
Control joints, 123
Conversion factors, brick/block, 121–123
calculations, 123
Conversion, feet-inches to decimal, 30
Conversion, takeoff units to order units, 182
Copings and facades, 94
Cost-based pricing, 7
Cost breakdown, 254
Cost control estimate, 2, 8
budgets, 8
feedback, 8
Cost forecasting, 10
Cost of high accuracy, 37
Cost plus contracts, 4–5, 175
fi xed fee contract, 2
percentage contract, 2
variable fee contract, 2, 5
Countertops, 96
Cross-sections, 15, 19
basement excavation, 70
Cubic yards, 30
Cupboards, 96
Curbs, 79
Curing slabs, 83
Custom homes, 3
Custom home builders, 3
fi nding, 3
Cut and fi ll calculations, 56
by grid method, 56
Cutbacks, 48
D
Damp proofi ng, 130
Deck construction, 97, 99
Depreciation, 206–207
calculating, 207
Depreciation schedule, 207, 208
Designer:
role of, 12–13
Description, 40
Detailed estimate, 2, 11–12
procedures for, 11
length, 23
length of baseboard, 108
length of exterior stud wall, 100
length of barge rafter, 118
number of items, 22
number of masonry units, 120
number of trusses, 106
perimeter, 24–28
volume, 30, 33–34, 49, 123
Canopy over entrance, 99
Carpentry. See Finish carpentry, Rough carpentry
Catalog of standard items, 34–35
Ceiling blocking, 106
Centerline of a circular wall, 27–28
calculating, 27–28
Circle, formulas, 32, 356
Circular columns, calculating volume, 30
Cleanup:
city pavements, 163
fi nal site, 165, 170
garbage containers/chutes, 165
move-in, 165
Columns, 78
Combination contract, 265
Common Brick Manufacturers Association, 121
Communication systems, 146
Compaction factor, 48, 185
examples of, 48, 185
Company overheads, 249
example of, 249
Competitive bid, 3
Computer estimating, 40–41, 167
Computer estimating programs, 38, 238
Computer estimating system, 36, 174
Computerized bid closing, 255
Computer software systems:
bidding, 260
digitizer, 54–56, 348
Computer spreadsheet template, 156
sample of bid analysis, 231
sample of bid results, 256
sample of subtrade list, 226
Concrete block masonry, 124, 139
lintel, 124, 130
standard, 124
takeoff, 124–126
Concrete in continuous footing, calculating 
volume, 30
Concrete material quote, 189
Concrete, measuring notes, 78–79, 82–83
sample of, 79
Concrete wall forms, 81
Concrete work takeoff, 83–86
measuring, 83, 86
Condominiums, 2–3
Conditional subtrade bids, 225
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

374 
INDEX
Estimate summary sheet, 167, 176
Estimates for remodeling work:
practice problems, 287, 289
resources, 277–278
summary, 186
Estimating equipment ownership cost, 216
Estimating plumbing, heating, ventilating, 
and air conditioning (HVAC), and 
electrical work:
practice problems, 151
resources, 150
summary, 150
Estimating process at closing, 243
Estimating shortcuts, 147–149
electrical work, 149
HVAC work, 148–149
plumbing, 148
Estimating stationery, 39
forms, 40–42
Estimating unit prices, 265
Estimator’s checklist, 243
Evaluating monthly progress payments, 254
Evaluating subcontractors:
assessment of risk, 228
fi nancial capability, 228–229
meeting schedule, 228
quality, 228
reputation, 228
Existing layout of a kitchen, 276
Expansion joints, 83, 123
Exterior fi nishes:
measuring, 130–131, 134
takeoff, 132–133
F
Fascias, 94
Facings, 123
Factory lumber, 190
Falsework, 36
Feasibility estimate, 2, 6
elements of, 6
Fee, 238, 247
Feet-inches to decimal conversions, 30
Financing charges, 166
Financing expenses, 209
Finish carpentry, measuring, 95
measuring notes, 95–96
Finishes, measuring notes, 82–83
Finish hardware, measuring notes, 97
Fire alarm systems, 146
Fire protection, 123, 166
Firm price, 188
Firm-price lump sum contract, 2–3, 264
First aid, 157–158
Determining feasibility, 5–7
Dewatering excavations, 164
Digitizers, 54–56
cut and fi ll calculations, 56
sonic, 54
tablet, 54
Dimensions, 35
Door schedule, 96
Doors and frames, measuring notes, 96
Double joists, 97
Down spouts, 131
Drawings, working, 15
Dressed lumber, 190
Ductwork, 145
Duplex home, 3, 144
E
Eaves, 107, 134
Electrical equipment, 146–147
Electrical work, 146–147
Electronic tape measure, 268
Elevations, 15
Employer’s liability insurance, 167
Energy effi cient construction details, 86, 87
Engineered joists, 97, 99, 191
Engineering News Record, 220
English units, corresponding to metric 
units, 43
Environmental concerns, 16
Equipment investments, 206
Equipment operator costs, 210–211
example of, 211
pricing, 210–211
Equipment rentals:
advantages and disadvantages, 206
considerations, 177
equipment kept at site, 164
hand tools, 163
major items, 163
rates, 177
Errors in subtrade quotes, 224
Estimate, 2
budget, 264
methods of, 8, 10–12
rough, 264
types of, 2
uses of, 5–8
Estimate maintenance, 303
Estimate maintenance window, 304, 321, 327, 330, 
331, 333, 337, 344
Estimate summaries and bids:
practice problems, 260, 262
resources, 260
summary, 259–260
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
INDEX 
375
Tabulation of Bid Results, 256
Telephone Bid Form, 253
Temporary Enclosure Estimate, 161
Wall System Takeoff, 101, 102, 103
Formwork, measuring, 80
measuring notes, 80
samples of, 81–82
Foundation system, 15
Framing work, 93
Fringe benefi ts, 157, 168
Front-end-loader, 52
Fuel costs, 210
consumption, example of, 210
Furnaces, 145, 148
Furring, 95, 123, 135
G
Gable:
end to roof, 106
section through, 107
General expenses:
add-ons, 155, 166–167
  cleanup, 165
at bid closing, 225
comments on, 168, 170
dewatering excavations, 164
direct costs, 153
equipment rentals, 163–164
identifying, 155
miscellaneous, 165–166
pricing, 168, 170, 276
project supervision, 157
safety and fi rst aid, 157–158
sanitary facilities, 158
security, 163
site access, 162–163
site services, 159
site storage, 158, 162–163
temporary heating, 161–162
temporary offi ces, 158
temporary structures, 160–161
utilities, 159
General expenses pricing:
example of, 168, 170
form, 169
at pre-bid review, 247–249
General expenses sheet, 153, 155
General rules of measurement, 35
components of, 35–37
Geometrical shapes, calculating perimeters and 
areas, 29
Glossary of terms, 347–352
Grade beams, 78
Grid areas, 56
First aid expenses:
on site supplies, 157
labor engaged in administering 
help, 157
Fixtures:
plumbing, 144–145
Flashing, 131
Floor beam, 95
Flooring, 134
Floor joists, 97
Floor system takeoff, 97, 99
forms, 98
Floor toppings, 79
Footings, 78
forms, 79
Forms:
Alternative Masonry Foundation Takeoff, 126
Bid Alternates Spreadsheet, 246
Bid Summary, 241
Bill of Materials, 183
Bill of Materials for House Example, 200, 201
Combined Takeoff and Pricing Sheets, 42
Concrete Work Takeoff, 84, 85
Equipment Ownership Template, 216
Estimator’s Checklist, 243
Excavation and Backfi ll Takeoff, 68
Example of Budget Format, 9 
Exterior Finishes Takeoff, 131, 132
Finish Carpentry Takeoff, 109, 111, 112
Floor System Takeoff, 98
Front-End Loader Cost Calculation, 218
General Expenses Sheet, 154
Generator Ownership Cost Calculation, 217
House Example Summary, 258
Interior Finishes Takeoff, 137, 138
Priced General Expense Sheet, 169
Pricing Sheet Stationery, 41
Quantity Sheet Stationery, 40
Recap and Pricing Example, 195, 196, 
197, 198
Remodeling Example Bid Summary, 285
Remodeling Example General Expenses, 284
Remodeling Example Recap, 282
Remodeling Takeoff, 279–280
Renovation Work Productivities, 272–275
Roof System Takeoff, 104, 105
Sales Price Breakdown for Purchaser, 240
Sales Price Estimate Summary, 239
Sample Bid Form, 244
Sample Project Schedule, 156
Service Trench Takeoff, 69
Site Visit Checklist, 17
Stationery for Combined Takeoff and 
Pricing, 270
Subtrade Checklist, 226
Subtrade’s Pre-Bid Proposal, 230
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

376 
INDEX
review questions, 344
setting up the, 297
takeoff using, 298
Interest expense, 209
Interior fi nishes, measuring, 130, 
134–136
Interior main fl oor, 100
Intersection points, 57
J
Job Information Window, 297–298, 
300, 301
Joists, 94
double, 97
engineered, 97, 117
fl oor, 97
header, 97
Junction boxes, 146
L
Labor add-ons:
consumables, 167
small tools, 167
payroll additive, 167
Ladder reinforcement, 120, 124
Landings, 79, 97
Laser tape measure, 287
Liability insurance. See Employer’s liability 
insurance
Lintels, 93
Lookouts, 93, 106
Loose insulation, 120
Lubrication costs, 210
Lumber, categories:
boards, 190
dimension, 93, 190
dressing, 93, 190
grade, 93, 94, 190
species, 93
timber, 190
Lumber, dressed and nominal, 93, 190
Lumber lengths, 190–191
Lumber, soft wood grades, 94, 190
Lumber quote, 192–193
Lump sum contract, 4, 264
M
Maintenance and repairs, 208–209
for larger company, 208
for smaller company, 208
Grid method of calculation:
cut and fi ll quantities, 56
example of, 57, 58
volume of cut, 56
Grid stations, 57
Gross fl oor area, 10
Gussets, 93
Gutters, 131, 134
Gypsum wallboard, 135
H
Header joists, 97
Headings, 36
Health department rules, 158
Heat exchangers/pumps, 146
Historical trends, 176
History of site, 16
Hoardings, 160
Homebuilder work:
cutting back excavation 
embankments, 157
shoring sides of trenches, 157
Homebuilder’s risk, 175–176
inaccurate takeoffs, 175–176
Home purchase contract, 2
House drawings, sample, 357–364
HVAC controls, 146
HVAC work, 145–146
I
Initial cost, 206–207
Instructions to bidders, 242, 245, 251
Instructions to builders, 48
Insulated concrete foundations, 80
Insulation:
building, 130
deck, 130
duct, 134
exterior, 130
loose, 120
rigid, 120
roof, 130
Insurance, 168, 209
Interactive cost estimating (ICE) software, 291
adding prices, 330–332
estimating example, 298, 300–304, 307, 309, 
312–313, 321, 327, 330
estimating process, 297
Job Information Window, 297–298
pricing general expenses, 333, 
335–337, 344
recommended resources, 344
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
INDEX 
377
miscellaneous concrete, 82–83
plumbing work, 144–145
rough carpentry, 93–95
windows, 96
Measuring rough carpentry, 92–95
Measuring sitework, 48–60
Mensuration, 22
Methods of Estimating:
detailed, 11–12
materials, 12
price per unit, 10
price per unit area, 10–11
Method of Measurement, 35
Metric system and conversions, 353–354
conversion factors, 354
SI, 353–354
Miscellaneous items, 297, 298, 301, 302, 312, 313, 
320, 321, 327, 329, 330, 333
Mortar factor, 123
Mortar, volume, example of calculations, 123
Multiple trade bids, 231
Multi-unit residential contractor, 3–4
Multi-unit residential projects:
builders, 4
estimating, 8
types of, 3
Municipal charges, 159, 163, 166
N
Naming subcontractors, 254
National Association of Home Builders, 8, 14, 19
National Association of the Remodeling Industry, 
The, 287
Net in place, 78, 120
New Estimate Window, 299
create, 299
New home warranty, 166
New layout of a kitchen, 278
Non-computer estimating, 173
Notations, 36
O
Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA) Construction Safety and Health 
Regulations, 48–49
Off-the-shelf designs, 3
On-site storage, 184
On-site takeoff, 268–269
exterior work, 268
interior work, 269
OSHA safety regulations, 158
Order quantities, 199
Maintenance costs:
calculating, 208–209
depreciation, straight-line method examples, 
208, 209
good records, 208
Managing subcontract pricing procedures, 225
Managing the work, 266–267
measuring demolition work, 266–267
Manholes, 72
Marketing tools, 3
show home, 3
Markup, 168, 211, 248, 249, 297, 333, 335, 344
Mark fi eld, 313
Masonry scope of work, example of, 232
items excluded, 233
items included, 232–233
Masonry wall details, 128
Material estimates, 12
Means Cost Data, 271
Means Plumbing Cost Data, 150
Measuring demolition work, 266–267
Measurement rules. See Rules of measurement
Measuring carpentry work:
practice problems, 118
resources, 117
summary, 117
Measuring categories, 78, 79, 80
Measuring concrete work:
practice problems, 88–90
resources, 87–88
summary, 87
Measuring excavation, 48–60
Measuring excavation and sitework:
practice problems, 73–75
resources, 72
summary, 71–72
Measuring exterior and interior fi nishes, 130–138
Measuring fi nish carpentry, 95
Measuring masonry and fi nishes:
practice problems, 141–142
resources, 140
summary, 139–140
Measuring masonry work, 120–130
Measuring notes:
bathroom accessories, 96
concrete, 78–79
doors and frames, 96
electrical work, 146–147
exterior fi nishes, 130–134
fi nish carpentry, 95–96
fi nishes, 82–83
fi nish hardware, 97
formwork, 80–82
HVAC work, 145–146
interior fi nishes, 134–138
masonry, 123–124
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

378 
INDEX
Price fl exibility, 245
Price per unit estimate, 8, 10
Price per unit area estimate, 10–11
Pricing backfi ll and gravel materials, 185–187
calculating trucking requirements, 186
gravel supply calculation, example of, 186–187
swell and compaction factors, 185
Pricing builder-owned equipment, 205
calculating, 205
Pricing carpentry materials, 190–192
lumber grades, 191
lumber lengths and waste factors, 190–191
lumber quote, 192
pricing rough hardware, 191, 192
structural lumber, full specifi cations, 191
Pricing concrete materials, 188–190
examples of, 188–190
material quote, 189
waste factors, 188
Pricing a construction estimate, categories of, 
174–175
Pricing equipment, 205–218
practice problems, 220–221
resources, 220
summary, 219
Pricing for house example, 194–198
Pricing general expenses, 11, 153–170, 276
practice problems, 172
resources, 171
summary, 171
Pricing HVAC work, 148
Pricing labor and equipment, 176–182, 269–271
equipment rental rates, 176–177
job factors, 178, 269–270
labor and management factors, 178–179
productivity of labor and equipment, 
177–179, 271
project cost information from cost reports, 
181–182
wage rates, 176
use of cost records, 179–180
Pricing materials, 184, 271
considerations for estimate, 184
Pricing procedures, subcontract, 225
Pricing the recap, 11
Pricing remodeling work, 269–271
form, 270
job factors, 269, 270
labor and equipment factors, 270–271
labor and equipment productivities, 271
recap, 269
Pricing subcontractor’s work, 11, 192–194
Pricing the work:
practice problems, 204
resources, 203
summary, 202–203
Order units, 182
Overall budget, 7
Overhangs, 93
Overhead costs, 211
calculating, 211–215
example of, 249
Overhead rate, 209
Overlap and gaps in subcontract work, 224–225
Owning equipment, 206
estimating cost, 206
P
Pad footings, 30, 307
Paint, 135–136
Paneling, 96
Parallam beams, 97, 117
Parallelogram, formulas, 29, 355
Parging, 134
Partitions, 123
Payroll additive, 167–168, 283
Payroll tax, 167
Pedestals, 78
Perimeter calculations, 24–28, 31–32
Perimeter formulas, 29
Perimeter walls, calculating volume, 30
Perimeter trench, calculating volume, 30, 
33–34, 356
Permits, 168
Photographs of site, 16, 165–166
Pile caps, 78
Plan service organizations, 3, 12
Plan views, 15
Plaster:
gypsum, 135
Portland cement, 135
Plates, 93
Plot plan, 15, 60, 165
elements of, 60
Plumbing work, 144–145
Portable space heaters, 161
fuel consumed, 161
rental rate, 161
Post-bid review, 257
Pre-bid review, 247–249
meeting, 248
parties in attendance, 248
objectives of, 247–248
topics, 248
Pre-bid subtrade proposals, 229–230
example of, 230
Pre-hung, 96
Preliminary estimate, 2
Preparing bill of materials, 182–184
Price book, 271
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
INDEX 
379
Recap quantities, 11
Rectangle, formulas, 29, 355
Refrigerant condensing units, 146
Refrigeration compressors, 146
Reinforcing steel, 83
Remodeling estimate, 265–266
example of, 272, 277, 278
steps in preparing, 265
Remodeling general expenses, 283
comments on, 283
example of, 283, 284
Remodeling Online, 287
Remodeling recap, 281, 282
comments on, 281–283
Remodeling summary, 283
comments on, 283, 
example of, 285
Remodeling takeoff, 267–269
comments on, 267
example of, 279–280
Remodeling work, contracts for:
combination, 265
construction management, 264
cost plus, 264
lump sum, 264
unit price, 265
Renovation work productivities, example of, 272–275
Rental, equipment, 163–164
advantages and disadvantages, 206
Residential construction industry, 2
contracts used in, 4
Residential Knowledge Base, 291
Residential market, 2
types of structures, 2
Restoration of city pavement, 163
Retaining walls, 78
Ridges, 93
blocking, 106
Rigid insulation, 120
Risks:
assessment, 247, 250
in bid work, 250
equipment rates, 176, 177
inaccuracy in measurement of takeoff, 175–176
nature of contract, 175
productivity, 175
subcontractor failure, 175
supplier failure, 175
wage rates, 176
Roofi ng, 131
specialties, 131
Roof systems, components of, 131
Roof system takeoff, 106–107
forms, 104, 105
Room-by-room basis, 267
Room takeoff checklist, 268
Primary quantity, 300
Prime consultant, 12
Principles of measurement, 22
Problems with subcontracting
conditional bids (quotes), 225
congestion at bid closings, 225
errors in quotes, 224
overland and gaps in work, 224–225
unreliability, 224
Production builders, 3
Production homes, 2
Productivity of Labor and Equipment, 177–179
job factors, 178
labor and management factors, 178–179
Profi t margin, 249–250
Project budget form, 9
Project cost information from cost reports, 181–182
example of, 181
Project feasibility, 6–7
assessment of benefi ts, 6
cost profi le, 6
Project information, 297, 300, 321, 327, 333
Project schedule, 155–156
bar-chart schedule, 156
sample, 156
Project signs, 166
Project specifi cations package, 242
Property damage insurance, 168
Public liability insurance, 168
Purchasing equipment, 206
Purlins, 93
Pythagorean formula, 29, 30, 356
Q
Quadrilateral, formulas, 29, 356
Qualifi ed bids, 251
Quantity takeoff, 11, 34–37
at bid closing, 242
preparing, 77
recap, 39
R
R-value, 130
Rafters, 93, 94
barge, 106
hip and valley, 93
Recap, 173–174
at bid closing, 242
comments on, 194
examples of, 195–198
Recap and pricing for house example, 194–198
comments on, 194
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

380 
INDEX
Site services, 158–159
Site storage, 158, 162
Site visit checklist, 17
Site visits, 1
characteristics of, 16
Sitework takeoff, examples of, 60, 70
samples of, 68, 69
Slabs:
fi nishes, 82
forms, 81
Slabs-on-grade, 79
Snow removal, 165
Social security tax, 167, 176, 283 
Soffi ts, 94
Softwood lumber, 190
factory and shop lumber, 190
structural lumber, 190
yard lumber, 190
Soils reports, 1, 15–16
elements of, 15–16
Soils testing, 166
Soldier course, 121
Sonic digitizer, 54, 55–56
Specifi cations, 15, 34, 155 
elements of, 15
notes, 267
Spec (speculative) builders, 2
Speculative homes, 2–3
housing risk, 250
Spillage allowance, 188
Splitface block, 122
Spreadsheet, 215, 246
samples of, 217, 218
template for, 216, 246
Staffi ng the bid closing, 251–252
Stakeout, 165
Stairs, 79, 96
Standard bid form, 244, 259
Standard, bricks, 121
Standard trade breakdown, elements of, 174
Stations, 57
Stipulated lump sum contract, 4
contingency sums, 4
terms of, 4
Stipulated price contract, 4
Storage costs, 209
Straight-line depreciation, 207–208
example of, 207
Structural lumber, 190
Structured grade light framing, 97
Studs, 93
Subfl ooring, 95
Subcontractors, 176. See also problems with 
subcontracting
bonding of, 229
defaults, 224
evaluating, 228–229
Rough carpentry, measuring, 92
fl oor system takeoff, 97–99
Rough hardware, 95
pricing of, 191
Rough out, 255
Row housing, 3
Royalty, 185
Rubber-tired equipment, 207, 208
calculating overhead, 213–215
depreciation rate, 208
repair and maintenance cost, 208
Rules of measurement, 35–37, 56
for demolition work, 266–267
S
Safety:
cost of worker’s time, 157
awards, 157
expenses, 157
OSHA regulations, 158
supplies, 157
Sales price breakdown for purchaser, 240
Sales price estimate summary, 239
Sales tax, 167
Sample drawings, 60, 366–370
single-family home, 61–67
Sanitary facilities, 158
Sanitary sewer lines, 144
Saw setup, 165
Scabs, 93
Scaffolds, 160
Scope of work, 4, 120, 144, 231–233
at pre-bid review, 248
subcontractors, 225, 230
Semi-custom homes, 2, 3
setting sales prices for, 7
Security systems, 146
Setting sales prices, estimates for, 7
cost-based pricing, 7
value-based pricing, 7
Setting up a grid, 57
Sheathing, 94
Sheet metal, 131
Shelving, 95
Shop lumber, 190
Shoring, 48
Show home, 3
Sidewalks, 79
Sidings, 94, 131
SI units. See Systeme International d’Unites
Site conditions, 48
Site security, 163
after-hours surveillance, 163
continuous surveillance system, 163
fence, 163
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
INDEX 
381
roof system, 104, 105, 106
rough carpentry fl oor system, 97–99
service trench, quantity sheet, 69
sitework, 60, 70
wall system, 100–103
Takeoff items, 35, 83
Takeoff notes, 303, 305, 311, 314, 315, 319, 322, 
323, 324, 328
Takeoff order, 37–38
Takeoff quantities, 199
Takeoff strategy, 38
example of, 38
Takeoff units, 182
Taxes, 167–168, 209
payroll tax, 167
sales tax, 167
social security tax, 167, 283
unemployment compensation, 283
uniform sales tax, 167
value-added tax, 167
Telepost, 97
Temporary enclosures, 160
estimate, 161
Temporary facilities, rental of, 158
Temporary heating, 161–162
calculating, 162
labor costs of maintenance and operation, 161
Temporary offi ces, 158
Terms of offer, 184
Thermal protection, 130–131
Tile fi nishes, 135
Timber, 190
Townhouses, 2, 3
Total cost of work, 160
Total quality management, 179
Trapezoid, formulas, 29, 355
Trenches, calculating volumes
backfi ll, 49
excavation, 49, 50
formula for, 49
Triangle, formulas, 29, 355
Trim, 95
Trusses, 94
Truss joists, 94
Truss rafters, 94
U
Underlay, 95
Unemployment tax, 176
Uniform sales tax, 167
Unit price catalogue, 298, 301, 302, 321
Unit price contracts, 5, 265
computing, 5
parts of, 5
terms of, 5
problems with pricing, 195
serious problems with, 224–225
sources of information about, 228
Subcontractor work:
practice problems, 235
resources, 234
summary, 233–234
Subsurface conditions, 15
Subtrades, 223
bid analysis, 229
checklist form, 226
comparisons, 229
conditions, 254
contacting, 227
errors in estimates, 224
exclusion of work, 254
pre-bid proposals, 254
purpose of list, 225
unknown, 227
unsolicited, 227–228
Summary and bid, 276
example of, 285
Summary chart of historic productivity rates, 271
Summary of estimated prices, 11
at bid closing, 238
Summary formats:
allocating add-ons, 238
for company accountant, 238
example of, 238, 257, 258
forms, 239, 258
for job superintendent, 238
for purchaser, 238
Summary sheet, 246
Surety bonds, 229, 246–247
Surfaced lumber, 190
Survey, 165
Suspended slabs, 79
Swell factor, 48, 185
example of, 48
Switches, 146
Systeme International d’Unites (SI)
base units, 353
conversion, 353–354
T
Tablet digitizer, 54
Takeoff, 2
brickwork, 126–128
concrete block masonry, 124–126
excavation and backfi ll, quantity sheet, 68
exterior fi nishes, 131–134
fi nish carpentry, 108, 109, 110–112
measuring excavation and sitework, 56
on-site, 268
remodeling, 267–268, 279–280
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

382 
INDEX
Value-based pricing, 7
Vapor barriers, 83, 95, 131
Variable price lump sum 
contract, 2
Venting, 145
Videos, site, 16
W
Wage rates, 176
Wall forms, 80, 81
Walls, 123
Wall system takeoff, 100–103
Warranty, new home, 166
Waste allowance, 188
Waste factors, 190–191
Water distribution, 144
Waterproofi ng, 130
Wear and tear, 208
Weep holes, 124, 130
Welded wire mesh, 83, 87
Wind bracing masonry, 166
Windows, measuring notes, 96
Wire reinforcement, 124
Wiring:
control, 146
low-voltage, 146
measuring, 146
Wizards, 298
Workers’ Compensation insurance, 
167–168, 176
Y
Yard lumber, 190
Units of measurement, 35
English units, 354
metric units, 354
board measure, 84
Unknown subtrades, 227
Unreliable subcontractors, 224
Unsolicited subtrade bids, 227–228
legal and ethical considerations, 227
risk, 227
time constraints, 228
Use of cost records, 179
cost report, 179–180
historic cost database, 179
historic data, 179
key processes, 179
Uses of estimates, 5–8
calculating approximate price, 5–6
calculating bid prices, 6, 8
determining budgets, 6, 8
determining feasibility, 5–7
providing value analysis, 5, 7
setting sales prices, 6, 7
Utility services, 158–159
consumption cost of, 159
installation cost of, 159
permanent, 159
predicting future costs, 159
temporary, 159
Utilities trench, 70
sample of, 71
V
Value analysis, 1, 7
cost vs perceived value, 7
Value-added tax, 167
Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

