
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE ETHICAL HACKING GUIDE TO CORPORATE SECURITY 
by ANKIT FADIA 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
PUBLISHED BY 
 
 
Page 2
Provide By ESiti Forum

Copyright © 2005 by Centro Atlântico, Lda. All rights reserved. 
This title is published by Centro Atlântico exclusively in electronic book. 
No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, scanning, 
recording, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the copyright owner and the publisher. 
 
 
 
 
The Ethical Hacking Guide to Corporate Security 
by Ankit Fadia 
 
 
Published by 
Centro Atlântico, Lda. 
   Av. Dr. Carlos Bacelar, 968 – Escr. 1 – A – 4764-901 V. N. Famalicão 
   Rua da Misericórdia, 76 – 1200-273 Lisboa 
   Portugal 
geral@centroatlantico.pt 
www.centroatlantico.pt 
 
Editorial Director: Libório Manuel Silva 
Interior design by Centro Atlântico 
Final Revisor by José Manuel Dias Cardoso 
Cover design by António José Pedro 
 
 
1st edition: January 2005 
ISBN: 989-615-004-4 
 
 
 
 
 
Centro Atlântico also publishes its books in paper format. Some content that appears in electronic books may not be available in print. 
 
The information in this e-book is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without warranty. While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this 
work, neither the author nor Centro Atlântico, Lda. shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused or 
alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the information contained in it. 
 
Trademarks: centroatlantico.pt, the Centro Atlântico logo and centroatlantico.pt magazine are registered trademarks of Centro Atlântico, Lda. and 
may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Centro Atlântico, Lda., is not 
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this e-book. 
Trademarked names are used throughout this e-book. Rather than use a trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, the 
publisher states that it is using the names only for editorial purposes and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringing upon 
that trademark. 
Page 3
Provide By ESiti Forum

ABOUT THE AUTHOR  
Ankit Fadia is an independent Computer Security and Digital Intelligence Consultant 
and has definitive experience in the field of computers. He has authored several best-selling 
books on Computer Security, which have been appreciated by professionals and industry 
leaders, all over the world. His books sold a record 80,000 copies across the globe. Fadia is 
also a widely recognized cyber terrorism expert. 
Fadia is however, more well known for his significant work in the field of digital 
intelligence, security consultancy and training. 
 
Moreover, Fadia has also conducted more than a 100 training sessions on various 
topics related to Computer Security to an audience comprising of international defense 
personnel, software professionals and college students. 
For his work in the field of computer security, Fadia has been honoured with numerous 
awards namely: Person of The Year 2002, Limca Book of Records, Silicon India Person of 
the Week, Embassy State Award, Best Speaker Award (3 occasions), Hall of Fame Award, 
Outstanding Young Achiever’s Award, Student of the Year 2002-03 and many more.  
Quite recently, Fadia travelled to Australia, Singapore and Malaysia where he 
addressed hundreds of CEO’s of various IT companies and provided them solutions to 
protect their network and keep their data safe. He has also been conducting a number of 
learning events for Young Entrepreneurs and Young Presidents of the most successful 
companies and businesses all across India.  
Fadia is currently pursuing his studies in Computer Science with specialization in 
Information Security at Stanford University, USA. 
 
Page 4
Provide By ESiti Forum

INTRODUCTION 
The Internet has considerably enhanced various business critical operations of 
companies in different industry sectors across the globe. However, as more and more 
Organizations become partially or completely dependent on the Internet, computer security 
and the serious threat of computer criminals comes to the foreground. A single network 
infiltration can cause severe losses totalling in millions of dollars. Unfortunately, most 
organizations across the globe continue to remain oblivious of to the threat posed by 
computer criminals, corporate espionage and cyber terrorism. ‘The Ethical Hacking Guide to 
Corporate Security’ dismisses this incompetent approach adopted by many companies and 
clears up some of the most horrific cyber crime cases that hit the corporate world across 17 
different countries in 5 continents. With the correct mix of technical explanations and 
subsequent business implications, this book draws a direct correlation between computer 
security and business profitability. The comprehensive yet easy to understand analysis of 
some of the most dangerous security threats and vulnerabilities on the Internet, lays down 
the path that companies need to follow to safeguard their networks. This book places a great 
deal of emphasis on investigating and solving real attacks faced by companies. Moreover, 
the thoroughly researched attack strategies, working and countermeasures described in this 
book are organized in an extremely unique easy to understand format.  This book is not only 
aimed at serious hardcore system administrators, but it also contains information that will be 
relished by top-level management gurus working in various industry sectors. 
Page 5
Provide By ESiti Forum

Contents 
 
About the Author 
 
Introduction 
 
 
I 
Buffer Overflows 
 
Introduction 
Business Definition 
Business Cheats, Cons and Crimes 
Case Studies 
 
Paris, France: Fashion Sector 
 
Seoul, South Korea: Hotel Sector 
The Art of Buffer Overflows 
Different Types of Buffer Overflows 
 
Stack Overflows 
 
Format String Overflows 
 
Heap Overflows 
 
Integer Overflows 
More Buffer Overflow examples 
 
Poor Programming 
 
MSN Messenger 
 
Wu-FTPD 
Countermeasures 
Page 6
Provide By ESiti Forum

II  
Denial of Services (DOS) attacks 
 
Introduction 
Technical Definition 
Business Definition 
Threats of DOS attacks 
Business Cheats, Cons and Crimes 
Case Studies 
 
Tokyo, Japan: Media Sector 
 
Delhi, India: Advertising Sector 
 
United States of America: Online Websites 
The Art of Denial of Services (DOS) Attacks 
Types of DOS Attacks 
 
Ping of Death 
Teardrop 
SYN Flooding 
Land Attacks 
Smurf Attacks 
UDP Flooding 
Hybrid DOS attacks 
Application Specific DOS attacks 
Distributed DOS Attacks 
 
Distributed DOS Attack tools 
 
 
Tribal Flood Network (TFN and TFN2K) 
 
 
Trin00 
 
 
Stacheldraht 
 
 
Shaft 
 
 
Mstream 
 
Fadia’s Hot Picks for popular distributed DOS attack tools 
 
Countermeasures 
 
Raw Fun 
Page 7
Provide By ESiti Forum

III 
E-mail Security 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
Business Definition 
 
E-mail Threats 
 
Business Cheats, Cons and Crimes 
 
Case Studies 
 
 
Karachi, Pakistan: Individual 
 
 
Dubai, UAE: Individual 
 
Types of E-mail Threats 
 
Abusive E-mails 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
E-mail Headers 
 
 
Tracing E-mails 
 
 
Case Studies 
 
Fadia’s Hot Picks for popular E-mail Threats tools 
 
E-mail Forging 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
The Art of Forging E-mails 
 
 
Countermeasures 
 
 
Case Studies 
 
Spam 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
Countermeasures 
 
Countermeasures 
 
Raw Fun 
Page 8
Provide By ESiti Forum

IV  
Input Validation Attacks 
 
Introduction 
Technical Definition 
Business Definition 
Business Cheats, Cons and Crimes 
Case Studies 
 
Throughout the Globe: Software Industry 
 
London, Britain: Internet Services Sector 
The Art of Input Validation Attacks 
Input Validation Threats 
Case Studies 
 
Hotmail.com 
 
Apache Web Server 
 
MailMachine.cgi 
SQL Injection Attacks 
 
Introduction 
 
Accessing Sensitive Files 
 
Bypassing Security Controls 
DOS Attacks VS Input Validation Attacks 
Fadia’s Hot Picks for popular Input Validation attack tools 
Countermeasures 
Page 9
Provide By ESiti Forum

V 
Intellectual Property (IP) Theft 
 
Introduction 
Business Definition 
Threats of Intellectual Property Theft 
Business Cheats, Cons and Crimes 
Case Studies 
 
Mumbai, India: Individual 
 
Paris, France: Architecture Sector 
 
Texas, USA: Agricultural Sector 
Types of IP theft 
Trojans 
 
Working 
 
Fadia’s Hot Picks for popular Trojan tools 
 
Detection of Trojans 
 
Countermeasures 
 
Sniffers 
 
 
Fadia’s Hot Picks for Packet Sniffing Software 
 
 
Detection Methods 
 
 
Countermeasures 
 
Keyloggers 
 
 
Working 
 
 
Fadia’s Hot Picks for Keylogging Software 
 
 
Countermeasures 
 
Spyware Software 
 
 
Countermeasures 
 
Traditional Data Hiding Techniques 
 
 
The Power of the Inside Force 
 
E-mail 
 
Instant Messaging (IM) 
 
FTP Uploads 
 
Steganography 
 
Fadia’s Hot Picks for popular Steganography tools 
 
Text Steganography 
 
Digital Cameras 
 
Mobile Phones 
 
Dumpster Diving 
 
Shoulder Surfing 
Page 10
Provide By ESiti Forum

VI  
Instant Messenger Threats 
 
Introduction 
Business Definition 
Instant Messaging (IM) Threats 
Business Cheats, Cons and Crimes 
Case Studies 
 
Canberra, Australia: Government Sector 
 
Hong Kong: Real Estate Sector 
The Art of Instant Messaging 
IM and Privacy 
IM Specific Vulnerabilities 
 
MSN Messenger 
 
ICQ Messenger 
Yahoo Messenger 
Fadia’s Hot Picks for popular IM attack tools 
Countermeasures 
 
Raw Fun 
Page 11
Provide By ESiti Forum

VII 
Social Engineering Attacks 
 
Introduction 
Technical Definition 
Business Definition 
Business Cheats, Cons and Crimes 
Case Studies 
 
Singapore: Shipping Industry 
 
California, USA: Education Industry 
The Art of Social Engineering 
Types of Social Engineering Attacks 
 
Impersonation 
 
Intimidation 
 
Real Life Social Engineering 
 
Fake Prompts 
Countermeasures 
Page 12
Provide By ESiti Forum

VIII  Identity Threats 
 
Introduction 
Business Definition 
Business Cheats, Cons and Crimes 
Case Studies 
 
Shanghai, China: Financial Sector 
 
Toronto, Canada: Software Sector 
Types of Identity Threats 
 
Proxy Servers 
 
Proxy Bouncing 
 
IP Spoofing Attacks 
 
Onion Routing Attacks 
Proxy Servers 
 
Uses/Misuses 
 
Wingates Torn Apart 
Proxy Bouncing 
Fadia’s Hot Picks for Proxy Servers 
Countermeasures 
IP Spoofing 
 
Introduction 
 
Challenges Faced 
 
Networking Basics 
 
Sequence Numbers 
 
Trust Relationships 
 
Exploit Trust Relationships  
Fadia’s Hot Picks for Packet Generation Tools 
 
Countermeasures 
Onion Routing 
Page 13
Provide By ESiti Forum

IX 
Password Cracking Attacks 
 
Introduction 
Business Definition 
Business Cheats, Cons and Crimes 
Case Studies 
 
Taipei, Taiwan: Consumer Electronics Sector 
 
Auckland, New Zealand: Individual 
Different Password Cracking Attacks 
 
Password Guessing 
 
Default Passwords 
 
Dictionary Based Attacks 
 
Brute Force Attacks 
Cracking Application Passwords 
 
(Zip Passwords; Instant Messenger Passwords; Windows Login Passwords; E-mail Client Passwords; PDF 
File Passwords; Microsoft Office Passwords; All Windows Passwords; Internet Explorer Passwords; File Maker Pro 
Passwords; Web Passwords) 
Cracking Windows NT passwords 
 
Obtaining the SAM file 
 
Cracking the Passwords 
 
Countermeasures 
Cracking UNIX passwords 
 
Identifying and locating the Password Files 
 
Unshadowing the Shadow 
Cracking the passwords 
 
Fadia’s Hot Picks for popular Password Cracking tools 
Countermeasures 
 
Appendix A: Default Passwords Torn Apart 
 
Appendix B: Well Known Port Numbers 
 
Appendix C: Country Codes 
 
Appendix D: Trojan Port Numbers 
Page 14
Provide By ESiti Forum

III. E-MAIL SECURITY 
Threat Level: HIGH (8/10) 
 
Ease Level: HIGH (10/10) 
 
Incident Level: LOW (4/10) 
 
Business Threats: Intellectual Property Theft, Social Engineering, Corporate Espionage, Virus attack on critical 
Business Infrastructure, Defaming corporate honchos, Online Abuse. 
 
 
Introduction 
 
E-mail is one of the most popular utilities of the Internet. Staying in touch with friends 
and relatives, closing business deals within minutes and forwarding mass e-mails to all 
addresses in the address book— are just a few common uses of e-mail. E-mail has rapidly 
replaced snail mail in almost all domains and has become the preferred form of 
communication for most people. However, an e-mail message is definitely not as harmless 
as it might seem at first glance. There are a lot of dangers, abuse and problems associated 
with the rapidly increasing popularity of e-mail. 
 
E-mail has become ubiquitous, especially in the corporate world. Most businesses 
cannot survive without the use of e-mail. However, in spite of the rapidly growing popularity 
Page 78
Provide By ESiti Forum

of e-mail as the preferred communication medium, very few people are actually aware of the 
numerous security risks involved. In the recent years, there has been an alarming increase 
in the number of e-mail fraud cyber crime cases on the Internet. Hence, it has become 
extremely important for all businesses to take the necessary precautions against the menace 
of e-mail fraud.  
 
Business Definition 
“…E-mail on many occasions is misused by internal disgruntled employees or external 
malicious people to steal intellectual property, to make abusive attacks, to perform social 
engineering, spread business rumors, harassment, ransom threats, Spam, identity thefts, 
mail bombing and many other related attacks. Attackers sometimes also use e-mail to carry 
out impersonation or identity hijacks for social engineering purposes against employees, 
clients or media representatives…” 
 
 
E-mail Threats 
 
Almost all employees in corporations across the globe use e-mail on a daily basis for 
either business or personal purposes. Some of the most common threats associated with e-
mail are as follows: 
1. Very few corporations, if any, actually use encrypted e-mail. Most e-mails on the 
Internet are sent in the plaintext form and hence can easily be recorded and spied with 
the help of a simple sniffer. Hence, e-mail provides the bad guys with a lot of 
opportunities to carry out information theft attacks. E-mail not only puts personal 
Page 79
Provide By ESiti Forum

conversations at risk, but even sensitive business deals can be violated with the help 
of simple sniffer tools.  
2. Almost all regular (ISP or web based) e-mail systems rely on external untrusted 
systems to send an e-mail from the source to the destination system. This means that 
while e-mail is being sent from one point to the other, there are plenty of methods with 
which the bad guys can get their hands on the sensitive contents of e-mail.  
3. It is very easy for an attacker to send out abusive e-mails to the victim and remain 
completely anonymous at the same time. Most sexual harassment and mental torture 
cyber crimes cases on the Internet occur either on IM or through e-mail. Office related 
online sexual escapades have indeed become extremely common. Hence, both 
corporations and individuals need to be very careful as far as using e-mail is concerned.  
4. Most employees use popular e-mail clients like Outlook Express, Microsoft Outlook, 
Eudora Pro, etc. to receive and send e-mail. Due to their ever-growing massive 
popularity, e-mail is the obvious target for an extremely large number of virus creators. 
Today, a high number of viruses and worms choose e-mail systems as the preferred 
method for propagation. This means that unfortunately, a majority of viruses and 
worms on the Internet spread by exploiting the numerous security vulnerabilities 
existing in such e-mail clients. Hence, corporations must take the necessary steps to 
stop the spread of viruses and worms through e-mail clients.  
5. Another common problem with e-mail clients is that while a user is being authenticated, 
the username and password pair is sent in plaintext to the mail server. This makes it 
very easy for an attacker to use a sniffer to sniff the password of a victim and carry out 
malicious activities. Moreover, if the save password option has been enabled (i.e. if the 
password of an e-mail account has been stored on the local machine) then it is quite 
easy for an attacker to crack the password using a basic password cracking tool.  
Page 80
Provide By ESiti Forum

6. E-mail forging has become an extremely widespread problem. Through e-mail forging 
an attacker sends a forged e-mail to a third party (client, partner or customer) in such a 
way that the e-mail seems to have been originated from the victim corporation’s CEO’s 
e-mail account. Such e-mail forging attacks can easily be used to create a number of 
misunderstandings, cancel orders, spoil relationships, defame corporations and carry 
out numerous other business related losses.  
7. Attackers commonly use e-mail to carry out social engineering attacks— both human 
and computer based. Read the section of Social Engineering for more information.  
8. Most online e-mail service providers are very vulnerable as far as input validation 
attacks, DOS attacks, buffer overflows and other attacks are concerned.  
9. Spam has become an extremely big problem for all e-mail users. A recent report 
revealed that Spam contributed more than 70% of all e-mail on the Internet. Spam e-
mails not only clutters up your Inbox, but it also leads to a waste of time and resources 
in the storing and reading of useless information.  
 
 
Business Cheats, Cons and Crimes 
 
1. Are your employees leaking sensitive information about your corporation to the bad 
guys through e-mail? 
2. Are you sure your sensitive official e-mails are not being watched or recorded by 
malicious attackers? 
3. Are the bad guys sending forged e-mails (that seem to originate from your e-mail 
account) to your clients and hence defaming your name? 
 
Page 81
Provide By ESiti Forum

4. Is your daughter receiving abusive e-mails studded with tons of sexual content?  
 
 
Case Studies 
 
Karachi, Pakistan: Individual  
 
The daughter of a Police Commissioner had just joined a college, when she suddenly 
started to receive a number of abusive e-mails that threatened sexual harassment unless a 
particular criminal (imprisoned by her father) was set free. It was certainly not possible for 
the police to agree with the attacker’s demands. Computer forensic experts began to 
examine and study the abusive e-mails received by the victim in a bid to trace them to the 
culprit. However, investigations revealed that the abusive e-mails received by the victim were 
forged. The e-mail exam revealed that the attacker used to go to a local Internet café, 
connect to a remote mail server and send out forged abusive e-mails to the victim. The e-
mail forging continued for almost a couple of months without the forensic experts being able 
to identify the culprit. The forensic experts even contacted the local ISP and local Internet 
café owners, however, without much success. The attacker was quite smart and never used 
the same Internet café twice. However, fortunately soon the frequency of the abusive e-mails 
started dropping and slowly completely died down. This cyber crime clearly reiterates the 
anonymity that an attacker can enjoy with the help of e-mail forging and Internet cafes. This 
cyber crime had numerous adverse consequences: 
• Mental torture and fear for the victim and her family. 
• The victim had to keep changing her e-mail address. 
• Inconvenience. 
Page 82
Provide By ESiti Forum

Dubai, UAE: Individual 
There was an engineer who was working for a big multinational company in Dubai, 
UAE. He enjoyed a good salary and quite hefty perks as well. However, he was not sure 
whether he wanted to continue doing (what his job profile demanded) for the rest of his life. 
One day he received an e-mail from another multinational company offering him a job with 
not only higher perks and a better salary, but also projects that were more challenging and 
interesting. After a few promising e-mail exchanges with his prospective project manager in 
the other company, he took the bold step to quit his secure job and take up this exciting new 
job opportunity. When he went to the company address (as mentioned in the contract that 
his prospective boss had e-mailed him), not only did he not find any job waiting for him, but 
also to his utter despair his so-called boss did not even work in that company. The 
consequences of this cyber crime were:  
• Victim lost his secure job.  
• Financial and Emotional Loss to the victim and his family. 
• Had to desperately hunt for a new job. 
• Victim Company lost a talented and experienced individual.  
 
 
Different Types of E-mail Threats 
 
As discussed above, there are a variety of e-mail related threats on the Internet. 
However, some of the most common attacks are as follows: 
1. Abusive E-mails 
2. E-mail Forging 
3. Spam 
Page 83
Provide By ESiti Forum

Abusive E-mails 
 
Introduction 
Before one can actually become involved in the termination of abusive or obscene e-
mail messages, we must understand the way how e-mail travels on the Internet. E-mail 
travels from the source computer to the destination computer on the Internet in a manner 
analogous to that of snail mail in real life.  
Typically the sender of an e-mail connects to a mail server (post office) and sends the 
e-mail to a particular destination e-mail address. This source mail server then routes the e-
mail through several other interim mail servers, until the e-mail reaches the actual 
destination address. In other words, every e-mail originated at a particular mail server, is 
routed through a number of different interim mail servers on a specific route and then finally 
arrives at the actual destination: 
 
Sender Outbox-----Source Mail Server----- Interim Mail Servers----- Destination Mail 
Server------ Destination Inbox 
 
In other words, if one is able to pinpoint the source mail server of an e-mail, then one 
could potentially even pinpoint the identity of the person who sent that particular e-mail. 
When an e-mail is sent across the Internet, t carries not only the actual message content, but 
also carries embedded information about the path it use from the sender to the receiver. This 
information about the path traveled by an e-mail is contained in the e-mail headers of the e-
mail itself. This means that by reverse engineering the path traveled by an e-mail, one can 
easily figure out its source. This means that each time one receives an abusive e-mail, one 
should open the e-mail headers and try to trace its source.  
Page 84
Provide By ESiti Forum

Unfortunately, statistics show that the most common reaction to an abusive e-mail is to 
hit the DELETE key. However, ignoring the problem will not put an end to it. Ideally each 
time you receive an abusive e-mail, you should follow the easy steps described below and 
try to trace the identity of the person who sent the e-mail: 
1. View the e-mail headers of the received abusive e-mail. 
2. Identify the IP Address of the computer that was used to send the e-mail. 
3. Trace the IP address to pinpoint the identity of the culprit.  
 
E-mail Headers 
E-mail headers certainly contain the key to tracing an e-mail to the real culprit who 
actually sent the e-mail. Typically e-mail headers contain specific information about the e-
mail client, mail server platform, time stamps and most important accurate coordinates of the 
path traveled by the e-mail from the source to the destination computer. E-mail headers are 
generated and embedded into an e-mail message both during composition and transfer 
between systems. Hence, by analyzing the e-mail headers of an e-mail, you can actually 
reverse engineer the path traveled by the e-mail and arrive at the originating system. For 
example, a typical e-mail header would look like the following one: 
Return-Path: <blah@blah.com> 
Received: from smtp3.Blah.com (8.12.11/8.12.11) 
 
by pobox4.Blah.com (Cyrus v2.1.16) with LMTP; Mon, 22 Mar 2004 12:28:42 -0800 
Received: from LIZ-Laptop.blah.com ([64.163.150.1]) 
 
by smtp3.Blah.com (8.12.11/8.12.11) with ESMTP id i2MKSfQI025425 
 
for <abc@blah.com>; Mon, 22 Mar 2004 12:28:42 -0800 
Message-Id: <5.2.1.1.2.20040322122800.025d9320@liz.pobox.blah.com> 
X-Sender: liz@liz.pobox.blah.com (Unverified) 
X-Mailer: QUALCOMM Windows Eudora Version 5.2.1 
Date: Mon, 22 Mar 2004 12:28:19 -0800 
To: abc@blah.com 
Page 85
Provide By ESiti Forum

From: Liz <blah@blah.com> 
Subject: Hi  
Mime-Version: 1.0 
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"; format=flowed 
 
Tracing E-mails 
 
The best way to analyze e-mail headers is to divide the header information into 
separate chunks, examine each chunk as an independent entity and then finally put back all 
the individual puzzle pieces together. In this example, the e-mail headers can be divided into 
the following chunks: 
 
Date: Mon, 22 Mar 2004 12:28:19 -0800 
To: abc@blah.com 
From: Liz <blah@blah.com> 
Subject: Hi  
Mime-Version: 1.0 
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"; format=flowed 
 
 
This e-mail header chunk tells us that this e-mail was sent by blah@blah.com to 
abc@blah.com on 22nd March 2004 at 12:18. It also contains the MIME version and data 
type carried by the e-mail.  
 
Return-Path: <blah@blah.com> 
X-Sender: liz@liz.pobox.blah.com (Unverified) 
X-Mailer: QUALCOMM Windows Eudora Version 5.2.1 
 
 
The above e-mail header reveals that the sender of this e-mail is running a version of 
Windows and is using Eudora 5.2.1 as the e-mail client. It also identifies the e-mail address 
blah@blah.com as the sender of this e-mail. 
Page 86
Provide By ESiti Forum


