December 2017 • www.euro-sd.com • ISSN 1617-7983
P o l i t i c s  ·  A r m e d  F o r c e s  ·  P r o c u r e m e n t  ·  Te c h n o l o g y
Night Vision
EU in Action
European military and civilian missions and  
operations
Conventional Submarines
Strong demand is being spurred on by new security 
challenges
I n t e r n a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y  a n d  D e f e n c e  J o u r n a l
ES&D
 COUNTRY FOCUS: HUNGARY 
      Security 
& Defence
European
8/2017
a 7.90


1
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
Editorial
P
athos, kitsch and euphoric resolutions 
have always been part of the style rep-
ertoire of European summits. If they were 
formerly reserved for the real landmarks 
of European integration, their use today 
is inflationary. Since the outbreak of the 
financial crisis more than a decade ago, the 
European Union has been working on a 
steadily growing number of problems that it 
is failing to master. Wherever the attempted 
solutions lack the power of persuasion, at 
least their staging and full-bodied rhetoric 
are supposed to convey confidence. If you 
summarise all the important courses that 
have recently been set in this way, the ques-
tion arises as to whether there is still any 
policy field in which a secure and prosperous 
future for Europeans has not long since been 
heralded. Unfortunately, the citizens of our 
continent are too stubborn to be infected by 
this optimism. Far too many of them have 
already said goodbye internally to the EU. In 
some Member States this mood is so strong 
that it shapes the government's course. To-
day's task is more than management of cur-
rent crises. The EU itself, as we know it today 
at any rate, is undergoing a test. 
In such a situation, it may seem rather 
ambitious to want to open a new chapter 
in European integration in a field that has 
hitherto been more in the background. 
On 13 November, the foreign and defence 
ministers of 23 of the current 28 EU Mem-
ber States agreed on a comprehensive 
package of commitments and measures 
intended to make pragmatic progress 
towards a security union under what is 
called Permanent Structured Cooperation 
(PESCO). At the beginning of December, 
the first projects were identified in which 
cooperation was to be promoted in differ-
ent constellations. 
Just a few years ago, it would have been 
necessary to explain laboriously to the 
public why the EU as civilian power sud-
denly also wanted to gain military weight. 
Today this is different. Citizens are worried 
and unsettled. They are aware how precar-
ious the security situation is in many crisis-
hit regions on the southern and eastern 
periphery of their continent. The terrorist 
threat has long since become daily routine 
for them. Surveys show a clear change of 
mood. Citizens expect politicians to invest 
more in internal and external security and 
to tackle cross-border problems in cross-
border cooperation. Who, if not the EU, 
should be able to provide a suitable frame-
work for this? 
And yet, prudence is required. Actionism 
is not a concept yet. On the contrary. To 
advance this or that project in an uncon-
trolled fashion on the basis of current op-
portunities and interests can very quickly 
lead to a veritable waste of resources. 
Moreover, PESCO is not a new brilliant 
idea, but an instrument provided for by 
the Treaty of Lisbon a decade ago. It does 
not have to be interpreted as an expres-
sion of lethargy or neglect of duty that this 
possibility has not yet been used. Several 
bilateral or multinational collaborations 
have been launched even without this 
framework. Such "coalitions of the willing" 
do not necessarily gain in flexibility and ef-
ficiency if they are embedded in the larger 
context of the EU. This applies in particular 
to the very extensive cooperation agreed 
by France and Germany in July 2017. Both 
countries together account for more than 
50 percent of the defence budget of all 23 
PESCO nations. Their bilateral collaboration 
could very quickly be deprived of any mo-
mentum if it becomes a kind of EU project 
through the PESCO backdoor. 
But above all, it is important to ensure that 
everything the Europeans do fits into the 
plans of NATO and in the end those dupli-
cate structures they have solemnly sworn 
to avoid do not take shape. Hitherto, you 
could count on the British to pay attention 
to this. Since they are also saying goodbye 
to the EU's Common Security and Defence 
Policy (CSDP) with Brexit, this voice of trans-
atlantic reason has fallen silent. France does 
not want to raise it and Germany cannot. 
The poor media image of the Trump admin-
istration makes it easy to use anti-American 
resentment in order to pass off Europe go-
ing its separate way as taking on responsi-
bility for itself. The security of our continent 
is not served thereby. It will continue to be 
guaranteed in the future only by the tried 
and tested alliance with the Americans  
(and the British). 
Peter Bossdorf
Much Ado About Little 

2
European Security & Defence · December 2017
Content
Georgian Military Modernisation
Country Focus: Hungary 
 
It is not yet clear whether the current reform will be 
more successful than the previous ones.
Page 42
Security and defence policy – armed forces – 
procurement programmes
Pages 30-41
 
 
SECURITY POLICY
 12 	 Russian-Iranian Relations: A Mixed Bag
	
	
Eugene Kogan
 17		
Making Sense of the Shanghai  
	
	
Cooperation Organisation 
	
	
Stephen Blank
	22	
Azerbaijan - Gateway to Central Asia
	
	
Korhan Özkilinc
	26	
The Iranian Shadow over the  
	
	
Middle East and Beyond
	
	
Bill Roy
 
 
 
COUNTRY FOCUS: HUNGARY
	30	
Securing Sovereignty and Integrity 
	
	
Hungarian Security Policy within the Framework  
of NATO and EU
	
	
Thomas Bauer
	34	
Security and Defence Policy of Hungary
	
	
General Tibor Benk
	38	
Hungary Begins Long-Awaited  
	
	
Modernisation
	
	
Zord Gábor László
 
 
ARMED FORCES
	42	
Georgian Military Modernisation:  
	
	
Two Steps Forward, One Step Back
	
	
Eugene Kogan
	48	
XIth Regional Seapower Symposium
	
	
Guy Toremans
 
 
ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
	52	
Conventional Submarines –  
	
	
Global Developments
	
	
Conrad Waters
	59	
Mortar Ammunition:  
	
	
New Weapon – New Ammunition
	
	
Michael Johnsson
	66	
Night Vision and Night Combat  
	
	
Capabilities
	
	
Waldemar Geiger
	71	
Getting the Picture –  
	
	
The Individual Weapon Sight Sector
	
	
David Saw
	75	
Milipol In Sight 
	
	
David Saw
 (Photo: NATO)
 (Photo: via Miroslaw Gyürösi)
Index of Advertisers
CONTROP	
73
Ceska zbrojovka a.s. (CZ)	
3rd cover
Enforce Tac	
31
EXPAL	
59
German Naval Yards	
79
Hagenuk Marinekommunikation	
77
Hirtenberger Defence Systems	
61
International Armoured Vehicles Forum	
83
MTU	
4th cover
Miltech Hellas	
3
NIMR	
2nd cover
SOFEX	
33
thyssenkrupp	
53
Underwater Defence & Security	
55
U.T.SEC	
29

3
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
 
 
COLUMNS
	 1	
Editorial 
	 4	
Periscope	
	45	
Masthead	
	90	
Firms & Faces
	91	
Preview IAV Special
	96	
Preview Issue 01/2018
 
 
INDUSTRY & MARKETS
	76	
The Development of the Maritime  
	
	
Defence Industry in Germany
	
	
Peter Grundmann
	81	
"We are designed to be a  
	
	
European player."
	
	
Interview with the Co-CEOs of the KNDS Group:  
	
	
Frank Haun, CEO of Krauss-Maffei Wegmann GmbH  
	
	
& Co. KG, and Stéphane Mayer, Chairman and CEO of 	
	
	
Nexter Group.
 84		
For the Security of the Country
	
	
Peter Jenni
 86		
Romanian Procurement Programmes:  
	
	
Wish List versus (Sober) Reality
	
	
Eugene Kogan
眀眀眀⸀洀椀氀琀攀挀栀⸀最爀
礀漀甀爀 琀栀攀爀洀愀氀 瀀漀椀渀琀 漀昀 瘀椀攀眀
Maritime Defence Industry in Germany
Shipyards and their domestic suppliers have a 
reputation for high-quality special ships.
Page 76
 (Photo: German Naval Yards)
 
 
VIEWPOINT FROM …
	16	
Tbilisi
	
	
Beka Kiria	
	25	
Paris
	
	
Denys Kolesnyk
	51	
Copenhagen
	
	
J. Bo Leimand
 	
 
 
THE BRUSSELS BACKDROP 
	46	
The EU in Action: European Military and  
	
	
Civilian Missions and Operations
	
	
Joris Verbeurgt

4
European Security & Defence · December 2017
  
 Drone Surveillance  
for 12 Hours 
(ck) The French company Aero Surveillance 
introduced a tethered option for its Quad 
and Octocopter ASV 30 400 and 800 series 
UAVs, designed for Police and Security ap-
plications. The tethered system is capable 
of hovering at up to 100 metres altitude 
for up to 12 hours at a time, providing 
persistent surveillance solutions and 360° 
full motion video by day and night. The 
cable link enables the system to provide 
virtually unlimited aerial surveillance at a 
reasonable price. The ASV 30 Quadcopter 
with four or Octocopter with eight rotors 
can also operate in free mode for up to 
60 minutes. The system has a payload of 
up to 6kg and a range of up to 10km in 
free mode, and comes with a dual-display 
ground control station designed to operate 
in both free and tethered mode simply by 
switching power modules. With onboard 
image processing for enhanced resolu-
tion, image stability and object tracking, 
the electro-optical payload is capable of 
detecting moving objects at up to 15 km.
  
 Airbus Helicopters  
Completes HForce Firing  
Tests in Hungary 
(ck) Airbus Helicopters recently completed 
a ballistic test of an HForce weapon sys-
tem on an H145M on Pápa Airbase in 
Hungary. The test included guns (FN Her-
stal HMP400), unguided rockets (Thales 
FZ231) and cannon (Nexter NC621), with 
an electro-optical targeting system by Wes-
cam (MX15) and a helmet mounted sight 
display by Thales (SCORPION). HForce is an 
incremental weapon system that can be 
fitted (“plug and play”) into Airbus Heli-
copter’s military platforms such as H125M, 
H145M and H225M for operations where 
equipment flexibility is a vital criterion. It is 
designed to meet the requirements of de-
fence agencies seeking light attack mission 
capabilities. The H145M is a military heli-
copter derived from the H145, designed for 
arduous Special Forces and police missions: 
the H145 fleet has flown more than 80,000 
flight hours. With a maximum take-off 
weight of 3.7 tonnes the H145M can be 
used for armed reconnaissance, ground fire 
support, anti-tank warfare, escort, tactical 
transport, MEDEVAC and CASEVAC. Cus-
tomers for the H145M include Germany, 
Serbia and Thailand.
  
 New 2.75” Rocket  
Launchers
(ck) Arnold Defense, a St Louis-based man-
ufacturer of 2.75” rocket launchers, pre-
sented its new, ultra-light LWL-XII and the 
combat-proven M260 2.75”/70mm weap-
on systems at the 2017 Dubai Air Show. The 
LWL-XII weighs just over 27kg. Traditionally, 
2.75” rocket systems have been used as 
an area suppression weapon, ordinarily de-
ployed by aviation assets, but Arnold De-
fense is currently developing the FLETCHER 
smart, laser-guided 4-round launcher, 
which is vehicle-mounted. FLETCHER uses 
laser-guided rocket technology to meet the 
demands of air, land and naval, mounted 
and dismounted asymmetric warfare. Ar-
nold Defense is one of the world’s largest 
suppliers of rocket launchers, manufactur-
ing systems that can be customised for any 
size, weight or capacity for air, ground, and 
naval platforms. The company has manu-
factured more than 1.1 million 2.75” rocket 
launchers since 1961 for the US Army, US 
Navy, US Air Force and many NATO cus-
tomers. 
Photo: AeroSurveillance
Photo: Airbus Helicopters
Photo: Arnold Defense
  
 BRIMSTONE: Successful  
TYPHOON Integration Trials 
(ck) A series of live firings of the BRIM-
STONE precision strike missile from a Eu-
rofighter TYPHOON has been successfully 
completed. The aim of the trials was to 
provide weapons integration clearance for 
operational use: the trials, conducted by 
BAE Systems in Warton, Lancashire, UK, 
form part of a programme of new enhance-
ments which will be rolled out across the 
Royal Air Force (RAF) to bolster TYPHOON’s 
combat capability. BRIMSTONE will provide 
TYPHOON with a low collateral, pin-point 
accurate air-to-surface weapon, enhanc-
ing the aircraft’s swing-role performance. 
The BRIMSTONE missile is now available for 
further evaluation by the RAF. BRIMSTONE 
is part of the Phase 3 Enhancement (P3E) 
package which also includes mission system 
and sensor upgrades. P3E is the final part of 
Project Centurion – the programme to en-
sure a smooth transition of TORNADO GR4 
capabilities on to TYPHOON for the RAF. 
Photo: BAE
  
 High-Speed Ballistic  
Protected Shutters
(ck) EFAPROTECT is a highly specialised 
business division of EFAFLEX Tor- und Si-
cherheitssysteme GmbH & Co. KG, Mu-
nich, Germany, developing and manu-
facturing some of the world’s fastest 
ballistic-protected and anti-burglary doors. 
EFAFLEX is claimed to be the only company 
worldwide to focus exclusively on high-
speed shutters, and presented its latest de-
velopments at Milipol in Paris in November 
2017. The company has taken its 40 years 
of design and engineering experience to 
Photo: EFAPROTECT
Periscope

5
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
develop a world first in the ballistics indus-
try: the world’s fastest vertically opening 
/ multi hit-resistant shutter. The brand is 
synonymous with premium quality and 
precision engineering, and the new shut-
ter is both burglar-resistant up to RC4 and 
has exceptional opening and closing door 
blade speeds of up to 2 metres per second.
EFAPROTECT shutters combine maximum 
operating speeds, ballistic protection and 
functional security with availability in a 
variety of protection classes, certified ac-
cording to country-specific guidelines. They 
will feature EFAFLEX’s unique patented 
spiral design which is virtually wear-free 
for reduced maintenance, minimal down 
time and ameliorated through-life costs. 
It is anticipated that EFAPROTECT will fast 
follow in the footsteps of EFAFLEX to be-
come the   high security protection shutter 
of choice within industries including law 
enforcement, military, maritime, govern-
ment, banking, hotels, private estates and 
embassies.
  
 New Radioisotope  
Detector from FLIR
(ck) FLIR has developed a new handheld 
radioisotope detector called the FLIR iden-
tiFINDER R440. This radiation detector 
provides one-hand operability and rapid 
detection and identification during survey 
missions and secondary screening opera-
tions. Weighing 1.5kg, the identiFINDER 
R440 is a small and light radioisotope iden-
tification device (RIID) with a 2” by 2” so-
dium iodide (NaI) detector. It offers some 
3.5 times more sensitivity than similarly-
sized RIIDs, so that responders can detect 
radiation from greater distance and behind 
heavier shielding. Due to an extended en-
ergy range, the identiFINDER R440 can 
detect gamma radiation and can also in-
dicate the presence of neutrons found in 
special nuclear materials. The user interface 
and easy-to-read data of the identiFINDER 
R440 allow easy integration with existing 
operational protocols. The device has built-
in wireless communications and features 
a new 360° degree EasyFinder mode that 
pinpoints and leads the operator to the ex-
act location of a radiation source. The FLIR 
identiFINDER R440 meets the American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI) N42.34 
standard, has been drop-tested up to one 
metre, and is the industry’s only IP67-rated 
RIID, which means it can withstand rain, 
splashing, and accidental submersion.
  
 FLIR identiFINDER R300 for 
US Homeland Security
(ck) The US Department 
of Homeland Security is to 
buy an unspecified quan-
tity of FLIR identiFINDER 
R300 spectroscopic per-
sonal radiation detectors 
under a contract valued 
at US$ 17.174M. For a 
period of five years, FLIR 
is to deliver these devices 
to the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office 
(DNDO), a branch of the US Department 
of Homeland Security (DHS). The delivery is 
part of the Human Portable Tripwire (HPT) 
programme, and deliveries will extend until 
mid-2019. The identiFINDER R300 is a belt-
worn spectroscopic pager that eliminates 
false alarms and false positives by providing 
a continuous radiation detection capability 
and threat identification. Under the con-
tract, all DHS branches can procure HPT sys-
tems and associated services, including war-
ranty, maintenance support and training.
  
 IPT for A330 MRTT
(ck) Airbus Defence & Space has entrust-
ed Indra, a manufacturer of simulators, 
to develop a tactical and Integrated Pro-
cedures Trainer (IPT) for training pilots of 
the A330 MRTT aerial refuelling tanker 
aircraft. Delivery is scheduled for 2019. 
The trainer is a key element for pilots to 
familiarise themselves with the aircraft: all 
pilots must pass mandatory training before 
assuming control of the real aircraft, which 
requires the completion of a number of 
flight hours on simulators. The simulators 
permit training / exercising situations which 
are impossible to reproduce using a real 
aircraft without fatal consequences.  These 
include engine failure, aircraft stalling and 
emergency landings. The trainer replicates 
the aircraft’s instrument panel with the 
aid of touch screens. The trainer enables 
pilots to learn by „putting their hands on 
the wheel“ of the aircraft from the very 
beginning, to move on to „flying“ in the 
Full Flight Simulator during the final stage. 
Photo: FLIR
Photo: FLIR
  
 New FN SCAR Carbine  
and Pistol
(ck) FN Herstal, one of the world’s leading 
manufacturers of small arms, introduced a 
new subcompact carbine at MILIPOL Paris 
2017. The new FN SCAR-SC is a recent ad-
dition to FN’s SCAR family, which is in use 
with the US Special Forces. The 5.56x45mm 
(.223) calibre gun has an extremely com-
pact design that makes it well suited for 
homeland security operations. Adapted for 
mobility and flexibility, the FN SCAR-SC has 
semi-auto only or selective fire capabilities, 
non-reciprocating charging handle and 
various add-ons including a red dot sight, 
tactical light, a variety of foregrips and a 
sound suppressor. The FN SCAR-SC comes 
with a telescopic buttstock as standard. 
Optional buttstocks include fixed, foldable, 
adjustable (for length and height) with ei-
ther concave or convex butt plate and a 
foldable offset buttstock for aiming and 
shooting with an anti-riot or bulletproof 
helmet visor. When fully extended with a 
telescopic buttstock, the gun has a length 
of 65cm and a weight of 3.1kg. It has a 
magazine capacity of 30 rounds and a cy-
clical rate of 550-650 rounds per minute.
Also at MILIPOL Paris FN Herstal presented 
a new pistol. The FN 509 9x19mm pistol is 
a striker-fired weapon designed for security 
forces. A major feature is its short recoil, 
brought about by the low bore axis. The 
slide and grip feature non-slip surfaces; the 
magazine latch, slide release and safety are 
ambidextrous, and interchangeable back-
straps permit adaptation to all hand sizes. 
This pistol has been tested with a variety of 
9x19mm ammunition types including FN EP 
and EPT cartridges. The FN 509 has fixed 
3-dot luminescent sights, providing target 
acquisition even in low light conditions. It 
also features a tactile and visible loaded 
chamber indicator and a 17-round capac-
ity magazine that allows a visual ammo 
check. The handgun weighs 960g with a 
full magazine. 
Photo FN Herstal
Photo FN Herstal

6
European Security & Defence · December 2017
This preparation is eminently practical and 
results in a faster, improved training process 
so that pilots are ready to fly an aircraft 
at maximum safety levels as soon as pos-
sible. Indra‘s IPT may also be connected to 
the Part Task Training system (PTT) used 
by boom operators for refuelling from the 
A330 MRTT, so pilots can train in this com-
plex operation, in which they must coor-
dinate with the both the boom operators 
and the crew of the aircraft being refuelled. 
The contract for developing the A330 MRTT 
trainer is in addition to one already awarded 
to Indra in 2015 to develop the level D Full 
Flight Simulator (FFS) for the same aircraft. 
Indra has supplied over 200 simulators to 
over fifty clients in 23 countries. 
  
 Kongsberg Sonars for  
GÖTEBORG Class Corvettes 
(ck) As part of Saab’s upgrade programme 
for the GÖTEBORG Class corvette fleet 
Kongsberg Maritime will deliver ST2400 
Variable Depth Sonar systems (VDS) for 
anti-submarine warfare (ASW) to the Roy-
al Swedish Navy. Kongsberg Maritime has 
manufactured naval sonars for ASW and 
mine hunting for more than 30 years, and 
the main purpose of the ST2400 VDS is to 
detect submarines, mines and unmanned 
underwater vehicles in littoral waters. The 
ST2400 VDS upgrade will strengthen the 
GÖTEBORG class corvettes’ ASW capabil-
ity while operating in the Baltic Sea. The 
ST2400 VDS is a medium-frequency sonar 
with an emphasis on operations in shallow 
waters. It is a compact design, weighing un-
der 3 tonnes, and it can be rapidly deployed 
for high speed manoeuvring. Key features 
of the ST2400 VDS include omni and sec-
tor transmission, electronic map overlay, 
sound propagation, advanced tracking and 
detection, as well as a built-in simulator for 
training. The system overcomes traditional 
towed array sonar issues with ambiguity, 
buoyancy and omni coverage. 
  
 French Army to Receive  
First MMPs 
(ck) The French defence procurement agen-
cy, the Direction Générale de l’Armement 
(DGA), has accepted delivery to the French 
Armed Forces of the first batch of 50 mis-
siles and 20 firing posts of the new Missile 
Moyenne Portée (MMP) system from MB-
DA. Deliveries were conducted between 15 
and 23 November 2017. The new system 
will gradually replace the Milan and the 
HOT missiles mounted on VAB Armoured 
Fighting Vehicles and it will be issued to 
French Army infantry and cavalry units, and 
to Special Forces of the Army, Navy and Air 
Force. The MMP programme will see the 
delivery of 400 firing posts and 1,750 mis-
siles across all of the French Armed Forces 
by 2025: first deliveries will be used to train 
future users. The weapon system will be 
deployed in operations in the course of 
2018. The DGA, which awarded MBDA the 
MMP contract in 2013, qualified the sys-
tem in July 2017, clearing the way for serial 
production. The government-run techno-
operational trials at the DGA’s test centre in 
Bourges confirmed that the system met the 
requirement of the armed forces. The MMP 
offers both ‘fire-and-forget’ and ‘man-in-
the-loop’ capabilities. The first enables 
fixed or mobile targets to be engaged with-
out intervention by the operator during the 
missile’s flight. The second allows the oper-
ator to change targets mid-flight, to refine 
the point of impact, or to divert the missile; 
it also opens up the possibility of firing at 
hidden targets beyond the direct line of 
sight. The weapon system can be used by 
day and night, and its multi-purpose war-
head is effective against vehicles, armour, 
infrastructure and personnel. It has a range 
of over 4,000 metres. The missile can be 
fired from confined spaces which is crucial 
for urban combat, and it can be shoulder-
fired by dismounted infantrymen or fitted 
on the EBRC Jaguar armoured reconnais-
sance and combat vehicle, which is due to 
be delivered to the French Army in 2020.
  
 New Meprolight Red Dot 
Sight
(ck) Meprolight, a manufacturer of electro-
optical systems, thermal and night vision 
equipment, self-illuminated sights, and 
Laser Range Finder systems for military, 
law enforcement and civil applications, 
presented a new additional version of its 
MEPRO M5 Red Dot Sight at Milipol 2017. 
The new version has a Bullseye reticle that 
allows extended operating time while pro-
viding quick acquisition of a target using a 
large display window. The MEPRO M5 Red-
Dot Sight is an energy-efficient, compact 
sight that provides thousands of operating 
hours with a single “AA” commercial bat-
tery. Featuring LED technology and rugged 
MIL-STD design, the sight has a large display 
window to ensure target acquisition with 
both eyes open. Offering numerous reticle 
brightness intensities, the MEPRO M5 suits 
every tactical scenario. To facilitate night 
operations and long-range target engage-
ment, the MEPRO M5 is compatible with 
GEN II and GEN III NVGs as well as with 
magnifying scopes. Its human engineering 
allows positioning of NVGs and magnifiers 
close to the sight’s optics with no decrease 
in the field-of-view and without compro-
mising convenient switch operation. 
  
 IWI Introduces New Pistol
(ck) At MILIPOL 2017 Israel Weapon Indus-
tries (IWI) presented the new MASADA line 
of striker-based pistols for military, law en-
forcement, and civilian markets. The first 
model, the full size 9x19mm MASADA, has 
several safety mechanisms including a fir-
ing pin block safety, a trigger reset with 
built-in trigger safety, and a fast, easy and 
safe takedown – with no need to pull the 
trigger. The pistol has an easily racked slide 
with improved front and rear cocking ser-
rations, enhanced ergonomics with the IWI 
grip angle, and a low barrel axis for reduced 
recoil. The body has a glass-reinforced poly-
mer frame as well as a polygonal cold ham-
mer forged barrel with a 1:10 right-hand 
twist rate. The pistol comes with ambidex-
trous operating controls and fixed 3-dot 
tritium illuminated Meprolight night sights. 
It has an overall length of 18.6cm with a 
barrel length of 10.4cm and a weight with-
out the magazine of 650g. The MASADA 
will be available in four colours: sniper grey, 
OD green, black, and flat dark earth. 
Photo: IWI
Photo: MBDA
Photo: Meprolight
Periscope

7
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
  
 Anti-Vehicle Barriers  
from Mifram
(sb) Mifram Security, a developer of anti-
terror solutions, threat protection systems 
and fortifications for the military, presented 
several fully-developed vehicle barriers for 
the prevention of vehicle-ramming attacks 
at Milipol 2017. Mifram’s portable road 
barriers include models that stop vehicles 
weighing up to 40 tonnes, moving at speed. 
Mifram introduced three easy-to-operate 
portable barriers, made of elastic materials 
that absorb the energy of the vehicle, al-
lowing the transfer from kinetic energy to 
potential energy, driving the momentum 
of an intruding vehicle into the ground to 
bring it to a complete, nearly immediate 
stop. The FBM flat drive-over folded barrier 
is a multipurpose anti-ram vehicle barrier 
which can stop vehicles weighing up to 
2,500 kg, including cars, trucks, tractors, 
motorcycles, and ATVs. The barrier is suited 
for deployment in urban areas as individual 
units fit together to suit varying vehicle and 
road sizes. The PYRAMID drive-over folded 
barrier for heavy vehicles is a two-way bar-
rier that blocks entrances and exits at the 
same time, and is ideal for deployment in 
urban areas. The modular anti-ram bar-
rier can stop vehicles of up to 7 tonnes. 
It requires no concrete foundation, can 
be activated either hydraulically or manu-
ally and can serve either as a temporary or 
permanent barrier. The RMB stops heavy 
trucks weighing up to 40 tonnes. The bar-
rier allows the transfer of kinetic energy to 
potential energy, causing the vehicle in the 
process of stopping to tip upwards in the 
air, thus minimizing the damage caused by 
the impact.
the supply of 15 surface combatant ships 
for the Royal Canadian Navy. The frigates 
would be built in Canada at Irving Ship-
building, maximising Canadian indus-
trial participation and job creation locally 
through a transfer of technology as well 
as integrating Canadian suppliers into the 
two companies’ global supply chains. Naval 
Group and Fincantieri have previously col-
laborated on major naval projects, includ-
ing the joint development of the FREMM 
frigate, which is now able to execute mis-
sions in all warfare domains such as AAW, 
ASW, ASuW, Land Attack, and Command 
Ship, for example. The general purpose and 
anti-submarine warfare variants are already 
in service in two leading NATO navies. 
  
 Norsafe Launches New  
MARATHON 900 RHIB-D
(sb) Norsafe is a developer of robust military 
boats for use in extreme weather condi-
tions. Its latest product is the multi-mission 
high speed craft MARATHON 900 RHIB-D. 
Its rigid bulwarks and D-fender configu-
ration increase the available deck space; 
cargo track configurations make the layout 
flexible and optimised for user-specific con-
figurations. Ergonomics and safety in ex-
treme conditions have been factored into 
the design; all main controls and switches 
are within direct reach of the pilot and the 
console has been designed with large flat 
surfaces to install additional mission-specif-
ic equipment. The navigational lights have 
been positioned so that they do not reflect 
or light up the vessel during night opera-
tions and the radar arch has been produced 
with high-tech woven GRP mats reducing 
vibration and stress on electronic sensors 
and equipment mounted on a large flex-
ible mounting surface. The vessel can also 
be delivered with self-righting capabilities. 
Crew and passengers can be seated us-
ing either shock absorbing seats or saddle 
seats with laminated foam-core seating. 
Seats and saddles are fitted to cargo-rails 
making reconfiguration and optional lay-
outs easy to implement. Movement around 
the MARATHON 900 RHIB-D is helped by 
grab-rails, robust anti-skid surfaces in step 
zones and ample work lights when need-
ed. The overall length of the boat is 9.57m 
and maximum displacement is 3,850kg.
  
 UK Selects NovAtel  
for Type 26
(ck) NovAtel’s GPS Anti-Jam Technology 
(GAJT) has been selected by the UK for the 
Royal Navy’s Type 26 frigates to meet a re-
quirement as part of a protected navigation 
system. The Type 26 frigates are intended 
to replace the Type 23 frigate as the work-
horse of the British fleet, undertaking the 
Royal Navy‘s three core roles - warfight-
ing, maritime security and international 
engagement - on the world stage. GAJT 
protects GPS-based navigation and precise 
timing receivers from intentional jamming 
and accidental interference, ensuring that 
the satellite signals necessary to compute 
time and position are always available. It is a 
Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS) product, 
and comes in versions suitable for land, sea, 
fixed installations and smaller platforms 
such as Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). 
Warships, military vehicles and platforms, 
networks and timing infrastructure all ben-
efit from anti-jamming protection. There is 
no need to replace GPS receivers already 
installed, as GAJT works with civil and 
military receivers including SAASM and 
M-Code. 
Photo: Mifram
  
 FREMM for Canada?
(ck) Canada wishes to acquire a proven 
NATO warship design that could be modi-
fied to meet Canadian Navy requirements, 
and the Naval Group from France together 
with Italian shipbuilders Fincantieri, with 
the support of both French and Italian gov-
ernments, will present an “off-the-shelf” 
solution to Canada based on the FREMM 
frigate design in pursuit of a contract for 
Photo: Naval Group
Photo: Norsafe
Photo: NovAtel
  
 Czech Republic to Buy  
UH-1Y Utility Helicopters
(sb) The US State Department has approved 
a possible FMS to the Czech Republic for 12 
UH-1Y utility helicopters, at an estimated 
cost of US$575M. The sale is expected to 
cover 12 UH-1Y utility helicopters, along 
with 25 T-700 GE 401C engines (24 in-
stalled and one spare), 13 Honeywell Em-
bedded GPS/INS (EGI) (one spare), and 12 
7.62mm M240 Machine Guns. The request 
also includes BRITE STAR II FLIR system, the 

8
European Security & Defence · December 2017
AN/AAR-47 Missile Warning and Laser De-
tection System, AN/ALE-47 Counter Meas-
ure Dispensing System (CMDS) and the AN/
APR-39 Radar Warning Receiver (RWR), 
Joint Mission Planning Systems, Helmet 
Mounted Displays, communication equip-
ment, small calibre gun systems including 
GAU-17A and GAU-21, electronic warfare 
systems, Identification Friend or Foe (IFF) 
Mode 4/5 transponder, spare and repair 
parts, tools and test equipment, technical 
data and publications and personnel train-
ing. As with all FMS deals, this proposed 
sale will support the foreign policy of the 
US by improving the security of a NATO 
partner. The Czech Republic intends to use 
these helicopters to modernise its armed 
forces and strengthen its homeland de-
fence and to deter regional threats, while 
further enhancing interoperability with the 
US and other NATO allies. 
  
 New Plasan Armoured SUV
(sb) Israeli armouring specialist Plasan has 
launched a new variant of the SandCat 
STORMER for police and counter-terrorism 
units. The SandCat STORMER is a light tac-
tical armoured vehicle with a high protec-
tion level. It is designed to serve in various 
mission profiles requiring a highly manoeu-
vrable and highly-protected vehicle, such 
as – increasingly - urban law enforcement, 
peace-keeping, homeland security and 
border patrol. The SandCat STORMER is 
equipped with the SCAT system to address 
low-intensity conflict levels of violence with 
a variety of non-lethal and less-than-lethal 
options, providing precise and propor-
tionate crowd control, preventing civilian 
casualties, and without risking the system 
operators. SCAT is a roof-mounted RCWS 
with day & night imaging, command and 
control system, dazzler, multi-shot 40mm 
smoke/gas grenade launcher, Long Range 
Acoustic Device, and an optional rifle. The 
SandCat STORMER offers optimisation 
between protection, payload, and cost 
through the use of composite materials to 
defeat threats, particularly in urban areas 
and civilian operations. It offers relatively 
low cost of ownership by using a reliable 
commercial Ford F550 Super Duty chassis 
with a powerful engine and four-wheel-
drive. The armoured cabin accommodates 
up to 10 passengers.
  
 SPIKE LR 2, 5th Gen for IDF
(ck) Rafael Advanced Defense Systems has 
been awarded a contract with the Israel 
Defense Forces (IDF) to supply more than 
1,000 SPIKE LR 2, 5th generation electro-
optical, precision-guided missiles. The 
SPIKE LR 2 has a range of 5.5 km when 
fired from ground launchers (an increase 
of over 35% from the 4km range of the 
original SPIKE LR) and up to 10km when 
fired from a helicopter using the RF Da-
talink. The IDF is a long-time operational 
user of the SPIKE Missile Family, and the 
addition of the SPIKE LR 2 will enhance 
both its infantry engagement range and its 
lethality against a wide variety of targets. 
The SPIKE LR 2’s connectivity through the 
IDF‘s network of sensors and effectors will 
enhance overall force capabilities. The IDF‘s 
LR 2 procurement complements the IDF’s 
fielding of the Integrated Control Launch 
Unit, the new digital networked launchers 
that provide improved tactical connectivity 
for third party target allocation. SPIKE LR 2 
is a multipurpose missile with full common-
ality to the SPIKE Missile legacy. The LR 2 is 
integrated with all existing types of SPIKE 
launchers in use today, enabling all of them 
to fire both LR and LR 2 Missiles
Photo: Plasan
Image: Rafael
  
 Sweden to Buy PATRIOT
(ck) Notwithstanding the unpleasant cost 
shock PATRIOT delivered recently to Po-
land, Sweden intends to buy Raytheon’s 
PATRIOT air defence missile system for 
US$1.2Bn, amid heightened regional ten-
sions and global offensive ballistic missile 
technology improvements: Iran, North Ko-
rea and Russia, among others, have made 
significant advances in their missile technol-
ogy. The Swedish government will make 
a final decision on the acquisition during 
2018. Raytheon will aim at deliveries be-
ginning in 2020, and for the system to be 
operational by 2025 at the latest. Raythe-
on has built more than 220 PATRIOT fire 
units and delivered them to customers in 
13 nations including The Netherlands and 
Germany. In September 2017, US and Ger-
man soldiers fired the first of dozens of live 
PATRIOT and STINGER missiles at the NATO 
facilities in Crete, aimed at strengthening 
the response to potential attacks from Rus-
sia and any other countries. The exercise on 
the Greek island includes a series of emerg-
ing “real world threats” such as the use 
of drones, electronic warfare and electro-
magnetic pulses. The exercise came amid 
a big push by the United States, Germany 
and other NATO members to rebuild their 
short-range air defence systems after the 
shock of Russia’s annexation of the Crimea 
region and its support of separatists in the 
Donbass region of Ukraine.
  
 New Practice Ammo  
for LEOPARD 2 
(sb) Rheinmetall will supply the 
German Bundeswehr with new 
practice ammunition for main 
battle tanks. This is the German 
Army’s first-ever order of the 
new DM98 full-calibre 120mm 
practice ammunition. The first 
10,000 rounds of DM98 am-
munition will reach the Bun-
deswehr before the end of the 
year. Rheinmetall expects to 
receive an order for a further 
3,200 cartridges at the begin-
ning of 2018, with shipment 
due in the first quarter of the 
year. The entire order is valued at €24.7M. 
Rheinmetall Waffe Munition GmbH devel-
oped the 120mm full-calibre round as a 
successor to the DM18. Essential charac-
teristics of the new round include a geom-
etry and length comparable to its DM18 
predecessor and above-average accuracy 
at ranges exceeding 2,000 metres. It also 
features a tracer function that assures 
steady visibility in all light conditions. In re-
sponse to an operational requirement, the 
new round – initially known as the RH88 
– was qualified in 2015 for all variants of 
LEOPARD 2 main armament, with Den-
mark serving as the pilot customer. In 2016 
it was successfully qualified with a second 
packaging system by the Bundeswehr, and 
introduced as the DM98. The official des-
ignation in English is “Cartridge 120mm 
x 570, DM98 TP-T”, with the final initials 
standing for target practice tracer. These 
two German orders mean that by the end 
of 2017, Rheinmetall will have supplied over 
20,000 rounds of RH88/DM98 ammuni-
tion to four different LEOPARD 2 user na-
tions in three years. 
Photo: Rheinmetall
Periscope

9
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
  
 Saab Subsystems Order for 
METEOR 
(ck) Saab will deliver subsystems for the 
MBDA METEOR Beyond Visual Range Air-
to-Air Missile (BVRAAM) missile system. 
The order value amounts to approximately 
SEK150M and deliveries to MBDA will take 
place during the 2020-2021 period. Swe-
den is working with France, Germany, Italy, 
Spain and the UK to develop and field the 
METEOR, with MBDA as the programme’s 
prime contractor. This order from MBDA 
comprises deliveries of radar proximity fuse 
subsystems (PFS) for the METEOR missile 
system. The PFS is developed and manufac-
tured by Saab and integrated in all METEOR 
missiles: the PFS detects the target and 
calculates the optimum time to detonate 
the warhead in order to achieve maximum 
effect. The METEOR is an advanced, long-
range, agile air-to-air missile system that 
is uniquely designed to counter sophisti-
cated airborne threats. In 2016, the Swed-
ish Air Force´s GRIPEN fighters became the 
world’s first combat aircraft to declare an 
operational METEOR capability, as part of 
GRIPEN’s MS20 capability upgrade. 
tion (FMV) for use at its Vidsel Test Range. 
Robonic, based in Tampere, Finland, is a 
Safran Electronics & Defence-owned en-
gineering company that manufactures un-
manned air system launchers. Delivery will 
take place before the end of 2017. Designed 
to launch tactical unmanned air systems 
and target drones, the pneumatic launcher 
is capable of catapulting several types of 
aerial target drones aloft. The KONTIO 
launcher is a mobile universal launcher with 
a large mass and speed envelope, which 
make it suitable for numerous variants of 
targets or tactical unmanned aerial vehi-
cles. It is designed to launch air vehicles of 
up to 140kg with a 70 m/s exit velocity or 
alternatives up to 500kg at 37 m/s.
  
 Berlin Police Orders  
SURVIVOR R 
(ck) The Berlin Police have ordered a pro-
tected SURVIVOR R vehicle from Rheinmet-
all Vehicle Systems Division RMMV. Tailored 
to meet the requirements of the Opera-
tions Directorate, this vehicle is earmarked 
for delivery in July 2018. The order is worth 
a six-figure Euro amount. After Saxony, Ber-
lin is the second German region to equip its 
police force with the SURVIVOR R. Made by 
RMMV, the SURVIVOR R meets the impera-
tives of security and mobility. Developed in 
cooperation with Austrian vehicle maker 
Achleitner, the SURVIVOR R is ideally-suited 
to police SWAT-type operations: vehicles 
of this kind are important in high-risk situ-
ations when special operators need to be 
transported safely to an area of opera-
tions. The SURVIVOR R is based on a 4x4 
MAN truck chassis, outfitted with a steel 
armour passenger compartment. Capable 
of reaching a top speed of over 100 km/h, 
this vehicle combines automotive engi-
neering with force protection technology 
from Rheinmetall. The vehicle’s armoured 
monocoque cab can be equipped with 
add-on protection elements; a ventilation 
system for filtering out nuclear, biological 
and chemical agents is standard. The de-
sign and appearance of the police version 
of the SURVIVOR R is intended to convey 
a de-escalating, non-military impression. 
The vehicle can carry up to eleven law en-
forcement officers and their equipment 
as well as extensive communications and 
command and control hardware. Civilian 
off-the-shelf and standard military compo-
nents result in a sensibly priced vehicle. This 
makes the SURVIVOR R a cost-efficient, 
easy-to-maintain vehicle with low lifecycle 
costs and high operational readiness. 
Photo: Rheinmetall
  
 Robonic to Deliver KONTIO 
to Sweden
(sb) As reported briefly in our Finland 
Country Focus (see ESD 7/17), Robonic, a 
subsidiary of Safran Electronics &Defence, 
has signed a contract to deliver a third-
generation KONTIO pneumatic launcher to 
the Swedish Defence Materiel Administra-
Photo: Safran
  
 Hellenic Navy Avionic 
Upgrades
(ck) Rockwell Collins will modernise the 
cockpits of Greek P-3 aircraft with its Rock-
well Collins Flight2 integrated avionics sys-
tem, which has been selected by Lockheed 
Martin to bring Hellenic Navy P-3 aircraft 
into compliance with upcoming mandates 
for unrestricted global airspace operations. 
The Flight2 integrated avionics upgrade 
will convert the flight deck into an all-glass 
cockpit, making for easier viewing of criti-
cal information on the primary and multi-
function flight displays, and the engine 
instrument display system. Additionally, 
integrated communications and Identifica-
tion Friend or Foe (IFF) Mode-5 capabilities 
ensure mission readiness. Already installed 
on 15 Greek C130s, Flight2 is built on archi-
tecture compliant with Communications, 
Navigation, Surveillance and Air Traffic 
Management Systems (CNS/ATM), sup-
portable and sustainable to meet current 
and future aviation mandates.
Photo: Rockwell Collins
  
 EMILY to Power Polaris 
(ck) The EMILY 3000 fuel cell by SFC Energy, 
a provider of hybrid power solutions to the 
stationary and mobile power generation 
markets, is the power generator on board 
Polaris Defence’s modified MRZR-D4 high 
mobility tactical vehicle. The MRZR-D4 is 
an ultra-light tactical vehicle developed by 
Polaris Defence to meet the mobility needs 
of international special operations forces, 
and expeditionary and light infantry forces 
in off-road missions and facing emerging 
threats. On board of the MRZR-D4 an 
EMILY 3000 fuel cell provides reliable tacti-
cal power for extended mobility and mis-
sion endurance. The EMILY fuel cell is an 
autonomous power source on board that 
recharges batteries anytime, anywhere. 
SFC fuel cell and accessory products carry 
a NATO stock number codification and are 
approved for air transportation according 
to UN3473.
Photo: SFC

10
European Security & Defence · December 2017
that enables weight reduction, leading to 
enhanced mobility and / or increased ar-
mour protection level with no increase 
in overall weight: new threats demand 
enhanced protection at lighter weights 
to increase user mobility. New armour 
systems have to not only provide protec-
tion to security professionals, but also to 
ground vehicles, maritime platforms, and 
assorted airframes used in carrying out 
the mission. ENDUMAX SHIELD XF33 can 
be used for high-performance hard body 
armour plates, helmets and rigid panels 
for vehicle and maritime protection. EN-
DUMAX SHIELD XF33 achieves a superior 
performance-to-weight solution for body 
armour inserts, such as NIJ III standalone as 
well as in conjunction with ballistic vests. 
Thanks to the structural integrity achieved 
with low processing pressures, the use of 
ENDUMAX SHIELD XF33 for vehicle and 
maritime protection enables easier process-
ing of larger panels with few or no seams, 
which minimises potentially vulnerable 
joints and increases design freedom for 
optimum panel cuts, thereby making the 
solution more cost-efficient. 
mechanised, reproducible and comprehen-
sively documented process, DLHP welding 
also reduces the risks caused by the manual 
MAG welding process, which is commonly 
applied in the defence and security environ-
ment.  Ballistic and blast tests according to 
WTD standards have successfully been car-
ried out at the German Test and Evaluation 
Unit for Defence Technology („Wehrtech-
nische Dienststelle WTD“). DLHP welding is 
now in its final phase of patent application 
and testing. 
  
 California Launch for First 
Spanish Military Satellite
(ck) Hisdesar, the Spanish government 
satellite services company, announced the 
launch window of military radar satellite 
PAZ as January 30, 2018. The US company 
Space X will put PAZ into orbit through its 
Falcon 9 launcher in the Vandenberg (Cali-
fornia) area base after two years of delay 
due to the war in Ukraine: originally, the 
Ukrainian-Russian consortium Kosmotras 
was to put the PAZ into orbit in 2015 from 
the city of Dnipró, but the war intervened. 
The satellite will be able to take more than 
100 images per day, with which it will cover 
an area of more than 300,000 square kilo-
metres every 24 hours, with high-resolu-
tion images. The satellite‘s main contractor 
is Airbus Defence & Space, managing a 
consortium of 18 Spanish companies and 
universities. 
Photo: Airbus
  
 New Welding Technology 
for Armoured Steel
(ck) Larger parts and components for ar-
moured vehicles have to undergo a careful 
manual welding process to ensure highest 
safety properties at and around the connec-
tion points of the steel plates. Stahlkontor, 
a Germany-based specialist for the process-
ing of high grade steels for defence and civil 
applications, has now patented a new fully 
automated joining technology. The propri-
etary „Dual-LaserHybrid-Process” (DLHP) 
reduces stress-induced risks of cracking and 
breakage in the welding zone. This new 
process has successfully undergone ballistic 
and blast tests at civil and defence authority 
establishments and has proven itself to be 
a reliable, safe and faster way to produce 
vehicle components made of armoured 
steel. DLHP combines simultaneous Laser 
and MAG welding with a special inductive 
heat treatment of the armoured steel plates, 
and the main aspect of this process is the 
significant reduction of stress-induced risks 
of cracking and breakage in and around the 
weld seam, eliminating a weak point of the 
vehicle component when under pressure 
loads from explosives or ballistic attack. As a 
  
 IWI’s New Bullpup
(sb) Israel Weapon Industries (IWI), a pro-
ducer of small arms for law enforcement 
agencies and the military, presented its new 
7.62x51mm calibre IWI TAVOR 7 rifle at 
Milipol 2017, as an addition to the TAVOR 
bullpup rifle family. The IWI TAVOR family 
of assault rifles was developed in coopera-
tion with the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and 
is in service in the IDF Infantry and Special 
Forces. The TAVOR 7 is an ambidextrous 
weapon on which the user can switch the 
ejection port and the charging handle from 
one side to the other. The ambidextrous fea-
tures include safety lever, magazine release, 
and bolt catch similar to the X95. The IWI 
TAVOR 7 also includes an M-LOK fore-end 
(2 M-LOK slots at 3 and 9 o‘clock) as well 
as a MIL-STD 1913 Picatinny rail to allow 
the use of multiple devices and accessories. 
The rifle’s body is built from high-strength, 
impact-modified polymer, and it has a ham-
mer-forged, chrome-lined, free-floating 
barrel. Additional features include a short 
stroke gas piston with a 4-position variable 
gas regulator including an OFF position de-
signed for special operation needs, a rotat-
ing bolt system that ensures safety for the 
user, and a pistol grip that can be changed 
or modified. It is available in four colours: 
sniper grey, OD Green, Black, and Flat Dark 
Earth, with replaceable barrels available in 
432mm or 508mm, for various uses. The 
rifle has an overall length of 723mm and 
without a magazine weighs 4.1kg. 
Photo: IWI
  
 Teijin Aramid Introduces 
ENDUMAX SHIELD XF33
(ck) Teijin Aramid has developed a poly-
ethylene-based armour fibre called EN-
DUMAX SHIELD XF33. This is a UHMWPE 
(Ultra High Molecular Weight Polyethylene) 
  
 TenCate Adaptable  
Armour System
(ck) TenCate Advanced Armour has devel-
oped a new threat-compliant body armour 
system that can be adapted to accom-
modate different threat levels within the 
same system by using add-on plates to the 
TenCate Multi-light CXP461IC Basic Light 
plate. Two modular add-on plates can be 
accommodated in the carrier system and be 
inserted or extracted to optimise the protec-
tion level of the complete system. The new 
body armour system is relevant for units 
operating in zones with alternating threat 
levels such as Special Forces and infantry op-
erating in urban environments. TenCate Ad-
vanced Armour presented its new TenCate 
Multi-light CXP461IC Basic Light plate and 
the additional Operator and Breacher plates 
Photo: TenCate
Periscope

11
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
  
 Electo-Optical Systems  
from Belarus
(sb) Modern combat operations dictate 
special materiel requirements. One of the 
main criteria is multifunctionality. That is 
why combined electro-optic systems have 
become more and more popular, and Be-
lOMO Holding and STC LEMT from the Re-
public of Belarus specialize in such devices 
for Special Operations Forces, Infantry and 
Police. The TV/R 2 is a portable electro-optic 
observation device which has the optimum 
number of functions for use on the battle-
field – a thermal imaging channel which al-
lows detection of human targets – by size 
and characteristics – to ranges exceeding 
2,000 metres, a laser rangefinder for dis-
tance measurement providing an accuracy 
of ±1 metre, magnetic compass, angular 
sensor, GPS. This combination of sensors 
and functions covers all the requirements 
for sniper tasks, for example, or night time 
operations. Regarding night combat, image 
fusion is one of the key technologies also of-
fered by BelOMO and LEMT as the solution 
to the problem of choosing between night 
and thermal vision. The Belarussian TN-KS 
Observation Device offers both Image Inten-
sification and Thermal Imaging on one plat-
form – channels may be used separately or 
together. This offers the advantages of both 
systems – target detection at long range 
and high-quality, detailed images at closer 
ranges. Also, the combined device makes it 
possible to use IR target designators which 
are generally not compatible with thermal 
vision technology. The TV/R2 is undergoing 
trials with Belarussian Special Forces, and 
the TN-KS is in the prototyping stage: both 
were presented at MILEX 2017. BelOMO 
and LEMT will be present at several specialist 
defence exhibitions throughout 2018.
  
 WEW Pods for US Army
(ck) WEW Container Systems has received a 
contract to deliver additional CAMEL low-
profile water tank modules for the US Army: 
WEW will deliver 167 tanks to prime con-
tractor Choctaw Defense for integration 
into the CAMEL II Unit Water Pod System. 
The system includes the 800USgal. CAMEL 
tank integrated into a frame and mounted 
onto the M1095 trailer. The trailers will ei-
ther be newly manufactured or refurbished 
by Choctaw. Delivery to Choctaw Defense 
began in August 2017, with production 
of up to six units per week thereafter. 
The extremely low-profile system is a key 
element of the US Army’s primary water 
distribution system for platoon level and 
below. WEW delivered 327 CAMEL tank 
units to Choctaw Defense in 2013-14 as 
part of the US Army’s CAMEL II Unit Water 
Pod programme. The thin-skinned water 
tank, which incorporates five patents, is 
insulated and jacketed and equipped with 
an internal baffle system to prevent water 
surge during rugged operations over rough 
terrain. It also has freeze protection. Other 
variants equipped with generator sets can 
be integrated with a chiller system to pro-
vide temperature-controlled water, as well 
at Milipol 2017. The TenCate Multi-light 
CXP461IC Basic Light provides protection 
against NIJ level III+AK47MSC in accordance 
with NIJ 0101.06 at only 720g and can ac-
commodate the Operator or Breacher plate 
to increase the protection level to 5.56x45 
SS109 or AP ammunition up to NIJ level IV 
respectively. The TenCate Multi-light CX-
P461IC Basic Light plate is up to 25% lighter 
than currently marketed AK47MSC plates. 
The plates offered in the system leverage the 
protective capability of the Basic Light plate 
to reach a protection level against higher 
classification threats. This provides the op-
erator with the possibility to tailor ballistic 
protection level against a mission-by-mis-
sion requirement, equips the operator for a 
broader range of operations, and decreases 
the need for units to stock plates for specific 
operational requirements. 
  
 TOR-M2 for Belarus
(sb) The Government of Belarus and Rus-
sia’s Almaz-Antey defence contractor have 
signed a deal on the delivery of another bat-
tery of TOR-M2 air defence missile systems 
to Belarus. The first batteries of TOR-M2 sur-
face-to-air missile systems entered service 
with the 120th anti-aircraft missile Brigade 
of the Air Force and Air Defence Troops in 
2011-2012. In early 2014, the 120th Brigade 
set up an air defence battalion comprising 
three batteries armed with TOR-M2 missile 
systems. The TOR-M2 air defence missile 
systems also went into operation with the 
740th antiaircraft missile brigade in 2016.
The TOR-M2 air defence missile system is an 
effective means to hit aircraft, helicopters, 
manoeuvring unmanned aerial vehicles, 
missiles and also other precision weapons 
flying at medium, low and extremely low 
altitudes in an adverse air and jamming / EW 
environments. The TOR-M2 is characterised 
Photo: WEW Container Systems
Photo: BelOMO
Daily News – Upcoming Events
www.facebook.com/eurodefence
Find us on facebook!

as compact water-treatment for saline and 
contaminated water sources. The tank is 
capable of sustaining positive pressure and 
partial vacuum to compensate for diverse 
operating conditions including during air-
lift, commensurate with modern military 
logistic requirements arising from multi-
modal operations.
by its high manoeuvrability, mobility, quick 
response, automation of combat operations 
and its efficiency in engaging a broad range 
of targets.

12
European Security & Defence · December 2017
 SECURITY POLICY
railways would not connect Iran with Rus-
sia. This connection would only have been 
possible if Georgia had agreed to allow rail 
transport through Abkhazia, which is not 
the case. Thus, the railway project lost out 
against a competing Azerbaijani-Iranian 
initiative, which has accelerated since 2016. 
Hussein Yaghoubi, Director General for In-
ternational Affairs at the Central Bank of 
Iran, said on 27 October 2017: “Under the 
recent agreement, Azerbaijan has agreed 
to allocate US$500M for the construction 
of railways.”
Russia is not prepared to support Iran’s hos-
tility toward Israel. Russia prefers to keep 
an eye on Iran. At the same time, Russia is 
preventing Israel from unilaterally attack-
ing Iran. Nevertheless, Russia and Iran are 
ready to work together to keep other coun-
tries away from the Southern Caucasus and 
the Eastern Mediterranean. It can be said 
that pragmatism was and still is the core of 
bilateral relations. Despite their pragmatic 
approach, the two countries differ when 
it comes to promoting their position in the 
world. Russia perceives itself as a world 
power on the international stage on par 
with China and the USA. Nevertheless, 
Russia and Iran are opposed to US-led in-
tervention in the region, be it in the South-
ern Caucasus or Syria. The United States 
was and still is the driving force behind the 
economic sanctions imposed on Iran in the 
past and on Russia following the annexa-
tion of the Crimea in March 2014. It must 
be recalled, however, that Moscow has 
supported the UN Security Council resolu-
tions imposing economic sanctions on Iran 
Russian-Iranian Relations:  
A Mixed Bag
Eugene Kogan
The declaration that Russia and Iran are strategic partners lacks both  
solid foundation and strategic perspective. 
D
espite the sense of urgency generated 
by regional and global concerns, Rus-
sia and Iran have failed to establish broad-
based economic, scientific, technical, edu-
cational and societal ties. In terms of arms 
exports, Russia still sees Iran as a customer, 
while Iran is doing its best to distance itself 
from Russia and to become self-reliant; Iran 
has recently turned to China in order to 
diversify its weapons imports away from 
Russia. Whether this divergence will con-
tinue remains to be seen. One thing is cer-
tain: Iran is interested in buying commercial 
aircraft from Europe and the United States 
rather than Russia, even if the latter insist 
on it. Whether or not this could lead to a 
collapse of bilateral relations is not a matter 
of course, but both issues, the burgeoning 
Iranian defence industry and the purchase 
of commercial aircraft from countries other 
than Russia, must be carefully monitored. 
Finally, the potential for Iranian gas exports 
to Europe, Gazprom’s main market to date, 
may further intensify the discomfort in this 
relationship that is based not on trust but 
on the need for cooperation to ward off 
American interests in the region.
Russian and Iranian Mixed 
Interests 
Russia and Iran differ on the topics of Ar-
menia and Israel. Iran is to some extent in-
terested in expanding its business relations 
with Armenia, while Russia is either not re-
ally interested in expanding the relationship 
or is constantly resisting Iranian overtures. 
The case of the possible construction of 
the Southern Armenian Railway, which 
failed to secure external funding, not even 
from Iran, underlines the ambivalence of 
Iran and the disinterest of Russia, since the 
Vladimir Putin and Hassan Rouhani, President of Iran, shaking hands 
during Putin’s visit to the Gas Exporting Countries Forum summit in Iran 
in November 2015. Despite the friendly appearance, Russia has been 
blocking Iranian attempts to export gas to Europe. 
Photo: kremlin.ru
Author
Eugene Kogan is a defence  
and security expert based in Tbilisi,  
Georgia.

13
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
SECURITY POLICY  
for its nuclear programme in 2006-2008 
and 2010. Whether the opposition to the 
United States and the existing world or-
der is a sufficient reason to unite the two 
countries in the long term is not a matter of 
course and remains open to debate.
Russia continues to regard Iran as its ar-
maments customer. But as early as May 
2016, the Rouhani government decided 
to diversify the country’s arms and military 
technology imports and to focus more 
strongly on China as a counterpart to Rus-
sia. Until now, China, unlike Russia, has 
not sold arms to Iran, but that is no longer 
excluded. This development must be mon-
itored carefully. In addition to turning to 
China, Iran is also striving to become self-
reliant, and that is what worries Moscow, 
because Russia is not interested in having 
Iran as a potential arms competitor in the 
countries near Iran, but rather a country 
that procures arms exclusively from Mos-
cow and pays for them in hard currency.
In addition to preserving Iran as an arma-
ments customer, Russia is also interested 
in maintaining a positive relationship with 
Iran’s regional rivals Israel, Saudi Arabia 
and Egypt. Moscow wants to preserve its 
flexibility and not allow Iran any chance 
to corner it. However, Iran’s hostility to Is-
rael constitutes a difficult balancing act for 
Russia. Israel wants to ensure that Russian 
weapons sold to Iran do not fall into the 
hands of Israel’s enemy Hezbollah. Mos-
cow takes into account Israel’s concerns, 
but this requires Russia’s constant atten-
tion in dealing with Iran and Israel, without 
alienating them both. It seems that Iran 
has so far accepted the balancing act of 
Moscow. Perhaps Iran is just waiting for 
the right moment to change the balance 
of power. It is clear that Iran is ready to be 
patient for the time being. For how long is 
hard to say.
Despite Moscow’s understanding of Israel’s 
concerns about Russian arms sales to Iran, 
Moscow has no qualms about supplying 
weapons to Tehran. Russia insists on the 
full price paid by Iran for Russian weap-
ons. Putin’s pursuit of better relations with 
Israel did not prevent Putin from forging 
closer ties with Iran when he refused to call 
Iran’s affiliated armed group Hezbollah a 
terrorist organisation and to prevent Rus-
sian weapons from falling into the hands of 
Hezbollah. Whether or not Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu’s government rejects 
Putin’s policy of considering the concerns 
of both sides is irrelevant to Putin, although 
Putin has a good relationship with Netan-
yahu and Netanyahu is often in Moscow. 
Netanyahu visited Moscow in August 2017 
for the sixth time since the Russian inter-
vention in Syria in September 2015. Putin 
will do the best for Russia and not the best 
for Israel or Iran.
Consequently, the Russians were less 
concerned than the Israelis about Iran’s 
improved technical nuclear capabilities 
and the political rationality of its leader-
ship, while at the same time the Russians 
warned of the dangers of an Israeli pre-
emptive strike against Iranian nuclear fa-
cilities, the danger of which only became 
apparent in April 2010. Putin’s pragmatism 
can therefore be described as pure cynicism 
on the basis of clearly formulated priorities, 
which both the Israeli and Iranian Govern-
ments reluctantly accept out of caution.
Diverging Interests or  
Wishful Thinking
In the energy sector, Iran and Russia are 
potential competitors. The 140-kilometre-
long gas pipeline, which was officially inau-
gurated in 2007, supplies natural gas from 
Tabriz, Iran, to Armenia. Contrary to Iran’s 
Loader-launcher and 9A83ME launcher of the Russian S-300VM  
ANTEY-2500 SAM missile system at the MAKS Airshow in 2011.  
Iran is interested in buying modern Russian SAM systems. 
Photo: Vitaly Kuzmin / Wikipedia CC
A Chinese J-10 aircraft at the Zhuhai Airshow. The J-10 is part of the core 
arsenal of the Chinese Air Force. China wants to sell 150 J-10 fighters  
to Iran. The J-10 is an all-weather, multirole fighter with modern air 
combat capabilities against both land and air targets. Iran currently  
has around 500 aircraft, mostly older jets like the F-4D, Su-24, F-5E,  
J-7M and the F1. 
Photo: Wikipedia CC

14
European Security & Defence · December 2017
 SECURITY POLICY
original plans, the pipeline cannot be used 
for larger exports outside Armenia, as its 
diameter has been reduced at the request 
of Russia. Consequently, the annual capac-
ity of 2.3 billion cubic metres of natural 
gas is not sufficient for export to Europe. 
Today, the entire gas distribution network 
in Armenia is controlled by Gazprom Arme-
nia, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Russian 
Gazprom. In other words, “Give the Em-
peror what belongs to the Emperor” and 
accept reality.
As sanctions against Iran were eased in Janu-
ary 2016, Gazprom began new negotiations 
to increase its presence as an investor in the 
Iranian energy sector. But the experience in 
Armenia has led many Iranian experts to be 
wary of Russian policy and Russia is unlikely 
to gain a foothold in the Iranian market, as 
the Government of Rouhani is not prepared 
to open up the lucrative market, even if Iran 
needs time and investment to achieve its 
goals. Whether or not Iran will turn to the 
EU for investment in the energy sector is 
something that cannot be discussed here. 
Nevertheless, it can be said that Tehran is 
considering this. But much also depends 
on the willingness of European investors to 
sign up. EU investors are reluctant to provide 
funds for fear of US sanctions.
Moscow is also concerned that Iran, Azer-
baijan or even both of them could be in-
volved in energy projects that could under-
mine Russia’s position in the European and 
Turkish energy markets. In August 2016, 
President Vladimir Putin called on his Azer-
baijani and Iranian counterparts in Baku to 
cooperate more closely on oil and gas. The 
trilateral format helped Moscow formulate 
a plan to supply Northern Iran with natural 
gas via Azerbaijan in exchange for Iranian 
LNG to be supplied to Russian companies in 
the Persian Gulf. This, in turn, would allow 
Iran to reduce its dependence on Turkmeni-
stan as the only natural gas supplier, while 
the Russian authorities could ensure that 
at least part of the Iranian gas does not 
enter Europe. However, the total quantity 
of Iranian gas that will reach Europe is likely 
to displease Russia. 
Russian-Iranian trade is declining. For ex-
ample, in 2015, trade between the two 
countries amounted to US$1.2Bn, com-
pared with US$1.7Bn in 2014 and with 
US$3.5Bn per year in 2010 and 2011. 
However, according to the Department 
of Asian Affairs of the Russian Ministry of 
Defense (MoFA), trade between Iran and 
Russia recovered to over US$2Bn in 2016, 
with energy, machinery and weapons sales 
accounting for the lion’s share of transac-
tions. According to RBC Information Sys-
tems of Russia, Russia supplied weapons 
worth more than US$300M to Iran. Never-
theless, this modest upturn can hardly be 
described as a breakthrough, as both sides 
expected higher sales. But reality turned 
out to be different.
By mid-2016, long-discussed joint projects 
in the energy sector were still on the draw-
ing board and the construction of the sec-
ond and third power units of the Bushehr 
nuclear power plant that were discussed 
back in November 2014 had not yet begun. 
The new headquarters of Gazprom Armenia in the capital Yerevan. The 
Russian state-owned company Gazprom controls the entire gas distribu-
tion network in Armenia, thereby denying Iranian companies access to  
the Armenian market.
Photo: Mikhail Arutiunian / Wikipedia CC
The Chinese Fast Attack Craft 2208 – Type-022 HOUBEI Class. China  
offered the HOUBEI Class high-speed missile boats to Iran. China also 
sold the boat to Pakistan. China and Iran already have a long-standing 
navy-to-navy relationship.
Photo: Wikipedia CC

15
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
SECURITY POLICY  
Therefore, it is premature to say whether 
Rosatom, Russia’s major nuclear energy 
corporation, is looking for new orders to 
compete after it finishes constructing re-
actors at Bushehr. We need to remember 
that most Iranian companies are short of 
money, which means that their Russian 
counterparts have to find the finances for 
each project. Since Russia is also experienc-
ing a credit crunch, only a small part of the 
projects receives government loans.
For instance, this was the case with the 
construction of a thermal power plant 
in Bandar Abbas and with the supply of 
rail wagons by Uralvagonzavod. Russia’s 
Vnesheconombank (VEB) signed an agree-
ment with an Iranian Bank of Industry and 
Mining over a loan worth US$1.2Bn for the 
development of the plant in Bandar Ab-
bas. Uralvagonzavod won the contract 
for the supply of 5,000 wagons, the first 
batch of which was shipped in September 
2016. In addition, Russia and Iran signed a 
US$2.5Bn deal in late July 2017 to set up 
a much-needed rail wagon factory. Both 
sides will set up a new joint venture, 80 
percent of which will be owned by Russia, 
but financed 100 percent by Russia.
In the summer of 2016, the Russian gov-
ernment released two loans (one of which 
as cited above was provided by VEB) to 
Iran totalling €2.2Bn (or about US$2.5Bn), 
but a promised US$5Bn loan to Tehran to 
promote industrial co-operation has yet to 
materialise. There are plenty of doubts re-
garding its materialisation.
During Putin’s visit to Tehran on 1 No-
vember 2017, Russia and Iran agreed on 
strategic energy transactions worth up to 
US$30Bn for the development of Iranian 
oil and gas fields as well as for research 
cooperation. But the agreement does not 
yet mean that it will be implemented.
It can therefore be said that the above-
mentioned diverging interests and/or 
dreams must be approached carefully in 
order to improve the current situation and 
implement the above-mentioned projects.
A Small Change in Relations 
or just an Illusion
Nonetheless, since the signing of the Joint 
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) 
between Iran and the P5+1 world powers 
– the United States, the United Kingdom, 
Russia, France, China and Germany – in 
2015, the Supreme Leader of Iran, Ayatol-
lah Ali Khamenei, enthusiastically support-
ed the initiative to deepen relations with 
Moscow while remaining cautious towards 
the West. The Iranian government has fo-
cused on Khamenei and has supported 
the development of relations with Russia, 
in particular with a view to strengthening 
defence capabilities. So far, no concrete 
arms deals have been concluded between 
Russia and Iran, although frequently pub-
lished figures of about US$10Bn have been 
announced for a potential deal. The JCPOA 
aims to lift the UN arms embargo by Octo-
ber 2020. Until then, all sales of offensive 
weapons systems to Iran must be approved 
by the UN Security Council. This is the rea-
son for the unsigned arms agreements, but 
negotiations are continuing.
Iran will continue to use its close relations 
with Russia to improve its defence struc-
ture, implement its regional policy and 
protect its interests at the international 
level. Russia’s right of veto in the UN Secu-
rity Council is an important instrument for 
defending Iran’s interests against possible 
Western sanctions, and the Iranian leader-
ship values continuous Russian aid. At the 
same time, Moscow is concerned about 
the development of the Iranian medium-
range ballistic missile programme, but this 
concern is now rarely or not at all made 
public. In September 2017, Iran had suc-
cessfully tested a new medium-range mis-
sile despite Russian frowning.
The Iranian-Russian relationship is not a 
strategic partnership, but a wary partner-
ship in which both sides pay close attention 
to each other and take special precautions 
to avoid misunderstandings and misinter-
pretations or possible mishaps. Lack of 
coordination, despite the support of Aya-
tollah Ali Khamenei, could be one of the 
determining factors for the wary relations 
between the two countries.
In addition, Iran is hesitant when it comes 
to publicly highlighting its relations with 
Russia, while Russia is boasting about its bi-
lateral relations. This has nothing to do with 
Moscow’s sense of superiority, as some re-
searchers claim, but with different politi-
cal positions. Russia plays the role of world 
power and Iran acts as a regional power. In 
addition, both sides accept the fact that the 
diverging positions are unlikely to change in 
the foreseeable future and that both sides 
must therefore find a modus vivendi.
In summary, it can be said that even with 
the increase in trade in 2016, Russian eco-
nomic relations and investment in Iran are 
below average and not very impressive. The 
number of Iranian tourists travelling to Rus-
sia in 2016 was rather low (about 80,000) 
compared with the number of Iranians 
travelling to neighbouring countries such 
as Armenia (189,000), Azerbaijan (about 
220,000), Georgia (142,000) and Turkey 
(1.7 million). On the other hand, Iranian ex-
patriates from the USA and Britain travel to 
Iran to visit their relatives and get to know 
the country their parents left more than 40 
years ago.
The arms deals in preparation are cur-
rently awaiting the lifting of the UN Se-
curity Council’s arms embargo. Whether 
China can counteract Russian arms sales 
to Iran must be carefully monitored.
It is therefore unlikely that Iran will be-
come Russia’s strategic partner, and most 
Moscovites and Tehranis can hope that a 
pragmatic relationship will develop based 
on the interests of the two countries as 
defined by their respective leaderships. 
Whether the pragmatic relationship can 
develop into a more substantial and 
comprehensive relationship remains to 
be seen. 
L
The Russian state-owned defence company Uralvagonzavod delivered 
more than 5,000 railway wagons to Iran. The Type 12-581 wagon de-
signed for export to Iran has a capacity of 66 tonnes. 
Photo: Uralvagonzavod

16
European Security & Defence · December 2017
H
istorically, the first stage of global or-
der transformation took place after 
the First World War, having a temporary 
soothing effect while a number of great 
economic powers were in the process of re-
covery. On top of that, an intricate system of 
alliances before WWI induced imperial and 
colonial rivalry for wealth and resulted in the 
fiasco of the European balance of power.
The second stage of the global paradigm 
shift occurred after the Second World War. 
International actors claimed neighbour ter-
ritories and expansionism had been the driv-
ing force behind nationalistic states expand-
ing their territorial boundaries by means of 
military aggression. 
At the end of the Second World War, the US 
perceived its involvement in the European 
Security framework as the top national prior-
ity in order to avoid the emergence of a new 
hegemonic power in Europe on the debris 
of the European balance of power. The risk 
that the Soviet Union could succeed where 
Nazi Germany had collapsed elicited the US-
European security partnership which formed 
the basis of the Atlantic political order.
Subsequently, during the Cold War, bloc-
based security systems emerged and Euro-
pean states along with the US established a 
number of security institutions. The aim of 
multi-layered institutional arrangements was 
to prevent Soviet pressure and influence in 
the rest of Europe. 
After collapse of the Soviet Union, the US 
was the only remaining superpower. After 
a while though, China has emerged among 
highflyers while the Russian Federation came 
back to the political stage making the world 
order become multi-polar.
Viewpoint from
Tbilisi
Beka Kiria
Director of the Gagra Institute
In the Wake of Post-Atlanticism
Thus, a key to success is to look through the 
prism of China at the Central Asian region. 
Needless to say, these territories in the past 
were under Chinese imperial influence. Still, 
recent military activities and economic de-
velopments illustrate that China’s current bid 
on its own Central Asian provinces – Xinjiang 
and Tibet – is significantly projecting power 
at Central Asian countries.
The outreach of EU institutions is very weak 
in this region. EU presence in Central Asia 
is understood through the chain of “neigh-
bours of EU neighbourhood”. Besides, 
comparing the EU’s presence to that of 
China, Central Asian countries are imme-
diate neighbours for Beijing. By contrast, 
referring to the Russian approach towards 
Central Asian countries, these states are still 
claimed to be in the sphere of Russia’s in-
fluence similarly as the South Caucasus is 
claimed as Russia’s backyard. 
In advance, common European values in the 
21st century in the scope of the transatlantic 
relationship seem to be losing their impor-
tance. Emerging powers – China, Brazil and 
India – are far more attractive and vital for 
US interests, but strategic move from Europe 
to Asia temporarily sacked the US strategic 
manoeuvre due to Russian political awaken-
ing which poses an open challenge to the 
European Security framework.
Finally, in spite of all challenges and diffi-
culties based on the wider global context, 
the strategic move from Europe to Asia is a 
critical necessity for US interests. Meanwhile, 
however, the US is facing a complex politi-
cal juggle, keeping the strong Euro-Atlantic 
bond, avoiding the realisation of the EU’s 
military dimension, protecting European Se-
curity framework from Russian aggressive 
stance and keeping the Asian re-balancing 
strategy.
Earlier, hegemonic dominance by the US 
successfully fostered the NATO enlargement 
process starting with the German reunifica-
tion, the Visegrad Group, the Vilnius Group 
and finally reaching aspiring countries like 
Georgia, Ukraine and Macedonia. However, 
due to geographical proximity, NATO faced 
challenges and difficulties from a newly 
emerged Russian Federation. 
In spite of intensive cooperative frameworks 
with particular stakeholders in targeted 
countries and regions, a possible NATO 
membership of Georgia and Ukraine be-
came a difficult task due to Russian aggres-
sion with strong opposition to any NATO 
expansion plans. 
On top of that, the long-term strategic shift 
by the US from Europe to Asia puts the Euro-
Atlantic security cooperation into question. 
There is no clear projection if the US security 
planners focus on the Asian continent and 
let Europe face challenges alone, or if the 
transatlantic relationship remains steady.
Moreover, the EU is enthusiastic about devel-
oping a European military dimension which 
could undermine NATO and weaken inter-
operability within NATO. However, the Rus-
sian activities in Ukraine are jeopardising the 
concept of a whole, secure and free Europe 
resulting in US roll-back of its rebalancing 
strategy. In a chain of political reactions, Rus-
sia unreasonably acts as a protective fence to 
China, hindering the US re-balancing strat-
egy against China while the European Secu-
rity structure is challenged by Russia.
In this geopolitical game, the Western posi-
tion must re-focus on a practical coopera-
tion and extended dialogue with the Central 
Asian region since geographically Central 
Asia is divided between Russia and China. 
Currently, institutional outreach of the EU 
and NATO is almost non-existent there.

17
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
SECURITY POLICY  
Author
Dr Stephen Blank  is a Senior  
Fellow at the American Foreign Policy 
Council. He is the author of numer-
ous foreign policy-related articles, 
white papers and monographs, spe-
cifically focused on the geopolitics 
and geostrategy of the former Soviet 
Union, Russia and Eurasia. He is a 
former MacArthur Fellow at the US 
Army War College. This is a revised, 
expanded, and update article based 
on the article “Whither the Expanded 
SCO: After the India-China Clash” 
which appeared in the “Central Asia 
Caucasus Analyst” in October.
T
his essay attempts to analyse some of 
the current and possibly foreseeable 
trends involving the SCO as it adapts to 
a new membership and a highly dynamic 
international setting. One example of the 
SCO’s response to the rising power of Asian 
states has been to incorporate India and 
Pakistan into the membership. This clearly 
represented a trade-off between Russian 
support for India’s membership and Chi-
na’s promotion of Pakistan’s entry into the 
SCO. But by doing so the organisation has 
also now incorporated into its midst not 
just the Indo-Pakistani rivalry but also Indo-
Chinese rivalry as well. And, as we shall 
see below, this is not the only international 
rivalry that has impinged upon the work-
ings of the SCO.
So while the recent Indo-Chinese crisis 
over the Doklam area near Tibet has been 
resolved peacefully for the moment, its re-
percussions will also spill over to Central 
Asia and are not confined to the Indo-Chi-
nese borders or even South Asia. Indeed, 
as a result of this clash, China has learned 
that it can no longer confidently assume 
that it can push India around and India 
has immediately registered that lesson in 
self-confidence by stating that it will play a 
larger role in Southeast Asia, another area 
where they both jostle for influence. But 
by the same token we can expect that we 
will also see in Central Asia an expanded 
rivalry, not least within the framework of 
the SCO, since India and Pakistan are both 
members. Even more intriguingly, India, at 
the recent BRICS summit succeeded in get-
ting the communiqué to single out Pakistan 
as a state sponsor of terrorism and pressure 
it to desist from those policies. How these 
trends will resonate within the SCO in the 
future is, for now, anybody’s guess. But 
they do show some of the dynamics that 
are already at work among the new and 
old members of the SCO.
Even if the Doklam crisis had not occurred, 
the appearance of enhanced contention if 
not rivalry between Beijing and New Delhi 
within Central Asia in general and the SCO 
in particular as well as the abiding Indo-Pa-
kistani rivalry would take place as a result of 
the SCO’s new membership structure. The 
Indo-Chinese rivalry in Southeast, South, 
and Central Asia is a long-standing affair 
and a keystone of China’s overall foreign 
policy strategy has always been to confine 
India to influence only on the subcontinent 
and even challenge it there. Thus in the 
context of the SCO, which China habitually 
employs as a venue for making the bilateral 
deals that go to comprise its huge Belt and 
Road Initiative that has aroused consider-
able Indian suspicion, the appearance of 
this Indo-Chinese rivalry within the SCO will 
almost certainly generate interesting and 
even possibly unpredictable dynamics and 
not only in Central Asia.  
As both parties’ capabilities and power 
grow this rivalry will probably become 
even more acute and far-reaching both 
with regard to the intensity and frequency 
of manifestations of this rivalry, and prob-
ably in regard to embracing ever wider ge-
ographical and/or issue clusters or zones. 
Certainly this “spillover” will include Paki-
stan. And the future of the Sino-Pakistani 
relationship, especially after the BRICS 
Making Sense of the Shanghai  
Cooperation Organisation
Stephen Blank
The Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) is one of the most interesting yet elusive phenomena 
in contemporary world politics. While it is rather difficult to get a handle on what it is accomplishing 
and to what degree it is successful, its membership has grown to include India and Pakistan and Iran is 
knocking at the door. 
The 2017 Summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation met in 
Astana, Kazakhstan.
Photo: Wikipedia CC

18
European Security & Defence · December 2017
 SECURITY POLICY
communiqué, merits careful scrutiny. The 
leaders of China and Pakistan have regu-
larly intoned the “all-weather” friendship 
between them. Indeed, Pakistan has be-
come a central part of China’s Belt and 
Road Initiative to the extent that China is 
not only building a road from its border to 
the port of Gwadar but also investing be-
tween US$46Bn and US$59Bn in Pakistan 
alone. China also announced this support 
for Pakistan and thus its support for vari-
ous terrorist groups inside Afghanistan in 
the wake of President Trump’s newly an-
nounced Afghan strategy. Yet one month 
later it signed off on the BRICS communi-
qué attacking Pakistan. So it remains to be 
seen just how much fidelity to this part of 
that communiqué Beijing will display and 
to what degree, if any, the acceptance of 
that language betokens a shift in Chinese 
policy.
At the same time all this Chinese support 
for Pakistan and Pakistan’s deliberate sup-
port of terrorist groups’ attacks upon In-
dian targets is increasingly intolerable to 
an India determined to play a great power 
role in Asia. Consequently in recent years 
Delhi has not only sought a massive en-
hancement of its indigenous defence ca-
pability (with uneven results) but has vis-
ibly expanded its ties and presence with 
Southeast, Northeast Asia and Afghani-
stan as well as with the United States. 
Trump’s Afghan strategy also explicitly 
calls on India to play a greater role than 
it already does in Afghanistan, presum-
ably in some as yet unspecified form of 
coordination with Washington. However, 
while India evidently is ready to expand its 
civilian profile in Afghanistan, it clearly will 
not commit military forces to that country.
Background
China has long viewed the SCO as one of 
the building blocks of its vision of Central 
Asia and long resisted Indian entry into 
it for reasons that stem from its determi-
nation to brook no rivals in the quest for 
Asian great power status. Instead it pre-
ferred Pakistan but could only get its way 
as part of a package deal whereby both 
states entered into the SCO, thereby also 
mollifying Russia, India’s principal sup-
porter. However, and given the dynamic 
evolution of Russo-Chinese relations and 
overall Asian relationships in the last few 
years, it is currently doubtful if, in a crisis, 
Russia would continue to prefer India. Prob-
ably, in fact, it would try to remain neutral 
in any subsequent Indo-Chinese conflict or 
major crisis but would ultimately have to 
lean towards China, albeit with great re-
grets. Indeed, Sino-Russian cooperation in 
regard to inviting the Taliban to a peace con-
ference and thus championing Pakistan’s 
proxy over that of the US. and India sug-
gests that there is little likelihood (for now) 
of breaking that Sino-Russian consensus 
that more and more comes to resemble a 
working alliance based on Russia’s grow-
ing dependence on China’s economic and 
political support in Asia, Europe, and the 
Middle East if not elsewhere. Indeed, me-
dia reports and expert analyses point to ever 
increasing signs of joint Sino-Russian activity 
in Latin America, Europe, and the Middle 
East beyond East, South, and Central Asia.
Beyond Afghanistan we know that the 
Doklam crisis generated much anxiety in 
Moscow because it raised not just the pros-
pect of armed conflict between India and 
China but might have forced Russia to take 
a stand in favour of one its two principal 
Asian partners at the other one’s expense. 
Although Russia’s ideal policy in Asia, go-
ing back to Yevgeny Primakov, would be to 
have a triangle with China, India, and itself 
all pushing the same policies; this dream 
has repeatedly foundered on Indo-Chinese 
rivalry. And more recently it has also be-
come apparent that Moscow’s growing 
dependency and relative weakness vis-a 
vis China is eroding prospects of a triangle 
or even a Sino-Russian duopoly to be a true 
relationship of equals.
In this context, the signs of Chinese sup-
port for Pakistan have been a notable issue,  
because since 2012-13 there has been a 
marked improvement in Russo-Pakistani 
relations to the point where both sides 
are conducting joint military exercises in 
the North Caucasus in September 2017. 
Russia is now selling arms to Pakistan and 
discussing major energy deals with it. Per-
haps most importantly Moscow, for some 
On 8-9 June 2017 the heads of the SCO states met in Astana, Kazakhstan, for the 2017 summit. 
At the SCO 2017 summit, India and 
Pakistan became members of the 
organisation.
Photo: Kremlin.ru
Photo: Wikipedia CC

19
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
SECURITY POLICY  
to the degree that it is able to enlist greater 
Indian support for the government in Ka-
bul. Thus there is good reason for believ-
ing that India’s enhanced confidence and 
willingness to stand up to China’s asser-
tive and hegemonic behaviour will soon 
be manifested within 
the SCO and the region 
at large. Thus the BRICS 
summit may have rep-
resented the first fruits 
of India’s newly gained 
assertiveness or confi-
dence.
Similarly to the degree 
that China actually fol-
lows through by putting 
pressure upon Pakistan 
to reverse course with 
regard to sponsorship of 
terrorism that will bring 
India and China closer to-
gether, to Russia’s delight 
and Pakistan’s discomfi-
ture. On the other hand, 
if there is no follow-up to 
the BRICS communiqué 
then the Indo-Chinese 
and Indo-Pakistani ri-
valries at the heart of the SCO will grow 
in size and scope and further erode the 
SCO’s ability to play any kind of role as 
a regional security provider or manager. 
How that kind of outcome would affect 
the dynamics of its members’ multiple re-
lationships could become a very interest-
ing trend. But at present it is too early to 
determine which way events and Chinese 
policies will go.
Beijing at the BRICS summit will affect the 
dynamics of the SCO or the larger dynam-
ics of Indo-Pakistani-Sino-Russian relation-
ships in South and Central Asia.
After the Doklam crisis, where India for 
the first time compelled China to treat it 
as an equal instead of retreating, we can 
easily imagine future situations regarding 
Afghanistan and Central Asia where their 
mutual rivalry as well as Chinese support 
for Pakistan will obstruct efforts to use 
the SCO as a platform for genuine and 
meaningful regional security cooperation 
among the members. This will be particu-
larly the case as Washington steps up its 
military commitment to Afghanistan and 
time, has been transferring weapons to the 
Taliban, Pakistan’s proxy, and supporting its 
inclusion in a future Afghan government 
as part of a Sino-Russian-Pakistani peace 
plan that counters Indian and American 
interests in Pakistan and that has elicited a 
decidedly cool response from the Afghan 
government in Kabul. Since this policy di-
rectly contradicts critical Indian interests 
and policies it is entirely plausible that one 
reason for the Russo-Pakistani rapproche-
ment at India’s expense has been Chinese 
influence on both its friends to be more 
friendly to each other even as this gambit 
weakens Indo-Russian ties and fully con-
forms to China’s long-term policy of boxing 
India into its subcontinent and frustrating 
New Delhi’s efforts to expand its influence 
into Central Asia.
Previously China has regarded the SCO as a 
building block of its hegemonic standing in 
Central Asia and a vehicle for pursuing ex-
panded bilateral ties with the Central Asian 
members. Therefore that organisation has 
hitherto been the site of many Sino-Russian 
disputes that have hindered the SCO’s abil-
ity to play the role envisioned by China or 
to maximise the SCO’s aspiration to be an 
effective security provider in Central Asia. 
Inasmuch as the SCO’s charter and sum-
mits regularly decry terrorism and call for 
support against it while China and Russia 
now embrace Pakistan who is sponsoring 
terrorism in Afghanistan and against India. 
Beijing and Moscow have not only vitiated 
the SCO’s effectiveness and legitimacy of 
the SCO, they have also incorporated the 
overlapping Indo-Chinese and Indo-Pa-
kistani rivalries into the heart of the SCO. 
Consequently it remains to be seen wheth-
er the seeming change of heart evinced by 
The restricted format meeting of the SCO Council of Heads of State in Astana in 2017.
In June 2017 a military stand-off occurred between China and India as 
China attempted to extend a road on the Doklam Plateau and Indian 
troops moved in to prevent this. India claimed to have acted on behalf 
of Bhutan. Bhutan has formally objected to China's road construction in 
the disputed area.
Photo: Kremlin.ru
Graphics: Nilesh Shukla, Wikipedia CC

20
European Security & Defence · December 2017
 SECURITY POLICY
energy investments in Russia, all of which 
are high-priority sectors for Moscow.
Certainly we have yet to see any sign of 
real strife or discord as regards Central 
Asia whether they occur in the SCO or 
beyond it. While the SCO may have been 
established as an instrument by which to 
regulate Sino-Russian relations regarding 
Central Asia and provide a framework for 
China’s emergence as a major regional ac-
tor, it seems clear with each passing day 
that China now is the key and dominat-
ing power in the SCO and Central Asia. 
While Russia proclaims its military might 
and willingness to defend the area against 
terrorism, it clearly is reluctant to have to 
make good on that stance as its negotia-
tions with the Taliban suggest. Thus while 
Moscow poses as the gendarme of Cen-
tral Asia, China is its banker. And there are 
signs of thought in Beijing that at some fu-
ture date it might have to act in the region 
to protect its investments. Recent political 
and military gambits point to the expansion 
of Chinese strategic perspectives.
For example, China could also use its new 
anti-terrorism law, which allows for foreign 
counter-terrorist operations, to intervene 
in Middle Eastern or Central Asian states 
against terrorist operations with these 
countries’ consent. China’s army has al-
ready appeared in Pakistan-occupied Kash-
mir. In this same context, the White Paper 
talks about expanding military exchanges, 
creating a regular mechanism for security 
cooperation and  joint anti-terrorist activi-
ties including continuing maritime opera-
tions like that in the Gulf of Aden. In this 
peace process towards that end. Beijing 
has also never spoken publicly about 
Moscow’s gun running and intelligence 
sharing with the Taliban even though the 
Taliban’s status as a terrorist organisation 
is incontrovertible. Moreover, despite the 
often-cited Russian grievance or sense of 
grievance about potentially becoming the 
weaker partner in the relationship, there 
has been no sign of this in policy or of-
ficial rhetoric. China’s caution in handling 
Russia therefore continues to pay ample 
dividends even as it is steadily consolidat-
ing its superiority over Russia.
In particular we see that even in areas 
where Russia has historically indepen-
dently thrown its weight around as a great 
power, it feels compelled to lean on the 
shadow if not the substance of Chinese 
support for the sustainment of its posi-
tion. In Europe there is now an increas-
ing number of reports of Sino-Russian 
cooperation in “active measures” and 
economic policies in Eastern Europe, such 
as joint activities connected to Chinese 
investment in the Greek port of Piraeus. 
Similarly the joint naval manoeuvres of 
2015 in the Mediterranean and of 2017 
in the Baltic show Russia invoking Chinese 
power as a crutch in its efforts to dem-
onstrate its great power presence and 
capability in those two theatres. In the 
Arctic and in energy affairs too we see 
China gaining equity in Russian firms to 
an extent that five years ago would have 
been unimaginable. For example, China is 
now the third largest investor in Rosneft 
and is present in other critical Arctic and 
These relationships are not the only ones of 
interest in the SCO. There is also considerable 
evidence of a growing Middle East-Central 
Asia connection. Tajikistan vetoed Iran’s 
membership in the SCO. This is not only 
because of Tajikistan’s long-running suspi-
cions concerning Iranian supported religious 
agitation inside the country or among Tajik 
students abroad. Evidently due to large-scale 
Saudi investments in domestic religious insti-
tutions in Tajikistan, Dushanbe proved recep-
tive to Saudi efforts to restrict Iran’s influence 
in the larger Muslim world and vetoed its 
entry into the SCO. This is merely one way in 
which Middle Eastern-Central Asian crosscur-
rents are now operating.
In other examples Qatar has invested 
substantial sums in building monumen-
tal mosques in Tajikistan but has resisted 
Dushanbe’s requests for huge industrial, 
mining, and infrastructural investments. 
So here the dependency runs from weak, 
poor Central Asian states to rich and po-
tentially generous Arab investors or state 
investor funds in return for which an obvi-
ous quid pro quo is expected as in the 
Tajik case. Probably as the Middle East 
continues to be torn by internecine rival-
ries among the regional states we will see 
more efforts by Central Asia to elicit aid 
in return for political support from these 
governments and possibly a correspond-
ing willingness on the part of Middle East-
ern states to look for investment opportu-
nities and political support in those states 
against their local rivals.
The Russia-China Dimension
However, it remains the case that the key 
SCO relationship is the Russo-Chinese one. 
Arguably this relationship too is an evolving 
one. It is already well established that China 
has supplanted Russia as the principal inves-
tor and regional economic power in Central 
Asia. It still appears to be the case that the 
prevailing sentiment among US experts is 
that while the Russo-Chinese partnership 
has grown in the last few years, it still is not 
all that troublesome a phenomenon. It is 
also thought that, due to what these ex-
perts believe is the inherent contradiction 
between them and Moscow’s refusal to be 
the “younger brother” in the relationship, 
this entente will sooner or later break up.
However, the evidence of the last few 
years repeatedly points to Moscow aban-
doning Western initiatives in favour of 
alignment with China and not only in 
Central Asia. The current Korean crisis has 
strengthened Sino-Russian ties, and China 
has supported Moscow’s Afghan policy of 
including the Taliban in any future Afghan 
government by endorsing this so-called 
Vladimir Putin in 2013, during a flight over military exercises near 
Sakhalin. During Putin’s trip to Sakhalin, Rosneft CEO Igor Sechin re-
ported to Putin on the completion of the drilling operations in the Sea 
of Okhotsk. Sakhalin’s geographic location and established relations 
with the Asia-Pacific countries provide a base for the establishment of a 
global energy centre there. 
Photo: Kremlin.ru

21
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
SECURITY POLICY  
started looking to European and American 
allies in Asia in response to its perception 
of Russia’s tilt to China. So the tightrope, 
upon which Moscow must now walk, in 
no small measure due to its own policy 
failures, is already standing and beckoning. 
Russia may have no ultimate choice but to 
placate China due to their shared border 
and immense military capability and Rus-
sia’s global ambitions. But will Russia and 
India be easily able to cooperate in Central 
Asia and the SCO? This is not a simple ques-
tion for despite the long-standing mutual 
friendship Russia is now becoming a spon-
sor and supporter of Pakistan against India, 
such as by selling Pakistan weapons. And 
India is unable to accept that status quo. 
China may desire that its friends be friends 
with each other but India may also insist 
upon that and thus upon a corresponding 
distance from its enemies, namely Pakistan 
and to a lesser degree China.
Those policy considerations are likely to 
emerge rather soon in Central Asia given the 
differences over Afghanistan, China’s Belt 
and Road Initiative, and US pressure upon 
India regarding Afghanistan. Should we see 
in the future as well a major US regional ini-
tiative for Central Asia, that too would add 
to the strains now becoming visible in the In-
do-Russian relationship. All of these factors 
will almost certainly come into play in the 
framework of the SCO given its expanded 
membership and might actually make it a 
more interesting if even less effective instru-
ment of regional security than it already is. In 
view of the numerous fires now burning in 
Asia, the SCO may come sooner rather than 
later to enjoy “interesting times.” 
L
due to straitened resources. Thus the SCO 
will probably continue to be a rather dubious 
foundation upon which to build an enduring 
and legitimate security system in Central and 
South Asia, even if it attracts new members.
Beyond that, India has for some time public-
ly expressed its scepticism and reservations 
concerning the Belt and Road Initiative. It 
also recently announced its intention to 
partner with Japan in building a rival project 
to Africa, an area of extensive Chinese eco-
nomic-political and even military investment, 
such as in the Chinese naval base at Djibouti. 
Although Central Asian governments are in 
no position to renounce the benefits that 
accrue to them from participating in China’s 
initiative, they also probably would welcome 
any counteracting Indian investment initia-
tive especially as they have welcomed both 
Indian and Japanese investment in the past. 
And since investment here plays as much 
of a political role as it does an economic 
role we could reasonably expect that a 
larger economic dimension will be grafted 
onto the strategic and political rivalry that 
already exists in Southeast and South Asia. 
And if Washington weighs in with substan-
tial support for an Indo-Japanese initiative 
or actually proposes its own plan, China will 
undoubtedly feel the competition.
For their part Central Asian states will wel-
come anything that adds to their individual 
and collective capability to manoeuvre 
among alternative investors and foreign do-
nors, not to mention foreign great powers. 
So they have a material interest in using India 
to regulate or restrict the Chinese presence 
especially as Russia no longer can or will play 
the role of an economic counterbalance to 
China in Central Asia. These manoeuvrings 
will undoubtedly be reflected in the future 
proceedings of the SCO. Indeed, the SCO 
has already been the scene for competi-
tive discussion of rival Russian and Chinese 
schemes for economic progress in Central 
Asia. So there is every reason to expect more 
of the same in the future in this regard.
Implications
For Russia, India's membership in the SCO 
in the context of New Delhi’s more overt 
and contentious rivalry with China across 
Asia also raises interesting problems. While 
both India and China have an interest in 
moderating their rhetoric to keep crises and 
disputes from mushrooming out of control; 
the fact of this rivalry obstructs its vaunted 
dream of a strategic triangle. Although 
Moscow would clearly prefer to have India 
buffer China it now depends too much on 
China for economic and political support 
in Asia and globally to be able to easily dial 
back its support for China. India has already 
context the base at Djibouti assumes new 
importance as a crucial facilitator of Chi-
nese trade and naval presence in the Indian 
Ocean and as the basis for rapid deploy-
ment of naval power to North Africa, the 
Middle East, and even South Asia while pro-
tecting key trade routes to Africa, the Mid-
dle East, and Europe. So there are already 
ample precedents, material, and strategic 
incentives to foster a new military alliance 
in Central Asia in the guise of anti-terrorism. 
Neither is there as yet any sign of discord-
ant Sino-Russian policies or differences be-
tween Moscow and Beijing (and not only 
in Central Asia) that cannot be resolved by 
the kinds of intergovernmental consulta-
tions that have now become the norm in 
their bilateral relations.
Consequences
The consequences of these trends are likely 
to make themselves felt soon, especially if 
Indo-American discussions about how In-
dia can and will contribute to the American 
strategy in Afghanistan leads to a major 
expansion of India’s overall profile in both 
Afghanistan and Central Asia. Or if there is a 
major change in Chinese tolerance for Paki-
stan’s support of terrorists against India and 
Afghanistan we will also see major changes 
across the Sino-Indian agenda, including 
in the SCO. While there is still no discern-
ible rupture between Moscow and Beijing; 
were that to occur the repercussions would 
be felt immediately and obviously not only 
in the SCO. On the other hand, a steadily 
tightening alliance will also trigger notice-
able and important consequences across 
many regions, not just Central Asia. 
To the degree that China continues to give 
Pakistan what amounts to a blank check for 
its policies as long as they do not materi-
ally injure Chinese interests, Central Asia will 
grow in importance as an area of increased 
Sino-Indian rivalry and that rivalry will be vis-
ibly expressed within the SCO. Middle East-
ern ties with all the members of the SCO 
are also clearly growing and that dynamic 
will also continue to make itself felt in mul-
tifarious ways among all of those actors. Fi-
nally there is no reason at present to expect 
the eruption of major Sino-Russian discord 
whether it is about Central Asia or another 
area. Indeed, if anything, it is becoming ever 
more clear that Russia’s pretensions or claim 
to great power status are ever more based 
on the expectation of Chinese support and 
hence Chinese sufferance. For example, 
while Russia has called for an international 
cooperation to reconstruct Syria it has solic-
ited China because it certainly does not have 
the necessary funding. Neither will it accept 
refugees from the war-torn Middle East also 
Vladimir Putin met with the Presi-
dent of the People's Republic of 
China Xi Jinping at the APEC Eco-
nomic Leaders’ meeting in Danang 
on 10 November 2017.
Photo: Kremlin.ru

22
European Security & Defence · December 2017
 SECURITY POLICY
T
he region around the Caspian Sea and 
the Central Asian countries of Kazakh-
stan and Turkmenistan have become im-
portant energy suppliers to the world and a 
geopolitical pipeline hub in the last twenty 
years.
The region is rich in oil and gas reserves, 
and it is not surprising that the world's most 
powerful states are struggling to control the 
Caspian region. But the political situation is 
tense, because the Caspian region has dif-
ferent ethnic groups with more than five 
dozen languages, several religions and many 
historical conflicts. No wonder, then, that 
the region is called the "Eurasian Balkans".
In 1844, the first boreholes in the country's 
oil industry were drilled in Bibi Heybat's oil 
field. At the end of the 19th century, Azer-
baijan was the world's largest oil producer. 
After the First World War, Baku was occupied 
by England. After the collapse of the Soviet 
Union and Azerbaijan's independence, the 
United States, Europe and Asia have made 
considerable efforts to exert more influ-
ence in the region at Russia's expense. Of 
course, Russia and Iran were sceptical about 
the Western expansion on their doorstep. 
But the test of strength between the north-
south axis (Moscow-Yerevan-Tehran) and 
the west-east axis (Washington-Ankara-
Tbilisi-Baku) has not yet reached its peak.
Nevertheless, Russia and Iran's rule of Azer-
baijan would be a global security risk. It is 
therefore Azerbaijan's destiny to ensure the 
balance of power in the region, which is a 
political art.
Historical Background
The Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan was 
proclaimed on 28 May 1918, but its free-
dom lasted only 23 months. On 27 April 
1920 the country was conquered by the 
Bolsheviks. After seventy years under So-
viet rule, the national liberation movement 
succeeded in gaining independence from 
the Soviet Union on 18 October 1991.
But war followed on foot. Historical ani-
mosities in the Caucasus led to the war 
between Armenia and Azerbaijan over the 
Nagorno-Karabakh region in 1988. The ter-
ritory was then occupied by the Armenian 
armed forces, and, on 10 December 1991, 
Nagorno-Karabakh declared its sovereign-
ty by referendum. In the spring of 1994, 
Azerbaijan - Gateway to Central Asia
Korhan Özkilinc
Azerbaijan's geographic location makes it a melting pot of cultures. In addition to Oriental, Central Asian 
and European cultures, the Azerbaijani people share ethnic roots with the Turks. Its predominantly Shiite 
Islam faith connects Azerbaijan with Iran, and through its historical past it has close ties with Russia. 
Baku, capital of Azerbaijan, has become a prosperous hub for global energy supplies.
Photo: OSCE

23
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
Georgia to Turkey – the Transanatolian 
gas pipeline TANAP.
Construction began on 17 March 2015 and 
commissioning is scheduled for 2018. The 
aim is to transport 16 billion cubic meters 
of natural gas per year from the Shah Deniz 
gas field to Europe and later to increase 
the transport capacity to 31 billion cubic 
meters.
The TANAP pipeline will be extended from 
Turkey through the Trans-Adriatic pipeline 
(TAP). Its construction also started in 2015, 
with a total annual capacity of 20 billion 
cubic meters. TAP runs through Greece, Al-
bania and the Adriatic Sea to southern Italy. 
TAP and TANAP are not only considered 
very important by Europe, but also receive 
the political support of NATO.
Azerbaijan – NATO
The first step of Azerbaijan towards NATO 
was taken in March 1992 with its admission 
to the North Atlantic Cooperation Council. 
Both sides met at the highest level on 4 May 
1994, and the President of Azerbaijan Hey-
dar Aliyev signed the Partnership for Peace 
(PfP). The focus was on the "Programme 
to End Armed Conflict and Achieve Peace". 
Implementation began in 1996.
During the visit of NATO Secretary General 
Javier Solana to Baku in 1997, President 
Heydar Aliyev declared that the necessity 
and obligations of the PfP programme were 
very important, and NATO Secretary Gen-
eral Javier Solana stressed the importance 
of the country in the Caucasus region.
In the same year, Azerbaijan joined the 
Euro-Atlantic Cooperation Council and of-
ficially attended a meeting of the Heads of 
State and Government of the Euro-Atlantic 
Cooperation Council in Madrid in July 1997.
In his historic speech, Heydar Aliyev called 
on NATO to insist on overcoming the armed 
conflicts in the Caucasus. Failure to resolve 
them would constitute a major threat to 
European security.
In November 1997, Heydar Aliyev signed 
the decree "Action Plan to Strengthen 
Co-operation between the Republic of 
Azerbaijan and NATO". In the same year, 
the Azerbaijani representative began his 
The second transport corridor "North-
South Transport Corridor Project" was 
launched on 16 May 2002 with the par-
ticipation of many countries. This will be a 
catalyst for relations between Russia, Azer-
baijan and Iran. The most important thing 
is not only the economic importance of the 
corridor, but also the acceleration of the 
integration of the Eurasian economic union 
and Russia's connection to the Persian Gulf.
Both corridor projects are mainly strategic 
access to Sunni-dominated Balochistan 
(Turkish peoples), which extends over three 
countries Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan, 
and is the subject of a tug-of-war between 
two powers, India and China. The Baluchis 
are poor, but they are rich in natural gas, 
crude oil and raw materials, as well as the 
TAPA and IP natural gas pipelines. In this 
respect, the Chinese want to secure en-
ergy supply from the Middle East and the 
export of goods to Europe via Pakistani Ba-
lochistan. India, too, has the same strategy 
as China, which is why they are expanding 
their economic corridor from Iranian Balo-
chistan.
The two strategically located ports of 
Chabahar (Iran) and Gwadar (Pakistan) may 
have an important geostrategic role in ten 
years or even earlier. The rivalry between In-
dia and China is a manifestation of this. The 
Chinese project "One Belt One Route" in 
particular competes with the "International 
North South Corridor"project. Trilateral co-
operation between Russia, Azerbaijan and 
Iran is therefore extremely important.
Over the past ten years, Baku has invested 
some 20 billion dollars in transport infra-
structure, ports, motorways and railways 
with the intention of linking them to the 
International Corridor projects. The coun-
try thus catapulted itself into a key interna-
tional position.
Azerbaijan – Georgia – Turkey
If the historic Silk Road is revived, Azer-
baijan, Turkmenistan and Turkey will 
cooperate not only in infrastructure pro-
jects, but also in connecting the world's 
largest natural gas reserves, from Central 
Asia via the Caspian Sea, Azerbaijan and 
Azerbaijan had lost the entire Nagorno-
Karabakh region. The ceasefire negotiated 
by Russia and the OSCE (Organisation for 
Security and Co-operation in Europe) can-
not enter into force because the region 
is permanently at war. In principle, seven 
territories of Azerbaijan are recognised 
as occupied, and the UN Security Council 
designates Karabakh as part of Azerbaijan 
through UN General Assembly Resolutions 
822, 853, 874 and 884 and UN Security 
Council Resolutions 19/13 and 57/298.
Geopolitical Perspectives
The legitimacy and power of the country is 
regulated internationally through trilateral 
relations and regionally through bilateral 
relations.
 
Azerbaijan – Iran – Russia
Azerbaijan and Iran cooperate economically 
and in military-related matters, but not as 
strongly as they do with Turkey. The shar-
ing of raw materials in the Caspian region is 
worth mentioning. The core of the trilateral 
relationship, however, is the development of 
two strategic transport corridors.
The final protocol for the South-West Trans-
port Corridor Project was signed on 19 June 
2017. It provides for joint participation by 
the countries of Azerbaijan, Iran, Georgia, 
Ukraine and Poland. The project is part of 
the already launched Trans Caspian Interna-
tional Transport Route. The main objective 
is to connect the countries of India, Paki-
stan and the Persian Gulf via Azerbaijan and 
Georgia with the ferry across the Black Sea 
and then Ukraine and Poland with the mar-
kets of Europe. On this route, around 100 
million tonnes of goods are shipped from 
India to Europe and vice versa at full capac-
ity each year.
The village Khudaferin in Nagorno-Karabakh was destroyed during  
the conflict and its Azeri population "ethnically cleansed".
Photo: Adam Jones, Wikipedia CC
NATO Secretary General Jens 
Stoltenberg met with Azerbaijan’s  
President Ilham Aliyev in Brussels 
on 23 November 2017.
Photo: NATO

24
European Security & Defence · December 2017
 SECURITY POLICY
Azerbaijan - Turkey
Turkey is a geopolitically active country 
with a complicated relationship towards 
the Caucasus region. Turkey and Azerbai-
jan share cultural, linguistic and religious 
values and maintain constructive rela-
tions. Turkey, as a NATO partner, plays an 
important role in shaping security struc-
tures in the Caucasus region, namely in 
training military personnel and shaping 
the defence industry in Azerbaijan. Tur-
key has therefore played a greater role in 
the integration of Azerbaijan into NATO 
standards.
In 1999, an agreement was concluded 
between two countries on the support 
of Azerbaijani security forces by Turkish 
security forces and then sent to Koso-
vo with a Turkish contingent for KFOR. 
At the same time, Turkey founded the 
Military Academy of Azerbaijan and the 
first graduates were trained according to 
NATO standards in 2001.
Turkey has initiated two central strategies 
in the Caucasus region: Turkey wants to 
modernise the Azerbaijani armed forces 
in terms of military policy, defence tech-
nology and health technology on an 
equal footing with NATO, and Turkey 
wants to strengthen the economies of 
Caucasus countries by organising eco-
nomic cooperation in the Black Sea re-
gion. This organisation was founded by 
Turkey in 1992.
In fact, Azerbaijan is part of the West-
East axis (USA, Turkey, Georgia, Azer-
baijan) which competes with the North–
South axis of Russia, Armenia and Iran. 
In particular, strengthening Russia's 
position in the Caucasian region could 
weaken Turkey's ties with Central Asia. 
Therefore, Azerbaijan and Turkey should 
work constructively together while 
maintaining good relations with Russia 
and Iran.
Conclusion
“Knowledge is power – geographical 
knowledge is world power" was often 
said in German geography at the end of 
the 19th century. These sentences are of 
enormous significance for the Silk Road 
Strategy Act of 1999. Although this law 
was passed by the US House of Rep-
resentatives but not ratified by the US 
Senate, some states partially implement-
ed it. In terms of overall development, 
Azerbaijan is an anchor of stability in 
the Eurasian Balkans and a geostrategic 
hub in the Caspian region. Because of 
its proximity to Central Asia, Azerbaijan 
is responsible for global energy security 
and world peace. 
L
emphasises the need for the transition to a 
new phase of partnership between NATO 
and Azerbaijan as a continuation of sus-
tainable relations. Cooperation in bilateral 
relations has so far been intensified.
It is interesting how Azeri relations to Rus-
sia and NATO develop. On 7 September 
2017 NATO and Azerbaijan discussed vari-
ous NATO programmes and one day later, 
on 8 September 2017, the General Staffs 
of the Armed Forces of Azerbaijan and 
Russia met for a meeting on military co-
operation. In the same week, the armed 
forces of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey 
conducted joint military exercises. It is 
also expected that Azerbaijan will not join 
NATO in the next decade. If Azerbaijan 
really becomes a member of NATO, that is 
another matter.
mission at NATO headquarters in Brussels. 
Since 1997, military cooperation between 
Azerbaijan and NATO has been continu-
ously expanded through a variety of pro-
jects, programmes and reforms, so that 
Azerbaijan has adopted NATO standards. 
In 1998, NATO representatives held a con-
ference with Azerbaijan on pipeline safety. 
Three years later, on 19 November 2001, 
Azerbaijan became an associate member 
of the NATO Parliamentary Assembly and 
has 5 out of 66 members of the Parlia-
mentary Assembly. In November 2002, 
President Heydar Aliyev again called on the 
Heads of State of the Euro-Atlantic Coop-
eration Council to hold a meeting to resolve 
the conflicts in the South Caucasus.
Also, the successor and son of Heydar 
Aliyev, the current President Ilham Aliyev, 
Ilham Aliyev, President of Azerbaijan, visited Iran on 1 November 2017 
and met with Iran’s President Hassan Rohani and Russia’s President 
Vladimir Putin to talk about economic cooperation.
Photo: Office of the President of Azerbaijan
On 30 October 2017, Ilham Aliyev, President of Azerbaijan, celebrated 
with Turkish President Recep Erdogan the opening of the Baku-Tbilisi-
Kars railway which will connect Azerbaijan to Turkey. The Prime Minis-
ters of Georgia, Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan also attended the opening 
ceremony.
Photo: Office of the President of Azerbaijan

December 2017 · European Security & Defence
25
A 
few months after Emmanuel Macron won the presidential 
elections in France he appointed a commission to draft a new 
White Paper on defence. This rapidity is due to the massive en-
gagement of French troops in current missions both abroad and 
at home. Some 30,000 French soldiers are permanently deployed 
on missions ranging from Operation “Barkhane” in Mali and the 
NATO-led reassurance mission on the Alliance’s eastern flank to 
Operation “Sentinelle”, carried out on France’s national territory 
and aimed at protecting vital state institutions from terrorism.  
Such an extensive use of France’s armed forces in current opera-
tions has brought into question their ability to respond to additional 
crises or emerging threats. For instance, in September France’s 
Chief of the General Staff, General François Lecointre, underlined 
that the ability of the French army to carry out an operation on a 
short notice, similar to one already in place in Mali, is under ques-
tion. This is why the authorities have to re-evaluate the country’s 
defence policy.
The new White Paper on defence, titled “Strategic Review” (Revue 
Stratégique) and published on 13 October,  re-evaluated the threats 
that France is facing and proposes new approaches to navigate 
the French Republic’s defence policy and forces in the unstable 
and unpredictable multipolar environment which has replaced the 
Post-Cold War order.
The Strategic Review will also serve as the basis for a new law on 
military programmes for 2019-2025, which would increase the mil-
itary budget by €1,7Bn annually. This increase would bring France 
closer to the NATO defence spending criteria of 2% of GDP, but to 
fully meet that standard, France would have to spend €50Bn per 
year instead of the current €32Bn. This figure is a distant goal even 
with the additional €1.7Bn per year.
In addressing security threats, the document recognises that the 
security climate has deteriorated much faster than foreseen in the 
previous version published in 2013 under François Hollande’s ad-
ministration. The document defines terrorism as the main and 
immediate threat to the French state; this is not surprising given re-
cent events, including the terrorist attacks (Bataclan and others) of  
13 November  2015, which shook the French nation. The Strategic 
Review also recognises that a return of coercion by demonstration 
of force and even the potential for open war in Europe constitutes 
a major threat for Paris as well.
The Review mentions Russia only 13 times but the document clearly 
considers Russiaa threat – maybe not directly to France but to the 
world order. Moscow has challenged the EU and NATO and actively 
blocks international institutions, including the UN and the OSCE, 
while promoting alternative regional projects such as the Eurasian 
Economic Union (EAEU). Regarding the Middle East, the Strategic 
Review sees Russia, Iran and Turkey as the dominant forces that are 
shaping the future of the region.
The Strategic Review outlines two main ambitions for France in its 
role as a UN Security Council permanent member and a nuclear 
power: first to preserve strategic autonomy, and second to build a 
stronger Europe.
Maintaining and upgrading its nuclear weapons is of paramount 
importance to Paris. Nuclear deterrence gives France strategic au-
tonomy that is a key issue for Paris as it allows France to make inde-
pendent decisions regarding the protection of its national interests.
Speaking of the Euro-Atlantic space, the Strategic Review recognis-
es the importance of NATO and seeks to strengthen the European 
security. The recently established Permanent Structured Coopera-
tion in Defence (PESCO) by 23 EU members obviously agrees with 
France’s vision. Moreover, Paris confirms its commitment to all 
responsibilities within NATO, including the collective defence clause 
of the Washington Treaty as well as reassurance measures and 
the strengthening of NATO’s eastern flank. It is worth noting that 
earlier this year France sent a contingent of around 306 soldiers, 
LECLERC battle tanks and IVFs to Estonia.
We can assume that France will be more open to cooperation in 
defence matters with the EU and NATO partners. This cooperation 
covers, for example, strategic air transport and, more generally, 
cooperation in the logistics and defence industries and joint military 
operations. However, much of this cooperation is likely to focus on 
France's neighbouring countries.
Viewpoint from
Paris
Denys Kolesnyk
France is Re-Evaluating  
its Defence Posture

26
European Security & Defence · December 2017
 SECURITY POLICY
I
ran sees itself as the champion of Shia 
Islam and believes that it has the right and 
the duty to stand up for the interests of 
Shia wherever they might be. Apart from 
this religiously inspired ideology, Iran also 
more traditional national security interests 
as well. In short, Iran has more change the 
facts on the ground in the Middle East and 
beyond.
There is no doubting the fact that Iran has 
been and is a state sponsor of terrorism, 
either directly using its own operatives or 
via surrogates such as Hezbollah in Leba-
non. Iranian-directed terrorist incidents 
have taken place across the Middle East, 
but also in Europe, Africa, Asia and South 
America. Iran has also supported a host of 
other terrorist groups, where it has suited 
its interests. It has also made its opposition 
to the continued existence of Israel quite 
obvious and, despite the fact that it is a 
signatory to the Non-Proliferation Treaty 
(NPT), has clearly been working to acquire 
nuclear weapons and appropriate delivery 
systems since the late 1980s. Even though 
it signed the Biological Weapons Conven-
tion (ratified 1973) and the Chemical War-
fare Convention (ratified 1987), Iran also 
has the capability to produce and weapon-
ise both biological and chemical agents. It 
should be noted that there is no convincing 
evidence of an active biological or chemi-
cal Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) 
programme in Iran at this point.
It is impossible to argue with the fact that 
Iran uses terrorism as a foreign policy tool 
or that it is a state sponsor of terrorism. 
It is also undeniable that Iran is engaged 
in a programme to obtain nuclear weap-
ons in breach of international agreements. 
Yet, there is another aspect to Iran that is 
difficult to ignore. Iran is the seventh larg-
est producer of crude oil in the world and 
the third largest producer of natural gas 
in the world. It has the fourth largest oil 
reserves and the second largest natural gas 
reserves. According to the US Central Intel-
ligence Agency, the Iranian Gross Domes-
tic Product (GDP), adjusted for Purchasing 
Power Parity (PPP), has Iran as the 19th larg-
est economy in the world. The country has 
a population of some 82 million, making 
it the 17th largest country in population 
terms. Furthermore, the strategic location 
of Iran must be taken into account, in par-
ticular its ability to block the Strait of Hor-
The Iranian Shadow over the  
Middle East and Beyond
Bill Roy
Iran is a dissatisfied power. It believes that the present international 
system does not suit its interests and indeed actively conspires to  
oppose its interests. It is a theocratic state that believes it is ‘right-
eously guided’ by a higher power. 
Iran acquired three Project 877EKM KILO Class submarines from Russia between 1991 and 1996. Future sub-
marine needs will be met by the indigenous FATEH Class SSC and the BESAT Class SSK. Iran will also introduce 
new missiles for its submarines and the HOOT supercavitating torpedo.

SECURITY POLICY  
27
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
muz, the number one oil chokepoint glob-
ally, and the potential it has to disrupt or 
destroy oil production facilities in the Arab 
states that are geographically adjacent. 
Nuclear Progress
This makes Iran a terrible conundrum for t 
he international community to tackle.  
Iran’s quest for nuclear weapons did re- 
sult in international sanctions from the US, 
European Union (EU) and the UN Secu- 
rity Council. US sanctions came into force 
against Iran in the wake of the Iranian 
Revolution in 1979. The scope of the sanc-
tions was gradually increased and then, 
post-1995, were imposed on companies 
and individuals dealing with Iran. UN sanc-
tions came into force from 2006 onwards, 
with separate EU sanctions coming into ef-
fect from 2007 on. This sanctions regime 
did cause Iran major problems; asset sei-
zures and being increasingly blocked from 
the international financial system were 
particularly troublesome. But Iran persisted 
with its nuclear programme in spite of the 
sanctions.
Resolving the problem of the Iranian nu-
clear programme came down to two solu-
tion sets: taking active measures or looking 
for a diplomatic solution. Very few had the 
stomach for active measures and so the 
diplomatic path was chosen. Coincidently, 
many proponents of a diplomatic solution 
were also focused on the economic oppor-
tunities to be gained in Iran if the sanctions 
regime were removed.
From the Iranian perspective, diplomatic ef-
forts were ideal. It gave them time to con-
tinue with their nuclear programme and in-
creasingly gave them time to mount a cred-
ible international lobbying effort to weaken 
sanctions. It was the US that became keen 
on a diplomatic solution, especially after 
Barack Obama took office in January 2009. 
As a candidate, Obama had stated that he 
would seek engagement with Iran without 
pre-conditions. This effort to repair rela-
tions with Iran would eventually become 
intertwined with the desire of Obama to 
have a grand foreign policy legacy and in 
turn this would lead to the Joint Compre-
hensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) otherwise 
known as the Iran nuclear deal that was 
adopted on 18 October 2015 and came 
into force on 15 January 2016. Signatories 
to the JCPOA included the five permanent 
members of the UN Security Council (Chi-
na, France, Russia, the UK and the US) plus 
Germany (referred to as the P5+1) and Iran.
Any notion that the JCPOA somehow re-
moves the threat of Iranian nuclear pro-
liferation is misguided; at best, the agree-
ment simply kicks the can of Iranian nu-
clear capability down the road. As far as 
Iran was concerned, the JCPOA was a true 
‘win-win situation'; they got relief from 
sanctions, had confiscated assets returned 
that amounted to some US$100Bn (includ-
ing the Obama administration delivering 
US$1.7Bn in cash) and had to agree to an 
inspection regime on their nuclear facilities 
that was hardly very stressful. 
In the Preamble and General Conditions 
to the JCPOA it states that: "Iran reaffirms 
that under no circumstances will Iran ever 
seek, develop or acquire any nuclear weap-
ons.”  There is very little doubt that Iran 
has continued with its efforts to develop 
and field nuclear weapons since signing 
the JCPOA. Despite this, there are many in 
the international community who believe 
that the JCPOA process must be continued, 
believing that talking and the diplomatic 
process are better than any alternative. Of 
course, the contrary position is that con-
fusing discussions with progress achieves 
nothing, and in the end the process be-
comes an end in itself rather than a means 
of delivering an end product. 
The Trump Era
Prior to his election, President Trump was 
extremely critical of the JCPOA but had re-
frained from doing anything about it once 
he was in office. Then, on 13 October 2017, 
Trump outlined a new policy as regards Iran. 
Firstly he discussed the ongoing difficulties 
with Iran: “The Iranian dictatorship’s ag-
gression continues to this day. The regime 
remains the world’s leading state sponsor 
of terrorism, and provides assistance to 
al Qaeda, the Taliban, Hezbollah, Hamas, 
and other terrorist networks. It develops, 
deploys, and proliferates missiles that 
threaten American troops and our allies. 
It harasses American ships and threatens 
freedom of navigation in the Arabian Gulf 
and in the Red Sea. It imprisons Americans 
on false charges. And it launches cyber-
attacks against our critical infrastructure, 
financial system, and military.
The United States is far from the only target 
of the Iranian dictatorship’s long campaign 
of bloodshed. The regime violently sup-
presses its own citizens; it shot unarmed 
student protestors in the street during the 
Green Revolution. This regime has fuelled 
sectarian violence in Iraq, and vicious civil 
wars in Yemen and Syria. In Syria, the Ira-
nian regime has supported the atrocities 
of Bashar al-Assad’s regime and condoned 
Assad’s use of chemical weapons against 
helpless civilians, including many, many 
children.”
Incidentally, in Britain it was revealed that 
there had been a ‘brute force’ Iranian cy-
ber attack against the British Houses of 
Parliament and the e-mail accounts of 
British MPs in June this year. The accounts 
attacked included those of the Prime Minis-
ter and other senior government ministers. 
Britain is a signatory of the JCPOA.
The Iranian government really does not 
seem to care that much about how other 
countries might react to its actions. For 
example, when sanctions were still in 
force, Iranian aid to Hezbollah in Lebanon 
amounted to US$200M annually. With 
sanctions lifted Iran is now reportedly 
sending US$800M annually to Hezbollah. 
At Iranian direction, some 7,000 Hezbol-
lah fighters are currently in Syria supporting 
JAMARAN is the lead ship of a class of two frigates with at least two 
more in build. Based on the old British ALVAND design, this frigate en-
tered service in 2010. Equipment fit is a mixture of reverse-engineered 
Western systems, systems acquired from other suppliers, such as China, 
and locally developed technology.

28
European Security & Defence · December 2017
 SECURITY POLICY
the Assad regime, with Hezbollah having 
fought in that country since 2011. Hezbol-
lah is said to have had 2,000 fighters killed 
in Syria since 2011. Iran also spends over 
US$60M in funding the military operations 
of Hamas in Gaza and hundreds of mil-
lions more supporting operations in Syria, 
Yemen and elsewhere.
The new Trump policy as regards Iran was 
summarised as follows: “First, we will work 
with our allies to counter the regime’s 
destabilising activity and support for ter-
rorist proxies in the region. Second, we will 
place additional sanctions on the regime 
to block their financing of terror. Third, 
we will address the regime’s proliferation 
of missiles and weapons that threaten its 
neighbours, global trade, and freedom of 
navigation. And finally, we will deny the 
regime all paths to a nuclear weapon.”
A critical element of the new policy is the 
imposition of sanctions on the Islamic 
Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) of Iran. 
According to Trump: ”The Revolutionary 
Guard is the Iranian Supreme Leader’s cor-
rupt personal terror force and militia. It has 
hijacked large portions of Iran’s economy 
and seized massive religious endowments 
to fund war and terror abroad. This includes 
arming the Syrian dictator, supplying prox-
ies and partners with missiles and weapons 
to attack civilians in the region, and even 
plotting to bomb a popular restaurant right 
here in Washington DC. I am authorising 
the Treasury Department to further sanc-
tion the entire Islamic Revolutionary Guard 
Corps for its support for terrorism and to 
apply sanctions to its officials, agents, and 
affiliates.” 
As regards Iranian nuclear activities Trump 
noted that: ”Since the signing of the nu-
clear agreement, the regime's dangerous 
aggression has only escalated. At the same 
time, it has received massive sanctions relief 
while continuing to develop its missiles pro-
gramme. Iran has also entered into lucra-
tive business contracts with other parties 
to the agreement.” Trump then went on to 
announce that he would not be certifying 
Iranian compliance with the JCPOA at this 
point. This does not mean that the US is 
abandoning the JCPOA, although it puts 
Iran and the other parties to the agreement 
on notice that the US is prepared to end its 
participation in the deal.
Trump concluded his remarks by noting 
that: “As we have seen in North Korea, 
the longer we ignore a threat, the worse 
that threat becomes. It is why we are de-
termined that the world’s leading sponsor 
of terrorism will never obtain nuclear weap-
ons.” Bearing in mind the fact that Iran has 
strong links with North Korea, it is almost 
inevitable that North Korean advances in 
bomb and delivery system design will be 
passed on to Iran in exchange for cash at 
some point.
Facts on the Ground
In Tehran the new aggressive attitude of 
the US government towards the JCPOA is 
not unexpected. After all, Trump was talk-
ing about walking away from the JCPOA 
and taking a robust stance towards Iran 
prior to his election. On the other hand, the 
other members of the UN Security Council, 
along with Germany and the EU, are still 
committed to the JCPOA and its accompa-
nying diplomatic process. This separation 
between Washington DC and the other 
signatories to the JCPOA offers Iran plenty 
of room to manoeuvre. It gives Iran criti-
cal time to weaponise its nuclear capability 
without sanctions. In the final analysis, Iran 
believes that it needs a nuclear deterrent 
for self-preservation at the basic level and 
because possession of such a deterrent will 
allow it to maintain an activist foreign policy.
As regards the Middle East, Iran can look 
upon a situation where it has made im-
mense strategic gains in recent years. Irani-
an sponsored Shia militias have been critical 
in assisting in the defeat of ISIS in Iraq; look-
ing at the situation from the Iranian point 
of view, it is they who have unparalleled 
influence in Iraq not the US. Iranian par-
ticipation in preserving the Assad regime 
in Syria has been another success story. It 
is now reported that Iran will be able to 
establish a permanent military base in the 
Damascus area. For years the idea of a ‘Shia 
Crescent’ linking Iran to its Hezbollah sur-
rogate in Lebanon, via Iraq and Syria has 
been discussed. Now it is a reality.
Also notable is how Iran has successfully 
sought to limit any progress towards Kurd-
ish independence in Iraq, using diplomacy 
with Kurdish factions but also using its sur-
rogates in the Iraq Shia militias to put pres-
sure on the Iraqi Kurds. The last thing that 
Iran wants is an independent Kurdistan, 
knowing that its own Kurdish population 
would seek self-determination if they had 
the opportunity.
Elsewhere, in the Yemen Iranian-backed 
Houthi rebels continue to bleed Saudi 
Arabia and the other Sunni Gulf States. 
Should it wish to increase the pressure, Iran  
has more cards to play. In Bahrain, the 
Shia majority population remains restive 
under Sunni rule; it would not take much 
imagination for Iran to exploit that situa-
tion. The Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia 
with its large Shia population also offers 
plenty of scope for Iran to fan the flames 
of a possible insurgency. Saudi Shia face 
systematic discrimination and this year 
there have been reports of major Saudi 
military operations against the Shia town 
of Al-Awamiyah in the Eastern Province in 
response to anti-government protests. 
The religious ideology of the Iranian regime 
also drives its opposition to the continued 
existence of Israel. Actively participating in 
actions against Israel allows Iran to appeal 
to the ‘Arab Street’ and contrast its actions 
with the lack of action of Sunni govern-
ments. Hezbollah and Hamas are two parts 
of this Iranian strategy, it is now looking to 
add to its tools by raising and supporting a 
new group in the West Bank to take active 
Iran has fielded a large number of coastal defence missile systems using 
the Chinese C802 missile and its Iranian manufactured NOOR derivative.   
These coastal defence systems have been exported to Hezbollah in Leba-
non and also to the Houthi forces that Iran is supporting in Yemen, who 
used them to engage a US Navy destroyer in 2016.

measures against Israel. Such a group could 
easily be based on existing Hamas cells in 
the West Bank.
The Ticking Clock
Strategically speaking, Iran can look at the 
current state of the Middle East with con-
siderable satisfaction, and more possibilities 
exist for further improvement of the stra-
tegic situation. The problem for the Iranian 
regime is time; the long-term prospects for 
Iran are actually rather grim. In the 1980s, 
during the Iran-Iraq War (1980-1988), Iran 
had resorted to human wave attacks to 
break through Iraqi positions; they had no 
problems in taking mass casualties. Now the 
situation is very different; Iran is very casu-
alty-sensitive, hence the use of Hezbollah 
and also the raising of mercenary units from 
Afghan and Pakistani Shia to fight in Syria.
This casualty-sensitivity reflects a greater 
concern – demographic decline in Iran. 
The Iranian government wants to in-
crease the population to 150 million by 
mid-century; this is not achievable with 
the current falling birth rate. It is said that 
between 23 and 25% of Iranian couples 
are infertile. Iran is also said to have one of 
the highest rates of sexually transmitted 
infection in the world. Iran admits that 
it has 2.8 million regular drug users, up 
from 1.3 million six years ago, with opium 
responsible for some 63% of drug con-
sumption. This probably undercounts the 
number of regular drug users in Iran. The 
UN has stated that Iran has one of the 
worst addiction crises in the world.
The Supreme Leader of Iran, the Ayatollah 
Ali Khamenei, has stated that Iran looks to 
discredit and replace Western hegemony 
in the Middle East with that of Iran. With 
Iran ageing and rotting from within, the 
time for Khamenei to achieve Iranian he-
gemony grows shorter year-by-year. Since 
the formation of the Islamic Republic of 
Iran in 1979, predicting how they might 
react has always proven difficult. If they 
believe that their window of opportunity 
to change the facts on the ground in the 
Middle East is gradually closing, how likely 
is Iran to act rationally and adhere to in-
ternational diplomatic norms? It would 
appear that the security situation in the 
Middle East and the surrounding area 
could be on the verge of a new, and even 
more troubled, era.
L
In March 2017, Iran unveiled the indigenous KARRAR tank. In effect, this 
vehicle is an attempt to obtain a T-90 equivalent based on T-72 technol-
ogy. Iran’s conventional forces are not its true strength, that comes in  
asymmetric warfare and the use of surrogates such as Hezbollah, the 
Houthi and the Shia militias  in Iraq.
UAV
DRONE DEFENCE
Nuremberg, Germany
7 – 8 March 2018 
EXPO
AND CONFERENCE
SAVE THE 
DATE!
U.T.SEC is the world’s only trade fair to focus 
on security by unmanned technologies and 
drone defence solutions.
Don’t miss out on the opportunity to benefit 
from the extensive display of products and 
solutions for visionaries and future thinkers. 
 
Get the information you need now:
utsec.de/become-visitor

30
European Security & Defence · December 2017
COUNTRY FOCUS: HUNGARY
national conservative to nationalist in many 
of the countries of Eastern and Central Eu-
rope as a consequence of the major round 
of EU expansion eastwards in 2004. After 
an initial wave of enthusiasm, the eupho-
ria gave way to a sense of disillusionment. 
Many sections of the population, in par-
ticular older people, were unable to benefit 
from the accession to the EU. Added to this 
were the protests in Hungary against the 
Europe-friendly government under Prime 
Minister Ferenc Gyurcsány. The disclosure 
of internal documents exposed Gyurcsány 
to accusations of widespread duping of the 
people by specifically falsified information. 
The protests among the people which fol-
lowed, and the general dissatisfaction with 
the country’s financial situation as a result 
of the global financial crisis, ultimately led 
to a change of government in 2010. Only 
one year later the Parliament in Budapest 
approved a new constitution, which came 
into effect on 1 January 2012. 
Prime Minister Orban is consistently direct-
ing his internal and external policy measures 
and initiatives towards the safeguarding 
and securing the sovereignty and integrity 
of the Hungarian state and its people. The 
protection of the country formulated in this 
way against foreign influences and the un-
controlled excessive presence of foreigners 
led, to a number of discords and accusa-
tions within the European Union at the be-
ginning of the refugee crisis in 2015, which 
are specifically viewed in the Western EU 
states and in Brussels as being contrary to 
the official refugee policy of the European 
Union.  
Behind the criticism voiced in Hungary 
against the opening of the borders for refu-
gees lies also the ongoing commitment by 
Budapest in support of the rights and wel-
fare of the Hungarian and Magyar minori-
ties in neighbouring countries. The origin 
of this lies in the collapse of the Habsburg 
monarchy at the end of the First World 
War and the diverse national struggles to 
salvage something from the bankrupt resi-
due of this multinational state. With the 
Austrian-Hungarian settlement of 1897, 
the multinational Kingdom of Hungary 
became a partner with equal rights in the 
Austro-Hungarian Double Monarchy, but 
nevertheless internally pursued a strict 
policy of Magyarisation at the expense 
of the Romanian and Slav sections of the 
population. Under the Treaty of Trianon in 
1920, Hungary was forced to accept exten-
sive losses of territory, and two-thirds of 
the area of the country were surrendered 
to Czechoslovakia, Romania, the southern 
Slav countries, and Austria. Since then, sev-
eral million Magyars have lived as minorities 
in the states bordering Hungary. Nor did the 
situation change after 1945, although since 
1933 Hungary had hoped for the recovery 
of the lost territories by acceding to the 
revisionist territorial policy of the National 
Socialist German Reich. With the end of the 
Second World War and incorporation into 
the Soviet sphere of influence, the issues 
of the Hungarian minorities was not even 
any longer on the back burner. It was only 
with the recasting of the Hungarian Consti-
tution in 1989 following the collapse of the 
Warsaw Pact and the end of the East-West 
conflict that Budapest again openly under-
took to concern itself with the aspirations 
and interests of the Magyar minorities in the 
neighbouring states. The improvement in 
T
he differences in opinion between Brus-
sels, Berlin, and Budapest with regard 
to refugee policy and migration have also 
caused difficulties with discussions about 
necessary reforms at the European level. 
“Difficult” may well be a euphemism for 
characterising the current relationships be-
tween the Western EU and NATO mem-
bers and Hungary, and the Government 
under Prime Minister Viktor Orban. At 
the parliamentary elections in September 
2014, the coalition between the Christian-
Conservative Fidesz Party and the Christian-
Democratic People’s Party (KDNP) again 
achieved the two-thirds majority needed 
for pushing through possible constitutional 
changes. Minister-President Orban has 
been in power with this party constella-
tion since 2010, and is pursuing his course 
towards a comprehensive overhaul of the 
Hungarian system of government, which is 
not going down well in Brussels. It is true 
that the present disagreements are based 
primarily on Orban’s attitude of rejection 
towards the liberal refugee policy being 
adopted by the European Union and the 
Federal German Government under Federal 
Chancellor Angela Merkel. The origin of the 
alienation, however, is also due in particu-
lar to the rise of movements ranging from 
Securing Sovereignty and Integrity
Hungarian Security Policy within the Framework of NATO and EU
Thomas Bauer
Like most of the states of Eastern and Central Europe, Hungary adopted a clear course towards integration 
with the West after the end of the Cold War. In the first few years after joining NATO, the efforts made by 
the country were exemplary, but with time disenchantment has crept in. 
At a joint press conference with his Polish counterpart Beata Szydło in 
Warsaw in September 2017, Prime Minister Viktor Orbán said that “We 
accept the decision of immigrant countries to become immigrant coun-
tries. We ask them to accept that we do not want to become one.”
Photo: Miniszterelnok

COUNTRY FOCUS: HUNGARY
has been repealed. Romania accorded with 
this criticism at the Summit Conference, 
clear proof of how seriously the foreign 
policy and security policy of the European 
Union and of NATO can be impaired by the 
stresses and conflicts of interests surround-
ing the ethnic minorities in the states of 
Eastern and Central Europe. 
Security Policy and the  
Refugee Question 
A determinant factor in an assessment of 
Hungarian security policy is the National 
Security Strategy from the year 2012. “The 
fundamental security interests of Hungary 
include the protection of its sovereignty, 
territorial integrity and constitutional order, 
the stability of the country, its economic, 
social and cultural development and the 
upholding of human rights and fundamen-
tal freedoms. The maintenance of interna-
tional peace, security and cooperation, the 
spreading of democracy, the stability of 
the Euro-Atlantic region, in particular the 
stability of regions in close geographical 
proximity to Hungary and of neighbouring 
countries, as well as the further deepening 
of Euro-Atlantic integration also constitute 
a national interest of Hungary.” 
Membership of NATO and the EU provide 
the foundation for the safeguarding of in-
Union in November 2017, the Hungarian 
Foreign and Trade Minister Péter Szijjártó 
voiced his criticism of the new education 
and training law in the Ukraine, by which 
the ethnic minorities in the Ukraine would 
be discriminated against, and therefore also 
the some 150,000 Hungarians in the re-
gion of what is referred to as the Carpathian 
Ukraine, who represent about 25% of the 
total population. Budapest will not be sup-
porting EU and NATO efforts until this law 
the relationships between Hungary and the 
Hungarian diaspora is part of this too, and 
the cultural and economic exchange. With 
the parliamentary elections of 2010 and the 
formation of the government under Viktor 
Orban, this obligation has become a specific 
component of Hungarian foreign policy, se-
curity policy, and defence policy as well. 
The topic is still shaping events at the pre-
sent time. During the Summit Conference 
of the Eastern Partnership of the European 
Membership in NATO was one of Hungary’s most ambitious goals, a goal 
pursued determinedly already by Hungary’s first post-communist Prime 
Minister Joszef Antall.  Pictured is a visit of NATO General Secretary An-
ders Fogh Rasmussen to Hungary in 2013 where he met with Viktor Orban. 
International Exhibition & Conference
Law Enforcement, Security and Tactical Solutions
We‘re happy to provide more information!
NürnbergMesse GmbH
T +49 9 11 86 06-49 32
visitorservice@nuernbergmesse.de
Conference partner
Those under the age of  
18 and private individuals  
will not be admitted.  
Identification required.
enforcetac.com
THE SPECIALIZED EXHIBITION – 
BECAUSE REALISTIC DRILLS ARE KEY! 
NUREMBERG, GERMANY
7 – 8.3.2018
E
Photo: Miniszterelnok

32
European Security & Defence · December 2017
terms of security policy. Originally founded 
as a free trade association, in order better to 
compensate jointly for the economic and fi-
nancial consequences of the break-up of the 
Warsaw Pact, the Group has also become 
the mouthpiece for the interests of the four 
states in the context of security policy in 
respect of Russia, but likewise against per-
ceived disadvantageous decisions emanat-
ing from Brussels. Europe watchers see in 
this a certain danger to the development of 
a uniform external dimension of the Union, 
and indeed, with the Visegrád Group as an 
internal organisation, it may be characterised 
as a degree of detachment in the form of an 
internal opposition to Brussels. This element 
will to an increasing extent also be exploited 
by outside parties in the formulation and 
implementation of their own interests in re-
lation to the EU. Israel’s Prime Minister Ben-
jamin Netanyahu was a guest in July 2017 at 
the meeting of the Visegrád Group in Buda-
pest. The result was a closing declaration in 
which the countries of the Visegrád Group 
indicated their readiness to co-operate with 
Israel in different areas, among them the 
combating of terrorism. At the same time, 
Netanyahu took advantage of the Summit 
Conference to voice some sharp criticism of 
the stance adopted by the European Union 
towards Israel and towards migration. In 
this context he expressly praised the policy 
of Hungary and the other Visegrád states 
for implementing a more restrictive attitude 
with regard to the refugee issue.
Hungarian Armed Forces 
The Hungarian armed forces at present 
number some 31,000 soldiers. The larg-
est proportion, with 24,000 soldiers, is 
assigned to the ground forces. Since the 
ending of national service in 2005, the Hun-
garian armed forces have been a purely pro-
fessional body. At US$1.2Bn, the defence 
budget in 2017 amounted to just on 0.94% 
of GNP. Weaponry and equipment are pre-
dominantly still comprised of old Soviet 
stocks, whether these be T-72 main battle 
tanks or the BTR-80 APC. With regard to 
standard weaponry, Budapest continues to 
rely on assault weapons produced in Hun-
gary of the AK-63D/E/MF type. Only the 
Special Forces have been equipped with 
US vehicles and weapons for their commit-
ments in Afghanistan and in Iraq, among 
others with the Oshkosh M-ATV as a Mine 
Resistant Ambush Protected (MRAP) vehi-
cle, the M249 SAW light machine gun, or 
the M4A1 SOPMOD assault rifle.  
The air forces are comprised of 14 Saab 
JAS-39 GRIPEN leased from Sweden, which 
are used as fighter-bombers, fighters, and 
trainers, and since 2009 have actively par-
whether this might be possible Russian ex-
pansion in the east or the result of crises and 
conflicts in the Balkans. This is also manifest 
from the commitment of the country to 
foreign engagements. The largest com-
ponent of the forces provided hitherto for 
international stabilisation and crisis 
actions has been committed to Ko-
sovo and in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
At the present time there are 700 
Hungarian soldiers serving abroad, 
100 of them in Afghanistan. 
It is particularly with regard to the 
neighbouring territory to the south 
and Balkans that the mixing of 
Hungarian security policy interests 
with the issues and challenges sur-
rounding the floods of refugees 
via the Balkan route which has 
developed into a complex melee, 
in which the delimitations are be-
coming blurred between security 
policy argumentation in the sense 
of proactive prevention of terror-
ism, and the concerns of a perceived or 
putative Islamicisation of the whole of the 
Balkans.  Budapest has spoken out against 
the official quota resolution in the distribu-
tion of the refugees already present in the 
EU. At the same time, the construction of a 
comprehensive border installation in relation 
to Serbia has made a considerable contri-
bution to the protection of the EU external 
borders against uncontrolled immigration. 
It is this air of tension which defines the pre-
sent difficult relationships and is also having 
its effect on other parties involved. By way 
of example, Prime Minister Orban has also 
sought support for his policy among other 
states of Central and Eastern Europe, and 
in this context has likewise made recourse 
to the Visegrád Group, established in 1991. 
Even though this does not have any for-
mal character or institutional structure, this 
unofficial alliance of Poland, Hungary, the 
Czech Republic, and the Slovak Republic has 
become an important multiplicator in the 
first five years for the interests of Hungary in 
terests. Of particular significance in this are 
stability and security in the states bordering 
the country to the east and south. Hungary 
has an EU external border of some 100 kilo-
metres in length with the Ukraine, and a fur-
ther 150 kilometre EU external border with 
Serbia-Montenegro. In the strategy from 
2012, in other words before the start of the 
Ukraine conflict, it appeared to Hungary, as 
it did to many European states that the likeli-
hood of a renewed threat to Europe in the 
form of an attack with conventional military 
means was extremely remote. This resulted 
in extensive standing down of mechanised 
units and formations in Hungary, so as to 
release money for corresponding transfor-
mation and modernisation programmes for 
the armed forces. Since 2014 the situation 
has changed radically. The central focus for 
security policy for Budapest is the protec-
tion of territorial integrity against any threat, 
Viktor Orban’s meetings with Russian President Vladimir Putin have 
displeased Brussels. The latest meeting between Orban and Putin took 
place in late August 2017 when Putin accepted Orban’s invitation to  
formally open the 2017 World Judo Championships.
Photo: Kremlin.ru
In recent years, Hungary’s Armed 
Forces have been subjected to 
several ambitious reform projects 
but Hungary’s military budget is 
far away from meeting NATO’s 
2 percent goal. Weaponry and 
equipment are predominantly still 
comprised of old Soviet stocks
Photo: Honvedelem

COUNTRY FOCUS: HUNGARY
ticipated in NATO exercises. Annual costs 
are incurred in the amount of US$140M, 
which Hungary must remit to Sweden. The 
leasing agreement has been extended by 
a further ten years until 2026. With regard 
to combat helicopters, Hungary urgently 
needs to find a successor to the Mil Mi-24 
HIND, which has now been taken out of 
service, and which the country acquired in 
1994 from Berlin, from old stocks of the 
East German National People’s Army. One 
successor under discussion, among others, 
is the AH-2 ROOIVALK from Denel in South 
Africa. Since both countries are having to 
battle with weakening currencies, the op-
tion of a stronger co-opera-
tion has also been discussed, 
in order to be able to carry 
out procurement projects 
despite financial bottlenecks. 
For South Africa, for exam-
ple, Hungarian knowhow in 
the maintenance, overhaul, 
and modernisation of Soviet 
weapons, vehicles, and equip-
ment could be of interest.
Outcome – Between 
Euro-Sceptic and 
European Army
Hungary and the European 
Union find themselves in 
a difficult position. Prime 
Minister Orban is only one 
example of the rising EU 
scepticism in the EU Member 
States with regard to Brussels 
bureaucracy. The European 
Union and its institutions 
and authorities are being 
challenged with regard to 
the ability to safeguard own 
national interests. This is all 
the more surprising in the 
case of Hungary, given that 
Budapest was the first EU 
member to ratify the Lisbon 
Treaty after years of negotia-
tions over a constitution for 
Europe. Nevertheless, apart 
from the somewhat public 
dispute with regard to refu-
gee and migration policy, 
there are still some positive 
indicators, which only a few 
are appreciating. This is man-
ifested, for example, in the 
matter of a European army. 
For Hungary, the bolstering 
of the security and defence 
policy dimension within the 
EU is of great importance, 
if one does not wish to be 
dependent on the USA alone. As early 
as at the meeting between Prime Minis-
ter Orban and his Czech counterpart at 
the time, Bohuslav Sobotka, in August 
2016 in Warsaw, both statesmen were 
outspoken in their support for a Euro-
pean army. Hungary is also one of the 
signatories to the Permanent Structured 
Cooperation (PESCO) of 17 November 
2017, which formed the cornerstone for 
the establishment of a genuine Euro-
pean defence union. The question re-
mains as to how far a commitment to 
Europe à la carte will hold up, which 
relies on a selective solidarity which is at 
all times open to renegotiation. In this 
case, however, a good number of cur-
rent EU Member States would have to 
review and scrutinise their commitment 
to the aims and values of the European 
Union. The issue here, however, is less 
the question of how extensive the mili-
tary capabilities of a country are, or how 
much money it is prepared to invest in 
the modernisation of its armed forces. 
Rather, it is a matter of a mutual un-
derstanding with regard to security and 
stability in the context of globalisation, 
and undivided responsibility in dealing 
with the consequences. 
L
THE       th
, 2018
, 2018
www.sofexjordan.com

34
European Security & Defence · December 2017
COUNTRY FOCUS: HUNGARY
O
ne of the basic needs of every society is 
to live in safety. In accordance with the 
country's Fundamental Law, it is the duty 
of the Government of Hungary to guar-
antee the country’s territorial and societal 
security, in line with securing the environ-
ment for their freedom and welfare. Allied 
solidarity, which also includes the collective 
defence of NATO member states, as well 
as transatlantic ties, are the cornerstone 
of Hungary’s independence, sovereignty, 
territorial integrity and security. Hungary’s 
protection is further strengthened by the 
cooperation and political solidarity within 
the European Union. Hungary’s member-
ship in these two organisations provides 
a unique opportunity to manage the cur-
rent security threats and challenges to-
gether with our Allies and EU partners in a 
more effective manner. Hungary’s external 
and internal security are perceived to be 
inseparable and unified. The Hungarian 
Defence Forces are on the road to mod-
ernisation. The National Military Strategy 
is a significant milestone along this road. 
The experiences of today are insufficient in 
themselves to prepare us for the conflicts 
of tomorrow. 
The strategy, which is firmly grounded in 
reality, allows us to avoid the pitfalls of this 
road. The purpose of the National Military 
Strategy is to determine the strategic objec-
tives, directions, tools and resources need-
ed for the Hungarian Defence Forces to fulfil 
their mission in line with the Fundamental 
Law of Hungary, the legal regulations de-
termining the activities of the defence sec-
tor, the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation’s 
Strategic Concept and the European Secu-
rity Strategy, and based upon the principles 
stipulated in the National Security Strategy. 
Hungary’s National Military Strategy rests 
on the two mutually supporting pillars: the 
nation's defence capabilities and the NATO 
alliance. But these pillars cannot stand on 
their own. Without the assistance of its 
allies, Hungary's military strength would 
not be sufficient to defeat a determined 
external aggression on the country's bor-
ders. At the same time, we must realise 
that NATO has no forces of its own: There 
is no NATO army or air force that can be de-
ployed to help out a member state in case 
of trouble. It is the strength and capabilities 
of its member states' military forces that 
determine the strength and capabilities 
of the alliance. Therefore, the Hungarian 
Defence Forces (HDF) must continuously 
improve their capabilities, and they must 
be an integral part of allied operations. The 
security environment has changed in recent 
years, the number of unstable countries 
is on the rise, and the threat of terrorism 
has significantly increased. The activity of 
international terrorist groups with global 
ambitions has become a significant global 
threat of our time, since the causes, pri-
marily social in nature, conducing to its 
appearance and evolution have not been 
successfully eliminated. Thus, terrorism still 
constitutes a danger to the security and val-
ues of the Transatlantic Community and, 
indirectly, to Hungary. Unfortunately, today 
it has become apparent that those states 
and regions that had difficulties in adapt-
ing to the challenges of globalisation are 
fragile; developments there are unpredict-
able. Rogue states strengthened the base 
of international terrorism and became a 
source of risks arising from mass migration. 
States that fall into anarchy can constitute 
a threat to a region’s stability and may be-
come a safe haven and training ground 
for terrorist groups with global ambitions. 
The role of non-state actors in shaping the 
security environment is growing. Our se-
curity, therefore, is increasingly influenced 
by actors outside international security 
structures, meaning that they are not di-
rectly controlled by politics. The renewed 
National Security and Defence Strategy has 
been completed, and it is now awaiting en-
dorsement by the Government!
Mission Roles and  
Perspectives of the HDF
The main mission/primary goal of the 
Hungarian Defence Forces (HDF) is to 
secure the homeland, ensure the sover-
eignty of the airspace of Hungary and 
integrity of its territory, and participate 
in restoration after natural disasters and 
emergencies. The force development, in 
accordance with the interest of the alli-
Author
General Tibor Benkő, PhD, has been 
the Chief of General Staff of the  
Hungarian Defence Forces since  
6 June 2010.
Security and Defence Policy of Hungary
General Tibor Benkő
The security and defence policy of Hungary is defined by the National Security 
Strategy and the National Military Strategy.
Photos: Honvedelen

35
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
COUNTRY FOCUS: HUNGARY
ance, is also among the priorities. In ad-
dition to that, we are ready and have the 
means to efficiently and productively par-
ticipate in international peacekeeping and 
humanitarian operations. Day by day our 
soldiers successfully protect Hungary’s bor-
ders and citizens against various threats. So 
far 17,000 soldiers have taken part in the 
protection of the country’s borders (among 
others providing reinforcement for the po-
lice) with full parliamentary mandate. With 
the amendment of the Fundamental Law, 
the Hungarian Defence Forces hereinafter 
can also be deployed on home ground if 
necessary. Everyone is aware of the fact 
that mass migration (mainly economic mi-
gration) can only be stopped with stable 
borders and with armed organisations. 
HDF has undergone significant changes 
over the last two and a half decades. Simul-
taneously with the transformation of the 
task system, the mass army was replaced 
by a smaller, flexibly deployable armed 
force comprised of highly trained soldiers.
The Roles of the HDF
The use of the Hungarian Defence Forc-
es generally occurs in crisis management 
operations, in many cases significantly far 
from Hungary, under extreme natural and 
climatic conditions, on a field, which is dif-
ficult to access without the support of the 
host nation (Iraq, Afghanistan, Kosovo, and 
so on). The HDF fully comply with tasks aris-
ing from NATO membership and contrib-
ute to the collective defence. NATO and EU 
membership enable Hungary to build ca-
pabilities in cooperation with its allies and 
partners in harmony with its own domestic 
capacity-building priorities that the country 
could not procure or maintain individually 
and that are also absent in the internation-
al domain. The cooperation between the 
Visegrád Four and other Central European 
partners is of great significance. 
Service abroad is of high importance for 
the HDF. We are tending toward solving 
the problems in crisis regions and provide a 
prosperous future for the inhabitants rather 
than bring crisis here. We’re ready to and 
capable of stationing one thousand troops 
in international operations at any given 
moment. From Hungary’s perspective, the 
Western Balkan theatre of operations is very 
important for the region’s security. Currently 
Hungary participates in the EU- and NATO-
led missions with 370 personnel there. In 
2016, the Hungarian military has about 700 
troops stationed in foreign countries (on 
three continents in 15 countries), as part of 
international peacekeeping forces, including 
“The Hungarian Defence Forces’ main mission goal is to secure the 
homeland.”
About 700 Hungarian soldiers are serving as part of international peacekeeping forces in foreign countries  
including 100 troops in the NATO-led mission in Afghanistan.

36
European Security & Defence · December 2017
COUNTRY FOCUS: HUNGARY
100 HDF troops in the NATO-led ISAF force 
in Afghanistan, 210 Hungarian soldiers in 
Kosovo under command of KFOR, and 160 
troops in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Hungary 
sent a 150-strong coalition unit to Iraq in 
2015, which is expected to be 200 at the 
end of 2017. The stability of the Balkans con-
tinues to be in our national interest. Despite 
the fact that the number of international 
forces has decreased, the Hungarian com-
mitment has not changed; Hungary con-
tinues to participate in UN, OSCE, EU, and 
regional missions. 
Perspectives 
As defined in NATO ’Article 3’ (“In order 
more effectively to achieve the objectives 
of this Treaty, the Parties, separately and 
jointly, by means of continuous and effec-
tive self-help and mutual aid, will maintain 
and develop their individual and collective 
capacity to resist armed attack”) we are pro-
gressively fulfilling the provisions contained 
therein. We are able to fully comply with 
the requirements of ’Article 5’ – (“Its com-
mitment clause defines the casus foederis: It 
commits each member state to consider an 
armed attack against one member state, in 
Europe or North America, to be an armed 
attack against them all”). The national law 
determines the conditions under which a 
Hungarian unit can be deployed abroad. If 
Hungary receives a NATO (Article 5) or UN 
request, the government can send troops 
anywhere for six months without approval 
of the parliament. After six months, the 
government has to ask the parliament to 
extend the time in accordance with the re-
quest of the international organisation. The 
second possible way is to send troops at the 
request of an allied country, but in this case 
only with the approval of the entire parlia-
ment. Military executives who are planning 
and leading military operations must be 
prepared for unforeseen situations, includ-
ing operations with large geographic scope 
and heavy forces, operations with special 
forces, and also wars involving only a few 
“soldiers”, hackers, drones, and so on. For 
commanders who conduct military opera-
tions, it is essential to know the potential 
of modern technology and to possess the 
vital abilities to apply them. A commander 
must be a person who can perform various 
tasks efficiently and dynamically by combin-
ing and coordinating the resources available.
Defence Industry, Develop-
ment, and Procurement  
Issues
The main goal is to ensure that the Hungar-
ian Defence Forces become a well-prepared 
and effective military force in the region by 
2026. A comprehensive political decision 
puts the Hungarian Defence Forces on an 
upward course by virtue of the availability 
of additional funds and the implementation 
of development. To achieve this, we initi-
ated the implementation of the so-called 
Zrínyi 2026 Programme which is based on 
the idea that “defence of the homeland is 
a national cause”. The programme has a 
dual purpose. The primary goal, of course, 
is to shift our focus from expeditionary op-
erations to high-intensity operations, restore 
combat capabilities that had withered away, 
and develop the HDF into a well-balanced 
armed force. The secondary goal is to re-
store the nation's military industrial capacity 
and achieve a measure of self-sufficiency 
through the acquisition of most of our new 
equipment from domestic suppliers.
Future Plans and Visions:  
Volunteer Territorial Defence 
Reserve 
The defence forces’ development plans 
of the Zrínyi 2026 Programme feature the 
reorganisation of the system of the volun-
tary reservists (planned number of reserve 
forces: 20,000), and the implementation of 
recruitment campaigns in this context, as 
well as the launch of the Defence Sports 
Association and the enhancement of de-
fence education as a priority goal, as part of 
which it is planned to develop a kind of ca-
det system. Among the plans regarding the 
development of Hungary’s defence capabil-
ity, we would like, inter alia, to reinforce the 
air force and the procurement of transport 
aircraft and helicopters. Certainly amongst 
the priorities are the modernisation of the 
soldiers’ individual equipment, including 
their clothing and weapons. 
Modernised Equipment and 
Weapons
Modernisation of the full range of our artil-
lery systems is another part of our agenda. 
Besides, work has already been started for 
the revival of the Hungarian defence indus-
try and the plans also contain the develop-
2010          2011            2012            2013            2014           2015            2016            2017           2018
308,2
248,9
233,7
241,3
241,5
241,3
281,4
323,9
369,1
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
0,79
1,14
0,82
0,85
0,79
0,79
0,89
0,99
1,09
1,2
1
0,8
0,6
0,4
0,2
0
In percentage of GDP
Hungary’s military budget between 2010 and 2018.
Graphics: ChoD HU 

37
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
COUNTRY FOCUS: HUNGARY
ment of communication and information 
systems (CIS). The Hungarian defence and 
security industry’s main aim is to create 
new opportunities to sell existing products 
or those still under development, and to 
bring new possibilities for cooperation. The 
demands of the Hungarian Defence Forces 
cannot be fulfilled solely by domestic sourc-
es, but foreign partners may see real suc-
cess by offering products that represent as 
much added value to Hungary as possible. 
It is certainly important to mention our de-
ficiencies in some development areas, but 
the directions should be rethought and the 
delays we have seen so far may be turned 
into advantages. Using the experiences of 
other countries, we can start the construc-
tion according to new strategic directions 
while avoiding unnecessary impasses. We 
will embark on the largest defence forces 
development enterprise of the past twenty-
five years. Plans include a pay settlement 
programme, as well. Long-term differen-
tiated wage-setting is of the utmost im-
portance; because of this – amongst other 
factors – the career path becomes more 
predictable and provides stability for the 
individual and his family while reducing the 
differences between the armed organi-
sations and civilian professionals. By the 
progressive general pay rises – which have 
been started recently – we could guarantee 
the retention of the capacity that has so far 
been a positive development. 
Development Directions and 
Changes of Training, Education 
and Support Systems
The system of health damage support was 
introduced in January this year. The HDF 
scholarship system has also been expanded, 
so the MOD now offers to the young ap-
plicants as many as 18 different scholarship 
programmes. The defence scholarship pro-
grammes can also be a retaining force and 
make the military career more attractive in 
the long run. We established a presence on 
social media, we have gone into the schools, 
where we offer national defence courses. 
We provide adventure opportunities in sum-
mer camps for interested youngsters. For 
their parents and older brothers we offer 
the opportunity to contribute to the security 
of the nation by joining the recently raised 
(brand new) reserve force, the companies 
of the Volunteer Territorial Defence Reserve 
(VTDR). According to the initial plans, the 
territorial reserve defence force will have a 
company in all 197 administrative districts. 
This ambitious plan will need thousands of 
new volunteers nationwide. The VTDR pro-
gramme is encouraging the notion of patri-
otic commitment and willingness to make 
sacrifices. The reserve system is capable of 
attracting the skilled, committed, motivated 
compatriots from the labour market, who 
are ready to serve our country and retaining 
them in the voluntary reserve force of the 
Hungarian Defence Forces.
Nevertheless the formerly established re-
serve system also works: this voluntary re-
servist system is an integral part of a modern 
armed force based upon professional and 
contracted personnel. It provides a frame-
work for the training of our fellow citizens 
wishing to take an active role in the defence 
of the homeland and their employment in 
peacetime and under special legal order. The 
volunteer reservist system (VRS) consists of 
three parts. The first contingent is the volun-
teer operational reservists (VOR), who can 
be called up for service in peacetime as well. 
The second contingent is the volunteer de-
fence reservists (VDR), who can be called up 
only when a state of preventive defence or a 
state of national emergency exists and serves 
as the lawful authority to call up, organise 
and train those who are potentially liable for 
military service. The third contingent is the 
previously mentioned VTDR. According to 
2016 data, some 3,791 people served in the 
voluntary army reserve of which 82 percent, 
some 3,109, were former service pensioners 
(an abolished form of pension that used to 
provide pension to military, police and fire 
department personnel based on their years 
of service). More than 2,000 of the reserve 
personnel were over 50 years old. 
Summary
The Hungarian Defence Forces require ex-
tensive modernisation. In our rapidly chang-
ing world, an organisation which protects 
a country’s sovereignty and security must 
think at least one step ahead of the next 
threat. Given the current crises and emerg-
ing security challenges, all NATO members, 
including Hungary, committed themselves 
to developing their military strength. In 
order to materialise this commitment, in 
January this year, the defence and military 
forces development programme – the fre-
quently mentioned – Zrínyi 2026 has been 
launched. The programme itself is the most 
significant defence and military develop-
ment programme of the last three dec-
ades, which aims to modernise nearly all 
segments of the Hungarian armed forces. 
The programme covers the development 
of the force structure and military capabili-
ties, the reform of the personnel’s training, 
at the same time as realising versatile in-
vestments. The Government and the Hun-
garian Defence Forces are therefore com-
mitted to the success in implementing the 
Zrínyi 2026 programme, aiming at the full 
execution of its specific directives, through 
which a Defence Force that is combat-
worthy in all respects should be created. 
The HDF task system has been substantially 
supplemented. In addition to international 
engagement, the focus shifted towards 
the implementation of national defence 
tasks. In order to overcome the emerging 
threats, the country's plan on armed de-
fence is being revised and supplemented, in 
a way that it strengthens the armed forces’ 
response capability to the challenges of 
21st century warfare. The development of 
new capabilities will enable the Hungarian 
Armed Forces to act against terrorism, mass 
migration and hybrid warfare, to guarantee 
the territorial integrity of the country and 
the life and property security of the popula-
tion, simultaneously with maintaining con-
ventional tasks. 
L
“The Volunteer Territorial Defence Reserve programme is encouraging 
the notion of patriotic commitment and willingness to make sacrifices.”

38
European Security & Defence · December 2017
COUNTRY FOCUS: HUNGARY
Z
RÍNYI 2026 (named after a famous Hun-
garian-Croatian military commander of 
the 17th century Turkish wars), was first 
mentioned in official Hungarian Ministry of 
Defence (MoD) communications in Decem-
ber 2016. It is called a “Home Defence and 
Military Forces Development Programme”, 
underlining the fact that it focusses not just 
on re-equipment, but also the rehabilita-
tion of the status of the armed forces as a 
state institution, embedded in the society; a 
link which was broken due to more than 20 
years of post-Cold War downsizing and the 
cessation of the conscription system in 2004. 
Addressing Personnel Woes
As recruitment and retention are the two 
biggest challenges facing the Hungarian 
Defence Forces (HDF), it is no coincidence 
that the “Home Defence” part is empha-
sised: since 2015 a phased, differentiated 
50% personnel expenditure hike has been  
ongoing, focussing on the lower ranks 
and the “high value” specialities, while 
at the same time a career model is being 
developed and implemented. This effort is 
also underlined by the fact that, beginning 
in 2010, higher education of military and 
police personnel and civil servants was con-
solidated under the aegis of the National 
Public Service University (NKE), which aims 
to establish smoother career transition and 
transfer between different arms of the pub-
lic services, also providing a “safety net” for 
those who have to leave uniformed service 
early. At the same time a big effort is devo-
ted to re-establishing the reserve forces (in 
2010 there were exactly 17 reservists in the 
HDF!) organised under the territorial prin-
ciple: currently numbering around 6,000, 
the goal is to reach 20,000 by the end of 
the ten-year planning period. To put that 
in perspective, 29,700 personnel has been 
the authorised strength of the HDF since 
2013, about 5,500 of which it is currently 
unable to fill. 
A non-traditional military mission, called 
Collective Will, to build, then guard a fence 
on the southern border to prevent illegal 
entry of migrants is the biggest ongoing 
operation of the HDF, with a few thousand  
troops deployed on a rotational basis since 
2014. Most of the time HDF meets a go-
vernment-mandated 1,000 personnel limit 
on NATO/EU/anti-ISIS foreign missions, 
the most important being Iraqi Kurdistan, 
Kosovo, Bosnia and Afghanistan. 
Ambiguity in Acquisition  
Programmes
Regarding the “Military Forces Develop-
ment” component of ZRÍNYI 2026, so-
me ambiguity still exists a year after the 
launch of the programme. To understand 
this one has to remember that in 2011 
the law regarding Defence was altered so 
that any information regarding the HDF is 
classified for 30 years. In practice, howe-
ver, the government and military leaders 
infrequently release bits of information 
and general orientation, including those 
related to ZRÍNYI 2026, out of political 
and PR expediency. Based on these and 
the fact that capability modernisation in 
the HDF has been very limited since the 
Cold War, much equipment is simply old 
Author
Zord Gábor László is a regulator 
contributer to the Hungarian  
daily “Magyar Nemzet” and runs the 
Air Power Blog "legiero.blog.hu" 
(in Hungarian language).
In Hungarian service NEŠTIN class minesweepers, originally from 
Yugoslavia, are designated MS-25: three - ÓBUDA (shown here), 
DUNAÚJVÁROS, and DUNAFÖLDVÁR - are operated by HDF 1st EOD  
& River Flotilla Battalion for river mine clearance.
Hungary Begins Long-Awaited  
Modernisation
Zord Gábor László
With the goal of reaching 2% of GDP for defence by 2024 set in a formal government declaration, Hungary 
has begun to draw up plans for the rehabilitation and modernisation of its national defence capabilities. 
Although transparency is not up to the standards of the European Union or NATO by any measure, 
information is slowly starting to emerge about the ZRÍNYI 2026 programme.

39
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
COUNTRY FOCUS: HUNGARY
or worn out, one can draw a very illumi-
nating picture on what is going on.
Concerning only significant Western acqui-
sitions, there were just three cases in the 
past 20 years: those of MISTRAL VSHO-
RAD systems, Kongsberg MRR radio sys-
tems and - the biggest of all - the lease-to-
buy of a squadron of Saab GRIPEN fighters. 
Land forces were generally neglected, the 
last significant acquisition being the deli-
very (in exchange for Soviet state debt) of 
several hundred BTR-80 and 80A Armou-
red Personnel Carriers (APC) in the early 
90s which to this day form the backbone of 
Hungary’s land capability. Also to be con-
sidered is the fact that these limited acqui-
sitions ran parallel to downsizing - and the 
deletion of certain capabilities altogether, 
or down to purely symbolic levels. At their 
lowest, Hungary’s tank forces consisted of 
one single Company equipped with T-72 - 
now back to a battalion, at least on paper): 
self-propelled artillery assets (2S1 GVOZ-
DIKA and 2S3 AKACIA) were withdrawn 
altogether, with one single unit of D-20 
towed howitzers remaining: tracked Infan-
try Fighting Vehicles (IFV) also disappeared 
with the withdrawal of the BMP-1.  Even 
the 120mm mortars were withdrawn. The 
“light infantry concept” behind these force 
reductions was mandated by audits by the 
US company Cubic, which emphasised 
contribution to US-led multinational expe-
ditionary missions versus heavy forces with 
a high level of protection and firepower. In 
terms of force structure this means two bri-
gades, one of which (25th KLAPKA at Tata) 
has certain heavy segments remaining - ar-
tillery, tanks, 9P148 tank destroyers - while 
the other (5th Bocskai in Debrecen) has 
no heavy assets but instead has the only 
reconnaissance battalion – UAVs and EW 
included – in the HDF). 
Bearing in mind these preconditions, so 
far, the following segments of ZRÍNYI 2026 
became public:
Air Force
In 2014, the MoD signed a contract with  
MBDA for the regeneration of missile stocks 
of the MISTRAL VSHORAD systems, which 
was depleted through practice firings as 
well as shelf life expiry. This included the ac-
quisition of new, longer range MISTRAL-3 
missiles (delivered at the end of 2016, the 
contract became part of ZRÍNYI 2026); 
new multi-functional sights, as well as 
local refurbishment and life-extension of  a 
certain number of old MISTRAL-2 missiles. 
At the end of 2017 a contract for another 
batch of MISTRAL-3 is in hand, along with 
the modernisation of MISTRAL Command 
The Hungarian Army fields only wheeled IFVs, but the intention to  
acquire tracked vehicles has been stated. BTR-80 upgrades are con- 
sidered to be a stopgap measure.
A plan has been drawn up for the replacement of the KUB SHORAD  
systems, which were last modernised in 2002.
Photos: via Miroslav Gyürösi

40
European Security & Defence · December 2017
COUNTRY FOCUS: HUNGARY
Posts (MCP). Prices were not made pub-
lic. A concept was also drawn up for the 
replacement of the KUB SHORAD systems, 
which were last modernised in 2002. This 
effort is regularly mentioned as Medium 
Range Air Defence (MRAD) of a Medium 
Surface to Air Missile (MSAM) capability, 
which would mean – by NATO terminology 
– a system with more than 25 km range - 
but no further details are known.
Hungary had installed three NATO-finan-
ced RAT-31DL backbone radars by 2014, 
but due to less than optimal locations - due 
to environmental concerns – has had to 
keep two gap-filler radar companies equip-
ped with old Soviet P-37/PRV-17 radars to 
provide the necessary NATINADS covera-
ge. These radars, as well as mobile groups 
equipped with ST-68M and P-18 radars, 
have to be replaced, but as a programme 
for Visegrad Four cooperation fell through, 
it is thought Hungary is alone in seeking a 
solution. In addition to a modern S-band 
radar it is thought that a requirement exists 
to retain a radar capability in the VHF band 
as well, for which the MoD company Ar-
zenal Zrt. has a prototype solution. Just as 
in the case of the ST-68M and P-18 today, 
future mobile systems are expected to have 
to be interoperable with the target acquisi-
tion radars of the SAM Wing.
In 2013, a programme for a “National He-
licopter Capability” was drawn up, which 
aimed at a single or coordinated package 
acquisition of Western helicopters for mi-
litary, police and Emergency Medical Ser-
vices (EMS) use. From 2014, however, it 
was slowly abandoned; the police bought 
used MD902s, the HDF acquired two for-
mer EMS Ecureuils and three used Mi-8s; 
and the EMS continued to lease H135s. By 
2016 the government had selected a total-
ly different, and – considering mainstream 
Euroatlantic political developments – very 
strange approach: instead of replacing its 
30-35 year-old fleet of mostly unservice-
able Soviet-Russian Mi-17 and Mi-24 heli-
copters, it was decided to overhaul them 
to give them eight more years and 2,000 
more flying hours of service. Also counted 
under ZRÍNYI 2026, these five transport 
and twelve attack helicopters were sent 
to the Russian Helicopters facilities in No-
vosibirsk and Saint Petersburg. While the 
former have not received any modernisa-
tion under a €15M overhaul contract, the 
latter may receive some upgrades under 
their €69M price tag. According to MoD 
communications this action does not mean 
a total abandonment of the new helicopter 
ambitions, but it definitely means a shift to 
the latter years of ZRÍNYI 2026.
For several years the MoD attempted to 
replace the very limited air mobility capabi-
lity provided by a small fleet of An-26 light 
transport aircraft, but never succeeded in 
getting beyond the initial phase, despite 
this effort being considered a priority by 
political leaders. Finally, based on defence 
leadership statements, things seemed to 
start to move in 2017, although require-
ments were never released officially, and a 
waiver given by the Parliament’s Defence 
Committee means that no open tendering 
is necessary for the acquisitions. An order 
from the Chief of Staff of the HDF publis-
hed in the official gazette in November also 
definitely signalled the beginning of con-
version training for the air transport crews. 
Despite the communication blackout, leaks 
to the press suggested that eventually the 
HDF – most likely through a Public-Priva-
te-Partnership (PPP) scheme – will acquire 
three Airbus A320/Boeing 737 class trans-
port aircraft, two smaller VIP-transport 
aircraft, and three medium military trans-
ports, maybe with an aerial refuelling ca-
pability.
Regarding its combat air capability, Hun-
gary is committed through a lease-to-
buy deal with Sweden to maintaining a 
single squadron (14) of GRIPEN fighters 
until at least 2026. Leasing costs per year 
are thought to be around €60 to €100M. 
Most recently, steps were taken to increase  
their  multifunctionality, especially the 
Close Air Support (CAS) capability, wi-
th existing LITENING IIIG targeting pods 
and GBU-12 laser guided bombs (LGBs) 
acquired from US stocks in 2015. Also, in 
November 2017 Hungary joined NATO’s 
Precision Guided Munitions MoU, a joint 
acquisition programme through which 
it will be cheaper to buy further bombs 
for GRIPEN, as well as pooling munitions. 
The acquisition of RecceLite reconnais-
sance pods is also ongoing. Also, earlier 
this year the MoD signed a contract with 
Sweden to enter the MS 20 upgrade with 
the aircraft, which will convert it to the 
most modern Swedish Air Force standard, 
including a METEOR Beyond Visual Range 
(BVR) air-to-air missile capability to repla-
ce the current AIM-120C-5 AMRAAMs. 
Hungary currently has leased 14 JAS 39 GRIPEN fighter aircraft. The contract includes 12 single-seaters and 
two dual-seat aircraft, as well as training for pilots and ground crew, ground maintenance facilities and a 
simulator.  Leasing costs are thought to be €60 - €100M per year, and under the MS 20 contract the Hungarian 
MoD will upgrade the squadron to the latest Swedish Air Force standard.

41
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
COUNTRY FOCUS: HUNGARY
However, no contract for the missiles has 
been signed yet. MS 20 will be implemen-
ted at least partially by 2019, as new iden-
tification capabilities will be needed when 
Hungarian GRIPENS will again take part in 
the Baltic Air Policing mission. Old SIDE-
WINDER missiles which have reached the 
end of their life cycle can only be replaced 
by IRIS-T, as this is the standard advanced 
short range AAM for GRIPEN, with no al-
ternative weapon having been integrated.
Hungary joined the NATO Flight Training 
Canada (NFTC) school in 2002, but the 
long term contract is coming to an end 
soon, and it is thought that the MoD is 
looking for alternatives. In this respect, 
its screening/basic training aircraft, Yak-
52s, were replaced this year by two Zlín 
Z-242L light trainers from the Czech Re-
public, with two Z-143LSi to follow so-
on (altogether a little more than €1M). 
Eventually the HDF will acquire eight of 
these aircraft. As a secondary role, some 
of the aircraft are to be equipped with 
a light electro-optical sensor payload 
for border patrol/disaster relief support 
missions. An advanced trainer is also 
being sought, but it is not known at this 
time whether on a national or regional 
(Visegrad Four for example) basis. It is 
known that Hungarian officials took 
part in demonstrations of the upcoming 
Aero L-39NG jet trainer.
Land Forces
Recently some basic information regar-
ding armour modernisation has started 
to appear, based on the fact that NATO 
has set Hungary a force goal to have an 
operational heavy brigade by the end of 
the planning cycle. Currently based solely 
on wheeled APC vehicles, having lost its 
IFV capability many years ago, it has been 
stated that the HDF wants to field tracked 
combat vehicles again. Also, the renewal 
of a Main Battle Tank (MBT) capability is 
envisioned. As Hungary’s economy is very 
much engaged in vehicle/car manufactu-
ring, it is thought to be the programme 
where the political requirement for indus-
trial participation and “localisation” is the 
strongest. Just like the helicopters, this 
big-ticket item is expected to move into 
high gear in the latter half of ZRÍNYI 2026, 
with further - or until now not financed - 
BTR-80 upgrades coming as a stopgap.
At the end of 2017, the Hungarian Govern- 
ment issued a decree on providing finan-
cial guaranties of about €€€30M to impro-
ve HDF fire support capabilities (acquisi-
tion of artillery systems and munitions) 
“in 2017-19”. Public studies and lectures 
in recent years have suggested a prog- 
ramme for the “renewal of field- and 
anti-tank artillery”, which is now widely 
regarded as either an acquisition of used 
self-propelled howitzers, or of anti tank 
guided missiles (ATGM) – at least as a 
stopgap solution. One also has to bear in 
mind that that the existing towed D-20 
howitzers are totally obsolete, and stocks 
of 9M111 FAGOT and 9M113 KONKURS 
(AT-4/5) ATGMs and their 9P148 plat-
forms are reaching the end of their life 
cycles. Newer 9M131 METIS-M missiles 
are in service, but their range is limited to 
only 2,000 metres. 
One of the companies of the MoD, Ei Zrt., 
has been engaged in developing and ma-
nufacturing light drones for many years, 
both for an air defence training target role 
and a tactical reconnaissance role. Based 
on METEOR, which was used for live firing 
exercises, NEMERE and ORKAN were de-
veloped for the latter purpose, with very 
different aerodynamic layouts. The sing-
le recon battalion of the HDF uses Israeli 
SKYLARK-LE UAVs, but it is though that 
the Hungarian products entered field trials 
in recent years. Special Operations Forces 
use RQ-11 RAVEN UAVs. 
L 
A contract for a further batch of MBDA MISTRAL-3 is in hand, along with 
the modernisation of MISTRAL Command Posts (MCP).
At their lowest Hungary’s tank forces consisted of one single Company 
equipped with T-72 - now back to a battalion, at least on paper.

42
European Security & Defence · December 2017
 ARMED FORCES
qualified personnel, which can be used 
either as contracted servicemen or in the 
reserves. In the past, army conscripts only 
exercised logistic and support functions; 
they were not trained for combat and did 
not participate in combat. At the same 
time, Izoria stressed that the army will con-
tinue to consist primarily of professional 
soldiers. Professionals currently account for 
90 percent or around 13,000, all of them 
deployed in Afghanistan as part of combat 
operations. However, conscripts currently 
account for only 10 percent or around 
2,000. For example, the current army has 
about 15,000 soldiers without the Ministry 
of Defence and the General Staff person-
nel as well as civilian staff of the Ministry of 
Defence, which according to various open 
sources consists of 36,000 to 37,000.
Izoria also announced plans to optimise the 
General Staff, the army, the air force, the 
air-defence forces, and the military police. 
The plans envisages abolishing an unspeci-
fied number of departments within the 
General Staff and emphasises the use of 
combat helicopters and UAVs as there is 
no Georgian air fleet. Because of this opti-
misation, 1,750 civilian personnel from the 
MoD and 340 military personnel from the 
Georgian Armed Forces (GAF) were dis-
missed in December 2016. Who will supply 
combat helicopters and UAVs to Georgia 
is currently unknown, as the West is not 
yet ready for such deliveries. And Israeli 
companies might not step in as they do 
not want to provoke Russia’s ire. After the 
August 2008 war, Israeli companies halted 
the supply of weapon systems to Georgia, 
while neighbouring Turkey did not provide 
any arms at all.
In the meantime, the number of infantry 
brigades was cut from five to four and 
Georgian Military Modernisation:  
Two Steps Forward, One Step Back
Eugene Kogan
The article focuses on the current modernisation of the Georgian military. Whatever happened before 
the appointment of Levan Izoria, the current  Minister of Defence, is history. Izoria was appointed Minis-
ter of Defence on 1 August 2016.
A
t a press conference on 7 November 
2016, Izoria announced plans to re-
form the country's armed forces, air force 
and air defence, but concluded that the 
construction of a new naval capacity was 
too costly. The Navy was disbanded in 
2009 and merged with the Coast Guard, 
which is part of the Border Guard Division 
and reports to the Ministry of the Interior 
(MIA). It should also be emphasised that 
Izoria's reform plans were not the first and 
probably will not be the last ones. His pre-
decessors tried to pursue the same reform 
and, idiomatically speaking, “they keep 
treading on the same rake.”
During the reign of the Georgian Dream 
Coalition between 2012 and 2016, two 
ministers resigned, the third was removed 
from office and the fourth, the current 
minister Izoria, retained his previous posi-
tion as minister. It remains to be seen how 
long. The frequent change of ministers has 
hampered efforts to build robust and ef-
fective armed forces, as each minister has 
his or her own vision of the armed forces 
he or she tried to implement without learn-
ing from the mistakes of his or her prede-
cessors. As a result, the reforms have not 
yielded tangible results and the country's 
military capabilities give little hope, even 
though Georgian Dream's officials claim 
otherwise. It is not yet clear whether the 
current reform will be more successful than 
the previous ones.
The Contours of Reform
During the press conference, Izoria added 
that the basic training of conscripts will in 
future be similar to that of professional sol-
diers, in order to create a larger pool of 
A mine-clearing line charge (MICLIC) explodes in a Georgian obstacle 
during a rehearsal for the combined arms live fire at Vaziani Training 
Area, Georgia. The live fire was the last training event before the  
closing of Exercise Noble Partner in August 2017. Noble Partner is a  
multinational, US Army-led exercise conducting training for the  
Georgian military designated for the NATO Response Force.
Photo: US Army
Author
Eugene Kogan is a defence  
and security expert based in Tbilisi,  
Georgia.

ARMED FORCES 
43
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
changes were made as to where they 
would be based. Georgia needs a small but 
well-equipped army that is highly mobile, 
robust, effective and cost-efficient and in-
teroperable with NATO standards. A new 
West Command of Land Forces of the GAF 
with its headquarters in Kutaisi was estab-
lished in November 2016. Simultaneously, 
an East Command of Land Forces of GAF 
was also established.
But the lack of a naval capacity leaves 
Georgia out of NATO maritime operations 
in the Black Sea. Prime Minister Giorgi 
Kvirikashvili stated on 7 November 2016, 
“We shall be part of Black Sea security to-
gether with the North Atlantic family, and 
Georgia will be included in patrolling and 
other similar operations." But this state-
ment should not be taken seriously, as it 
is not the competence of a prime minis-
ter to deal with military issues. This would 
be a task of MoD officials or the minister 
himself. Moreover, Georgia has no naval 
capabilities aside from a few Coast Guard 
ships donated by the US.
In addition to the initiatives mentioned 
above, the annual NATO-Georgia military 
exercise Noble Partner which began in 
2014 aims to improve the interoperability 
and performance of the Georgian military. 
In May 2016 the Georgian Army com-
manded for the first time a joint Georgia-
US-UK air and land forces exercise. Howev-
er, deterrence with defensive weapons and 
training of troops for homeland defence 
remains an unresolved issue for Georgia 
which has not yet been addressed by its al-
lies. In July 2016 it was reported that the US 
intends to step up training combat skills of 
the GAF and help Georgia building a local 
training centre for self-defence rather than 
only deploying troops to Afghanistan. The 
US does some combined arms training of 
Georgian troops, but it does so at Hohen-
fels Training Area in Germany. Izoria said 
that the proposed training centre will prob-
ably be located at Vaziani Air Base, with 
Georgia investing GEL10M. Izoria added 
that nine Georgian battalions would start 
training there on 1 March 2018.
As for the overall cost of the aforemen-
tioned endeavour, the MoD budget largely 
covers personnel wages and to a lesser 
degree training and acquisition despite 
standing at 2 per cent of the GDP. 
Defence Budget and  
Acquisition
In May 2014 a bill proposed to spend 2 per 
cent of the country’s GDP on MoD’s an-
nual budget. However, the bill was never 
adopted; there is no such obligation in 
Georgia’s legislation. Nonetheless, in 2014 
the MoD received 2.24 per cent of the GDP 
(GEL660M). In 2015 and 2016 the MoD 
received GEL670M. In 2016, 67 per cent 
of the budget was spent on salaries and 
social benefits while 33 per cent was spent 
on military equipment, ammunition and 
other unspecified needs. This was a big 
mistake indeed and an improper allocation 
of funds.
According to NATO standards, salaries and 
administrative expenses should range some-
where between 50 to 53 per cent, and Geor-
gia tries to live up to these standards. In April 
2017, Izoria said that Georgia’s spending ra-
tio would change, with a larger percentage 
of the budget allocated for procurement 
needs and combat readiness. It remains to 
be seen whether or not Izoria’s intention 
will be realised. According to a government-
revised draft published in December 2016 
the MoD is to receive GEL750M (or about 
US$312M) in 2017. It is still unclear how this 
sum will be spent. It is obvious, however, 
that the revised defence budget does not 
allow for substantial acquisition of new 
equipment and advanced weapon systems. 
It is also uncertain that NATO member states 
– together or individually – would be ready 
to offer Georgia arms at a discounted price.
General Petr Pavel, Chairman of the NATO Military Committee, and the 
Georgian Minister of Defence Levan Izoria provide opening remarks for 
the Special Military Committee meeting with Georgia.
Photo: NATO
A US Army Soldier assigned to 2nd Cavalry Regiment poses with one of 
the local children during their stop in Khashuri, Georgia, on 31 July 2017 
as they begin Exercise Noble Partner. Noble Partner 17 is a European  
Rotational Force exercise of Georgia’s light infantry company contribu-
tion to the NATO Response Force. The exercise provides participating 
nations with the opportunity to train in a multinational environment 
while enhancing interoperability during realistic training events. 
Photo: US Army

 ARMED FORCES
44
European Security & Defence · December 2017
But it is a fact that even nine years after the 
August 2008 war the West remains reluc-
tant to sell arms to Georgia due to concerns 
about provoking Russian ire. Thus far, West-
ern reluctance has resulted in serious im-
pairment of the country’s air-defence and 
anti-tank capabilities. As long as the West 
is unwilling to sell these weapon systems 
to Georgia, the Georgian military inven-
tory will consist of obsolete Soviet equip-
ment, some Georgian-made equipment 
and some Western arms like US-donated 
helicopters. As a result, the Georgian mili-
tary remains vulnerable vis-à-vis the heavily 
armed Russian military stationed in Abkha-
zia and South Ossetia which has been in-
creased in strength since the August 2008 
war. More than 8,000 Russian soldiers are 
stationed in Abkhazia and South Ossetia – 
the occupied regions of Georgia. The in-
tegration of the Abkhazian and South 
Ossetian troops under Russian command 
further increased the numbers and agility 
of the deployed forces.
Despite Western reluctance to sell arms it 
was reported in February 2016 that Ameri-
can military assistance to Georgia known 
as Foreign Military Financing (FMF) would 
decrease under a budget proposal from 
US$30M in 2016 down to US$20M in 2017. 
The 2017 funding is intended “to advance 
Georgia’s development of forces capable 
of enhancing security, countering Russian 
aggression, and contributing to coalition 
operations. This will include support in ar-
eas such as upgrades to Georgia’s rotary 
wing air transport capabilities, advisory 
and defence reform, and modernisation of 
Georgia’s military institutions.” Yet, as late 
as July 2016, it was not entirely clear what 
type of weapon systems Georgia would be 
allowed to acquire as a result of the afore-
mentioned funding. American officials 
were tight-lipped regarding the provision 
of weapon systems. Even in September 
2017 uncertainty about acquisitions per-
sisted. It appears, however, that JAVELIN 
ATGMs and F-92 STINGER MANPADS are 
unlikely to be sold to Georgia. Despite a 
wealth of information in open sources 
about Georgia’s likely acquisition of French 
air-defence systems nothing has material-
ised thus far. In April 2017 it was reported 
that Izoria plans to visit France to negotiate 
with his French counterpart about purchas-
ing air-defence systems. All of this makes 
Georgia’s military unprepared against po-
tential Russian military attacks.
The final piece of the current reform an-
nounces the establishment of reserve 
forces. Previous ministers of defence have 
tackled this issue with little success. An-
other initiative should be taken with a grain 
of salt.
Reserve Forces
The Georgian military expert Vakhtang 
Maisaya said, “Forming robust military 
reserve forces remains the most impor-
tant and challenging step in army reform. 
Currently, the main objective should be to 
make use of the reserves and work out 
mobilisation plans that signal the defensive 
strength of the country. The government 
has worked out the concept, and it fully 
corresponds with NATO standards.”
Indeed, in March 2016 Georgia’s top mili-
tary commanders discussed the mobili-
sation and reserve forces draft concept. 
According to the concept, the main mis-
sion of the GAF reserves is to support the 
armed forces in wartime, during crisis and 
in peacetime. The draft includes three cat-
egories of the reserve system – army, ter-
ritorial and specialists’ reserve.
In May 2017, the aforementioned catego-
ries were elaborated. The first category is 
Georgian Army soldiers from the 22nd Light Infantry Battalion listen  
to their captain during a Georgian Independence Day celebration on  
26 May 2006 in Baghdad, Iraq.
Photo: US Army
Georgian Army soldiers wait for air transportation prior to conducting 
operation Northern Lion II at Camp Bastion, Helmand Province, Afghani-
stan, July 2013. Northern Lion II was a Georgian-led operation conduct-
ed to deter insurgents, establish a presence and gather intelligence.
Photo: US Marine Corps

45
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
to be composed of demobilised servicemen or servicemen who 
completed a five-year military contract and are willing to serve for 
another five years in a reserve unit.
The second category is to be the territorial reserve established on 
the basis of the existing Georgian National Guard with its current 
1,600 active reservists that is used as reserve for the GAF. In the 
event of hostilities, its members will be deployed only in their home 
district and serve for five years.
The third category is to consist of civilian experts whose knowledge 
and experience can be useful to the army in peacetime or wartime.
The active army reserve is to number 1,500 people, and the ter-
ritorial reserve will be 10,000 strong. The specialised reserve units 
will not be limited in size, and will be dynamically formed based 
on GAF’s developing needs. Unlike the current reserve system, the 
new concept envisions manning a reserve on a voluntary basis only. 
Women up to 55 years of age will also be allowed to serve. Under 
this proposed system, members of the reserve who sign a five-year 
contract will undergo an annual 45-day retraining course; they will 
receive financial compensation equalling 20 per cent of the salary 
of a military service member of similar rank and grade. As for the 
others’ refreshing course it remains unknown and, as a result, there 
are questions around whether or not the proposed idea is feasible.
Izoria said that if the legislature adopted this reserve concept, a 
‘pilot’ programme for selecting participants and concluding service 
contracts would start in 2018. It is a good idea to carefully evaluate 
the pilot programme before continuing with the rest of the afore-
mentioned reserve components.
Back in 2012 a similar ‘pilot’ project was launched and 13,000 
volunteer reservists (out of an envisaged 100,000) were recruited. 
At the time, the new recruits accounted for less than 1 per cent of 
Georgia’s defence budget (US$3.5M). The author does not know 
whether Izoria took recent experience into account and it is unclear 
whether resources allocated to the reservists is money well spent.
There is one very important point on which the author and 
Maisaya agree, with the latter stating: “Georgia still does not 
have an overarching comprehensive military strategy to replace 
the now outdated one adopted after the August 2008 war and 
that would define the role of the reservist force vis-à-vis the regu-
lar army.” And as long as such a strategy has not been prepared, 
reforms of the reserve forces are likely to fail.
To conclude, there are currently more questions than answers. 
What is clear is that even the good intentions in the West trans-
lating into training of the GAF for missions in Afghanistan is not 
sufficient help for Georgia at this crucial juncture for training in 
homeland defence. The meagre defence budget and its improp-
erallocation, namely 67 per cent for salaries and social benefits, 
while the rest goes towards military equipment and so on, impair 
the country's abilities to purchase urgently needed modern arms. 
Western reluctance to sell modern arms lessens the ability of GAF 
to defend Georgia. Whether or not Izoria’s negotiations would ulti-
mately lead to the signing of a contract for the purchase of French-
made air-defence systems is not a foregone conclusion. Thus far 
Emmanuel Macron, President of France, has not given any hints 
about the signing of a contract. Therefore, the issue of Georgian 
air-defence capability remains unresolved and the country remains 
unprotected. In addition, even if the aforementioned reform with 
the reserve forces looks great on paper there is no guarantee for 
its success. It should be remembered that past experience showed 
that reform of the reserve forces ended in failure and no con-
clusions were drawn from the past failed experience. And 
finally, it remains unknown whether or not the current min-
ister of defence will retain his position, or be dismissed as his 
predecessors and subsequently a new wave of reforms will be 
initiated. 
L
Masthead
European Security & Defence
Issue 8/2017 · December  2017 
ISSN 1617-7983 · www.euro-sd.com
Published by
Mittler Report Verlag GmbH
A company of the Tamm 
Media Group
Editor-in-Chief: Dr. Peter Bossdorf (pb)
Managing Editor (Magazine): Stephen Barnard (sb)
Managing Editor (Newsletter): Dorothee Frank (df)
Industrial Editors: Waldemar Geiger (wg), Gerhard Heiming (gwh), Jürgen Hensel (jh) 
Sub-Editors: Christopher Ellaway-Barnard (cb), Christian Kanig (ck)  
Editor Special Assignments: Stefan Nitschke, Ph.D (sn)
Correspondents: Rolf Hilmes (Army Technology), Peter Preylowski (Airborne Systems)
Regional Correspondents: Tamir Eshel (Israel), Tim Guest (UK), Jaime Karremann (The 
Netherlands), Beka Kiria (Georgia), Shinichi Kiyotani (Japan), Yury Laskin (Russia),  
J. Bo Leimand (Denmark), Jay Menon (India), Chet Nagle (USA), Luca Peruzzi (Italy), 
David Saw (France), Joris Verbeurgt (Belgium/EU/NATO), Esteban Villarejo (Spain)
Supported by the editorial team of “Europäische Sicherheit & Technik”
Layout: 
davis creativ media GmbH, Germany
Production:
Lehmann Offsetdruck GmbH 
22848 Norderstedt, Germany
Office address:
Mittler Report Verlag GmbH
Baunscheidtstraße 11, 53113 Bonn, Germany
Phone.: +49 228 3500870, Fax: +49 228 3500871
Email: info@mittler-report.de, www.mittler-report.de
Director of Marketing
Jürgen Hensel (jh)
Baunscheidtstraße 11, 53113 Bonn, Germany
Phone: +49 228 3500876, Fax: +49 228 3500871
Email: juergen.hensel@mittler-report.de
Advertising Representatives:
Dipl.-Betrw. Uwe Nemeyer, optiproject GmbH –  
Agentur für sicherheitspolitische und wehrtechnische Kommunikation
Von-Imhoff-Weg 5, 53359 Rheinbach, Germany
Phone: +49 2226 909637, Fax: +49 2226 909653
Email: uwenemeyer@optiproject.de, www.optiproject.de
France/Italy
Diana Scogna
Phone.: +33 6-6252-2547, Email: diana.scogna@mittler-report.de
UK/Ireland/Eastern Europe/Israel/Turkey:
Stephen Barnard, c/o Mittler Report Verlag GmbH
Phone: +49 228 35 00 886, Email: stephen.barnard@mittler-report.de
USA/Canada:
Susan Spilman-Gardner
Email: Susan.Gardner@mittler-report.de
Phone: +1 817-751-5888
Russia & CIS:
Laguk Co., Yury Laskin, General Director
Krasnokholmskaya Nab., 11/15, 132, RF-109172 Moskau, Russian Federation
Phone: 007-495-911-1340, Fax: 007-495-912-1260, Email: ylarm-lml@mtu-net.ru
Subscription/Reader Service: 
PressUp GmbH, Postfach 70 13 11,
22013 Hamburg, Germany
Phone: +49 40 38 66 66-319, Fax: +49 38 66 66-299
Email: mittler-report@pressup.de
European Security & Defence  
© 2017 Mittler Report Verlag GmbH
The views expressed are not necessarily those of the editor or publisher.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced without prior 
written permission of the publisher in Bonn.
Cover Photos: Photonis Netherlands, EUTM Mali, USNI
Annual subscription rate (8 issues):  
€49.80 incl. postage

 ARMED FORCES
46
European Security & Defence · December 2017
European Security & Defence · December 2017
The Brussels Backdrop 
46
European Security & Defence · December 2017
Common Security and  
Defence Policy 
The idea of a common European defence 
policy dates back to 1948 when the Treaty 
of Brussels was signed by Great Britain, 
France and the Benelux countries. The mu-
tual defence clause paved the way for the 
Western European Union (WEU), founded 
in 1954. The Treaty of Lisbon (signed in 
2007 and that entered into force in 2009 
after all member states ratified the Treaty) 
extended mutual assistance to all EU mem-
bers, making the WEU superfluous. Since 
then, European security policy has pursued 
a number of paths, developing simultane-
ously within the EU and NATO. 
The EU pursues foreign and security policy 
within the framework of its Common For-
eign and Security Policy (CFSP) which cov-
ers all areas of foreign policy and all ques-
tions relating to the EU's security. Among 
others, the CFSP includes a Common Se-
curity and Defence Policy (CSDP), dealing 
with defence issues and with the military 
and civilian aspects of crisis management. 
Within the EU’s foreign and defence policy, 
the EU External Action Service (EUEAS) and 
the High Representative for Foreign Affairs 
and Security Policy play a prominent role.
Missions and Operations
Since the implementation of the CSDP al-
most 15 years ago, the EU has carried out 
more than 30 civilian missions and military 
operations. The EU currently manages six 
military and ten civilian overseas missions 
and operations in fourteen countries spread 
across three continents (Europe, Africa and 
Asia). More than 4,000 people are com-
mitted to maintaining peace, prevent-
ing conflict, strengthening international 
security, supporting the rule of law and 
preventing human trafficking and piracy.  
The latest mission is dated 17 October 2017: 
a consultative mission in Iraq (EUAM Iraq) 
to assist the Iraqi authorities in implement-
ing the civilian aspects of the Iraqi national 
security strategy. With a budget of €14M 
per year, the 35 experts advise and sup-
port the Iraqi government in building state 
institutions capable of consolidating secu-
rity, peace and conflict prevention while re-
specting the rule of law and human rights 
standards. Another advisory mission was 
sent to Ukraine end 2014 after the Maidan 
revolution: EUAM Ukraine (200 strong) as-
sists the Ukrainian authorities through stra-
tegic advice and hands-on support towards 
a sustainable reform of the civilian security 
sector based on EU standards and interna-
tional principles of good governance and 
human rights. At the 1,222-kilometre-long 
border between Ukraine and Moldova, 
the EU Border Assistance Mission to Mol-
dova and Ukraine (EUBAM) was launched 
in 2005. It promotes border control, cus-
toms and trade norms and practices that 
meet EU standards and serve the needs of 
its two partner countries. It is an advisory, 
technical body based in Odessa (Ukraine) 
staffed by 200 people. Its mission ended 
on 30 November 2017. EUBAM Rafah (since 
2005) and EUBAM Libya (since 2013) have 
a similar goal. At the Rafah Crossing Point 
between the Gaza Strip and Egypt, the EU 
assumes the third-party role, ensuring the 
freedom of movement of the 1.5 million 
Palestinians living in Gaza while taking into 
account Israel’s security concerns. EUBAM 
Libya supports the Libyan authorities at 
strategic and operational level in develop-
ing border management and security at the 
country’s land, sea and air borders. Through 
advising, training and mentoring Libyan 
counterparts, the civilian crisis management 
mission with a capacity-building mandate 
strengthens the border services in accord-
ance with international standards and best 
practices. Southwest of Libya, the CSDP is 
involved in two capacity-building missions 
in the Sahel; since 2012, EUCAP Sahel Niger 
has supported Niger in its fight against ter-
rorism and organised crime. 
The 180-people-strong team provides ad-
vice and training to the Nigerien security 
institutions in strengthening their capaci-
ties to ensure constitutional and demo-
cratic order, maintain State authority and 
shape the conditions for lasting peace. In 
neighbouring country Mali, EUCAP Sa-
hel Mali does exactly the same as from 
January 2015. The mandate for the staff 
The EU in Action: European Military and  
Civilian Missions and Operations
Joris Verbeurgt
French frigate FS FLOREAL during the EUNAVFOR Operation “Atalanta” 
in 2016
Photo: EUNAVFOR

ARMED FORCES 
47
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
47
December 2018 · European Security & Defence
47
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
of 140 with a year's budget of €15M ex-
pires in January 2018. The EU also has an  
on-going military training mission in Mali: 
EUTM Mali. In line with UNSC Resolution 
2085 (2012), the mission supports the 
rebuilding of the Malian armed forces by 
providing expertise and advice, in particular 
regarding command and control, logistics, 
human resources and international human-
itarian law. Besides training combat units, 
EUTM Mali is also involved in the disarma-
ment, demobilisation and reintegration of 
former rebel forces. The CSDP manages two 
other training missions in Africa. In the Cen-
tral African Republic, EUTM RCA supports 
the CAR authorities in the preparation and 
implementation of the Security Sector Re-
form. It assists the CAR Armed Forces with 
building the capacity and quality needed 
to evolve towards modern, effective, ethni-
cally balanced and democratically account-
able armed forces by offering strategic 
advice, education and operational training. 
EUTM Somalia supports the Somali security 
forces by providing political and strategic 
advice, by mentoring the military training 
system and by advising the Headquarters 
of the Somali National Armed Forces. EU-
CAP Somalia (since 2015) emanated from 
EUCAP Nestor, a civilian mission aimed at 
assisting countries in the Horn of Africa and 
the Western Indian Ocean to develop self-
sustaining capacities for the enhancement 
of maritime security. From the headquar-
ters located in Mogadishu, its 170 men 
and women from 13 contributing nations 
manage a budget of €23M per year for 
the establishment of maritime civilian law 
enforcement capabilities in Somalia, in-
cluding Somaliland. EUNAVFOR Somalia, 
perhaps better known under the name 
“Operation Atalanta”, is the EU’s maritime 
operation against piracy and armed rob-
bery at sea off the Horn of Africa and in 
the Western Indian Ocean. Several frigates 
and support vessels patrol the seas to pro-
tect vessels and vulnerable shipping, deter 
and disrupt piracy and armed robbery at 
sea, monitor fishing activities and support 
other EU missions working to strengthen 
maritime security and capacity building in 
the region. The other maritime operation 
under the CSDP flag is EUNAVFOR MED 
(from Mediterranean) or Operation Sophia, 
launched on 22 June 2015 as part of the 
EU’s comprehensive approach to manage 
irregular migration and disrupt traffickers’ 
and smugglers’ networks in the Southern 
Central Mediterranean. 
The mission trains the Libyan Coastguard 
and Navy and contributes to the implemen-
tation of the UN arms embargo of the coast 
of Libya. It conducts surveillance activities 
and gathers and shares information on hu-
man trafficking and on illegal trafficking of 
oil exports from Libya, among others with 
FRONTEX and EUROPOL. All EU mem-
ber states are involved in this operation. 
In Georgia, the EU deployed an unarmed 
civilian monitoring mission in 2008, the 
EUMM Georgia. The 200 monitors with 
headquarters in Tbilisi patrol the areas ad-
jacent to Abkhazia and South Ossetia to 
prevent a return to hostilities, to support a 
normalisation of the situation, to build con-
fidence among the opposing parties and 
to promote EU policies in the wider region. 
EUPOL COPPS/Palestinian Territories is the 
EU’s Office for Palestinian Police Support. 
Since 2006, the mission contributes to the 
establishment of sustainable and effective 
policing arrangements by advising Palestin-
ian authorities on criminal justice, the rule of 
law and on issues within the wider context 
of the security sector. In the Balkans, the EU 
is present in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in 
Kosovo: EUFOR (Operation Althea) provides 
capacity building and training to the Bosnian 
Armed Forces following NATO standards. It 
also contributes to stabilisation, deterrence 
and continued compliance with the Dayton 
and Paris agreements that brought peace 
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1995. The 
mandate, backed by several UN Security 
Council resolutions, also includes assuring 
a safe and secure environment. The EU 
military operation (still 7,000 strong) suc-
ceeded the NATO operation SFOR in 2004 
but still relies on NATO assets and capa-
bilities. EULEX Kosovo has two objectives: 
supporting Kosovo’s rule of law institutions 
to strengthen the chain of criminal justice 
by monitoring, mentoring and advising 
(MMA). The emphasis is on fighting politi-
cal interference and ‘sensitive’ cases. At the 
executive level, EULEX delivers rule of law 
services until Kosovo authorities are capa-
ble of ensuring those services themselves 
through continuous assessments and the 
building of capacities in these areas.  
EULEX Head of Mission Alexandra Papadopoulou during the inaugura-
tion of the Educational-Correctional Centre for Juveniles in Lipjan,  
Kosovo, on 15 September 2017
Photo: EULEX
An Irish sergeant serving with 
EUTM Mali teaches a class on  
counter-IED to Malian officer  
cadets at the Military Academy  
in Koulikoro, Mali, in March 2015.
Photo: Irish Defence Forces

48
European Security & Defence · December 2017
 ARMED FORCES
Author
Guy Toremans is a freelance naval 
journalist based in Belgium. 
XIth Regional Seapower Symposium
Guy Toremans
From 18 to 20 October 2017, Admiral Valter Girardelli, Chief of the 
Italian Navy, hosted the eleventh iteration of the biennial Regional 
Seapower Symposium (XIth RSS) in the Sala Squadratori of the 
Arsenale in Venice.
T
his year’s edition saw the attendance 
of 31 chiefs of navy and 21 top-rank-
ing naval representatives from 35 navies 
of Europe, the Mediterranean, the Black 
Sea, the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf – the 
so-called Wider Mediterranean – and 17 
navies from beyond the Wider Mediterra-
nean, as well as prominent representatives 
from 11 international organisations and the 
naval industry. In his opening speech Adm 
Girardelli extended a warm welcome to the 
delegates from Australia, Canada, Indone-
sia, Iran, Kuwait, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia 
who attended the RSS for the first time. 
He underlined that no maritime aspect is 
attracting so much attention as Maritime 
Situational Awareness (MSA), Maritime 
Security (MS) and Maritime Capacity Build-
ing. "I would like to promote the idea of 
sea-centricity, a concept that is tied to the 
theory of the Blue Century, e.g. an increas-
ing dependence on marine resources and 
the development of policies for a sustain-
able and inclusive exploitation of this huge 
amount of resources. 
This requires the development of opera-
tional models which must be “expedition-
ary” in nature, while meeting jointness 
requirements. In this light, Navies are best 
placed to leverage on the inherent cross-
domain capability. They have the agility and 
implicit ability to rapidly deliver joint and 
strategic effect from the sea, while retain-
ing political manoeuvring space, to carry 
out enhanced Maritime Security Opera-
tions. Consequently we need to engage in 
common efforts by fostering cooperation 
and develop mutual trust and interopera-
bility. This can be achieved through Capac-
ity Building, an area where maritime forces 
can provide a major contribution, thanks 
to their inherent strategic versatility and 
operational flexibility, further enhanced by 
full exploitation of sea-basing.”
Hereupon the XIth RSS, under the general 
theme of "Navies beyond traditional roles: 
crewing effort to project stability and secu-
rity from the sea”, structured around three 
sessions, kicked off.
Session 1, chaired by RADM Henry Babalo-
la, Chief of Policy and Plans Nigerian Navy, 
was themed Maritime Security Operations 
present and future: how to face trans-re-
gional challenges through traditional capa-
bilities. The panel included RADM Stuart  
Mayer – Commander Australian Fleet; 
RADM Mitko Petev – Commander Bulgar-
ian Navy; ADM Christophe Prazuck – Chief 
of the French Navy; CDRE Mohammed 
Taoudi – Chief Maritime Affairs Depart-
ment Royal Moroccon Navy; VADM Ihor 
Voronchenko – Commander of the Ukraine 
Navy; RADM Habibollah Sayyari – Com-
mander-in-Chief Iranian Navy; RADM En-
rico Credendino – Commander EURONA-
VFOR; Mr  Chris Trelawny – Special Advisor 
to the Secretary-General of the Internation-
al Maritime Organisation (IMO).
Session 2, chaired by RADM Chuen Hong 
Lew, the Chief of the Republic of Singapore 
Navy, covered Maritime Situational Aware-
ness towards a federative approach: how 
to include trans-regional actors and pursue 
effective interoperability. The panel mem-
bers of this session were VADM Mosuwa 
Samuel Hlongwane – Chief of the South 
African Navy; ADM Manuel Garat Carame 
– Deputy Chief Spanish Naval Staff; Lt Gen 
Esa Pulkkinen – Director General EU Mili-
tary Staff; Mr Alberto Tuozzi – Head Tele-
communications & Navigation Division ASI; 
and Mr Bernhard Friess – Director Maritime 
Affairs & Fisheries European Commission 
DG Mare. 
The final session, headed by VADM An-
dreas Krause – Chief of the German Navy, 
focused on “Maritime Capacity Building as 
a fundamental pillar of International Coop-
eration: how to identify, develop and deliv-
er comprehensive portfolios of activities to 
support worldwide partners”. Speakers in-
cluded Major General Haouli Mohammed 
Larbi – Commander Algerian Naval Forces; 
RADM Ahmed Abdelmoaty Mohammed 
Hawash – Defence Attaché Egyptian Navy; 
VADM Nicolas Tsounis – Chief of the Hel-
lenic Navy General Staff; ADM Yutaka Mu-
rakawa – Chief of Staff Japanese Maritime 
Defence Force; ADM Sir Philip Jones – First 
Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff UK, ADM 
John Richardson – Chief of Naval Opera-
tions US Navy and VADM Vincenzo Melone 
– Commander Italian Coast Guard.
The first informal meeting of the navy chiefs from the G7 countries 
(Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the UK and the USA) onboard  
ITS AMERIGO VESPUCCI.
Photos: Guy Toremans

49
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
ARMED FORCES 
Some of the more noteworthy speakers 
included VADM Ihor Voronchenko – Com-
mander of the Ukrainian Navy and RADM 
Habibollah Sayyari – Commander-in-Chief 
Iranian Navy. In his presentation, VADM 
Voronchenko said that “the aggressive 
annexation and following militarisation of 
Crimea by Russia is a serious challenge for 
the maritime security of Ukraine, as well 
as for the Black Sea and Eastern Mediter-
ranean regions. Therefore, we must quickly 
build maritime capabilities to defend our-
selves. An option for a continuous presence 
at sea is a Mosquito Fleet. Such a fleet, with 
multirole boats like fast patrol boats and 
minehunting vessels, can provide maritime 
security capabilities for most of our tasks 
within littoral waters. Comparatively these 
units can carry almost the same (or compa-
rable) amount of weapons as a corvette or 
a frigate. We plan to acquire between 25 
and 32 patrol boats, mine countermeas-
ures vessels and raid/amphibious units. 
We anticipate them to join the fleet by 
2021/2022. Such a Mosquito Fleet is an ef-
fective solution to ensure a presence at sea 
and will definitely support further develop-
ment of our blue water ambition.” 
Obviously, the presentation of RADM Say-
yari attracted considerable attention. He 
gave an overview on Iran’s experience in 
ensuring a sustainable security in the Straits 
of Bab-el-Mandeb, the Persian Gulf, the 
Gulf of Aden and the Strait of Hormuz. 
“Since 2008, we continuously participated 
in antipiracy operations by deploying more 
than 50 naval task groups to the Gulf of 
Aden and the Strategic Strait of Bab-Al-
Mandeb.”He also said that the presence 
of foreign navies in the region which im-
pose unsolicited security measures creates 
instability in the region: “Iam in favour of 
a revision of international law of the seas 
and the identification of deterrent and 
effective mechanisms and enforcement 
measures to deal with piracy, illegal immi-
gration via the sea and maritime terrorism. 
We should design a maritime cooperation 
model and provide the collective security 
through interaction with the global mari-
time community.” The admiral also had 
bilateral talks with his counterparts from 
the Italian, Netherlands, Algerian, Ukrain-
ian, Russian, Spanish, Greek, Bulgarian, 
Portugese, South African, Croatian and 
Argentinian navies, about possible co-
operations and about sharing the Iranian 
Navy’s lessons learned from experiences 
in the area. 
On the final day of the symposium the 
Italian Ministry of Defence, Sen. Roberta 
Pinotti and the Chief of Italian Defence 
General Claudio Graziano, flew in from 
Rome to attend the RSS. Minister Pinotti 
noted that “One must make sure that co-
operation extends beyond the ships. The 
development of synergies and a coherent 
partnership between military, law enforce-
Admiral Valter Girardelli, Chief of 
the Italian Navy, during his open-
ing speech
Participating Navies
Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, 
Canada, Chile, China, Cyprus, Croatia, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, France, 
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Japan, India, Indonesia, Iran, Israel, Kuwait, 
Libya, Malta, Morocco, Mauritania, Mexico, Montenegro, The Nether-
lands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Saudi 
Arabia, Singapore, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Tur-
key, the United Arab Emirates, the UK, Ukraine and the USA.
For the 11th time, 
the Italian Navy 
succeeded in making 
the RSS an outstand-
ing event with an 
all-time record of 52 
participating navies.
Participating International 
Organisations
Agenzia Spaziale Italiana (ASI), 
Centro Alti Studi per la Difesa 
(CASD), Maricogecap, Fincantie-
ri, Leonardo, ELT, International 
Maritime Organization (IMO), 
the EU Commission DG Mare, EU 
Military Staff, EU Navfor Med, 
COM JFC Naples, and the Allied 
Maritime Command (AMC).
The ltalian Navy, in its usual flawless way, organised the 11th iteration 
of the Regional Seapower Symposium in the beautiful surroundings of 
the Arsenale in Venice from 18 to 20 October 2017.

50
European Security & Defence · December 2017
ment and civilian institutions is imperative 
for the achievement of maritime security.” 
Hereupon the sessions' chairmen present-
ed their conclusions. RADM Babalola said 
that “to counter the threats one should 
increase cooperation with those countries 
where the threats originate from by pro-
viding training and transfer of expertise.” 
RADM Lew noted that “navies must be 
prepared to face potential risks, instabili-
ties, threats and uncertainties. Navies are 
not only one of the most valuable instru-
ments to implement effective security poli-
cies but they also boost the process of sta-
bilisation in international relations.” VADM 
Krause pointed out that “the exploitation 
of uncontrolled irregular migration flows by 
criminal organisations and the rise in illicit 
activities on high seas are the most dramat-
ic aspect of a complex set of interrelated 
problems. No single navy can achieve 100 
percent comprehensive awareness alone. 
Sharing operational information amongst 
navies is essential.”
In his closing remarks, Admiral Girardelli 
stated that a strong cooperation in interna-
tional and national frameworks is needed 
to counter borderless threats. "The growing 
complexity of the maritime challenges calls 
for dialogue and cooperation to tackle the 
phenomena threatening international secu-
rity and facilitate effective capacity building.” 
Highlights organised alongside the sym-
posium were the second meeting of the 
navy chiefs of the Adriatic-Ionian Initiative 
ADRION (Albania, Croatia, Greece, Italy, 
Montenegro and Slovenia), the first infor-
mal meeting of the navy chiefs of the G7 
nations (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, 
Japan, the UK and the USA), the meeting 
of the Trans-Regional Maritime Network 
(T-RMN) members of Brazil, Italy and Singa-
pore, and the signature of the Note of Ac-
cession to the T-RMN by the Chilean Navy. 
Conclusion
For the eleventh consecutive time, the Ital-
ian Navy succeeded in making the Region-
al Seapower Symposium an outstanding 
event with an all-time record of participants. 
The geostrategic context and regional re-
alities continue to heavily influence the for-
mulation of medium- and long-term plans 
and requirements by navies. Today, navies 
must take into account not only physical, 
geographic, and technological aspects but 
also the perception of the threat. This is 
linked to ongoing renewal and upgrading 
programmes focused not merely on the 
number of warships but mainly on increas-
ing capabilities and efficiency of a limited 
number of platforms which will become 
technologically more advanced and inte-
grated in a joint, multinational and opera-
tional context. The key requirement, shared 
by several naval forces, is the availability of 
modern systems for communications and 
information sharing. Obviously this may be 
ample food for thought for the next edition 
of the Regional Seapower Symposium in La 
Serenissima in 2019. 
L
ITS AMERIGO VESPUCCI was the 
venue for the signing of several 
agreements during the XIth RSS.
The XIth RSS saw the attendance of 31 chiefs of navy, 21 top-ranking naval representatives and prominent 
representatives from 11 international organisations and the naval industry.
The V-RMTC is a virtual centric network for maritime traffic data exchange 
in the Mediterranean region. The centre provides unclassified informa-
tion on all merchant ships displacing more than 300 tons. It was during 
the 4th Regional Seapower Symposium in 2002 that the delegates agreed 
on enhancing maritime traffic security in the Mediterranean through re-
lated initiatives. The Italian Navy presented the "Pilot Project Virtual Re-
gional Maritime Traffic Centre" at the 5th Regional Seapower Symposium 
in October 2004. Initially signed by 17 countries (Italy, Portugal, Spain, 
France, Slovenia, Croatia, Montenegro, Albania, Greece, Turkey, Cyprus, 
Malta, Jordan, Israel, Romania, the UK and the USA), the project officially 
started on 20 September 2006. The following year, Germany and Bulgaria 
joined and in 2008 the navies of Belgium, Georgia, The Netherlands and 
Senegal signed the Note of Accession to the Operational Arrangement 
of the V-RTMC at the 7th Regional Seapower Symposium. Accession of 
the Ukrainian Navy to the V-RTMC on 20 October 2010 brought the total 
number of Wider Mediterranean Community members to 24. 
In the meantime, the V-RMTC has evolved into a Trans-Regional Maritime 
Network (T-RMN) and with another seven navies having joined since, it 
currently stands at 31 members.

51
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
Viewpoint from
Copenhagen
Attrition or Reverse  
Engineering
J. Bo Leimand
A
t this very moment, Danish politicians 
are finalising the next 5-year Defence 
Agreement. At the same time we have elec-
tions for the town councils, which means 
that no decisions on the closure of barracks, 
air bases and naval stations will be taken 
before November 21, 2017. Nobody wants 
to rock the boat before election date.
So we are left with discussions between 
journalists, university professors and air 
force officers on the number of fighter air-
planes to rocure, which were ignited by a 
report from the Danish Government Audit 
Office (GAO). There are four issues under 
debate: 27 fighter aircraft might not be 
enough; will the F-35 fighter aircraft be able 
to fly 250 hours per year, taking the pilots' 
working conditions into consideration? Life 
cycle cost, and will the F-35 fighter aircraft 
be available 70% of the time? In the follow-
ing, these issues will be dealt with according 
to the report.
27 F-35 Fighter Aircraft
In its report, the Danish GAO concludes that 
decision-making is generally based on thor-
ough analysis and calculations. However, 
the investigation shows that, for some core 
assumptions the MOD has not shown the 
probability for the calculations and has not 
reflected the uncertainty. The Danish GAO 
assesses that there is therefore a greater risk 
than foreseen by the MOD that the armed 
forces will be unable to solve all the sched-
uled tasks with 27 F-35 fighter planes.
 
Pilots' Working Conditions,  
250 Hours and 70% Availability
The GAO report shows that the MOD cal-
culations of the need for pilot flight hours 
is not based on the probabilities of synergy 
or the pilots' working conditions, and that 
this uncertainty is insufficiently reflected. In 
addition, the investigation shows that in the 
calculation of the total flight hour produc-
tion for 27 F-35 fighter aircraft, the MOD has 
not reflected the uncertainty of the assump-
tions about the average flight hours per year 
or the degree of availability of the fighter 
aircraft. It might be likely that the need for 
pilot flight hours are set too low and that 
the flight hour production may be too high. 
Both the uncertainty around the necessary 
pilot flight hours and of the flight hour pro-
duction should have been made clear in the 
decision papers, as it affects whether the 27 
F-35 fighters can solve all the tasks.
Life Cycle Cost
The review by the Danish GAO also shows 
that in the decision papers the MOD has 
calculated the life-cycle cost of 27 F-35 
fighter aircraft for a 30-year period to stand 
at DKR66Bn. As a starting point, the MOD 
has established a satisfactory model for the 
calculation of life-cycle costs but has insuf-
ficiently reflected all the risks of the prereq-
uisites for, inter alia, the synergies and pilot 
working conditions. It is therefore likely that 
the expected cost of the risks is set too low 
and therefore the life expectancy costs will 
be higher. 
In the light of the investigation, the Dan-
ish GAO has recommended the MOD to 
strengthen the Folketing decision-making 
paper by explaining the uncertainty of the 
essential assumptions before presenting the 
Financial Act on the purchase of 27 new 
fighter aircraft to Finance Committee.
Reverse Engineering or  
Attrition
This is now being debated in Danish news-
papers, and questions continue to arise 
around whether 27 fighter aircraft is a good 
number. One part is claiming that the num-
ber of fighter aircraft is based on the amount 
of money available and that Denmark can 
only afford to buy 27. Some experts call this 
reverse engineering.
In any event, the total percentage of a fight-
er fleet expected to be lost due to accidents 
as well as combat is considered “attrition”, 
a planning factor used to help determine 
how many of a given type of aircraft should 
be bought. Contingency planners certainly 
watch the size of fleets closely to make sure 
enough aircraft are likely to be available 
when needed, but the percentage of a given 
type of aircraft lost over time has decreased 
steadily from one generation of fighters to 
the next and should continue to do so in the 
years ahead. By using this explanation, the 
27 aircraft match:
•	 six fighter aircraft on mission*
•	 six fighter aircraft for maintenance
•	 six fighter aircraft for training*
•	 two fighter aircraft for air policing*
•	 two fighter aircraft in reserve/mainte-
nance*
•	 five fighter aircraft in the United States 
for initial pilot training.
If you take the 22 aircraft and assume that 
70 percent are combat ready, you will get 
15 fighter combat-ready aircraft. Actually 
6*+6*+2*+(2*)=16 fighter aircraft would 
be combat ready. This is called “apportion-
ment”.
Conclusion
History has shown that Denmark bought 10 
F-16s at the peak of the Cold War period 
and it might be foreseen in the future that 
Denmark could buy an additional number of 
F-35s from the Mojave Desert. Or as Napo-
leon said in Maxims of War (1831): “When 
drafting a campaign, it is a prerequisite to 
foresee everything the enemy may do, and 
be prepared with the necessary means to 
counteract it. The campaign plans may be 
modified ad infinitum according to the cir-
cumstances, the genius of the general, the 
character of the troops, and the features of 
the country.”

52
European Security & Defence · December 2017
 ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
Author
Conrad Waters is a naval and de-
fence analyst based in the UK. He is a 
regular contributor to ESD and Editor 
of Seaforth World Naval Review
Conventional Submarines –  
Global Developments
Conrad Waters
The decline in global submarine numbers that was one of the key features of the post-Cold War naval en-
vironment has been largely halted in recent years. Strong demand for conventional submarines is being 
spurred on by new regional rivalries, particularly in Asia. This has resulted in a marked geographical split 
between those countries possessing conventional submarine technological expertise – principally located 
in Europe – and those regions driving submarine acquisition. Although structural barriers to new entrants 
are high, it seems unlikely this divide will persist in the longer term.
Australian COLLINS class submarines. Demand from the Asia-Pacific region is driving the wider market for 
conventional submarines; Australia alone has earmarked the equivalent of €33Bn to replace and expand its 
submarine fleet.
(Photo: Australian Department of Defence)
Conventional  
Submarine Demand
Although precise numbers vary accord-
ing to source, there is a general consensus 
that around 800 submarines were in ser-
vice globally when the Cold War drew to 
a close. Approximately 500 of these were 
conventionally powered diesel or diesel-
electric boats. Today, the number of sub-
marines in service has roughly halved to a 
little over 400 units. Of these, about 250 
have conventional propulsion. This decline 
in unit numbers has not been replicated by 
a similar fall in the number of submarine 
operators. This has remained little changed 
at just over forty countries, albeit this hides 
something of a shift from Europe towards 
Asia. Moreover, most commentators agree 
that this period of contraction has now 
largely run its course, with future procure-
ment plans likely – at least – to sustain cur-
rent force numbers.
Given the technological, political and eco-
nomic challenges related to their acquisi-
tion, the possession of nuclear-propelled 
submarines will remain the preserve of 
only a handful of countries for the foresee-
able future. These expensive programmes 
will, however, account for the vast bulk 
of global submarine market expenditure. 
For example, a 2016 report by UK-based 
Strategic Defence Intelligence suggested 
that around two-thirds of procurement 
spending would be allocated to nuclear-
powered strategic and attack submarines 
over the following decade. By contrast, 
conventional submarine acquisition will be 
far more significant in numerical terms by 
dint of being the only practical option for 
most submarine users.
It is undoubtedly the case that it is the Asia 
and Pacific region that is driving conven-

Marine Systems
Non-nuclear submarines, surface vessels and maritime defence 
equipment from a world leading naval system and service provider. 
Modular, innovative designs are outstanding hallmarks of the proven, robust Blohm+Voss 
MEKO® corvettes and frigates in commission around the globe.
HDW Class 209, 212A and 214 submarines operate in the most extreme environments for 
20 navies worldwide. Installed technologies include, for example, mission-proven fuel-cell 
based air independent propulsion systems. www.thyssenkrupp-marinesystems.com
Ships. Systems. Solutions.
Worldwide.

 ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
54
European Security & Defence · December 2017
A Spanish S-80 submarine pictured under construction at Navantia’s 
facility at Cartagena. The problems encountered in bringing this pro-
gramme to fruition reflect the challenges inherent in establishing an 
independent submarine design and manufacturing capability. 
(Photo: Navantia)
German thyssenkrupp Marine Systems’ submarine designs hold a very 
strong market position. This image shows a Republic of Korea Navy 
AIP-equipped Type 214 boat, which was licence-built by Hyundai Heavy 
Industries. 
(Photo: Republic of Korea Armed Forces)
tional submarine acquisition. This partly 
reflects the fact that all the current larg-
est operators of conventional submarines 
– China, Russia, Japan, South Korea and 
India – are either wholly or partly located 
in the region and have an ongoing require-
ment to update their existing underwater 
flotillas. Beyond this, two additional factors 
are also in play.
One is the region’s recent economic rise. 
This makes the heavy expenditure associ-
ated with the acquisition and operation of 
underwater forces a more realistic propo-
sition than previously. The other is the 
heightened level of tension in the region. 
This has served to increase the submarine’s 
attraction as a means of both defensive and 
offensive warfare. Although China’s asser-
tive stance to its territorial and economic 
interests in waters such as the South China 
Sea is probably having the greatest impact 
in this regard, it is not the only factor. To 
give just one example, South Korea’s sub-
marine programme is undoubtedly being 
influenced by a desire to extend the range 
of options it has available to undertake 
both pre-emptive and retaliatory strikes on 
the North. It is also worth noting that issues 
of national prestige are at stake. Thailand’s 
Premier Prayuth Chan-ocha was quoted as 
stating his country’s acquisition of Chinese 
submarines was ‘…not for battle, but so 
that others may be in awe of us…’ when 
justifying the controversial programme. 
Conventional Submarine  
Design & Production: Europe
Many countries have undertaken the as-
sembly of submarines under licence. 
However, there are probably only around 
ten worldwide that have the technologi-
cal capabilities to undertake the complete 
design and build process of anything but 
the most basic submersibles. Even some of 
these are reliant on the import of key com-
ponents, such as weapons handling and 
discharge equipment, to complete other-
wise indigenous programmes. The design 
and completion of submarines remains a 
hugely challenging process, as Spain’s re-
cent experience with the protracted and 
costly S-80 project evidences. Very few 
recent submarine programmes have been 
undertaken without encountering at least 
some problems in the course of construc-
tion and associated delay.
At present, the bulk of conventional die-
sel-electric submarine design expertise 
resides in Europe. Here France, Germany 
and Russia are dominant. All three benefit 
from long-established and comprehensive 
design and build capabilities, as well as a 
track record of successful export orders. 
In addition, Sweden and Spain have both 
made significant investment in subma-
rine technology. The United Kingdom 
should also be mentioned as an impor-
tant global supplier of various submers-
ible components as a result of its ongo-
ing nuclear submarine programmes. The 
major groups operating in the sector are 
as follows:
thyssenkrupp Marine Systems (Germa-
ny): TKMS probably remains the world’s 
most influential submarine producer 
through its Kiel-based HDW business. The 
group’s products encompass a wide range 
of submarines. These extend from updated 
variants of the venerable Type 209 design 
through to the recent Type 212A, Type 
214 and Type 218 boats equipped with 
PEM (polymer electrolyte membrane) air 
independent propulsion (AIP). A flotilla of 
DOLPHIN class submarines has also been 
delivered to Israel. Whilst the bulk of re-
cent production has been focused on Kiel, 
licensed assembly of Type 212A and Type 
214 variants has been agreed with Italy, 
South Korea and Turkey. Recent accords 
with Norway and Italy for further develop-
ment of the Type 212A support the busi-
ness’s longer-term sustainability. In broad 
terms, the group has gained most success 
in the production of medium-sized boats of 

ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY 
a little under 2,000 tonnes submerged dis-
placement that are suitable for littoral de-
ployment. This probably reflects Germany’s 
Cold War focus on underwater operations 
in the shallow waters of the Baltic. 
Naval Group (France): Naval Group – 
formerly DCNS – is currently TKMS’ main 
Western European rival. Although pro-
duction of submarines for domestic re-
quirements has long-focused on nuclear-
propelled boats, its SCORPÈNE series of 
diesel-electric submarines has gained con-
siderable export success. The SCORPÈNE 
design is broadly similar to TKMS’ Type 214, 
but sales to date have lacked the latter’s 
AIP capability. This might reflect a lack of 
customer enthusiasm for Naval Group’s 
MESMA (Module d’Energie Sous-Marine 
Autonome) AIP technology. One possible 
consequence has been greater success in 
attracting customers with less of a need to 
operate in confined waters, such as Brazil, 
Chile and India. Naval Group’s latest export 
success has been the sale of the SHORTFIN 
BARRACUDA – a larger, over-4,500-tonne 
oceanic type evolved from the nuclear-
powered BARRACUDA class – to the Royal 
Australian Navy to meet their SEA-1000 
requirement. As for Brazil’s and India’s 
SCORPÈNES, these will be locally built un-
der licence.
United Shipbuilding Corporation (Rus-
sia): Russian conventional submarine pro-
duction remains dominated by the latest 
Project 636 variant of the ‘Kilo’ class sub-
marine. This traces its origins to the older 
Cold War-era circa-3,000-tonne Project 
877 type originally developed by the Ru-
bin design bureau. USC’s Admiralty yard 
in Saint Petersburg is the current centre of 
production of Project 636.3 boats for the 
Russian Navy. It has also secured export or-
ders for the slightly older Project 636.1 de-
sign in recent years from Vietnam and Alge-
ria. Continued reliance on the KILO reflects 
problems with Russia’s follow-on Project 
677 or LADA class. The lead boat of this 
‘fourth generation’ type – named Saint Pe-
tersburg – commenced trials in 2005 but 
has suffered significant teething problems. 
Successful resolution of these difficulties 
prior to the operational debut of further 
members of the class will undoubtedly 
have a significant impact on the Russian 
industry’s future prospects.
Elsewhere in Europe, Sweden’s Kockums 
submarine business is now recovering from 
a period of decline whilst under TKMS’ 
control following transfer of ownership to 
France's SCORPÈNE design – Chile’s Spanish-assembled CARRERA is  
pictured here – has been particularly successful with countries not  
requiring an AIP capability.
(Photo: Navantia)
Uniting the Submarine, 
MCM & ASW Community
Industry 
Early Bird ends 
15th December 
2017
20th - 22nd March 2018 | Portsmouth, UK
www.underwater-defence-security.com
Event Partner
Lead Sponsor
Organised By 
Lead Media Partner
Uniting the Submarine, 
MCM & ASW Community
Industry 
Early Bird ends 
15th December 
2017
20th - 22nd March 2018 | Portsmouth, UK
www.underwater-defence-security.com
Event Partner
Lead Sponsor
Organised By 
Lead Media Partner

 ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
56
European Security & Defence · December 2017
Saab. Its prospects are supported by the 
strategic importance Sweden attaches to 
maintaining an underwater defence sector, 
as well as the group’s ownership of Stirling 
AIP technology. Two modern A-26 type 
boats – designed to operate in a broadly 
similar environment to the German Type 
212A – are being built for the Royal Swed-
ish Navy. Collaboration with Damen also 
places the group in pole position to meet 
the Royal Netherlands Navy’s planned re-
placement programme. Saab claims that 
the A-26’s modularity provides more flex-
ibility to meet customer requirements than 
TKMS’ Type 212A and Type 214 designs. 
However, lack of export references may 
hinder sales. Meanwhile, Spain’s Navantia 
continues to suffer from the S-80 design 
debacle. This saw the lead boat require 
substantial redesign after it was found to 
be overweight. Whilst construction has 
now resumed, problems developing an 
AIP-system based around an ethanol re-
former and PEM fuel cells means that it is 
unlikely to be before the mid-2020s before 
the new class’s full potential is achieved.
Conventional Submarine Design & 
Production – Elsewhere: In spite of such 
setbacks, the European submarine design-
ers’ current leadership in AIP technologies 
is a reflection of their wider dominance of 
current conventional submarine design. Al-
though a small number of Asian countries 
have matured their industries to the extent 
they are now able to design and build ca-
pable indigenous submarines, they still face 
gaps in critical areas. The extent to which 
they are able to overcome these limitations 
will have a significant impact on future mar-
ket development.
The Asian country with the most advanced 
conventional submarine construction sec-
tor is Japan. Here, manufacture is split 
between Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd, 
Kobe Shipyard and Kawasaki Heavy In-
dustries Marine Ocean Company, also at 
Kobe. Production is currently dominated 
by the SORYU class, a large oceanic boat 
of over 4,000 tonnes submerged displace-
ment. Strict controls over defence exports 
have meant that construction to date has 
been limited to the domestic requirements 
of the Japan Maritime Self Defence Force 
(JMSDF). However, these have been eased 
in recent years. The design was an unsuc-
cessful contender for Australia’s SEA-1000 
submarine replacement programme and 
is likely to be the basis of an offering for 
India’s Project 75(I). Although most of the 
SORYU class’s components are indigenous-
ly sourced, all class members currently in 
service rely on Sweden’s Stirling AIP tech-
nology. However, Japan has been devel-
oping lithium ion battery technology to 
provide an alternative means of extended 
underwater endurance. These batteries will 
be installed in the final submarines of the 
type to enter service.
Neighbouring South Korea is somewhat 
behind Japan in developing indigenous 
submarine design capabilities. The KSS-I 
and KSS-II series of submarines currently 
in service with the Republic of Korea Navy 
are licence-built TKMS Type 209 and Type 
214 boats. However, the follow-on KSS-III 
project that is now underway involves con-
struction of a larger, circa-3,700-tonne in-
digenous design that will incorporate South 
Korean technologies in all but a few, critical 
areas. Construction is being split between 
DSME and Hyundai Heavy Industries, with 
DSME currently the lead yard. South Korea 
intends to build the KSS-III in three batches 
of three submarines. Each will incorporate 
incremental improvements. The aim is to 
reduce the amount of foreign equipment 
used in subsequent batches. In the mean-
time, South Korea is ahead of Japan in one 
important area through its successful ex-
port of improved Type 209 submarines to 
Indonesia.
China operates the largest submarine fleet 
in Asia. Its first indigenous conventional 
submarine design was the Type 035 MING 
series, a development of the older Russian 
Sweden’s Saab Kockums has re-entered the submarine construction 
market with its A-26. The design’s modular nature means that it can be 
easily adapted to meet a range of requirements; different design con-
cepts are illustrated here. 
(Photo: Copyright Saab AB)
The latest Russian Project 636 variant of the Cold War KILO Class  
continues to attract orders from the Russian Navy and for export.  
This view shows the Russian Navy’s KRASNODAR transiting the English 
Channel in 2017.
(Photo: Crown Copyright 2017)

ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY 
57
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
ROMEO class. Later Type 039 SONG and 
Type 039A/B YUAN series boats also reflect 
some Russian influences. However, they 
appear to have benefitted from incorpora-
tion of a number of Western technologies 
– acquired by various indirect means – as 
well. For example, there have been persis-
tent rumours that at least some of the cir-
ca-2,500-tonne YUAN class are equipped 
with AIP systems similar in concept to Swe-
den’s Stirling technology. Precise details of 
class capabilities remain largely a matter 
of conjecture. However, they may still lag 
Western equivalents in certain key areas 
such as stealth. Both Pakistan and Thai-
land have recently ordered versions of the  
YUAN series and other export prospects 
are being pursued.
Future Developments
Looking to the future, it seems there will 
be few significant changes to the overall 
shape of conventional submarine demand 
and supply. Certainly, the more unstable 
global environment that forms the back-
drop to decisions on naval force structures 
tends to support the broad consensus of 
forecasts that suggest stable submarine 
numbers. Whilst it seems unlikely that few 
countries would now willingly abandon 
existing underwater forces, the expense 
involved in creating or re-establishing such 
a capability makes it equally unlikely that 
there will be many new joiners to the sub-
marine club. 
Turning to submarine design and produc-
tion, there are similarly strong obstacles to 
any significant change to the current domi-
nation of the industry by a small number 
of firms. Successful development of an 
indigenous submarine design capability is 
a hugely expensive and time-consuming 
process. It can only be achieved on the 
back of strong domestic demand and a sus-
tained commitment to relevant industrial 
and technical investment. The AU$50Bn 
The Japanese SORYU Class submarine UNRYU. The latest variants of the 
class will incorporate lithium-ion batteries, reflecting the progress made 
by Asian submarine designers in closing the technology gap with the 
leading European groups.
(Photo: US Navy)
MITTLER REPORT VERLAG GMBH Baunscheidtstraße 11 · 53113 Bonn · Germany
Fax: +49 228 35 00 871 · info@mittler-report.de · www.mittler-report.de
ESD Spotlight
7
Issue 2 / 2015
Savox Communications
(df) Savox Communications will be unvei-
ling at IDEX a new future infantry soldier 
modernisation headgear system that has 
major applications for soldiers on tomor-
row’s battlefield, as well as for homeland 
security and special ops forces, both regio-
nally in the Middle East, where Savox alrea-
dy has a number of Special Forces custo-
mers, and globally.
Savox will also show the compact intercom 
system, CPIC. The system broadens the 
C3 capabilities of Savox’ software-defined 
lightweight, rugged command and control 
system, IMP, on which CPIC is based. The 
new intercom system is suited to applica-
tions on land, for the widest B-vehicle in-
ventory, and at sea, aboard smaller vessels, 
such as RIBs, as well as the largest, such as 
destroyers and aircraft carriers.
www.savox.com
FN herstal
(df) FN Herstal will show several of it’s 
modern weapon systems and firearms at 
IDEX and also be hosting a variety of exhi-
bits that allow attendees to view up close 
its equipment. On display for the first time 
in the Middle East will be FN Herstal’s Sea  
deFNder remote weapon station. 
Whether intercepting smugglers, running 
anti-terrorism operations, or for self-de-
fence, this highly modular system gives 
naval ships and coastguards the armament 
to be in control at all times. It can be moun-
ted on a variety of vessels, from fast patrol 
boats up to large ships, and its universal 
cradle can house an extensive range of FN 
Herstal weaponry. 
Packed with several new features, the Sea 
deFNder also has a sight module (CCD + 
IR uncooled or cooled), one-hand or game 
pad control handle, and 2-axis gyroscope 
to provide rock solid stability on any naval 
operation.
www.fnherstal.com
(Photo: FN Herstal)
Roketsan
(df) Roketsan will display several new and/
or enhanced products at the IDEX 2015. 
Very interesting is the 2.75” Laser Guided 
Missile, so called “CIRIT”, an all-up round 
missile designed to eliminate light armored, 
stationary/moving opportunity targets with 
high precision and affordable cost. CIRIT, 
designed as the main weapon system of 
T-129 ATAK Turkish attack helicopter, is in-
tegrated and used by AH-1W Cobra helicop-
ter, AT-802 Arc Angel Border Patrol Aircraft 
and on EC635 Light Combat Helicopter. 
CIRIT is also integrated on vehicle mounted 
weapon stations, autonomous stationary/
mobile weapon platforms, stabilized naval 
weapon platforms for patrol boats and Tac-
tical UAV. The combat proven CIRIT has a 
quite long range with 8 km, MEMS Based 
IMU, restriction-free components, Type V 
insensitive munitions characteristics for 
warhead and rocket motor against bullet im-
pact and liquid fluid fire and smart launcher.
www.roketsan.com.tr
(Photo: Roketsan)
te Connectivity
(df) TE Connectivity will display it’s latest 
electrical interconnect solutions that provi-
de connectivity and high-speed data trans-
mission for networking in armored vehicles 
in electronic warfare and C4ISR applications.
A system of networked ground vehicles 
provides situational awareness for troops 
on the battlefield, as well as reduces the 
number of independent systems that each 
vehicle must carry. The result of networ-
king is an overall reduction in the size and 
weight of systems within each vehicle, less 
redundancy in the network, and yet great 
ability for vehicles to share data and elec-
tronic warfare capabilities.
TE will feature several rugged and flexible 
end-to-end solutions that offer design 
engineers modularity for easy integra- 
tion, advanced components for weight and 
space savings, and a variety of options in 
gigabit and 10 Gigabit Ethernet (GbE) con-
nectivity to help meet tough application 
challenges. Also on display at the booth, 
TE will be showcasing its compact, high-
speed CeeLok FAS-T connector. The CeeLok 
FAS-T connector among the most rugged, 
10 GbE, field terminable I/O connectors in 
the defence marketplace.
www.te.com
3
Issue 2 / 2015
(Photo: Diehl Defence)
(Photo: Renault Trucks Defense)
IRIS-t SL demonstrates 
full performance
(df) With system validation completed 
last  year, Diehl Defence´s IRIS-T Surface 
Launched (IRIS-T SL) SAM system demons-
trated its full performance. All of the jet 
target drones of different sizes, which per-
formed a large variety of realistic evasive 
manoeuvres, were directly hit.
The first target was engaged at a distance of 
more than 30 km. The IRIS-T SL missile flight 
time was about one minute reaching an alti-
tude above 12 km. Despite an evasive mano-
euvre involving changing direction and alti-
tude, a direct hit of the target was achieved.
The second firing was at very close range 
to the launch point to prove the missi-
le´s short range engagement capabilities. 
During this firing, IRIS-T SL jettisoned its 
aerodynamic cover shortly after launch 
immediately initiating a hard turn-over 
manoeuvre towards the low flying target. 
The entire engagement lasted less than 10 
seconds with a direct hit.
The third firing was carried out against 
a very small, fast and agile target drone 
featuring high agility and extreme mano-
euvrebility. A direct hit was achieved at a 
range of 12.5 km range at an altitude of 1.5 
km even though the drone performed ag-
gressive dive/
pull-up evasi-
ve 
manoeu-
vres.
IRIS-T SL is 
the 
missile 
of the new 
IRIS-T 
SLM 
air 
defence 
system 
and 
is planned to 
be a compo-
nent of the future German Air and Missile 
Defence System.
www.diehl.com/en/diehl-defence.html
hybrid drive system
(gwh) As part of an advanced design plan 
assigned to Renault Trucks Defense, the 
Electer demonstrator fitted with a parallel 
hybrid drive system and developed on the 
basis of a VAB MK III has been delivered to 
the French defence procurement agency 
(DGA) on 13 January 2015.
Combining an electric machine and a Diesel 
engine, the parallel hybrid drive system is 
fitted to a number of the Volvo Group‘s civil 
vehicles that have demonstrated pollution 
reduction and consumption qualities, and 
could now be used for military applications. 
The features of the hybrid drive system are: 
Booster with more than 170 kW additional 
electrical power, thereby reducing its tac-
tical “leap forward” time. Stealth mobili-
ty to move silently over more than 10 km 
through the sole use of the electric motor. 
Large generator delivering power of up to 
15 kW for mobile internal and 70 kW for 
static external use. 
www.renault-trucks-defense.com
technology
Protected Bulat 6x6 for the 
Russian Army
(gwh) The Russian Army has ordered 50 
protected type Bulat SBA-60-K2 armoured 
personnel carriers for a crew of ten from 
the manufacturer Zashcita. The first 15 are 
to be delivered before the end of 2015.
With less than 20 tons gross weight the 
vehicle features a payload of 3.5 tons 
depending on the protection level. The 
all-welded steel monocoque hull is the 
guarantor of basic protection against small 
fire and shell splinters. The V-shaped bel-
ly provides protection against blast of mi-
nes and IED, which will be completed by 
mine-protection-seats and spall-liners. A 
remote weapon station may be fitted to 
the roof. Kamaz contributes subsystems 
like the Diesel power train with 191 kW in-
cluding transmissions and suspensions for 
axles and wheels. The equipment fit inclu-
des a central tire inflation system (CTIS), air 
conditioning, fire suppression system and 
racks for personal weapons.
www.zashchita.ru
(Photo: A. Khlopotov)
Smart energy container
(gwh) The German Armed Forces have 
procured mobile containers with high per-
formance photovoltaic modules from Aleo 
Solar. The modules are integrated in contai-
ners from Multicon Solar and can be used 
as power plants for military camps and bi-
vouacs. They are designed to replace or to 
bolster fuel-operated generators. The Ger-
man procurement agency BAAINBw is now 
going to test the containers with regard to 
if and how solar power can be integrated 
with the energy supply of military camps.
www.multicon-solar.de 
www.aleo-solar.de
New Fortnightly Newsletter
European Security & Defence is escorted by the new bi-weekly newsletter ESD Spotlight which 
is distributed by email. ESD Spotlight is available free of charge. You can order your subscription by 
sending an informal email message to esd.spotlight@mittler-report.de.
Alternatively, there is a subscription order form on the magazine’s website at www.euro-sd.com.
Issue 2 / 2015
Published by
Sweden not only chairs the Nordic Defense 
Cooperation (NORDEFCO), the Swedish Ar-
med Forces have also several procurement 
projects on schedule for 2015. The largest 
three programmes comprise the develop-
ment of the next generation of the JAS Gripen 
fighter system (JAS E), the development of 
the next generation submarine (NGU) and the 
modification of the Leopard main battle tank 
system.
Next generation of the JAS Gripen
The Swedish government ordered 60 JAS Gri-
pen E (plus 10 as option) with scheduled de-
livery from 2018 to 2027. Contrary to initial 
plans all the future JAS Gripen E will be new- 
built fighters and not upgrades of existing Gri-
pen C. The first flight of the pre-production 
JAS Gripen E is expected within this year.
The JAS Gripen E will be slightly larger than 
the predecessors. Giving place to an increase 
of the fuselage tank with the new and bigger 
nose bearing most of the main gear. The com-
pany Saab stated, that the new fighter has an 
increase of 40% in internal fuel capacity.
Apart from this two additional weapon sta-  
tions have been installed. The JAS Gripen E 
will also have a new landing gear, modern sen-
sor configuratuions like the Selex Skyward-G 
infrared search and track (IRST) turret or the 
advanced interrogation friend-or-foe suite. 
Next generation submarine
The first programme on procuring modern sub-
marines to replace the four Walrus serving in 
the Swedish Navy, known as the A26 program-
me, has been cancelled in February 2014. Then 
in December 2014 an agreement between 
Saab and Damen Shipyards was announced 
to jointly develop, offer and build the next 
genera-
tion sub-
marines 
( N G U ) 
for Swe-
den.
The new 
subma-
rines will base on the Type 612 submarines, 
that Saab Kockums has built for the Royal Aus-
tralian Navy.
But there will be changes, since the Australi-
an submarine has 4,000 tonnes and the Swe-
dish NGO programme is heading for a 3,000 
tonnes submarine with some elements of the 
cancelled A26 programme included.
The first of the five Swedish submarines is 
planned to be operating by 2023.
Modification of the Leopard
The Swedish version of the main battle tank 
Leopard has additional protection, including 
overall coverage, mine protection, an extra 
bomblet protection for the turret, a modern 
command system and an improved fire-con-
trol system.
At the moment the Swedish Armed Forces 
plan further improvements and uses of the 
Leopard. Especially the communication sys-
tems and a weight reduced armour system are 
in the focus. Elements of the Leopard 2A7, in 
service at the German Armed Forces, will be 
included.
Additionally Sweden purchased three Leguan 
bridge layers on Leopard 2 chassis. In this vari-
ant, the Leguan is capable of laying a 26 metre 
bridge or two 14 metre bridges independent 
of each other, whose MLC 80 (approx. 70 ton-
nes) load capacity can be used by even heavy 
equipment.  
 
      Dorothee Frank
Procurement programmes in Sweden
Content 
• Sweden
• Defence
• Technology
• Industry
• IDEX Preview
MAStheAd
eSd Spotlight
Email newsletter of the bimonthly magazine 
“European Security & Defence” (ESD)
editor-in-Chief: Dr. Peter Bossdorf
deputy editor-in-Chief: Henning Bartels
Managing editors: Dorothee Frank (newslet-
ter) and Stephen Barnard (magazine)
editors: Gerhard Heiming (gwh), Yuri Laski (yl)
Layout: davis creativ media GmbH, Bonn, 
Germany
Photo front page: Matthias Kabel
Published by
Mittler Report Verlag GmbH
A company of Tamm Media Group
Mittler Report Verlag GmbH
Baunscheidtstrasse 11
53113 Bonn, Germany
Phone: +49 228 350087-0
Telefax: +49 228 350087-1
Email: esd.spotlight@mittler-report.de
www.mittler-report.de
Managing Directors: Thomas Bantle, Dr. Peter 
Bossdorf  and Peter Tamm
The company is located in Bonn
District Court of Bonn – HRB 18658
Identification number DE 811 223 089
2
Issue 2 / 2015
(Photo: NATO)
decisions to strengthen NAtO
(df) The defence ministers of the NATO 
countries have taken several decisions to 
strengthen the Alliance’s collective de-
fence. NATO Secretary General Jens Stol-
tenberg said the decisions would “ensure 
that we have the right forces, in the right 
place, at the right time”. The ministers 
agreed on the implementation of a so 
called Spearhead Force.
Also the NATO Response Force will be en-
hanced. The Defence Ministers agreed on 
the size and scope of a new very high rea-
diness force or Spearhead Force. “We deci-
ded that this very high readiness force will 
consist of a land brigade of around 5,000 
troops. These will be supported by air, 
sea and special forces”, said Stoltenberg. 
He explained the Spearhead Force would 
be backed up by two more brigades “as a 
rapid reinforcement capability in case of 
a major crisis. Altogether, the enhanced 
NATO Response Force will count up to 
around 30,000 troops.”
The defence ministers also decided to 
immediately establish six command and 
control units in Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, 
Lithuania, Poland and Romania.
www.nato.int
defence
Goldstein new General Manager 
NAMeAdSMA
(df) Col. Michael T. Goldstein of the Ger-
man Air Force was assigned the position 
of  General Manager of the NATO Medium 
Extended Air Defense System Manage-
ment Agency (NAMEADSMA) on 01 Febru-
ary 2015. He took over the responsibili-
ties from Gregory Kee, who had been the 
agency‘s General Manager since Novem-
ber 2008. Goldstein joined the German Air 
Force on 01 July 1975 and completed the 
Improved HAWK Officer Course at the GAF 
Air Defense School, Ft. Bliss, Texas, in 1981. 
Later, Goldstein served as a platoon leader 
Hawk at the 4th Battery SAM Battalion 34 
in Manching, later Head of Patriot Scena-
rio Generation Seciton, GAFADS, Ft. Bliss, 
Texas. Other assignments included Deputy 
System Manager Patriot at the Federal Mi-
nistry of Defence for almost three years. On 
01 August 2012 Goldstein became Director 
Technical Integration at NAMEADSMA, fol-
lowed by the position as Deputy General 
M a n a g e r 
& 
Director 
Technical In-
tegration on 
01 July 2014 
and now Ge-
neral Mana-
ger & Direc-
tor Technical 
Integration 
NAMEADSMA.
http://meads-amd.com/
(Photo: NAMEADSMA)
It support for Norwegian logistics
(gwh) The Swedish International Financial 
Services company (IFS) has rolled out the 
IFS applications to cover additional Navy 
personnel, now supporting 2,500 users 
in the Armed Forces with mission-critical 
configuration management, MRO, and lo-
gistics. 
The Norwegian Armed Forces (Air Force, 
Army, and Navy including the Coast Guard) 
have been using IFS Applications since 
1999 for military logistics including con-
figuration management, document and 
spare parts management, maintenance, 
repair, overhaul (MRO), and supply chain. 
The Navy’s recent decision to cover addi-
tional users means that IFS’s industry solu-
tion will empower more personnel working 
deployed on one of its vessels or on land. 
The solution is distributed between vessels 
and onshore sites, also offering integration 
with the government finance and HR sys-
tem.
www.forsvaret.no 
www.ifsworld.com 
(Photo: FMV)
NORdeFCO plans more cooperation
(df) The Nordic Defense Cooperation 
(NORDEFCO), consisting of Denmark, Fin-
land, Iceland, Norway and actual chaired 
by Sweden, wants to improve the collec-
tive border defence by installing a cross-
border defence cooperation. Also Sweden 
is pushing forward an initiative to form 
a modular Nordic-Baltic battle group 
(NBBG), that could be seen as a counter-
part of the EU Nordic Battle Group (NBG), 
that is led by Sweden with soldiers coming 
from Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania 
and Norway.
The aims of the Swedish initiatives are to 
give more protection to areas, such as Arc-
tic region or Baltic Sea.
www.government.se

 ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
58
European Security & Defence · December 2017
(€33Bn) allocated to a rolling programme 
of submarine acquisition over the course 
of forty years in Australia’s National Ship-
building Plan and the almost crippling ex-
pense of Brazil’s extensive investment in its 
PROSUB project provide some indication 
of the extent of the costs involved. Both 
programmes are heavily reliant on licensed 
Naval Group technology. However, they 
could conceivably form the basis of a fully 
indigenous submarine production capacity 
in the longer term. 
There are few other potential entrants to 
the market. Turkey – currently Western 
Europe’s largest operator of conventional 
submarines – has a strong record produc-
ing licensed TKMS designs. It could well 
progress to developing a fully indigenous 
capability along similar lines to the steps it 
is pursuing in surface warships. India also 
has significant experience in the sector, al-
beit its main current design effort relates 
to its nuclear-powered strategic subma-
rines. Elsewhere, Iranian and North Korean 
production of midget submarines will re-
main focused on domestic requirements. 
Taiwan’s mooted indigenous submarine 
programme – born more out of despera-
tion than desire – has many hurdles still to 
overcome.
These barriers to market entry suggest 
few new truly independent submarine 
manufacturing groups will emerge in the 
foreseeable future. At the same time, 
however, it does seem likely that the 
Asian countries already active in the field 
will have greater influence than hitherto. 
This reflects a number of factors. Impor-
tantly, China, Japan and South Korea have 
all worked diligently to establish the do-
mestic infrastructure necessary to supply 
the key components – combat systems, 
weaponry, handling systems and the like 
– that an independent submarine manu-
facturing capability requires. In certain 
technologies – for example, with respect 
to Japan’s work in the area of lithium-
ion batteries – they are now arguably  
edging ahead of the field. Alongside this 
industrial expertise comes the practi-
cal advantage of deploying some of the 
world’s largest conventional submarine 
fleets. This provides operational knowl-
edge that can be fed back into the design 
process. The fact that it is Asian countries 
that are driving submarine orders argu-
ably makes this local experience addition-
ally valuable. Certainly, being located in 
the centre of market demand, with the 
enhanced opportunities for political and 
trading deals this provides, can only be 
of assistance. 
In conclusion, it is the established European 
yards that currently dominate conventional 
submarine design and manufacture. How-
ever, as in so many areas, they have a fight 
on their hands to retain this status. 
L
China’s submarine-building industry has progressed a long way since its 
production of Russian-influenced ROMEO and MING Class submarines. 
However, its latest designs still reflect Russian influences. 
(Photo: Courtesy Ian Shiffman)
Conventional Submarines – Principal Manufacturing Countries
Country
Manufacturer
Principal Designs
Displacement (Submerged) 	 Location
France
Naval Group	
SCORPÈNE
SHORTFIN BARRACUDA
1,800+ tonnes
4,500+ tonnes
Cherbourg
Germany
thyssenkrupp Marine Systems
Type 209
Type 212A
Type 214
Type 218
1,200+ tonnes
1,800 tonnes
1,900 tonnes
2,400 tonnes
Kiel
Russia
United Shipbuilding Corporation
KILO
3,000+ tonnes
St Petersburg
Spain
Navantia
S-80 Plus
2,500 tonnes
Cartagena
Sweden
Saab
A-26
1,900 tonnes
Karlskrona
China
China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation
China State Shipbuilding Corporation
Type 039A/B YUAN	
2,500+ tonnes
Wuhan
Shanghai
Japan
Kawasaki Shipbuilding Corporation
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries	
SORYU
4,200 tonnes
Kobe
South Korea
Daewoo Shipbuilding &  
Marine Engineering Co
Hyundai Heavy Industries	
KSS-III
3,700 tonnes
Geoje
Ulsan
Note: Displacement figures are approximations and often subject to a degree of speculation. They can also change dependent on variant. They are provided only to give a general indication of submarine size.

ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY 
59
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
Author
Major Michael Johnsson 
Head of Guns and Mortars Branch
Fire Support Division,Danish Army 
Combat and Fire Support Centre
T
he system will be integrated in a number 
of the 300(+) PIRANHA 5s that will be 
implemented in the Danish Army over the 
next two to three years. The new 120mm 
mortar will not replace an existing system. 
It is a new capacity, and the army does not 
yet have the necessary ammunition port-
folio. After abandoning all the operational 
120mm Heavy Mortar Platoons in 2004, 
DALO decided to keep in stock the high-
explosive bomb (HE) M/50. Both the round 
and the fuse (M49/62) were designed back 
in the 1940s. Even though the fuse was 
upgraded in the early 1960s, HE M/50 is 
outdated ammunition and cannot exploit 
the full potential of CARDOM 10. The HE 
M/50 is regarded as outdated and only suit-
able for training future mortar crews.
The Danish Army therefore needs to pur-
chase modern ammunition for the new 
120mm mortar system. The new ammuni-
tion should not only utilise the CARDOM 
10's technical potential but also offer the 
effects required on today's battlefield – a 
battlefield which might differ from the one 
Danish units know from operations in Iraq 
and Afghanistan.
Concurrent with the introduction of the 
CARDOM 10, a new autonomous artillery 
system is being introduced. The 155mm 
CAESAR 8x8 by NEXTER will also need new 
powerful ammunition to utilise the 40 km(+) 
capability and other new technical possibili-
ties. It is impossible to fund all the effects 
for both systems. An analysis should give 
answers to how the army should prioritise 
some of the effects for different fire support 
Mortar Ammunition:  
New Weapon – New Ammunition
Michael Johnsson
During the next two to three years, Denmark will acquire a new autonomous 120mm heavy mortar sys-
tem. The Danish Defence Acquisition and Logistics Organisation (DALO) has signed a contract for an up-
dated version of Elbit’s 120mm CARDOM, called CARDOM 10.

 ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
60
European Security & Defence · December 2017
levels (company, battalion and brigade).
This article is the author’s personal view on 
what should be considered when drafting 
requirements for mortar ammunition.
Smart Bombs
The paramount challenge in operations in 
Iraq and Afghanistan was to minimise col-
lateral damage. Loss of civilians or damage 
to their property was impeding coopera-
tion with the local population and security 
forces, and it attracted negative media at-
tention. Coalition forces were usually facing 
smaller units, down to a few people who 
fought an asymmetric war and among ci-
vilians. Small targets like these and the re-
quirement to limit civilian casualties posed a 
challenge for traditional mortar fire support. 
Most fire support systems are designed to 
engage point targets and not area targets, 
which is the strength of mortar and artil-
lery systems in comparison to conventional 
ammunition. The only fire support systems 
that could solve this task for the Danish Bat-
tlegroup in Helmand were guided precision 
munitions from UK artillery (GMLRS, Exactor 
– aka SPIKE NLOS), US 155mm EXCALIBUR, 
fixed wings and combat helicopters. 
At various international conferences on 
mortars over the past ten years, I have no-
ticed great interest in mortar ammunitions 
that could hit the target’s “bull’s eye”. There 
have been a number of projects to develop 
this type of ammunition, but not all chal-
lenges have been addressed yet. This is be-
cause the control unit consumes a sizeable 
chunk of the volume which reduces the ef-
fect of the round itself. There are also tech-
nical challenges to the guidance mechanism 
and these rounds come at a hefty price. The 
Danish Army has limited funds; it must leave 
high-priority targets, which require preci-
sion ammunitions, to more powerful plat-
forms such as Close Air Support and artil-
lery, and let mortar systems do the task they 
are made for: providing close fire support to 
infantry units against enemy area targets.
For years to come, the main requirements 
for mortar ammunition will be traditional 
ones: high explosives, smoke and illumi-
nation rounds. Therefore, we should look 
more closely at recent developments in 
terms of effect when it comes to mortar 
ammunition.
Pre-Fragmentation
Pre-fragmentation technology is one way 
to increase the impact of traditional high-
explosive rounds. A controlled fragmenta-
tion provides greater effect in the target 
area against the type of target it is opti-
mised for. It may also reduce the risk of 
A Further Insight:
Interview with José María Fajardo, Mortar Systems  
Product Manager at EXPAL
ESD: Which market trends do you foresee regarding the de-
mand of mortar ammunition? 
Fajardo: Demand for mortar munitions varies according to 
the market. There is a discernible trend towards improving the 
features with respect to the ammunition countries currently 
have in service. NATO countries talk about enhanced lethality 
ammunition and guided munitions while in other countries 
there is growing interest in ammunition with multispectral 
effectiveness such as IR Illum or RP Smoke ammunition.
When it comes to the NATO market, the trend points in two 
directions: safety and features. In the past, buyers have placed 
more emphasis on features, but this is changing as many 
countries are favouring safety over features. Perhaps this is 
because Army training with an eye on occupational health 
and safety has increased considerably in recent years. Safety has moved to the forefront, not 
only in regard to usage but also in terms of the effects of the ammunition. Modern asymmetric 
conflicts and terrorist insurgents hiding among civilians necessitate an increased awareness of 
the ammunitions’ effects in advance. Predicting the effects has become more important to 
avoid collateral damage.
Examples of safety trends are heightened safety requirements in the ammunition (e.g. double 
safety fuses), insensitive ammunition, noise level reduction and training simulators. When it 
comes to the effects, the trend toward more safety is shown by improvements in precision, 
controlled fragmentation and training simulators.
Examples of trends in features are improved range, improved effectiveness (lethality, lighting, 
screening, and so on), improved versatility (effectiveness in different situations, such as effective 
fragmentation against armour vehicles or infrared illumination), improved accuracy, improved 
precision and last but not least improved reliability.
These terms are indicative of the larger trend; they apply to all munitions. Priorities and demand 
of features differ also depending on the calibre. There is considerable interest in guided ammu-
nition in calibre 120mm but not in calibre 60mm. The same holds true for ammunition against 
armoured targets.
EXPAL is working hard to meet all customer requirements without compromising performance. 
This is a real challenge for the industry. Products like EXPAL’s Firing Control System “TECH-
FIRE” for instance, are good examples for how technology improves the performance of the 
ammunition, increases precision and first hit probability and, as a result, reduces ammunition 
consumption.
ESD: When it comes to technology, which future developments can be expected for mortars 
and mortar ammunition?
Fajardo: Mortars have always been among the first targets. They are considered high priority 
due to their destructive capacity and the effects on enemy troops. Mobility and reaction speed 
are therefore obligatory, hence the lightness that characterises this type of weapon. Nowadays, 
however, technology allows capturing instantaneously and in detail the location of enemy fire. 
That is why it is more important than ever to improve mobility and ensure the withdrawal of fire 
support. This is where developments trend are headed to. 
In the short term, the biggest challenges for mortar operators are mobility, firepower, protec-
tion, fast positioning, aiming and reaction. Logistical issues and supply chain management are 
becoming more important, too, which is proof of the greater complexity that these systems have 
due to the need for integration and interoperability.
In the medium term, the trend points towards greater sophistication of operations – integrated 
fire control systems, automatic aiming, aligning devices, communications network, the acquisi-
tion of targets, (semi-)automatic loading systems, and so on. In this regard current artillery firing 
practices could be considered as the near future of the mortars.
When it comes to a long-term perspective, we could talk about the digitalization of operations 
as well as the introduction of concepts such as sensing the environment, the internet of things 
or machine learning. These are all concepts common in other industrial sectors. It is true that the 
new generation of users is more accustomed to technology and solves problems differently. It is 
only a matter of time until this ends up being reflected in the operation of mortars.
Faced with this panorama of evolution and change, EXPAL’s strategies has also evolved. We 
switched focus from the product to the user and hope to cover all customer requirements to 
make their work easier by offering a wide range of solutions. This is why we call ourselves a “one 
stop shop for mortar systems”.
EXPAL’s “one-stop shop” for mortar systems is a new and unique solution responding to all 
operational and logistical requirements demanded by a mortar unit. This includes weapons, am-
munitions and associated systems (operational needs) and training, maintenance and phase-out 
at the end of its life cycle (logistics needs).
The interview was conducted by Waldemar Geiger
Photo: EXPAL

hds.hirtenberger.com
THE COMPRHENSIVE
60 MM COMMANDO MORTAR SYSTEMS.
The 60 mm Cdo system is the consequent realization of a highly mobile and effective ﬁ re support weapon 
system for infantry units, which can make a difference on the battleﬁ eld by providing high-angle 60 mm 
ﬁ re support from within. Operated, aligned and commanded by the group commander, the quick and 
easy usability of the weapon is combined with the high performance of the different types of the 
Commando mortar ammunition family, such as high explosives, smoke or illumination. Every element of 
the 60 mm Cdo system was designed to maintain high mobility by lowering the man burden to accomplish 
supremacy in ﬁ re power.
With the 60 mm Cdo system, every infantry group becomes one´s own 60 mm ﬁ re support team.
The Mortar Company.

 ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
62
European Security & Defence · December 2017
collateral damage outside the target area. 
This is not the case with conventional high-
explosive rounds.
In Afghanistan, the Danish Army success-
fully used 60mm MAPAM (SAAB Bofors 
Dynamics Switzerland – SBDS) against 
Danish Army CARDOM 10:
Compared to the 120mm CAR-
DOM used by the Israeli Defence 
Forces and the US Stryker bri-
gades, the Danish version has 
several upgrades:
•	 Two-metre barrel enabling 
longer range.
•	 Semi-automatic loading sys-
tem to reduce the workload of 
the crew and the number of 
human errors when handling 
the mortar.
•	 Muzzle velocity radar to im-
prove accuracy when the  
NATO S4 ballistic kernel based 
Fire Control System is calculat-
ing data for the fire missions.
•	 Placed inside the new PIRAN-
HA 5 from MOWAG, the crew 
will benefit from level 4 pro-
tection against ballistic and 
mine threats.
•	 The system is autonomous 
and can operate in a hostile 
counter-mortar environment.
•	 There will be four CARDOM 
systems for every platoon 
which support a battalion 
each. The platoon also includes 
the platoon leader’s command 
vehicle and two ammunition 
trucks.
A Further Insight:
Interview with Florian Kunz,  
Head of Sales & Marketing  
JUNGHANS Microtec GmbH
ESD: In terms of technology, which future de-
velopments can be expected for mortar fuses?
Kunz: The use of tactical mortars continues to 
increase steadily. Future key requirements for 
mortar systems can be summarised as:
•	 increased lethality
•	 extended range
•	 multi-option usability (“lessen the burden”)
•	 increased IM (Insensitive Munitions) compli-
ance and compatibility
On the one hand there is a need to improve the IM characteristics of exist-
ing mechanical mortar fuses. On the other hand there is a demand for multi-
option mortar fuses with extended proximity and electronic time capability. To  
JUNGHANS, a solution to these challenges would be to satisfy the future capabil-
ity requirements listed above.
For multi-option fuses there are two types to be considered. One type fea-
tures hand-adjustable mode selection, typically used for hand loading mortar 
systems. These will normally be open systems, powered by a wind turbine 
generator. The other design features a programming interface for an ex-
tended mode selection spectrum for automatic or semi-automatic loading 
systems, consisting of a closed fuse design powered by a battery. The latter 
could contribute significantly to current and future demands of the armed 
forces: to lessen the burden of the soldier in terms of training and physical 
loads by delivering multi-purpose systems and ammunitions.
When it comes to effectiveness and improved lethality for the mortar 
round, the fuse can contribute with increased accuracy. There are clear driv-
ers for more precise and adjustable heights of burst for proximity function  
as well as low delay impact function and/or well defined impact delays. In 
addition, for certain applications, some penetration capability would also be 
beneficial.
Regarding the requirement for extended range, JUNGHANS has improved the 
aerodynamic design of the fuse shape, mass (and/or centre of gravity).
ESD: What exactly are the requirements imposed by the current STANAG, and 
does STANAG compliance constitute a challenge? 
Kunz: A central requirement of STANAG 4187 is that two fully physical-
ly independent mechanisms should prevent the arming of the fuse before  
firing. In the past, fuses used a safety pin to be pulled out by the operator 
before firing as a first mechanism. The second mechanism was launch ac-
celeration. 
This design is safe and reliable but not fully compliant with STANAG require-
ments, and it does not fully satisfy future tactical demands. In future mortar fuse 
designs, two independent safety elements, entirely relying on environmental 
characteristics (only achieved in live firing), are mandatory. 
The JUNGHANS fuse portfolio has been extended to include mechanical 
PD and time fuses with a second safety mechanism (wind wheel arming 
unit) to be fully compliant with STANAG 4187. Next generation designs  
deliver increased safety and usability, with no need to prepare the fuse before 
firing, and there is no fiddling with prepared fuses in the event of an aborted 
fire mission. JUNGHANS considers this concept as the basis and way forward 
for any future mortar fuse development, whether electronic or mechanical.
In support of these goals, JUNGHANS will continue to be proactive and invest in 
innovative technologies, subsystem building blocks and state-of-the-art fusing 
systems.
The interview was conducted by Waldemar Geiger
Photo: JUNGHANS

ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY 
63
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
unprotected personnel. In addition to the 
effect on the enemy, MAPAM also brings 
fire much closer to your own forces (Dan-
ger Close) without an increased risk, in 
contrast to conventional high-explosive 
rounds.
The development of pre-fragmentation 
is moving forward, but there are only a 
few companies developing these rounds 
for 120mm mortars. SBDS is in the final 
stage of developing a 120mm version 
called "THOR", and Hirtenberger offers a 
120mm pre-fragmentated round produced 
after their ConFrag concept.
CARDOM 10 can fire Multiple Rounds Si-
multaneous Impact (MRSI). When com-
bined with the optimised power of pre-
fragmentation ammunition, a heavy mortar 
platoon can achieve the desired effect with 
a smaller number of rounds. Only the first 
or, maybe, second rounds fired need pre-
fragmentation technology. In most cases, 
subsequent rounds provide lesser effect 
as the enemy has taken cover. Therefore it 
makes sense to use conventional high-ex-
plosive rounds for the remainder of the fire 
mission. When CARDOM 10 is firing MRSI, 
the platoon’s four systems can deliver up 
to 16 rounds within the same second. This 
way optimised ammunition offers a lot of 
firepower to reap the benefits of the ele-
ment of surprise.
A Further Insight:
Interview with Christian Herren,  
Director of Development and Quality  
at Saab Bofors Dynamics Switzerland
ESD: What technologies have been implemented 
with the new THOR mortar bomb?
Herren: The new THOR round integrates the fol-
lowing technologies:
•	 THOR technology, based on a multidimensional 
fragmentation system. THOR allows the combi-
nation of different sizes, shapes and materials in-
to one mortar round. Therefore the adaptability 
to customer requirements is high. Overall lethal-
ity of such a round is at least three times higher 
when compared to MAPAM. THOR is made possible by a sophisticated analytical 
model for the fragmentation process itself.
•	 ODIN technology to guide the fragmentation beam in the desired direction. 
•	 Ammunal++ and Allocator technology. The new mortar round can optionally integrate 
an enhanced blast module. Based on an explosive formulation called Ammunal++ and 
using a controlled dispersion principle called Allocator, a highly efficient blast effect can 
be projected and adapted in relation to customer requirements. This enhancement lifts 
the new round up to the level of multi-effect/multi-purpose ammunition.
ESD: Why did you not just scale the MAPAM ammunition for 120 mm mortar ap-
plications?
Herren: MAPAM is a 2nd generation mortar technology based on the use of ball 
bearings in a specific plastic matrix which provides the structural integrity of the round. 
This kind of application is dependent on the surface/volume ratio, which is very good 
in a 60 mm round, acceptable in an 81mm one but not promising in a 120 mm round. 
This is why the lethality gain compared to a 1st generation round is insufficient and 
demands the integration of improved technologies like THOR and ODIN.
ESD: Can you elaborate on the functional principles of ODIN technology?
Herren: ODIN uses the analytical model already mentioned as basis of the THOR tech-
nology and implements elements of differential geometry into the set of equations.
This makes it is possible to generate beams of fragments in different directions at dif-
ferent times of the fragmentation process using material parameters and geometrical 
elements. The result is a multi-beam spray which can be adapted to customer demand.
Originally ODIN was developed to provide a back-spray element in a multi-effect mis-
sile system. Saab Bofors Dynamics Switzerland has successfully integrated this technol-
ogy into the new 120mm round. 
ODIN offers:
•	 the advantage to use geometry optimisation resulting in a cylindrical design of 
the round which provides a spray where more than 90% of the fragments hit the 
designated target area (compared to less than 60%  for a conventional round).
•	 the possibility to optimise the round aerodynamically to extend its range. 
ESD: Are there plans to convert or upgrade THOR, such as to a guided mortar bomb?
Herren: The new round is adaptable to most of the existing fuse systems (quick re-
sponse, delay) but of course especially optimised for proximity fuses.
In the future the following enhancements of the THOR round are scheduled:
•	 Adaptation to different mortar systems (self-propelled and French mortar systems).
•	 Use of general platonic bodies with an optimised number of edges and corners to 
increase lethality. This improvement is done in combination with the use of adaptive 
layer manufacturing (ALM).
•	 Introduction of a high-performance blast element called DONAR. This element 
provides a superior blast effect without a specific blast element.
•	 Use of guided fuse kits (when commercially available at reasonable cost).
The interview was conducted by Waldemar Geiger
Photo: Saab Bofors Dynamics Switzerland
The CARDOM 10 is an upgraded 
version of the Israeli 120mm 
mortar CARDOM in use with US 
Stryker Brigades and IDF. It is fully 
automated, supported by a semi-
automatic loading system, has a 
longer barrel to improve range, 
and it will be built into the Danish 
Army's new APC: PIRANHA 5 from 
MOWAG. 
Photo: ELBIT

 ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
64
European Security & Defence · December 2017
Anti-Structure
Another way to increase firepower is to 
use rounds with anti-structure effect. 
Thermobaric ammunition utilises oxygen 
from the air to generate an intense high-
temperature explosion with a long blast 
wave. The blast wave is used to destroy 
different kinds of structures. Thermobaric 
ammunition is rarely in stock in Western 
Europe. Although a 120mm carrier can 
deliver a strong effect it is unlikely that 
Denmark will go down that road.
Smoke Screen
When fighting an adversary that does not 
have multispectral observation means (e.g. 
infrared or thermal imagers), smoke ammu-
nition can conceal your movements from 
the enemy or, when placed directly on and 
behind the adversary position, create con-
fusion when trying to change position.
When battling a near-peer or stronger 
adversary you also need a multispectral 
screen of his observation- and target allo-
cating instruments. When acquiring smoke 
ammunition, there must be a bigger focus 
on the thermal effect in order to screen 
the enemy´s observation of your actions. 
For political and practical reasons, smoke 
ammunition based on white phosphorus 
has not much of a future. One should con-
centrate on the multispectral effects that 
can be achieved using red phosphorus or 
other new smoke materials.
Illumination
The market offers both 120mm white and 
IR illumination. No matter if you are fight-
ing counter-insurgency (COIN) or combat 
operations there will be a need for both 
types in future conflicts. The Danish infan-
try companies have various systems in stock 
to illuminate the battlefield. That is why a 
more detailed analysis is needed when pur-
chasing the aforementioned types.
The Armoured Threat
Guided rounds are not the only threat to 
the army´s budget. There is one area where 
COIN and combat operations differ con-
siderably: the near-peer adversary’s use of 
armoured vehicles. In combat operations 
on the modern battlefield the adversary 
will most likely deploy his fleet of armoured 
vehicles. With the end of the Cold War the 
Danish army lowered its capability to coun-
ter an armoured adversary. Today the ar-
moured threat is back. This necessitates an 
analysis on what anti-tank capacity each 
weapon system can contribute with. For 
the time being the 120mm STRIX anti tank 
round manufactured by SAAB Bofors Dy-
namics is the only real answer for mortars 
when it comes to tackling medium and 
heavy armoured vehicles. Although this is 
not a priority at the moment it is something 
the army should keep an eye on .
Long Range
CARDOM 10 has a firing distance of 9 km 
(+). There might be a need to limit dispersion 
at target ranges above 7-8 km. As the dis-
A Danish Army mortar crew prepares to load a Saab MAPAM mortar 
round into their 60mm Expal commando mortar during a firing demon-
stration in Sweden.  The MAPAM round provides the same effect as an 
81mm mortar round in its 40-metre lethal zone. 
Photo: SAAB
 Graphic: Hirtenberger
A comparison of the fragmentation dispersion of different kinds of 
60mm mortar ammunition. Left is a conventional high-explosive;  
on the right ConFrag, an enhanced-lethality mortar bomb.

ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY 
65
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
pertion of rounds fired on the same target 
will increase; steps should be taken in or-
der to achieve the required effect. A similar 
problem although at longer ranges can also 
be seen when using artillery. This issue is 
partly addressed by using 1- and 2D cross-
correction fuses. It would be interesting to 
see how correcting fuses for mortar ammu-
nition might work out but as long as heavy 
mortars in the Western world are used for 
ranges of 7 km and below, there is little need 
to launch an expensive development project.
Insensitive Ammunition
Another widely discussed topic is insensi-
tive ammunitions (IM). The Danish Army 
has introduced IM as a valuable method to 
optimise operational security, transport and 
storage of the ammunition. Some of the 
benefits of IM are as follows: 
•	 Reduced loss of life and material because 
of hostile attacks and accidents. 
•	 Tactical advantages when preserving the 
ammunition’s capability as the secondary 
result of enemy attacks and accidents. 
•	 Reduced requirements for ammunition 
storage magazines and security. 
•	 Contribution to maintaining the fighting 
spirit among own troops. 
DALO has established some minimum re-
quirements for IM. All future purchases of 
ammunition will be based on an individual 
assessment which describes to what extent 
the new ammunition types must meet the 
minimum requirements for IM.
Summary 
When Denmark is to acquire ammunition 
for the new 120mm CARDOM 10 there 
should be little focus on guided munitions. 
need to acquire conventional and pre-frag-
mentation high-explosive rounds. Smoke 
and illumination ammunition should un-
dergo a comprehensive analysis together 
with other effectors in the inventory of 
a combat battalion. There is no need for 
training ammunition as the old HE M/50 
will cover the needs of the Danish Army for 
years to come.
L
A Further Insight:
Interview with Carsten Barth,  
Vice President Sales & Marketing  
at Hirtenberger Defence Systems
ESD: What do you think are the future require-
ments and demands for conventional and en-
hanced lethality mortar ammunition?
Barth: Increasing the lethality of HE mortar rounds 
will have a very high priority. Enhanced lethality 
ammunition has to come with the same ballistics 
as well as size and weight as a standard HE round. 
It should have a fully proven IM footprint, including 
the use of modern IM explosives. It also needs to be 
cost effective. At Hirtenberger we have introduced 
our ConFrag Technology for all standard mortar calibres to achieve these enhanced 
lethality requirements (at least doubling the lethality of a standard HE round of the 
same calibre). A third independent party scientifically verified the increased lethality.
ESD: What do you anticipate in terms of future requirements for precision and ac-
curacy of modern mortar ammunition?
Barth: Precision and accuracy will be important requirements in the future. We 
believe that increasing the first-hit probability is a key feature. The capability to en-
gage individual targets, even armoured vehicles, will also become more important, 
of course in combination with Multiple-Round-Single-Impact (MRIS) capability. This 
will require more accurate weapons and sighting systems and improved ammunition 
and the capability to guide them. 
The interview was conducted by Waldemar Geiger
Photo: Hirtenberger Defence Systems
This kind of ammunition should initially be 
acquired for the artillery only and solely be 
used for destroying high-priority targets. 
This is not for tactical reasons but due to 
the limited budget. The Danish Army will 
keep an eye on any future development of 
correcting fuses as they help to reduce the 
number of rounds required to achieve the 
desired effect above 7 km. There is also a 
Enjoy reading European Security & Defence as e-paper for  
your tablet computer or smartphone. 
MITTLER REPORT VERLAG GMBH · Baunscheidtstraße 11 · 53113 Bonn, Germany
Fax: +49 (0) 228 35 00 871 · info@mittler-report.de · www.mittler-report-shop.de
European Security & Defence 
Now available in e-paper format!
ORDER
1.  Install iKiosk app on your  
tablet device  
(available as freeware in  
Apple App Store and  
Google Play Store)
App available in Axel 
Springer AG’s iKiosk
2.  Select European Security & 
Defence in iKiosk and order!
Single copy: 2.99 Euro
Subscription (8 issues/year) 10.99 Euro
      Security 
& Defence
European

 ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
66
European Security & Defence · December 2017
Night Vision and Night Combat  
Capabilities
Waldemar Geiger
The ability to conduct military operations at any time of day and under any conditions of visibility is a 
core requirement for modern and powerful armed forces. Image intensification and thermography  
(infrared detection) constitute the two core technologies which decisively contribute to acquiring 
night vision and night combat capabilities. 
N
ight vision capability enables soldiers 
to see their surroundings in low light 
conditions. Night combat capability goes 
one step further; it enables soldiers to 
take aim and to operate their weapons or 
weapon system effectively in low light con-
ditions. The classic way to achieve these 
capabilities has traditionally been with bat-
tlefield illumination which, however, has 
the disadvantage that it is available for a 
limited period of time only and also allows 
the adversary to profit from this artificial 
lighting for his own operations. Particularly 
with respect to combat operations against 
irregular troops, access to state-of-the-art 
night vision technology is a unique feature.
Image Intensifiers
Like many other technological achieve-
ments, night vision technology has its roots 
in Germany. Generation 0 (image converter 
principle) still required the use of IR beam-
ers and was first employed in limited num-
bers in World War II by the German Wehr-
macht. Modern night vision goggles (NVG) 
are significantly lighter and more powerful 
and now constitute Generations I and II+.
Irrespective of their generation, all modern 
NVGs are based on the same functional 
principle: Photons in the near-infrared-
spectrum (approx. 750 to 950 nm), which 
is invisible to the human eye, are collected 
and collimated in the objective lens and 
converted by a photocathode into elec-
trons. A micro-channel plate then amplifies 
these electrons by a zillion-fold and trans-
forms them into visible light appearing on a 
phosphor screen. According to the laws of 
optics, the resulting image is upside down 
and must be turned around with another 
lens in front of the eyepiece. The assembly 
of photocathode, micro-channel plate and 
phosphor screen is called a “tube”. 
Tube Technology  
Generations
As already mentioned, tubes of GEN II 
(Photonis, The Netherlands and France) 
and GEN III (L3 and ITT-Corporation, both 
USA) are integrated into state-of-the-art 
military NVG whose functional principle 
has been used and further advanced since 
the 1970s and 1980s. The vast majority of 
the present US-produced tubes feature a 
photocathode of 18 mm which, from the 
American point of view, offers the best per-
formance–weight tradeoff. Photonis also 
supplies GEN II+ 16-mm tubes in addition 
to the 18-mm tubes.
As regards their function, light intensifiers 
have not seen any particular technical ad-
vancement in the past decades (except for 
the fusion method). However, they have 
meanwhile become considerably smaller, 
lighter, more robust and more powerful. In 
addition, the production costs of the tubes 
have fallen drastically over time. Accord-
ingly, they are now in common use and 
no longer reserved for just a few selected 
units, as was the case in the past.
The photocathode makes the technical dif-
ference between the tubes of GEN II+ and 
GEN III. In GEN III tubes, multi-alkali pho-
tocathodes were substituted by gallium/
arsenide cathodes, which have the advan-
tage of opening up a slightly wider IR-light 
spectrum for image taking and being more 
sensitive to IR radiation. In the end, more 
electrons, and thus more visible light, can 
be obtained from available ambient light.
The improved sensitivity of GEN III tubes 
initially entailed the adverse effect of elec-
trons emitted from the micro-channel plate 
causing damage to the photocathode. As 
an initial countermeasure, an ion barrier 
film was inserted between cathode and 
micro-channel plate to achieve acceptable 
durability. The useful life of the presently 
available tubes of any generation ranges 
from 10,000 to 15,000 operating hours.
Meanwhile industry has succeeded in pro-
ducing equally durable GEN III tubes with-
out the use of ion barriers. This enhances 
the clarity and contrast of the images and 
represents the current state-of-the-art 
technology. In the beginning, these “film-
less” GEN III tubes were incorrectly desig-
nated Generation 4.
Micro-channel platel 
Phosphor screen         Photocathode
Ocular                                               Objective
Functional principles of an image intensifier
Graphics: IEA MIL-OPTICS GmbH

ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY 
67
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
the two eyepiece lenses to make it appear 
more natural to the wearer of the goggles. 
Nonetheless, such goggles fail to provide a 
stereoscopic view, especially at close range. 
Users must therefore pay special attention 
not to trip over obstacles or to stumble 
while walking. Injury patterns like twisting 
one’s ankle or impact with obstacles occur, 
particularly when soldiers are unfit to keep 
their mind on their own movement due to 
fatigue or in stressful situations. Likewise, 
these goggles are unsuitable for drivers. 
Binocular NVG represent a third type of 
goggles. The two synchronised channels 
of such binocular goggles are more expen-
sive but produce an image which agrees 
considerably more with reality than mo-
nocular or bi-ocular goggles do. As such 
goggles correctly indicate ranges they can 
also be worn by vehicle drivers. The use of 
a second tube makes such goggles almost 
twice as expensive to procure but offers the 
advantage of retaining a monocular night 
vision capability for the soldier, should one 
of the tubes fail.
Quad-eye goggles are currently right out in 
front of the light intensifier evolution and 
are therefore issued only to Special Forces. 
Four separate and synchronised input chan-
nels generate a horizontal field of vision of 
more than 90 degrees which comes clos-
est to the natural 120-degree field of view 
of human beings. What does not sound 
particularly overwhelming in theory has an 
impressive effect in practice. Due to their 
limited field of vision, traditional binocular 
goggles always have the disadvantage of 
developing a tunnel vision. Accordingly, to 
keep aware of the situation, the soldier is 
forced to shift his line of sight constantly 
from one side to the other. Especially when 
engaged in close-quarters combat, it takes 
some time to get a total overview of newly 
per unit of time into electrons. Auto-gated 
tubes are capable of producing a constant, 
sharp and high-contrast image even in 
changing light conditions, including day-
light. In practice, the auto-gating quality 
can be recognised by the speed of down-
regulation. For the time being, this func-
tion is so well engineered that changes in 
lighting are hardly visible to the eye, even in 
case of an abrupt and very strong exposure 
to light (explosion, muzzle flash, and so on) 
and still produces a consistent and smooth 
image in the dark.
NVG Cases
As night vision goggles do not consist 
of a tube alone, their cases constitute a 
crucial factor for their function and per-
formance. Different mechanisms ensure 
the precise adjustment of the goggles to 
the user's eye.
In order to make NVGs operational even 
in complete darkness (such as in base-
ments or tunnels), many of them have 
integrated and optionally connectable IR 
lamps, which can compensate for insuf-
ficient natural low light if necessary. 
In order to save weight, how-
ever, IR lamps are not always 
available, as many soldiers 
are equipped with stronger 
IR booster lights mounted 
on their helmet or handgun 
anyway.
Different military missions also 
call for different NVG designs. In 
addition to monocular devices, bi-
ocular goggles (LUCIE goggles in the 
Bundeswehr) are in common use. They 
contain only one tube and are therefore 
obtainable at a reasonable price. A beam 
splitter distributes the generated image to 
Performance Determination
Tube performance is determined, among 
other metrics, in terms of the resolution, 
low-light intensification (gain) and signal-
to-noise ratio (S/N) of the produced image. 
Whatever generation, virtually all modern 
military tubes provide a resolution of ap-
prox. 64–72 line pairs per millimetre. Since 
an even higher resolution is no longer per-
ceptible to the human eye, efforts are now 
primarily directed at improving S/N value 
and increasing gain to generate a clearer 
image even in dark surroundings. The high-
er the S/N value, the less disturbing back-
ground noise affects the image. The higher 
the gain, the brighter the image, which re-
sults in a sharper contrast under poor light 
conditions. Advanced devices additionally 
allow manual gain adjustment. High gain 
produces a brighter image, yet more image 
noise, while lower gain generates a darker 
image with less image noise.
The result of the multiplication of resolu-
tion value with signal-to-noise ratio (lp/
mm x S/N) represents a quality feature. In 
the USA, this value is called FOM (Figure of 
Merit – performance of the device relative 
to its available best alternative) and deci-
sively determines the export release of US 
tubes. Currently, European GEN II+ tubes 
occasionally come up to a FOM of approx. 
2,300.
In addition to the aforementioned values, 
the auto-gating function represents an 
essential advantage of advanced tubes.
Autogating immediately downregulates a 
sudden increase of the light to which the 
night vision goggles are exposed and auto-
matically keeps the brightness at a constant 
level. This is achieved by a timer, which en-
sures that the photocathode converts only 
a desired maximum number of photons 
A Question of Generations
A popular misconception is to assume the performance of night vision devices from 
their respective generation. Yet it is irrelevant for performance whether the tubes 
belong to GEN II+ or III; rather, quality and technical functionalities of the tube are the 
decisive factors (gain, resolution, S/N-value, auto-gating and so on).
Broadly speaking, two different possible solutions exist to the same problem. Like 
diesel or petrol engines for vehicle propulsion systems, GEN II+ and III tubes represent 
two valid approaches to implement night vision capability, with both having their 
pros and cons.
The multi-alkali photocathodes of GEN II tubes are less sensitive to light, but they 
have the advantage that both their sensitivity to dazzling and the halo around a light 
source are likewise significantly reduced. State-of-the-art GEN II+ tubes are therefore 
particularly suitable for military operations in urban terrain.
GEN III tubes are based on gallium-arsenide cathodes, which increase their sensitivity 
to light, resulting in an improved light yield in the presence of little residual light. Yet 
this higher light sensitivity increases the sensitivity to dazzling; so these tubes play 
to their strengths particularly in a low-light environment (such as forests or areas of 
operation with underdeveloped or destroyed power supply installations).
The XACT-nv33 
binocular from  
Telefunken RACOMS 
weighs less than 500 g  
despite its integrated IR-lamp and 
dioptric and focus adjustment 
mechanisms. 
Photo: Telefunken RACOMS

 ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
68
European Security & Defence · December 2017
and platform-independent systems. The 
image is produced by displaying in dif-
ferent greyscales or pseudocolours the 
thermal differences in the observed en-
vironment. In general, two categories of 
infrared detectors can be distinguished: 
cooled and uncooled.
Cooled Infrared Detectors
Cooled infrared detectors have the ad-
vantage that they sense and depict envi-
ronmental temperature differences much 
more precisely. Accordingly, they detect 
and identify potential targets at a much 
greater distance than non-cooled devices. 
Before they can display an image, the sen-
sors of a cooled infrared detector have to 
be brought to their respective operating 
temperature. This consumes both time and 
energy. While the cooling process with de-
vices of previous generations took several 
minutes, modern devices are operable after 
no more than a few seconds. The addi-
tional cooling system makes these devices 
heavier, more energy-consuming and more 
expensive compared to uncooled systems. 
However, the state-of-the-art meanwhile 
enables the production of compact cooled 
infrared detectors with a total weight of 
less than two kilogrammes, making this 
technology also suitable for infantry opera-
tions. Handheld or weapon-attached ob-
servation devices enable the detection and 
identification of individuals at maximum 
ranges of 4,000 m and 1,500 m, respec-
tively.
occupied terrain. This problem does not 
occur with quad-eye NVG, which ensure 
situational awareness similar to that achiev-
able in daylight.
Infrared Detectors
Infrared detectors are based on the prin-
ciple of thermography. They respond to 
emanations in the medium IR-spectrum 
(3,000 to 5,000 nm) from objects of dif-
fering temperature and convert tempera-
ture differences into an image even in total 
darkness.
Compared to light intensifiers, infrared 
detectors do without low light or artifi-
cial light sources, provide larger effective 
ranges, and have proven to be significantly 
superior in detecting human targets and 
identifying vehicle targets.
The range of application of this technol-
ogy covers all conceivable platform-based 
The Quad-Eye GPNVG (Ground 
Panorama Night Vision Goggle) 
from L3 in use with a German  
special forces operator. 
Photo: Bundeswehr
Fusion
The disadvantages of light intensification and infrared detection can be eliminated 
by fusing these two technologies into one image. This “fusion” approach is achieved 
by superimposing the optical or low-light-intensified image with the infrared detec-
tor image. The idea behind this is to merge at least two different image sources into 
one “more useful” image which can make it much easier to take on specific tactical 
challenges on the battlefield.
For instance, it is very difficult for light intensifiers detect stationary individuals in a 
wooded spot even at ranges as short as 50 m, especially when they lean against trees 
or bushes. Superimposing the infrared detector image on the low-light image allows 
operators to exploit any differences detected between the temperature of construc-
tions and vegetation relative to body temperatures. So, the targets become clearly 
discernible also at longer ranges.
There are two 
ways to perform 
such fusion. One 
option already in 
use for quite some 
time is to mount 
an infrared detec-
tor attachment in 
front of the night 
vision device (clip-
on). In this way, 
the combat ef-
ficiency of exist-
ing night vision 
devices can be 
improved if neces-
sary. The consider-
ably more efficient 
second option is 
internal image fu-
sion. Technically speaking, fusion devices represent a separate category in night vi-
sion technology. These devices are designed from scratch with in-built light intensifier 
tubes and an infrared sensor. The superimposition of the two images is performed 
internally, producing a significantly more detail-rich fusion image. If not needed, the 
infrared detector may be disabled to save energy. Such binocular fusion goggles con-
stitute the current state-of-the-art.
The internally fused image of an AN/PSQ-36 Fusion 
Goggle Enhanced (FGE) sets the human target  
clearly apart from the background. 
Photo: IEA MIL-OPTICS GmbH

ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY 
69
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
and concurrently prevent any dazzling oc-
curring in house-to-house fighting.
Summary
Since all the mentioned technologies are 
key factors for any military operation, 
night combat capabilities are not just nice 
to have, but a key factor for the efficiency 
and survivability of soldiers. Still, most Eu-
ropean armed forces are fully aware of the 
inappropriateness of their equipment in 
the field of night vision and night combat 
capabilities. The existing devices are fre-
quently dated and only available in insuf-
ficient numbers in many European armies, 
among them major actors like the German 
Bundeswehr. It is no longer acceptable for 
soldiers on missions that procurement law 
or economic measures entail dramatic de-
lays in the provision of equipment which 
is urgently needed for mission fulfilment 
and personal protection. 
L
his shooting position. This drawback not 
only involves additional motoric effort but 
also the loss of the panoramic field of view 
as the shooter has only the tunnel-type vi-
sion through the eyepiece. What might be 
still acceptable for fighting out of a pre-
pared defence position develops into a life-
threatening danger in battles for area or 
on urban terrain, because in such scenarios 
the shooter depends on permanent envi-
ronmental awareness to be able to engage 
suddenly occurring targets.
This drawback is avoided by employing 
night-vision-compatible gunsights or IR-
laser modules. Special diffusers widen the 
collimated IR-beam of the laser modules 
to a field of view of approx. 100 degrees 
Uncooled Infrared Detectors
Doing away with the cooling system and 
the attached power supply not only low-
ers the purchase price; it also allows a sig-
nificantly more compact infrared detector 
design with a total weight of just a few 
hundred grammes. Yet this cost saving is 
bought at the expense of performance. 
Individuals can be detected and identified 
only at maximum ranges of 1,800 m and 
500 m, respectively.
Physical Limits
In addition to energy, infrared detection 
technology is particularly dependent on 
temperature differences to provide op-
timum results. The closer the ambient 
temperature approaches the target tem-
perature, the poorer are the resolution and 
consequently the produced detector im-
age. Solar reflections, major fires on the 
battlefield, as well as rain, fog and snow-
fall may gravely interfere with the perfor-
mance of the detector or even eliminate 
its functionality. Infrared detectors also 
cannot spot light sources or light cones. 
Detected objects are depicted in only two 
dimensions. Moreover, infrared detectors 
cannot sense through glass surfaces. So, it 
is impossible to ascertain by means of an 
infrared detector image if and how many 
crew members are present within a vehicle.
Night Combat Capability
Night vision and infrared detector attach-
ments with crosshairs enable the soldiers 
to fight under limited visibility conditions, 
but they cannot be used in connection 
with night vision goggles. The shooter is 
forced to turn up his goggles 
every time before 
he takes 
HuntIR Mk2 from AIM is an exam-
ple of a versatile cooled infrared 
device which can be handheld for 
observation purposes or clipped 
onto a weapon as a targeting 
sight or riflescope attachment. 
SWIR
The efforts of industry in advancing night vision technology extend more and more 
into the field of short-wave-infrared (SWIR) radiation. At present, such sensors and 
infrared detectors are being rapidly developed and should be capable of detecting 
short-wave infrared radiation and depicting it in an operationally usable manner. 
Considering their function, these devices resemble light intensifiers more than infrared 
detectors. SWIR technology combines the advantages of the infrared detection and 
night vision technologies and offsets their respective disadvantages. Short-wave infra-
red radiation features properties similar to visible light and can therefore be exploited 
in a similar way. Light sources are found in the near-infrared (700–1,400 nm) and the 
short-wave infrared (1,400 to approx. 3,000 nm) spectra. Objects are depicted by 
SWIR devices in an inverse monochrome image.
Once mastered, SWIR technology promises several benefits. Unlike traditional infrared 
detectors (medium IR spectrum), SWIR devices would be capable of detecting light 
cones and laser beams even in the spectrum so far invisible to GEN II+ and III night 
vision technology (1,350 nm). Another and very important advantage is their capabil-
ity of sensing through glass surfaces. Short-wave infrared radiation penetrates glass, 
smoke, and fog and detects any objects and individuals that may be hidden behind. 
Photo: AIM Infrarot Module GmbH
The multifunctional uncooled 
L3-LWTS-LR (Light Weapon Ther-
mal Sight – Long Range) detects 
individuals at a range of up to 
4,000 m and weighs no more than  
850 grammes, including batteries. 
Photo: IEA MIL-OPTICS GmbH

 ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
70
European Security & Defence · December 2017
A Further Insight:
Interview with Mark de Nes, Regional Sales Director and  
Gert Nützel, Chief Innovation Officer, Photonis Netherlands. 
ESD: There are only few high end tube manufacturers in the 
world. What is the challenge in manufacturing military grade 
night vision tubes? 
de Nes: The complexity of bringing a combination of differ-
ent scientific disciplines (High-Vacuum, Chemicals, Electron-
ics, Specialised Production etc.) together in a small tube is a 
challenging concept and doing that in a large and steady out-
put is challenging in itself, especially if you are continuously 
improving a product that has been around for quite some 
time. This is why there are only a hand full of companies that 
are able to provide quality high performance tubes in large 
volumes with a stable performance. 
Nützel: In addition the manufacturing of image intensifi-
ers requires a huge investment in clean rooms, ultra high 
vacuum equipment and other process industry tools. 
ESD: What are the characteristics of your state-of-the-art 
tube and what capabilities does it provide? 
de Nes: Our 4G image intensifiers are currently the state-of-
the-art tubes, which despite being only 4-5 years old, have 
already been improved at various levels considering inputs 
from our end-users and OEMs. We listen to the market and 
work intensely on matters such as high FOM performance 
(signal-to-noise improvements), extended bandwidth pho-
ton collection, fast autogating and small Halo and smaller/
lighter tubes like the 16mm 4G tubes. Another very impor-
tant feature of the 4G is the sensitivity down to green, blue 
and even the UV spectrum of the wavelength band. 
Nützel: The night vision community has always taken it for 
granted that the night sky is "infrared". All performance 
parameters like gain, signal to noise ratio and FOM are meas-
ured with infrared light.  The source of the infrared light 
at night sky is a phenomenon called "night glow". Recent 
studies have shown that night glow varies a lot from season 
to season, day to day and even during one night. There are 
nights which are "infrared dark" because this phenomenon 
is absent. Light from all other sources at night: moon, stars 
and galaxies, is blue. Therefore, it is of great importance that 
an image intensifier has a high sensitivity from the UV up to 
the infrared spectrum. 
 
ESD: Photonis produces 16 and 18 mm tubes. What are the 
advantages/disadvantages of 16 mm tubes? 
Nützel: When asking users what changes they would like 
for new night vision equipment almost 100 percent respond 
with the wish for lighter and smaller equipment. Further im-
proved image quality only comes as the third priority. 
de Nes: With a trend in weight reduction at soldier systems 
level and an increasing demand for binoculars, or multi-
functional monocular configurations, we are able to safe 
40% using the 16mm tube in comparison to an 18mm tube. 
Ultimately, the soldiers will have less weight to carry which 
makes their challenging job a bit more comfortable. The 
16mm tubes also offer high FOM values (min. 1800 FOM 
or min. 2000 FOM) as they are also part of the 4G family 
technology. 
ESD: What trends do you envision for night vision devices? 
de Nes: We see an evolution from monocular/ binocular into 
binocular for one. Secondly, the performance level require-
ment is a continuous improvement trend to stay ahead of 
the potential enemy who has a night vision capability, too. 
So the technology for the soldier must be superior to that 
of the enemy (see the enemy before he sees you). Add-on 
functionalities such as augmented reality input of battlefield 
data, lower weight in response to an increased number of 
equipment items for the individual soldier and a (collabora-
tion) fusion of thermal imaging and image intensifiing tech-
nology is the future. 
The interview was conducted by Waldemar Geiger.
Mark your diary: Brussels, 23/24 January 2018
14th NATO Life Cycle Management Conference
LCM as a Joint Effort -
Perspectives and Objectives for NATO, Major Industries and SMEs
Chaired by: Thomas E. Pedersen and J. Bo Leimand (ret), Danish Defence Acquisition and Logistics Organisation (DALO)
The annual NATO LCM Conference will continue to consider the lessons learned and achievements made in areas such as Quality 
Assurance, Life Cycle Costing, Configuration Management, Acquisition Practices, Material Maintainability et al. as a basis for new and 
innovative, even disruptive approaches and perspectives which will be introduced in respective presentations. The event will again 
be organised in cooperation with the NATO Life Cycle Management Group (AC/327) and with the support of the NATO Industrial 
Advisory Group (NIAG) and the German CALS Forum. The conference will be combined with a small exhibition to showcase respective 
capabilities and will take place at the Parker Hotel Brussels Airport (formerly: Golden Tulip) on 23/24 January 2018.
Contributing Organisations: NSPA, SSM (Turkish MoD), NETMA, FFI, UK MoD, Airbus Defence & Space, Leonardo, QinetiQ, 
Ukroboronprom (tbc), KPMG, T-Systems, Systecon et.al.
More Information: Mittler Report Verlag, Jürgen Hensel, Phone: +49 228-35008-76, Email: juergen.hensel@mittler-report.de,
www.mittler-report.de
MITTLER
REPORT

ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY 
71
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
submachine gun in certain applications. 
The new weapon also needed a new 
round and this resulted in the adoption of 
the .280 British round (7x43mm)classed as 
an intermediate round. To provide some 
context, the 7x43mm round would offer 
more in the way of range and penetra-
tion than the Soviet 7.62x39mm round of 
the AK-47. In comparison to a 5.56x45mm 
round, the British round was equivalent 
in velocity at 300 metres and greater at 
500 metres.
The British Army designed a true assault 
rifle to handle the 7x43mm round in the 
shape of the EM-2 and this was officially 
adopted as the future British rifle in 1951 
and designated as the No.9 Mk 1 rifle. 
The British Army had always put great em-
phasis on marksmanship. That is why it is 
particularly significant that this new rifle 
was equipped with a telescopic sight in a 
fixed mount on top of the carrying handle. 
The decision to adopt the NATO standard 
7.62x51mm round marked the end of the 
EM-2 rifle, as it could not handle the more 
powerful round, and saw the British Army 
adopt the FN FAL as their standard battle 
rifle. This also meant that the British Army 
would not have a telescopic sight on its 
rifle, although Canada, which had also 
adopted the FAL, did try unsuccessfully to 
develop a telescopic sight solution.
Austrian Vision
It was the Steyr AUG (Armee Universal 
Gewehr) that would see the successful 
fielding of an integrated sight solution. The 
AUG was designed to be a replacement 
Getting the Picture –  
The Individual Weapon Sight Sector
David Saw
There was a time when the concept of providing the ordinary infantry 
soldier with a weapon that had an add-on optical sight would have 
been inconceivable. Optics were precision instruments and expensive. 
W
hile it was perfectly reasonable to 
equip a sniper with an optical sight, 
there was no rational argument to justify 
the widespread issue of optical sights. The 
perception was that iron sights worked 
perfectly well at all common battle ranges 
and that was all that was needed.
Then perceptions started to change. The 
British Army had developed a new small 
arms strategy based on its operational ex-
perience gained between 1939 and 1945, 
and it had also incorporated ideas gained 
from the evaluation of foreign weapons. 
Its plan was to field a new weapon to re-
place its 7.7x57R-calibre Lee Enfield bolt-
action battle rifle and the STEN 9x19mm 
On overwatch in Afghanistan in early 2011, a sharpshooter of the Royal Scots with an L129A1 (Lewis Machine 
& Tool LM308MWS) 7.62x51mm rifle. In British service the rifle has a Trijicon 6x48 ACOG sight and a  
Trijicon Rugged Miniature Reflex (RMR) red dot sight. 
Photo: Defence Images, MOD

 ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
72
European Security & Defence · December 2017
and L110A2 5.56x45mm Squad Automatic 
Weapons (SAW), otherwise known as the 
FN MINIMI. The SUSAT was also exported 
to a number of customers including the 
Swedish Army, who used it for designated 
marksmen on their AK5 (license built FN 
FNC) assault rifle.
Canadian Solutions
Canada also replaced its SLR battle rifle 
with a 5.56x45mm assault rifle, select-
ing the Colt Model 715, otherwise known 
as the M16A1E1, a weapon that incorpo-
rated some features from the M16A2. The 
weapon was known as the C7 in Canada, 
with a carbine variant known as the C8. 
These initial weapons were superseded by 
the C7A1 and the C8A1. Here the carrying 
handle was replaced with a flat top upon 
which a ‘Weaver-type’ rail is fixed and at-
tached to this is the Elcan C79 sight, a x3.4 
magnification sight. The C79 is also used on 
the Canadian version of the FN MINIMI, the 
C9A1 light machine gun. This weapon is fit-
ted with a MIL-STD-1913 Accessory Mount-
ing Rail for Small Arms Weapons, otherwise 
known as the Picatinny rail. As the Canadian 
Forces upgrade their weapons to the C7A2 
and C8A3 standard, they receive the new 
C79A2 sight. The US uses the C79 sight un-
der the M145 designation for machine guns 
such as the M249 and the M240.
The French Arme Individuelle Future (AIF) 
assault rifle programme to replace the cur-
rent FAMAS rifle was won by the Heckler 
& Koch HK416, with the version for the 
French military being given the HK416F 
designation. The first 300 weapons were 
The only part of the weapon to emerge 
with any credit was the L9A1 Sight Unit 
Small Arms Trilux (SUSAT). SUSAT is a x4 
optical sight attached to a mounting on the 
rifle body. Rugged and reliable, SUSAT was 
also used by the British Army on its  L108A1 
to the FN FAL for the Austrian Army using 
the 5.56x45mm round. The programme 
started at the end of the 1960s, with the 
first prototype ready in 1974. The proto-
type did not have an integrated sight. The 
AUG was adopted by Austria as its service 
rifle in 1977 and this had a Swarovski Optik 
x1.5 telescopic sight integrated onto the 
receiver. 
Eventually the British would develop sights 
for their SLR battle rifle. Initially, the aim 
was to have a sight for low-light conditions 
and/or close quarter battle ranges and this 
need was met by the L5A1 Trilux sight. 
Then came the L2A1 Sight Unit Infantry 
Trilux (SUIT). This  was a x4 optical sight 
and was fitted to a rail that was attached 
to the top cover of the SLR. SUIT was issued 
in limited numbers primarily to what would 
these days be called ‘designated marks-
men', but it was also used on the GPMG 
medium machine gun. Both Australia and 
New Zealand acquired SUIT.
In the late 1960s, the British Army devel-
oped a new rifle as the replacement for 
the SLR as part of the Small Arms for the 
1980s (SA80) programme. Eventually this 
would result in the L85 assault rifle being 
issued in 1985 and remaining in produc-
tion through to 1994. As is well known, 
theoriginal L85 had tremendous problems. 
Canadian infantry from Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry (PPCLI)  
during exercise Allied Spirit VI at Hohenfels, Germany, in March 2017. 
The Canadian Forces use the Elcan C79/C79A2 optical day sight with 
their carbines, rifles and support weapons. The US uses the sight as the 
M145 on M240 and M249 machine guns. 
Photo: Canadian Forces Combat Camera 
KAHLES K 624i 6-24x56
The K 624i RAL 8000 is the new telescopic sight for the new sniper rifle of the Jag-
dkommando (Austrian Special Forces), the SteyrMannlicher in .338 Lapua Magnum. 
The particularity of this tactical scope is the placement of the parallax wheel. Austrian 
scope specialist Kahles holds a patent for an integrated parallax wheel in the elevation 
turret. This configuration allows the placement of the windage adjustment turret on 
the left or the right side of the scope, which allows the shooter to use all operating 
elements with the support hand. The shooting hand remains in shooting position at 
all times. This ambidextrous architecture makes left- or right-handed manipulation of 
the scope elements equally comfortable. 
(wg)
Photo: Kahles

ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY 
73
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
the M4 carbine and the M16A4 rifle. The 
US Marine Corps classifies the ACOG as the 
AN/PVQ-31 Rifle Combat Optic and every 
Marine rifleman is equipped with the sys-
tem. Other users of the ACOG include the 
British military, with the optic available in 
many different variations.
As previously noted, the British had im-
mense problems with their L85 assault ri-
fle, with the SUSAT sight being the only 
part of the system to emerge with any 
credit. The L85A2, the current version of 
the rifle, has resolved – courtesy of Heckler 
& Koch, the issues that had plagued the 
weapon. Combat experience in Iraq and 
Afghanistan led to a decision to acquire 
the current version of the M68CCO could 
be used, this sight is based on the Aimpoint 
CompM4. Other options for the  SOPMOD 
include the AN/PVS-17A mini night vision 
sight from L3, AN/PEQ-2 target pointer/il-
luminator/aiming light from EOTech, AN/
PEQ-5 carbine visible laser from Insight 
Technology and the AN/PSQ-18A M203 
day/night sighting system from ASU. 
The US Army M150 Rifle Combat Optic has 
become one of the more common sighting 
options internationally, this system is also 
known as the Advanced Combat Optical 
Gunsight (ACOG). The standard ACOG is 
a 4x32 magnification optical scope built by 
Trijicon that was originally developed for 
delivered to France in early May and the 
objective is that 5,000 HK416F will have 
been delivered by the end of 2017. In to-
tal, France has ordered 90,380 HK416Fs.
The delivery schedule calls for 50% of the 
weapons to be delivered by 2022 and de-
liveries to be complete by 2028. 
The HK416F has been acquired in two vari-
ants: The standard variant has a 14.5-inch 
barrel and the compact variant has an 
11-inch barrel. Both variants have Picatinny 
rails. The HK416F programme also saw the 
acquisition of 10,767 HK269F 40 mm gre-
nade launchers, but the grenade launchers 
can only be utilised with the HK416F stand-
ard version. The standard HK416F will also 
be the host for elements of the FELIN future 
soldier system. In total 14,915 weapons will 
be optimised for FELIN. The FELIN system 
has a combined day/night sighting system 
and so the sight requirements in this case 
are already fulfilled.
As to the other HK416Fs that are not des-
tined for FELIN integration, the aim is to 
utilise sighting systems that are already 
in service with the FAMAS. The standard 
French sight is the x4 magnification Scrome 
J4F1. This is used on both the FAMAS and 
the MINIMI in France. They also use the 
Aimpoint red dot sight; reportedly, EOTech 
sights have also been acquired. 
Picatinny World
The Picatinny rail provides the ability for 
a weapon to accommodate a host of dif-
ferent sighting options. In the case of the 
Special Operations Peculiar Modification 
(SOPMOD) of the M4A1 carbine, the list 
of sighting options is extensive. For exam-
ple, options include  the Trijicon CQB reflex 
sight, the M150 Trijicon x4 magnification 
day optical scope, the ECOS-N CQB sight 
(a version of the Aimpoint CompM2 oth-
erwise known as the M68, the US Army 
purchased over a million of these units), or 
On the range in the Philippines, the Picatinny rail systems opens up a 
host of possibilities for attaching sights and other devices to a weapon, 
note the AN/PVQ-31 Rifle Combat Optic otherwise known as the ACOG 
and the AN/PEQ-5 carbine visible laser on this US Marine Corps M4A1 
carbine. 
Photo: US Marine Corps
Please visit CONTROP at Singapore Air Show 2018
6-11 February 2018, Singapore, Stand Q30

 ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
74
European Security & Defence · December 2017
the ACOG sight, as the SUSAT was start-
ing to show its age, although this did not 
mark a complete replacement of the SUSAT 
system. The key point is that although the 
British were in combat and were reacting 
to changing needs by acquiring capability 
through Urgent Operational Requirements 
(UOR), they also had a comprehensive Sur-
veillance and Target Acquisition (STA) pro-
gramme underway as a part of their Future 
Infantry Soldier Technology (FIST) effort. 
The systems that go to make up the STA 
element of FIST are now in service, giving 
the British Army a very credible selection of 
STA options.
The STA package includes the Close Quar-
ter Battlesight (CQB) manufactured by 
Shield. The CQB is a x1 red dot sight offer-
ing quick and accurate close quarter en-
gagement capabilities at ranges of under 
75 metres. The CQB is mounted on all of 
the other sight elements of the STA. Shield 
had previously supplied their MINI SIGHT 
to the British Army and Special Forces 
(some 15,000 units in total), as well as to 
US, Australian and New Zealand Special 
Forces amongst others, with over 100,000 
sights built. The CQB was developed from 
the MINI SIGHT and, according to Shield, 
35,000 of these sights have been deliv-
ered to the British Army. The Lightweight 
Day Sight (LDS) is the x4 magnification El-
can C79 as used by the Canadian Forces. 
This is the SUSAT replacement. 
Other FIST STA elements include the FIST 
Thermal Sight (FTS) from Qioptiq, this 
replaces the existing Lightweight Ther-
mal Imager (LWTI) and offers enhanced 
detection and recognition features. The 
CWS-Maxikite Conversion (CMC) is an 
upgrade to section-level night sights such 
as the Common Weapon Sight (CWS) 
and the MAXIKITE III, both manufac-
tured by Qioptiq. The CMC integrates 
these systems with FIST, adds a Picatinny 
rail and the CQB sight. There is also the 
Underslung Grenade Launcher Sighting 
System (UGLS), built by Istec, for use with 
the L123A2 (Heckler & Koch AG36) 40 
mm UGL. 
In 2009, the British Army developed a 
UOR for a designated marksman rifle in 
7.62x51mm for Afghanistan, with this 
programme being won by Lewis Machine 
& Tool with their LM308MWS, which 
was then classified as the L129A1 rifle. 
The selected day sight was the 6x48 Triji-
con ACOG TA648 on a Picatinny rail. Also 
present is the Trijicon Rugged Miniature 
Reflex (RMR) red dot sight. The L129A1 
can also be fitted with the Schmidt & 
Bender 3-12x50 PM II daylight scope, 
with the FLIR AN/PVS-27 MUNS (Mag-
num Universal Night Sight). The L86A2 
Light Support Weapon (LSW), another 
member of the SA80 family, has also 
been used as a designated marksman 
weapon and is effective in that applica-
tion, although as a 5.56x45mm weapon 
its performance is limited in comparison 
with the L129A1.
As things stand today, there is no doubt 
that an infantry weapon will be fitted 
with a sighting system, whether it be a 
red dot sight for close quarter work, or an 
ACOG or similar system for the full range 
envelope of an assault rifle. With the fit-
ting of Picatinny rails there are few limi-
tations on day or night sight integration. 
The anointed successor to the Picatinny 
rail will be the NATO accessory rail (STAN-
AG 4694), although the Picatinny will be 
around for many years yet. Added to 
which, powered versions of the Picatinny 
and the NATO rail will inevitably appear 
offering some very interesting mounting 
possibilities.
Into the future though, the evolution of 
the infantry weapon sight sector is direct-
ly linked to the progress of future soldier 
systems. If these deliver a more complete 
integration of the soldier, the sensor and 
the weapon then one of the most impor-
tant objectives of these systems will have 
been achieved. Until that point it is still a 
matter of selecting rails, sights and other 
weapon accessories to achieve the desired 
objective.
L
CONTROP at D&S Thailand
CONTROP Precision Technologies Ltd. recently highlighted its aircraft upgrade capa-
bilities for the modernisation of light aircraft, helicopters, and UAS at D&S Thailand 
2017. The company recently reported the sale of the A-DSMS Airborne Defense 
Surveillance Mission System with the iSky-50HD as part of an upgrade programme 
for Search & Rescue missions in Africa. The A-DSMS is a complete integrated solu-
tion specially designed for converting military, law enforcement and government 
aircraft into an advanced EO/IR surveillance mission configuration. It is offered with 
a variety of CONTROP’s EO/IR gyro-stabilized payloads, including with a full HD day 
camera. In addition, the A-DSMS includes an operator’s work station with a display 
monitor, DVR, control unit, mission computer, moving map software, video down-
link. The iSky family is CONTROP’s line of six medium and long-range aerial payloads 
(iSky-20HD, iSky-30HD, iSky-50HD) which provide solutions for most medium and 
long-range aerial surveillance platforms. Features include a continuous optical zoom 
lens in HD day camera and thermal imaging (SD/HD) cameras, gyro-stabilised gim-
bals, and multi-sensor options including EYESAFE LASER RANGE FINDER (ELRF) and/
or Laser Pointer. Ideal for manned or unmanned airborne platforms, all of the iSky 
systems include real-time image enhancement features, built-in INS, and Automatic 
Video Tracker.
(sb) 
The British SA80 encountered tremendous problems when it entered 
service, these have now been resolved with the L85A2 variant of the 
weapon, which was modernised and upgraded by Heckler & Koch. Note 
the multiple Picatinny rails on the rifle, and the optical sight with the 
CQB red dot sight located above.  
Photo: Defence Images, MOD 

75
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY 
T
he MILIPOL exhibition was held in Paris 
at the end of November, although this 
exhibition is normally perceived to be de-
voted towards the internal security, para-
military and police marketplaces, it also 
had much to interest those focused on the 
military. This was particularly true as re-
gards weapon sights for dismounted sol-
dier and related applications. There were 
a number of key developments in terms 
of new sighting systems from Israel, new 
contracts in Europe and some insight into 
the impact of rapid technology evolution.
Israel’s SK Group is the holding company 
for such key defence capabilities such as 
Israel Weapon Industries (IWI), the small 
arms manufacturer, and Meprolight, the 
leading Israeli capability in optical and 
electro-optical sights for small arms. Back 
in 2016 the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) 
had placed a major order for ‘many thou-
sands’ of the Meprolight MEPRO MOR 
reflex sight, this came when the company 
was still delivering MEPRO M5/RDS PRO 
red dot sights to the IDF from a previous 
major order. Other sights in use with the 
IDF include MEPRO M21, MEPRO MX3, 
MEPRO LIOR sniper night vision sight and 
the MEPRO GLS grenade launcher sight. 
Meprolight is not the only Israeli company 
active in the weapon sights area, competi-
tors include Elbit for example. However, 
the size and competitive nature of the 
Israeli market is such that it can support 
innovation from multiple manufactur-
ers and provide the production numbers 
necessary to support being competitive in 
export markets.
At MILIPOL Meprolight unveiled a number 
of new products that will be of interest to 
military users. The MEPRO NYX-200 is a 
multi-spectral weapon sight that can also 
be used as a hand-held device, the system 
has an uncooled thermal channel and a 
high resolution day/night digital camera, 
providing an all-in-one solution to both 
day and night sight requirements. Two 
variants of the system are available: ther-
mal channel and digital night camera and 
thermal  channel and digital day camera. 
The sight also supports image capture and 
video recording on an internal SD card for 
post-mission debriefing.
A new version of the MEPRO MOR red 
dot reflex sight was introduced, this 
now has a green laser pointer to meet 
the needs of users for higher visibility 
in certain environments. There are now 
three versions of this sight available: IR 
and green pointer, IR and red pointer, 
and red and green pointer. There is also 
a new version of the MEPRO M5 red dot 
sight featuring a bullseye reticle, with the 
reticle colour being green or red depend-
ing on customer preference. The sight al-
lows the user to rapidly engage targets, 
while reducing power consumption and 
extending battery life. The MX3-T is an-
other new system, this is a x3 reflex sight 
magnifier and fits on a Picatinny rail be-
hind reflex/red dot sights such as the ME-
PRO MOR. When longer range engage-
ments are required the MX3-T sight is 
flipped into position, with no re-zeroing 
required, and when no longer required 
the magnifier is flipped to the side.
Elsewhere, the Finnish Defence Force has 
ordered the Aimpoint Micro T-2 com-
pact red dot sight for use with the RK62 
7.62x39 mm assault rifles that are being 
modernised. The value of the contract is 
€5.5 million and the sights are to be deliv-
ered before the end of 2018. Finland has 
ordered the sights through the NATO Sup-
port and Procurement Agency (NSPA), in 
which it is a partner. Earlier in September 
Aimpoint unveiled the CompM5 red dot 
sight, at 147 grams it is the most compact 
version of this sight family. The CompM5 
sight was developed to meet the require-
ments of an undisclosed user, the sight is 
now available for sale worldwide.
Qioptiq, one of the major suppliers into 
the British Army Future Infantry Soldier 
Technology (FIST) Surveillance and Tar-
get Acquisition (STA) programme, noted 
the importance of rapidly integrating 
improved/enhanced technologies into 
such systems as the FIST Thermal Sight 
(FTS), the objective being to increase 
performance and reduce system weight 
wherever possible. Both weight and size 
reduction are becoming important topics 
in the weapon sight area these days.

(David Saw)
Milipol In Sight
The Meprolight MEPRO NYX-200 is a multi-spectral 
weapon sight that can also be used as a hand-held de-
vice; it can provide an all-in-one solution to both day 
and night sight requirements. Meprolight unveiled 
many new sight developments at MILIPOL in Novem-
ber 2017.
The FIST Thermal Sight (FTS) manufactured by Qioptiq 
(shown here on an L85A2) is a key element of the Brit-
ish Army Future Infantry Soldier Technology (FIST) Sur-
veillance and Target Acquisition (STA) programme. The 
rapid fielding of enhanced technology allows sights to 
achieve better performance, while reducing weight.
Photo: Meprolight
Photo: Qioptiq

76
European Security & Defence · December 2017
 INDUSTRY & MARKETS
port facilities, which was important for the 
restructuring of traditional shipyards.
Consistent portfolio streamlining and 
the inevitable reduction of overcapacities 
have left their indelible mark on German 
shipyards. According to the Association 
for Shipbuilding and Marine Technology 
(Verband für Schiffbau und Meerestech-
nik – VSM), the number of jobs in German 
shipyards has fallen from 62,000 to 18,000 
during the past 35 years.
The invisible hand of the free market was 
the only principle that determined adap-
tation to changing conditions, since the 
German shipbuilding industry is privately 
owned and, to a large extent, family-
owned. The government does not grant 
subsidies, regardless of the volume of or-
ders. And industry has never requested 
subsidies for fear of losing entrepreneurial 
independence. Only the development of 
technical skills has been taken on to a lim-
ited extent under OECD and EU rules. This 
also applies to shipbuilding for the Navy. 
In Germany, this is not a state domain and 
the German naval industry, unlike many 
international competitors, receives no sup-
port. Until recently, Navy contracts were 
predominantly awarded at national level. 
However, the current Europe-wide call for 
tenders for the MKS180 warship shows 
that the German Government is not pro-
tectionist in principle.
Concerns about National  
Security
The significance of a national naval indus-
try for the country's security policy has 
long been discussed against the back-
ground of rapid changes and fundamen-
tal challenges in the international security 
architecture. According to its own state-
ments, the Ministry of Defence does not 
see itself as a representative of the inter-
ests of any industry, but it still wants to 
tries such as Germany had to radically re-
structure their shipbuilding industry. Within 
a few years, the labour-intensive mass ship-
building industry disappeared. Even with 
modern production facilities for super tank-
ers and container ships it has not been pos-
sible to regain the market shares of the past. 
After a critical examination of their per-
formance, German shipyards and their 
domestic suppliers are now relying on the 
construction of high-quality special ships. 
These include not only cruise ships, fer-
ries, large yachts and floating equipment 
for the offshore industry, but also highly 
specialised naval vessels. These product 
areas have a long tradition in Germany, 
and there is recognised market presence. 
In addition, a supply industry spread across 
a wide geographical area also allowed for 
a corresponding distribution of the various 
D
espite many recent market adjust-
ments, the current industrial capabilities 
and capacities continue to provide the Navy 
with the supply it is accustomed to. The na-
val industry makes a significant contribution 
to national security. However, the process 
of continuous adaptation and develop-
ment of German shipyards has reached a 
degree of consolidation which should be 
considered in more detail with regard to its 
significance for the defence sector.
Significant Shrinkage over the 
Decades
Just over three decades ago, when the con-
struction of merchant ships – in particular 
tankers, bulk carriers and container ships 
– increasingly became the domain of the 
large new shipyards in Asia, European coun-
The Development of the Maritime  
Defence Industry in Germany
Peter Grundmann
Dedicated to national entrepreneurial responsibility and committed to serving the Navy as a matter 
of long tradition – this is the image that the German maritime industry (shipyards, system companies 
and suppliers) – wants to portray based on respective equipment supplies and materiel management 
for the past five decades.
A&R design study for a small multifunctional corvette in co-operation 
with Rheinmetall 
Graphic: A&R

production sites in northern Germany. FLW 
generates one-third of its turnover in the 
navy, police and customs sectors. FLW is re-
garded as the world market leader for mega 
yachts, but also has a long military tradition, 
from new buildings and repairs to complete 
refits. For the German Navy, the family-
owned company designed and built high-
speed Class 141, 142 and 143 Alpha fast 
patrol boats, followed by the SM343 and 
MJ332 minesweepers in a consortium with 
A&R, the K130 corvettes in a consortium 
with the Blohm+Voss shipyard, which has 
also been part of Lürssen since 2016, and 
the EGV task group support ship fleet. The 
construction portfolio currently comprises 
the national Class F125 frigates in a consor-
tium with tkMS and the second batch of the 
EU and its defence industries. Cooperative 
procurement should enable more economi-
cal batch sizes.
Current Suppliers of Naval  
Vessels 
There are only five shipyards or shipyard 
groups left in Germany for the construction 
of new naval vessels: FLW, tkMS, GNY, A&R 
and Fassmer. They differ in terms of produc-
tion facilities, engineering knowledge for 
the design of naval vessels and the integra-
tion of weapons and control systems.
The national range in the naval sector is still 
relatively broadly diversified:
The Bremen-based Lürssen Group (FLW) 
employs more than 2,700 people at six 
be able to rely on core competences and 
capacities in existing defence technology. 
For selected technology sectors, this has 
already been laid down in a federal gov-
ernment strategy paper on strengthen-
ing the German defence industry and in 
the 2016 White Paper as the basis for the 
country's military capabilities. At present, 
however, there are no concrete measures 
to put this into practice. As far as the Navy 
is concerned, only a few sectors have been 
defined as key national technologies. The 
more comprehensive parliamentary reso-
lutions of October 2015 and March 2017 
on the anchoring of naval surface ship-
building as a key technology of strategic 
importance for Germany have met with 
little response so far. The EU-wide call for 
tenders for the largest procurement pro-
ject of the German Navy, the Multi-Role 
Combat Ship Class 180 (MKS 180), is in 
line with this narrow view of national key 
technologies. 
There are also political questions concern-
ing the procurement of military materiel. 
The European Defence Action Plan aims to 
harmonise defence equipment in the EU 
and to promote bi-national or multination-
al procurement through European financial 
incentives for research and development 
and to strengthen the sovereignty of the 
Task group support ship FRANKFURT AM MAIN at the German Naval 
Yards drydock in Kiel
Photo: German Naval Yards
Hagenuk Marinekommunikation
Hagenuk Marinekommunikation
A company of the ATLAS ELEKTRONIK Group
Hagenuk Marinekommunikation GmbH
Hagenuk Marinekommunikation GmbH
Hamburger Chaussee 25 | 24220 Flintbek | Germany
Phone: +49 4347 714-101 | Fax +49 4347 714-110
info@hmk.atlas-elektronik.com | www.hmk.atlas-elektronik.com
As a reliable partner of the German Navy for almost 50 years, 
Hagenuk Marinekommunikation GmbH (HMK) has supplied sys-
tems and equipment deployed on board of all vessel classes.
The latest systems operating successfully with HMK integra-
tion are the U 212 A 2nd batch class submarines, the K130 class 
corvettes and the joint support vessel EGV Bonn.
FIT FOR THE FUTURE
Integrated Communication Systems 
by Hagenuk Marinekommunikation 
 500 W / 1 kW HF Transceivers
Comms Operator Console (sample)
New ERX 3003 – HF SDR
with 24 kHz Wideband Capability

78
European Security & Defence · December 2017
partner shipyards in the customer coun-
tries. At present tkMS is a contender for the 
MKS180 contract together with FLW.
With the acquisition of ATLAS ELEKTRON-
IK, tkMS has become a supplier of complete 
systems. ATLAS ELEKTRONIK has a leading 
position in maritime high technology arena, 
from control systems, including radio and 
communication systems for submarines 
and surface ships, to mine countermeasure 
systems, heavy torpedoes and unmanned 
maritime systems (UMS).
German Naval Yards (GNY) consists of the 
former surface shipbuilding facilities of 
Howaldtswerke-Deutsche Werft GmbH 
(Kiel), as well as its sister shipyards No-
biskrug (Rendsburg) and Lindenau (Kiel). 
With integrated management and joint ad-
ministration, GNY employs around 1,000 
people in the German state of Schleswig-
Holstein. The German Naval Yards Kiel facili-
ties (GNYK) specialise in the planning and 
construction of large naval vessels – frig-
ates, corvettes and patrol boats. Under a 
subcontract to tkMS, GNYK handed over 
two frigates for Algeria in record time in 
the summer of 2016. In addition to the con-
sortium partnership with Lürssen and tkMS 
for the second batch K130, the Kiel ship-
yard's order backlog currently includes the 
construction of corvettes for Israel. GNYK 
is also a contender for the MKS 180 pro-
gramme. German Naval Yards is a wholly-
owned subsidiary of Privinvest Group, a 
leading provider of marine solutions. This 
European shipyard group also comprises 
internationally renowned specialists, such 
as the French CMN naval shipyard, Hellenic 
Shipyards and Isherwoods in Great Britain. 
Their expertise complements the expertise 
of German Naval Yards Kiel as a system inte-
grator for large, complex naval vessels.
Abeking & Rasmussen (A&R), primarily fo-
cused on the construction of large yachts, 
but also successful specialist shipbuilders 
such as the SWATH ships, have a hundred 
class 214/214A boats with air-independent 
propulsion systems based on fuel cell tech-
nology. The core business of tkMS is the 
design and development of state-of-the-art 
frigates, corvettes and naval support ves-
sels. References are the F125, K130 and the 
EGV fleet. The project expertise enables the 
company to build surface vessels not only 
in German shipyards but also in selected 
K130 corvettes, while Lürssen is a contender 
for MKS180 in the consortium with thys-
senkrupp Marine Systems (tkMS). Exports 
focus on a variety of ships and boats, in-
cluding the successful PV80 type, as well as 
various fast attack craft and patrol boats. 
Customers worldwide include a large num-
ber of navies that in many cases also require 
a comprehensive range of maintenance and 
logistics services from the group. With its 
extensive production capacities, many ex-
perienced engineers and the necessary 
financial strength, Lürssen is capable of as-
suming a role as the prime contractor for 
complex frigate programmes.
As mentioned above, tkMS is another major 
player. tkMS consists of the three former 
large shipyards Blohm+Voss, HDW and Em-
den Nordseewerke and was supplemented 
by ATLAS ELEKTRONIK in 2017. tkMS em-
ploys 5,800 people and offers sophisticated 
technology. The company has decades of 
experience in the areas of submarines, sur-
face ships, naval electronics and services. 
The Kiel-based tkMS shipyard has built ad 
delivered more than 160 submarines world-
wide, including class 209 and the modern 
The OPV80 from Lürssen is destined to support seaborne strike forces in 
multinational engagements. 
Photo: Lürssen
Hagenuk Marinekommunikation (HMK) has supplied its HF Series 3000 
equipment to all German naval units. Shown here is the new digital HF 
broadband exciter ERX 3003.
Photo: HMK
Class 214 tkMS export submarine 
Photo: tkMS

INDUSTRY & MARKETS 
potential national orders for the next dec-
ade; on the other hand, they show in which 
areas advertising can be made in the future, 
whereby the parent navy serves as an im-
portant reference for entering the interna-
tional market.
National Requirements
The German Navy is currently in control of 
a fleet that is too small and largely obsolete 
for the required tasks. Not only the coali-
tion partners, but also most of the parties in 
the Bundestag call for a stronger presence 
of the Bundeswehr in UN and Alliance op-
erations, and a clear increase in capabilities 
and materiel resources is being discussed. 
Repeated demands for a higher defence 
budget suggest an increase in procurement 
and new construction activity. Chancellor 
Merkel and Defence Minister von der Leyen 
have promised NATO to increase the de-
fence budget from its current level of 1.2 
to 2 percent of Germany's gross domestic 
product by 2024. The strong economy and 
the growing security awareness of the pop-
ulation, coupled with the recognition that 
national security also requires the willing-
ness to enter into an international security 
partnership, means that the implementa-
tion of these promised goals is not only nec-
optoelectronic sensors), MBDA (missiles, 
and Hagenuk Marinekommunikation 
HMK) and Rohde & Schwarz (communi-
cation and antenna systems). With this 
product range, the German naval yards 
are well positioned to offer complete sys-
tems which are important for export.
Preservation of Capacities and 
Expertise
All these naval yards also have a strong civil 
production branch. It is uncertain whether 
the German shipbuilding industry will con-
tinue to offer naval products in the distant 
future; this depends largely on companies' 
assessment of the expected order situation. 
However, it also depends to a large extent 
on the political climate in Germany, which 
must promote research and development, 
secure national procurement, take a relia-
ble position on arms exports and adopt an 
active political stance in armaments coop-
eration. After all, industry is not obliged to 
preserve defence capabilities and resources. 
Ultimately, a more or less resilient market for 
grey ships is what counts, in order to fully 
utilise the highly specialised workforce.
The German Navy's procurement plans are 
a forecast indicator. On the one hand, the 
plans allow conclusions to be drawn about 
years of tradition in the military sector in 
mine countermeasure vessels (MCMV). In 
addition to MCMV, the shipyard will in fu-
ture deal intensively with naval vessels up to 
corvette size, including associated auxiliary 
and support vessels.
The Fassmer shipyard, another family-
owned company with 1,200 employees 
worldwide, has recently caused a stir 
with interesting new building projects. 
These include innovative research vessels 
and ferries with environmentally friendly 
LNG propulsion, patrol boats and vari-
ous special vessels. Fassmer successfully 
developed an 80-metre-long Offshore 
Patrol Vessel (OPV80), which was sold to 
a considerable extent in South American 
countries. In addition to the OPV mar-
ket, Fassmer will also be involved in more 
complex naval units.
The shipyards have additional partners 
for dedicated equipment at their dis-
posal, covering the entire spectrum from 
sensors to effectors with products de-
veloped and manufactured in Germany, 
both above and under the water. In ad-
dition to ATLAS ELEKTRONIK, there are 
Rheinmetall Defence (multi-sensor plat-
forms, medium-calibre guns and decoys), 
Diehl Defence (missiles, ammunition, and 
surveillance systems), HENSOLDT (radars, 
www.privinvest.com
With a reputation for outstanding operational 
performance and comprehensive lifecycle  
support, CMN has built over 700 naval  
civilian and research vessels.
info@cmn-cherbourg.com
www.cmn-group.com
With over 175 years of shipbuilding knowledge 
and state of the art infrastructure, GNYK  
focuses on the design and construction of  
large complex naval vessels.
info@germannaval.com
www.germannaval.com
Isherwoods creates and services  
computerised management and logistics  
support systems for commercial, offshore  
and naval applications.
email@isherwoods.com 
www.isherwoods.com

 INDUSTRY & MARKETS
80
European Security & Defence · December 2017
essary, but also possible. The current plans 
of the Navy lead us to expect additional 
procurement of tankers, fleet service vessels 
and new minehunters, in addition to the 
MKS 180 and type U212CD submarines for 
the joint German-Norwegian procurement 
programme. A successor to the Class F123 
frigates, new replenishment vessels and the 
renewal of the armament sector's fleet are 
also planned.
Modernisation of the Navy beyond this 
framework and within the time frame envis-
aged in the plan could be fully implemented 
by the German maritime industry with cur-
rent production capacities. But even if these 
plans were to be implemented, i.e. prioritis-
ing naval projects in the Bundeswehr with 
sufficient financial resources, there would 
still be no firm foundation for the naval ship-
yards. A forward-looking approach would 
primarily be a planning approach that is 
also attractive from the Navy's point of 
view, based on line instead of class. A long-
term, constant procurement process would 
allow for the continuous use of industrial 
resources and a uniform modernisation of 
the Navy. Concepts for this already exist and 
they are just waiting to be implemented.
The equipment of the German Navy is an 
important technological and referential 
basis for the German shipbuilding industry. 
However, additional export business is re-
quired to secure economic capacity utilisa-
tion. The export market is even more dif-
ficult to forecast than domestic demand. 
There are too many factors beyond the con-
trol of the shipyards. "Made in Germany" 
still stands for quality, but this has its price. 
Without political support, orders can hardly 
be won in international competition, as cur-
rent examples from the submarine indus-
try show. Support measures, such as the 
provision of personnel and equipment for 
the testing and acceptance of ships or the 
training of foreign crews by the German 
Navy, are the most important element. Ex-
tensive packages of services, financing and 
compensation will be put together, with 
the ship project itself being only part of the 
deal. Political support for exports has been 
and still is fundamental to the survival of the 
maritime defence industry.
Opportunities in Export
In conventional submarines with fuel cell 
technology, the Kiel-based products are 
among the world's best systems. In order to 
maintain this lead, everything must be done 
to constantly adapt the product range to de-
mand, but in the medium term, the know-
how acquired over decades should also be 
a contract guarantee. The current list of 
contracts and enquiries still present a largely 
positive picture. However, the practice that 
has existed for years to offer customers the 
opportunity to build submarines for them-
selves by transferring the basic elements of 
design and production, will greatly intensify 
the competitive situation in the future.
The market for frigates and corvettes, 
which are difficult to handle and expensive 
to procure, is relatively narrow. The coun-
tries that qualify as customers are looking 
for a low-risk and proven all-in-one solu-
tion from a single source.  A key compo-
nent is a nationally available spectrum of 
system competence to be able to combine 
the weapons and sensors specified by the 
customer in a control system. The oper-
ational value of a frigate derives primar-
ily from the performance of the warfare 
system on which a particular class is op-
timised, such as an ASW or AAW frigate 
(Anti-Submarine/Anti-Aircraft Warfare). 
The highest demand applies to the design 
of the air defence system of an AAW unit 
due to the potentially complex threats 
and the very short response times. Only 
those who are able to master the increas-
ingly complex technology of this core seg-
ment of warship technology and offer it 
as a package will be able to survive in the 
market for frigates and corvettes. In this re-
gard, Germany has a solution available with 
the command and weapon control system 
from ATLAS ELEKTRONIK and the sensors 
from HENSOLDT in the required higher per-
formance class. However, national access 
to advanced technology is time-consuming 
and costly due to the associated develop-
ment capacities. This can be positively influ-
enced by the use of national synergies from 
other projects (such as TLVS or MANTIS)
or by international cooperation, such as 
a more intensive interaction with Thales. 
This requires a fundamental decision to be 
taken by industry. Exports on the highly 
competitive OPV market are very likely to 
be possible. Increasingly, there is a demand 
for ships with high ocean freight capacity, 
which offer rough handling and high flex-
ibility in armament. In this area, a consider-
able number of potentially efficient sup-
pliers from other nations are also present. 
For this reason, export customers will only 
select German products if they receive an 
attractive overall package including con-
vincing after-sales service. This also applies 
to the area of the mine countermeasure 
vessels. With the experience in building 
low-signature boats that are well-protect-
ed against mine explosions and the equip-
ment required for mine neutralisation, such 
as hull-mounted, side-scan or synthetic ap-
erture sonars, as well as UUVs and USVs 
for mine hunting and simulation, attractive 
complete packages can be offered.
The Outcome
The German naval industry is still well 
positioned to meet the national require-
ments even after the current consolida-
tion and to hold its own position on the 
international market. In order to secure 
the existing structures, however, a sched-
uled contract award for the projects for 
the German Navy is essential. Although 
this will not yet bring sufficient basic ca-
pacity utilisation of the production capaci-
ties and system sectors, it will nevertheless 
provide important references for export. 
And without the economic success that 
can be achieved through exports, the 
privately-owned companies will switch 
to other products in the medium term. 
The preservation of national security is not 
mandatory for them.
Economic success is the decisive key to 
continued cooperation on the international 
stage. It is not whether, but only who, with 
whom and when, that is unclear. European 
industry itself is the driving force behind 
this process. The premises are strength and 
success through size, competence, quality, 
innovative ability and the corresponding 
market presence. Today's status quo leaves 
important questions unanswered, especial-
ly with regard to a stronger commitment to 
industrial policy in Germany. In the area of 
security policy, it would be an encourag-
ing development if a future naval industry 
would have significant German participa-
tion. This can only be achieved from a posi-
tion of strength.
L
Fassmer OPV80 for the Chilean Navy 
Photo: Fassmer

INDUSTRY & MARKETS 
81
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
ESD: The contract governing the es-
tablishment of the KNDS Holding was 
signed at the end of 2015. Which steps 
have since been taken? Which issues are 
you approaching jointly?
Mayer: We are currently working on a 
lot of different subjects. To begin with, 
we are working on our corporate func-
tions leading to more and more integra-
tion, bringing synergies, efficiency and 
best service to the customer. This con-
cerns for example sales, financing, pur-
chasing, and communication. Secondly, 
we are working on the product line. Our 
strategy clearly is to pursue a more inte-
grated product portfolio while keeping in 
mind that existing products in Germany, 
France and many other countries will stay 
in service for 30, 40 years, and we will 
continue to support them. We are look-
ing at our existing product range and will 
try to bring even better products to the 
customer in the short term. Thirdly, and 
I think that is a very important point for 
KNDS, we want to identify and to partici-
pate in common programmes resulting 
from the discussions between the French 
and the German government. Two pro-
grammes are already taking shape – a 
new generation main battle tank and an 
artillery programme, the Combined Indi-
rect Fire System (CIFS). The governments 
are discussing these programmes, and 
we are looking at our portfolio to decide 
how we can find the best solution in re-
sponse to this common vision of France 
and Germany.
ESD: We are talking about 2020, 2025?
Haun: 2030, 2035. The governments 
first indicated interest in these activities 
in 2012, three years before we, KMW and 
Nexter, signed our contract. France und 
Germany are thinking about joint require-
ments. According to their time schedule 
they will have their work more or less 
completed by 2018.
Mayer: The product definition started al-
ready in 2012. We do not wait until 2018 
or even later. We are already busy with 
dedicated R&D efforts.
ESD: Are you doing it jointly?
Haun: This is our interest. Our intention 
has been to support the formation of a 
European industrial base and to become 
one of its main elements. This is an urgent 
need as can be demonstrated by the MBT 
project pursued by France and Germany. 
Currently a huge number of tanks are in 
service throughout Europe – the CHAL-
LENGER, the LECLERC, the LEOPARD 
2, different versions of Russian tanks in 
the Eastern part of Europe. Altogether 
there are at least 17 versions, and when 
you also consider the different versions 
of the LEOPARD you better stop count-
ing. We have too many systems and too 
many of low quality. That does not make 
sense from a European point of view. On 
the other hand, whenever soldiers are in 
theatre, that is the experience of the last 
two or even three decades, they oper-
ate jointly; you see for example French, 
Belgian, Dutch, German, Danish, Swed-
ish or other European military forces act-
ing together. Look at Afghanistan, look 
at former Yugoslavia, go down to Africa, 
go down to wherever you want to go to, 
it is always the same. So why in heaven 
should they use different systems? And it 
is not only the system itself, that also ap-
plies to logistics aspects like spare parts, 
maintenance and  whatever you need in 
operations. Why do they use different 
boots? Why do they use different weapon 
systems? From my point of view we have 
to synchronise much more than we have 
done in the past.
Mayer: And it is a matter of competitive-
ness, too! When you develop a product 
for two, three, four or even 17 countries, 
the result will be much more competitive 
– not only for the countries participating 
in the programme but also in terms of ex-
port perspectives. Therefore we achieve 
"We are designed to be a  
European player."
Interview with the Co-CEOs of the KNDS Group:  
Frank Haun, CEO of Krauss-Maffei Wegmann GmbH & Co. KG,  
and Stéphane Mayer, Chairman and CEO of Nexter Group.
Frank Haun, CEO of Krauss-Maffei Wegmann and  
Co-President of KNDS Group
Stéphane Mayer, Chairman and CEO of Nexter 
Group and Co-President of KNDS Group
Photos: KNDS

 INDUSTRY & MARKETS
82
European Security & Defence · December 2017
ESD: But at the moment, BOXER and 
VBCI might be options?
Haun: The BOXER is British by birth, the 
UK participated in the development be-
fore they withdrew from the programme 
several years ago.
Mayer: And the VBCI is an option, too. 
It is well known to the British Army from 
joint training. We have to wait and see 
which product meets their needs best.
ESD: What is the long-term vision for 
KNDS?
Haun: The European leader in land de-
fence. I think we said that several times, 
there is no change.
Mayer: With a common range of prod-
ucts, with common products for France 
Germany and many other countries, more 
and more integrated.
Haun: But it will take a long time. Look 
at the SCORPION programme. The con-
tract was awarded in late 2014. Our Joint 
Venture came too late, as a result, SCOR-
PION is a French programme without Ger-
man participation. When the last vehicle 
will have been delivered, how long will it 
stay in service? Until 2050, 2060 or even 
longer. This gives you a good impression 
of how long-lasting activities in the field 
of defence procurement are. If we, Nexter 
and KMW, had signed our JV agreement 
earlier, we would have made SCORPION a 
European programme; now it is a French 
programme only.
ESD: The MIV programme in the UK 
might be such a case?
Haun: The MIV programme is a huge pro-
gramme and indeed very interesting for 
us. But at the moment we do not know 
how the UK will go ahead with this pro-
gramme. Decisions still have to be made. 
Hopefully, we will know more by the end 
of 2017.
a real win-win situation for both the cus-
tomer and the supplier if products are 
jointly defined and developed.
ESD: The product portfolio of both of 
your companies overlaps to a certain 
extent. Do you envision a streamlining 
process? 
Haun: We do not have that much over-
lap. Everybody talks about it. The real-
ity is different. As an example, look at 
the broad range of artillery products of 
KMW and Nexter. There is not a single 
overlap. Or look at the KMW and Nexter 
8x8 vehicles we exhibited at our com-
mon KNDS stand at DSEI. Are they 8x8? 
Yes. Are they the same? No. The DNA is 
different. Taken as a whole the overlap 
of the product portfolios of KMW and 
Nexter is pretty small. Consequently, the 
same applies for the markets we are deal-
ing with. I do not see that much overlap 
in terms of competitive segments.
Mayer: Another example for the merely 
slight extent of overlap are the long-
standing activities of Nexter in the field 
of weapon and ammunition that have 
had no equivalent in the KMW portfo-
lio. Now they are activities of KNDS as a 
whole. In addition to what was already 
said: We coordinate our decision pro-
cesses to decide jointly what product to 
offer to the customer.
ESD: It could be different ones?
Mayer: If the requirements of a customer 
are not that clear maybe we would offer dif-
ferent solutions to leave the choice to him.
The GTK BOXER, shown here with the turret of the PUMA infantry fight-
ing vehicle, is already in service in Germany and The Netherlands. The 
first vehicle has been delivered to Lithuania.
The VBCI armoured infantry vehicle has been in service with the  
French armed forces since 2008 and has been deployed in Afghanistan 
and Mali.

INDUSTRY & MARKETS 
getting our products to the customer in 
the future. 
ESD: Could a treaty like Lancaster House 
between France and the UK be desirable 
for France and Germany? For instance, 
to provide you with a kind of roadmap?
Haun: That is what we need. We have 
got support from the French and the Ger-
man government. Now we need more 
deeds instead of words.
Mayer: We have had strong support 
from the beginning of the negotiations 
for the creation of KNDS. We perceive 
the recent defence minister council as a 
confirmation of our course as well. Of 
course, a treaty like Lancaster House pro-
viding a framework for joint programmes 
would properly foster our activities.
ESD: A European Commission pro-
gramme on defence – would it help?
Haun: We need something as a base 
for cooperation in the future. A more 
detailed 
government-to-government 
agreement should be in place. Our gov-
ernments know about it and I am still 
confident that they will do the right thing.
The interview was conducted by 
Peter Bossdorf.
the quality the customer is looking for; 
and then we have to decide what fits best.
Mayer: I think it is more realistic that joint 
requirements lead to joint products.
Haun: But not only with respect to France 
and Germany. This statement applies for 
Europe as a whole. The more joint the re-
quirements there are the more standard-
ised products will be there and the higher 
will be the interoperability of the soldiers 
operating in the same theatre.
ESD: KNDS is not the first and only ex-
ample for industrial consolidation within 
Europe. Another has been MBDA. Is this 
a kind of model for you?
Mayer: MBDA is a success story that was 
enabled by joint programmes and a state 
treaty providing the best conditions to 
cooperate. But we definitely would try to 
pursue that in less than 20 years.
Haun: We draw two lessons from the 
MBDA and the Airbus success story as 
well. First: We have to be faster. And 
second: We have to be more efficient. 
The world is changing so fast that R&D 
phases of 30 years and more cannot be 
accepted anymore. Do you know what 
kind of threats we have to expect in 30 
years? We will have to be much faster in 
ESD: The revenue of KMW and Nexter 
together adds up to €2.5Bn. Do you need 
to grow much bigger or is your size good 
for the moment?
Mayer: First of all: Yes, size matters. I do 
not know about an ideal or "magic" fig-
ure, but size matters. This is why we are 
together now. More revenues give you 
more power to invest in R&D and other 
sectors. Have a look at our competitors, 
some of them are large, very large com-
panies; especially the US; there are giants 
working for the huge US market.
Haun: We are designed to be a European 
player. Look at the trend, the direction is 
more and more consolidation within Eu-
rope leading to more and more competi-
tiveness if compared with US companies, 
too. Therefore, our door is open and we 
are working on becoming a much more Eu-
ropean based company than we are now.
ESD: A simple speculation: If the German 
Bundeswehr defines requirements for a 
new programme and you perceive that a 
Nexter product will meet these require-
ments better than any KMW product 
does, might it be possible to propose a 
Nexter product in this case?
Haun: It depends on the requirements, 
 @IAVehicles
#IAVevent
presents the 18th Annual...
THE WORLD’S PREMIER ARMOURED VEHICLES FORUM
22-25 January 2018
Twickenham Stadium,  
London, UK
7
International Armoured Vehicles
22-25 January, 2018
London, UK 
Register today!
This section of the report is based on an exclusive Defence IQ survey of senior executives and professionals within 
the armoured vehicle domain, which includes commercial and military (currently serving and retired) respondents. 
The analysis of the survey data has been supplemented with proprietary interviews and desktop research. 
Defence IQ’s Global Armoured Vehicle Market Report is now in its seventh year, meaning the data in this report 
has been analysed within the context of recent developments and offers a reliable framework for the future 
trends of the armoured vehicle market.  
Topics examined include; the key emerging regional markets, global procurement requirements, the primary 
challenges facing armoured vehicle manufacturers over the next decade, armoured vehicle design requirements, 
and the ‘new normal’ in the industry as the effects of the global financial crisis begin to wane and new 
opportunities emerge.
1. Analysis of respondents by type
The largest segment of survey respondents (34 per cent) 
derived from the commercial sector, which is a decrease 
of 8 per cent on the number of respondents from industry 
in last year’s Global Armoured Vehicle Market Report. This 
variance is due to an increase in academia and media 
participation (up 9 per cent), with military respondents 
accounting for 32 per cent of all respondents. ‘Other’ 
respondents derived largely from independent 
consultancies.
Please select which of the following categories best describes your current role with 
armoured vehicles.
34%
32%
16%
12%
Commericial organisation (vendor)
Goverment organisation
Military
Media / academic
6%
Other
9
International Armoured Vehicles
22-25 January, 2018
London, UK 
Register today!
GLOBAL
Very confident      46%
Quite confident       43%
Not confident     
    6%
Unsure/no opinion    5%
AFRICA
Very confident   
              23%
Quite confident                75%
Not confident 
  
0%
Unsure/no opinion  
2%
ASIA-PACIFIC
Very confident                     61%
Quite confident 
 
33%
Not confident 
 
  5%
Unsure/no opinion 
  1%
EUROPE
Very confident 
        
32%
Quite confident       
50%
Not confident 
        
14%
Unsure/no opinion       
   4%
MIDDLE-EAST
Very confident 
 
79%
Quite confident 
 
 11%
Not confident 
 
   0%
Unsure/no opinion 
 10%
NORTH AMERICA 
Very confident 
 
27%
Quite confident                 50%
Not confident 
 
18%
Unsure/no opinion 
  5%
LATIN AMERICA
Very confident 
 
38%
Quite confident  
50%
Not confident 
 
   5%
Unsure/no opinion 
    7%
3. Analysis of armoured vehicle market confidence by REGION
Overall, confidence in the global armoured vehicle market 
is near level with last year’s statistics which were found 
to be at a six-year high. This amounts to 46 per cent of 
respondents stated a firm assurance in order books over 
the next decade, marking a 4 per cent rise on 2016-17 and 
a 13 per cent climb from where the result stood in 2014 
when only a third of participants identified being ‘very 
confident’ in the future of the armoured vehicles market. 
Strong confidence in the once-dominant North American 
market slid marginally again with only 27 per cent of 
participants centred in this region indicating a robust 
confidence (compared to30 per cent last year and 47 per 
cent in 2015-16). However, overall confidence for this 
region has barely budged in the last 12 months. A number 
of high profile government contracts and investments, as 
well as a reinvigorated defence budget and the increased 
potential for overseas conflict, has seen confidence in the 
world’s largest armoured vehicle market stay afloat with 
77 per cent still declaring faith in continued commercial 
activity. 
Latin America saw a rise in assurance levels, with gains in 
confidence (up 19 per cent) despite ongoing economic and 
political uncertainty across the region. Likewise, the Asia-
Pacific – once seen by most analysts as driving the future 
of the market over the next ten years – saw a minor gain 
on last year, with 3 per cent more projecting a robust faith 
in the regional market, but equating to a massive 94 per 
cent of regional market confidence.
Steadily increasing budgets, new contract opportunities, 
and the continued intensity of local conflict saw the Middle 
East retain sincere market confidence, with 79 per cent 
feeling particularly buoyant about future business. This 
represents only a negligible one per cent drop in overall 
confidence from last year. 
Africa registered the largest overall confidence with 95 per 
cent of respondents (over 91 per cent for the Middle East) 
expressing faith in the continent’s commercial position. 
This however is a more modest level of confidence that the 
Middle East figure, with around three quarters of relevant 
respondents calling themselves ‘quite confident’ compared 
to less than one quarter as ‘very confident’.
Europe has also climbed in this category, with those 
claiming to be ‘very confident’ up by 27 per cent since last 
year. Overall, 82 per cent of these respondents saw the 
region as promising against 14 per cent cynical. 
One of the clearest signs of self-assurance is being 
decisive; sitting on the fence rarely inspires confidence. 
With this in mind, the number of respondents stating 
they were ‘unsure’ about the market outlook dropped 
from 7 per cent in the 2017 report to 5 per cent in 2018. 
While confidence in the market remains careful since 
the economic slump, recovery has been established 
and industry is once again investing heavily in future 
capabilities and infrastructure. That said, the market 
for the year ahead is reliant on many external and 
unpredictable factors, so those involved are advised to 
remain cautious and watchful of market movement.
How confident are you in the future of the armoured vehicle market in your region over the next 10 years?
ARMOURED VEHICLES
MARKET REPORT 2018
L
FIND OUT MORE

 INDUSTRY & MARKETS
84
European Security & Defence · December 2017
T
oday's conflicts often occur among 
the civilian population. Often it is dif-
ficult to uniquely identify the enemy, and 
the intensity of the battle can change 
quickly. The Swiss Society of Technology 
and Armed Forces (STA) points out that 
the country's security forces must adapt 
to these threats. This means that they 
must be properly trained and equipped, 
and they must have adequate resources 
to do so.  
Long-Term View
In Switzerland, security and armaments 
policy must regain political and social im-
portance and, above all, have a long-term 
orientation. In order for the army to be able 
to respond appropriately to all threats at all 
times, it must be able to mobilise quickly 
and decentrally. This means that there must 
be a multi-layered reaction system. And 
this means, above all, that the emergency 
services must be fully equipped again in 
order to be ready for action at all times. 
With the WEA (Further Development of the 
Army), which is to be implemented shortly, 
all this should be operational. The new 
army will still have a numerical strength of 
100,000, but it must catch up in terms of 
operational readiness, training of senior of-
ficers and, above all, equipment. Essential-
ly, this means correcting the mistakes of the 
euphoria after the end of the Cold War and 
prioritising things that have been pushed 
into the background. The representatives 
of the Military Department hope to invest 
CHF5Bn annually over the next four years 
to fill the biggest gaps. By the end of this 
four-year period, most of those responsible 
for dismantling the Swiss Army will have 
retired. 
The Industrial Base has  
Suffered Too
The shortage of materials and personnel 
in recent decades has also caused damage 
to the domestic defence industry. Govern-
ment expenditure on the military dropped 
from 16 percent in 1990 to 7 percent in 
2016, and currently a modest 0.7 percent 
of GNP is being allocated to the military in 
the budget, which has led to a reduction in 
staffing and capacity in the respective sec-
tor and thus to a loss of know-how. 
The sustainability and persistence of an ar-
my is strengthened by a country's defence 
industry. For this reason, the STA calls for 
"sufficient capacities of a domestic defence 
industry with export capability" to be re-
vived. A broad technology base strength-
ens the army's resilience. It is difficult to 
assess future global and regional develop-
ments in the medium and long term, so the 
army must be flexible enough to respond 
to a serious threat. Only a competitive Swiss 
defence industry with a broad technologi-
cal base can guarantee this flexibility in ma-
terial terms.
Important Industrial Base
For a small state such as Switzerland, it is 
important to have an industrial base capa-
ble of supplying its security organisations 
with all kinds of goods – arms, vehicles, am-
munition and communications equipment 
– and to maintain them, as well as to carry 
out conservation and value-enhancement 
programmes. Industry must be able to of-
fer modern technologies at competitive 
prices. Against this background, the gov-
ernment has formulated procurement rules 
for the army. The development and mainte-
nance of industrial defence capabilities are 
the guiding principles of Switzerland's new 
armaments policy.
The Swiss market itself is comparatively 
small. Exporting its products is an obvious 
and vital solution to ensure the survival of 
our industrial base. In other words, there is 
For the Security of the Country
Peter Jenni
An industrial base with high technological capacities and skilled personnel is important for the security 
of Switzerland. The perceived threat and requirements profile of the security forces (army, police, civil 
protection and rescue services) have changed constantly over the past 25 years, and not only in Swit-
zerland.
Swiss infantrymen 
Photo: NATO
Author
Prior to his retirement Peter Jenni 
worked for several companies as 
director of communication. Since 
2004 he has been responsible for the 
"Armament & Technology" segment 
of "Schweizer Soldat". He served in 
the Swiss Army as an officer of the 
militia, including positions as unit 
commander and intelligence officer in 
a brigade as a lieutenant-colonel.

INDUSTRY & MARKETS 
85
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
no domestic security and defence indus-
try without exports. If this industrial sec-
tor were to fall by the wayside, this would 
inevitably lead not only to a loss of know-
how and jobs, but would also affect the 
country's security. Only a domestic defence 
technology industry can guarantee the ar-
my's self-sufficiency in times of crisis. 
For this reason, the government declared 
in its "Procurement Strategy of the Federal 
Council for the VBS (Federal Department 
for Defence, Civil Defence, and Sport) in 
March 2010 that competitive aspects of 
procurement for the military and security 
sector are secondary if procurement sus-
tainably strengthens Switzerland's indus-
trial base or is indispensable for ensuring 
security. 
Export
The export of military equipment is a sensi-
tive political issue, not only in Switzerland. 
The Swiss defence industry should be able 
to operate at least as freely as its European 
competitors, which has been recognised 
by the government and parliament with 
the adoption of the regulation on defence 
equipment. One challenge is that defence 
technology is not a hermetically sealed 
industry. For example, aviation, satellite 
technology, communications and the au-
tomotive industry are closely linked to the 
defence sector. It is difficult to draw a divid-
ing line between these industries. 
It is obvious that no Swiss security and 
defence technology company can survive 
solely on the basis of its domestic market. 
The export of goods and services has long 
been a survival strategy in this sector. 
Procurement for the Swiss Armed Forces is 
not just about turnover, profits and jobs for 
domestic companies. In the international 
context, it is also about the very important 
reputation of the home market.
Disadvantages and Success 
Factors
On the international market, Swiss com-
panies suffer from disadvantages such as 
high labour costs, a strong currency, non-
membership in NATO and restrictive ex-
port legislation for military products. On 
the other hand, the strengths of the Swiss 
defence industry lie in technological mas-
tery, innovation, excellent product quality, 
punctuality, reliability and a good price/
performance ratio.
Scope of the MEM Industry
With more than 300,000 employees, the 
Swiss mechanical engineering, electrical 
engineering and metalworking industry 
(MEM) is by far the country's largest in-
dustrial employer. With an export share of 
around 30 percent, it contributes signifi-
cantly to the country's economic success. 
The association of the MEM industry is 
called Swissmem and represents the inter-
ests of its more than 1,000 members. 
Within Swissmem, many member compa-
nies work in one or more specialist groups. 
The SWISS ASD (Aeronautics, Security & 
Defence Division of Swissmem) division 
comprises around 60 small and medium-
sized companies in the aerospace, secu-
rity and defence technology sectors. The 
few larger companies are mainly contrac-
tors for complex systems. Medium-sized 
and small companies manufacture state-
of-the-art technological equipment and 
modules as well as components and spare 
parts or provide special services. These are 
primarily development and production 
businesses. These companies often offer 
dual-use products and services that can 
be used for both civilian and military pur-
poses. 
These companies offer among other things:
•	 Complex systems for air defence op-
erations, armoured vehicles, command and 
control information systems, simulators
•	 Mechanical, electrical, electrical, elec-
tronic or optical modules and equipment 
such as wing segments, external tanks, 
cockpit window fittings, gearboxes and 
transmission systems, galleys, power plant 
monitoring systems. 
•	 Demanding components and individual 
parts, such as engine wings and hot gas 
components
•	 Services for surface coatings, basic engi-
neering for various services, modern CNC 
machine tools for demanding tasks.
The ASD industry has a workforce of some 
15,000 with an annual turnover of about 
CHF3.5Bn. 
Certifications
SWISS ASD focuses on five specific areas of 
activity. Swiss companies must be certified 
according to EN9100 in order to be a sup-
plier for the international aviation industry. 
In the past, companies had to be certified 
by foreign authorities, but ten years ago 
SWISS ASD set up the necessary organisa-
tion and infrastructure, which it now oper-
ates together with the official accreditation 
body of the Federal Administration.
Offset Transactions 
If the Swiss army purchases armaments 
from abroad, suppliers are obliged to 
participate directly and indirectly in Swiss 
industry. In this way, many local compa-
nies have been able to access the supply 
chains of international corporations. The 
obligation from offsetting transactions is 
included in the contracts with the supplier. 
Progress is monitored by Offsetbüro Bern 
agency, which was founded in 2009 and 
can extend over a period of several years. 
This system is important for Swiss industry. 
SWISS ASD now has a seat on the supervi-
sory board and represents the interests of 
the local and domestic economy. 
In other countries there are similar meth-
ods of compensation, but under a different 
name. For example, a company from Swit-
zerland was able to win a major contract 
for the Bundeswehr with the obligation to 
assemble the vehicle on site, that is, at a 
factory in Germany.
L
The Swiss mechanical engineering, electrical engineering and metal-
working industry is by far the country's largest industrial employer. 
Photo: SWISSMEM
Hans Hess, President of Swissmem 
Photo: SWISSMEM

 INDUSTRY & MARKETS
86
European Security & Defence · December 2017
a service that requires the most attention 
because of the Russian intensive military 
modernisation and militarisation of Crimea 
in particular, has been strongly affected 
by these developments. The long-awaited 
tender to modernise the Navy’s British-built 
Type 22 frigates acquired by Romania from 
the UK in 2003 came to a halt in 2017. The 
sum of €180M allocated for both frigates 
including their overhaul and fitting with 
modern anti-ship and SAM missiles, new 
search and fire control radars, electronic 
warfare suits, etc was insufficient. In late 
August 2017 it was finally reported that 
the purchase of four corvettes will be paid 
in instalments between 2018 and 2024. In 
addition, Romania’s public acquisition rules 
are not just complicated but also not trans-
parent. Whether or not the government 
may reform public acquisition regulations 
remains to be seen.
Therefore, the credibility of the entire gov-
ernment in general and of the MoND staff 
in particular is on the line. Furthermore, the 
country’s credibility as a NATO ally and its 
defence are at stake. The words and plans 
of the MoND officials are good but deeds 
are better.
Still, as a good start, on 11 May 2017 the 
Romanian parliament has finally approved 
a spending programme valued at €9.3Bn 
for the next decade, 2017-2026, which in-
cludes eight major programmes:
1	 Advanced surface-to-air missile (ASAM) 
systems that include four missile sys-
tems for the Land Forces and three for 
the Air Force worth €4Bn;
2	 Integrated weapon systems for short-
range air-defence system (SHORAD) 
and very short (VSHORAD) worth 
€2.1Bn. In a first stage the acquisition 
will only target SHORAD components 
and cost €1.37Bn.
3	 Mobile anti-ship missile launchers worth 
€0.2Bn;
4	 Four multirole corvettes with related 
equipment such as ship-to-ship missiles, 
The latter lost both manpower and income, 
while some of the enterprises declared 
bankruptcy. In terms of military modernisa-
tion almost every piece of equipment, from 
assault rifles and APCs to air-defence mis-
siles, will need to be replaced. This is indeed 
a tall order and there is no guarantee that 
mistakes of the past will not be repeated.
It is known that the ability of the MoND to 
manage an increased acquisition budget is 
questionable. The ministry has a bad record 
in managing both major and minor pro-
grammes. For instance, a tender for acqui-
sition of 18 light anti-submarine torpedoes 
was cancelled three times since 2014. The 
modernisation of a mechanised infantry 
battalion with Piranha IIIs APCs has taken 
about a decade to implement.
Furthermore, since 2015, a number of im-
portant defence programmes had to be 
either delayed or reassessed because of 
bureaucratic errors or political disagree-
ments that dominated the discourse in Ro-
mania. For instance, the Romanian Navy, 
A
s a result, Romania has increased its 
defence expenditure to 2% of GDP in 
2017, worth RON16.3Bn (€3.6Bn). Accord-
ing to Gabriel Les, former Minister of Na-
tional Defence, “Under the current budget 
worth RON16.3Bn about 45% are to be 
allocated to investments and acquisitions.“ 
The figure of 45% should however be tak-
en with a grain of salt since past experience 
shows that funds allocated for this purpose 
were not spent properly.
It needs to be remembered that Romania 
has to overcome a decade of defence un-
derinvestments which requires to modern-
ise the entire military and urgently restruc-
ture the state-run defence industry which 
has been neglected for quite some time.
Romanian Procurement Programmes: 
Wish List versus (Sober) Reality
Eugene Kogan
According to the Romanian MoND press release in December 2015, the proposed defence budget for 2016 
amounts to 1.5% of the GDP in 2016, plus other [unspecified] expenditures that totalled 1.7% of the GDP. 
Back in January 2015 President Klaus Iohannis negotiated a cross-party agreement to reach the 2% thresh-
old starting in 2017, and maintain it for the next ten years.
Author
Eugene Kogan is a defence  
and security expert based in Tbilisi,  
Georgia.
Address by Klaus Iohannis, President of Romania at the Plenary session 
of the NATO Parliamentary Assembly in Bucharest in October 2017
Photo: NATO

INDUSTRY & MARKETS 
87
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
signed and ultimately implemented. Still, 
certain programmes discussed below have 
been approved by the previous govern-
ment but not yet implemented.
Focus on Approved 
Programmes
CSAT has approved the contract to build 
600 8x8 Boxer IFVs, worth about €2Bn in 
March 2017, while parliamentary approval 
was given on 11 May. The deal was men-
tioned for the first time back in November 
2016 by then Prime Minister Dacian Cio-
los. The deal was signed on the condi-
tion that Rheinmetall Defence of Germany 
construct the vehicles in Romania and that 
its Romanian partner Uzina Automecanica 
Moreni (UAM or Moreni Mechanical Plant) 
share 50 per cent in the new Romanian 
Military Vehicle Systems (RMVS) company. 
Under the plan, the new IFVs will replace 
Romania’s TAB vehicles, which are locally 
built variant of the Soviet-designed BTR-
70.
The founding document of the joint ven-
ture RMVS for the building of 8x8 APCs 
was signed at the Romanian Ministry for 
Economy, Trade, Industry and the Business 
Environment in June 2017. The agreement 
foresees transfer of German know-how 
and development of technology in Ro-
mania. In April 2017 it was reported that 
Romanian army could be taking delivery of 
new APCs in 2018.
The recent change of the government and 
appointment of a new minister of national 
defence has delayed an international ten-
der of the aforementioned programmes. 
The newly appointed minister of national 
defence has not yet made himself clear. As 
a result, it remains to be seen when ex-
actly the aforementioned programmes are 
up for an international tender, negotiated, 
ship to air missiles and encrypted am-
munition worth €1.6Bn;
5	 C4I systems with ISTAR integration ca-
pabilities worth €0.180Bn;
6	 Armoured Personnel Carriers (APCs) 
8x8 and 4x4 worth €0.370Bn. Accord-
ing to the Press Office of the MoND, 
during the first stage, 94 out of total 
657 vehicles is to be acquired.
7	 Modernisation of the MLI-84M IFV 
worth €0.138Bn and
8	 Long-range Multiple-Launch Rocket 
Systems (MLRSs) worth €0.69Bn.
Romania’s Supreme Council of National 
Defence (CSAT) has approved the afore-
mentioned programme in August 2017.
Further programmes may be approved in 
the near future, namely the acquisition of 
attack and transport helicopters, and the 
recently cancelled contract for purchasing 
of the Israeli-based Aeronautics Defense 
Systems’ Orbiter 4 UAV. Regarding the ac-
quisition of attack helicopters it is known 
that Bell Helicopter of the US has signed 
a MoU with Romanian company IAR Bra-
sov for the potential support of the AH-
1Z VIPER attack helicopter. The MoU, an-
nounced on 14 November 2016, covers the 
possible MRO of the AH-1Z should it be 
procured by the Romanian government. In 
July 2017 it was reported that Lockheed 
Martin-owned Sikorsky helicopter manu-
facturer set its sight on producing S-70 
Black Hawk helicopters in Romania, if the 
army chooses this helicopter model to re-
place the old helicopter fleet of Puma. Air-
bus Helicopters is the third contender for 
the tender.
The modernisation of the Romanian Navy’s British-built Type 22 
frigates, shown here the REGINA MARIA, is still pending.
Based on an MoU with the Romanian company IAR Brasov, Bell offers 
the AH-1Z VIPER to Romania to replace the old PUMA helicopter fleet.
Photo: US Naval Institute
Photo: Bell

 INDUSTRY & MARKETS
88
European Security & Defence · December 2017
ing that he intends to sign this year all 
the relevant contacts that are likely to 
be implemented starting from 2019 on-
ward. Les’ explanation is based on legal 
ground. According to Les, “the legisla-
tion is very clear: previous to initiating the 
proceedings one must first get Parliament 
endorsement through the joint commit-
tees on defence, public order and national 
security. Parliament should endorse every 
deal that exceeds cost of €100M. This 
means that the Government commit to a 
multi-annual financing and multi-annual 
contracts. Therefore, it is logical to seek 
Parliamentary endorsement and not to 
release the government decision before 
the endorsement is in place.“ As was 
above-mentioned Parliament approved 
programmes on 11 May 2017 and CSAT 
approved them in August 2017 but noth-
ing yet has changed regarding the pro-
curement programmes. With regard to 
the question on the Damen Shipyard in 
Galati that was supposed to build multi-
purpose corvettes Les said: “Our intention 
is not to choose a shipyard or to come 
up with a suggestion like “build at this or 
that facility“. Any global operator, prefer-
ably NATO and EU, can come to (…) forge 
associations with companies in Romania, 
to integrate on the product we need in 
a Romania-based shipyard. We also have 
what comes from offset compensation. 
Offset operations should bring Romania 
top benefits.“ What kind of top benefits 
Les did not elaborate on and since Les is no 
longer Minister of National Defence there 
is no sense to speculate on his statement.
To conclude, the geostrategic position 
of Romania as one of the NATO littoral 
states around the Black Sea region has 
worsened because of Russia's intensive 
military build-up and the Russian an-
nexation and militarisation of Crimea in 
particular. From Crimea Russia is capable 
to bully and intimidate three NATO mem-
ber states located around the Black Sea 
region (namely, Bulgaria, Romania and 
Turkey). Furthermore, the long-belated 
procurement programmes have put the 
local defence industry and the armed 
forces under immense stress since the 
first one is in a bad operational shape, 
while the latter lacks modern equipment. 
Even though a new Romanian govern-
ment of Prime Minister Mihai Tudose was 
installed in late June 2017 it remains to 
be seen how quickly the aforementioned 
programmes are likely to be negotiated, 
signed and implemented. The Romanian 
military modernisation wish list looks 
very promising. However, sobering real-
ity may not match the expectations and 
produce needed results. 
L
also approved purchase of additional 20 
F-16 fighters in February 2017. According to 
the Press Office of the MoND, the number 
of aircraft is likely to increase to 36 and the 
aircraft would be procured after modernisa-
tion. Les told Parliament on 13 February 2017 
that: “Romania intends to buy these fighters 
from the United States. All further details will 
be announced [in due course“]. No further 
details were announced as late as September 
2017. In August 2017 it was reported that the 
MoND will purchase four multipurpose cor-
vettes worth €1.6Bn in the upcoming seven 
years. However, the corvettes are to be built 
and equipped in not yet specified Romanian 
shipbuilding facility. And the allotted funds 
will be paid between 2018 and 2024. De-
spite the announcement no new tender was 
launched as late as September 2017.
But Impossible to  
Implement in 2017
In an interview on a wide-range of topics 
conducted in March 2017, Les said that 
military hardware supplies for the Roma-
nian Army’s major equipping projects are 
“almost impossible“ in 2017, underscor-
The amount of the planned acquisition was 
not disclosed, but the Romanian Armed 
Forces is planning to replace about 1,500 
such vehicles in the coming years. It is 
known however that Romania has already 
replaced an undisclosed number of those 
vehicles with aforementioned Swiss-built 
MOWAG Piranha IIIs. Ciolos said back in 
November 2016 that: “A portion of the 
funds [how much? is not known] will stay 
in Romania and allow creating new jobs 
in the country.“ Ciolos also insisted at the 
time that Romania would pursue similar 
deals with other foreign manufacturers, in-
cluding upgrading its navy. Besides the 8x8 
APCs, the Army would need 4x4 APCs that 
may also be manufactured by the RMVS.
Romania filed request to purchase Patriot 
ASAM systems as part of its aforemen-
tioned procurement programme back in 
April 2017. According to the Defense Secu-
rity Co-operation Agency (DSCA), the State 
Department has cleared the sale in July. It 
needs to be remembered however that all 
announcements from DSCA are subject to 
congressional approval and must pass final 
negotiations with the potential buyer.
The country’s Parliament and CSAT have 
Romanian Fleet Command building in Constanța on the Black Sea
Photo Romanian Navy
ESD will publish a  
Black Sea Regional Focus  
in issue 3/2018 (April)

EUROPEAN SECURITY & DEFENCE is a specialist magazine  
tracking events and developments in the defence and security arena. 
One of the magazine’s objectives is to describe, explain and interpret European 
and transatlantic security policy – which extends far beyond conventional  
defence with military forces – in all its complex and sophisticated correlations.
EUROPEAN SECURITY & DEFENCE provides answers to questions on  
international affairs, business, technology and defence/security matters.  
Our analysis is based on neutral and in-depth investigation.
The primary mission of EUROPEAN SECURITY & DEFENCE, both in print and online, and including the 
daughter publication ESD SPOTLIGHT, is to convey information and influence within the  
European theatre, to and from decision makers at all levels in the security and defence arenas.
 Annual Subscription Rate: € 49.80 (print format; postage included)
Annual subscription includes 8 issues, special issues and free access to the “subscribers’ area”  
at www.euro-sd.com.
INTELLIGENCE FOR THE INTELLIGENT
March 2017 • www.euro-sd.com • ISSN 1617-7983
P o l i t i c s  ·  A r m e d  F o r c e s  ·  P r o c u r e m e n t  ·  Te c h n o l o g y
a 7.90
2/2017
Assault Rifles
Brazilian Air Force
Planning, budgets and major procurement programmes
Protecting Naval Vessels
Threats, concepts and systems
I n t e r n a t i o n a l  S e c u r i t y  a n d  D e f e n c e  J o u r n a l
      Security 
& Defence
European
ES&D
European Security  
& Defence
• Politics 
• Armed Forces 
• Economy 
• Technology
Mittler Report Verlag GmbH – Subscription/Reader Service
PressUp GmbH · Postfach 70 13 11 · D-22013 Hamburg
Phone: +49 40 38 66 66-319 · Fax: +49 38 66 66-299 · mittler-report@pressup.de 
www.euro-sd.com
Test EUROPEAN SECURITY & DEFENCE and order a free copy now!
 ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
66
European Security & Defence · March 2017
and methods to deal with contaminated 
rooms and building, or things that are 
harmed by more traditional wet methods, 
such as aircraft interiors and electronics.
Numerous companies provide generic ma-
teriel such as tents and hoses, but this is a 
segment too broad and non-specialised to 
examine here. There is ample opportunity 
for crossover in this market as a customer 
can easily buy one company’s sprayer and 
use it with another company’s chemistry. 
There’s nothing stopping a customer from 
spraying Cristanini decontamination agent 
or soapy water with, say, an OWR sprayer.
Systems and Chemicals from 
the 80s and 90s
Decontamination is an example of a portion 
of the CBRN space which resists dominance 
by US companies. Non-US firms are quite 
a large segment of the decontamination 
industry. Whereas the detection market is 
heavily driven by a series of major US mili-
tary procurements, decontamination has 
not been as seriously influenced in recent 
years. US acquisition has been largely fol-
lowing the market rather than leading it.
In both hardware and chemistry, the US 
Army is still heavily reliant on systems and 
generic chemicals purchased in the 1980s 
and 1990s. These include the large M12 
and M17 decontamination sprayers, which 
the author learned to use in 1993 as a jun-
ior officer. Indeed, the US Defense Depart-
ment investment and procurement in the 
decontamination space is somewhat low 
compared to other areas of CBRN defence.
While the US government is spending 
money on research and development in 
this area, very little is being spent on actual 
procurement. The last major investments 
were the Joint Service Transportable Decon-
tamination System (JSTDS), a procurement 
which commenced ten years ago, and the 
adoption of Reactive Skin Decontamination 
taries must assume that the use of CBRN 
weapons will result in something getting 
dirty somewhere.
From the viewpoint of technology and in-
dustry, it is useful to break decontamina-
tion into three segments: hardware, chem-
istry and fumigation are distinct segments. 
Some companies operate in a single seg-
ment; others operate in all three.
The hardware segment is largely composed 
of sprayers, pumps, dispensers and ancillary 
hardware for dispensing either proprietary 
or generic decontaminants.
The chemistry segment comprises a variety 
of wet and dry substances used to remove, 
absord, adsorb, and/or neutralize contami-
nants. Some products work through multi-
ple mechanisms. Some chemistry products 
are designed for use on equipment, while 
others are designed for use on human skin.
The fumigation segment includes systems 
D
econtamination is an essential compo-
nent of CBRN defence, both in terms 
of doctrine and technology. Most modern 
militaries place great emphasis on “con-
tamination avoidance” by using detection, 
hazard prediction, and reporting systems to 
minimize the amount of personnel, terrain, 
and equipment that are contaminated by 
persistent agents. Some militaries, such as 
the UK’s, place a high premium on contam-
ination avoidance, with the aim of much 
lower costs for protection and decontami-
nation. However, no avoidance measures 
can completely assure that soldiers, equip-
ment or vehicles are not contaminated. Mili-
An Overview of Trends and 
Developments in Decontamination
Dan Kaszeta
CBRN weapons and agents can cause either short-term or long-term contamination. Decontamination, 
is the (hopefully) orderly and systematic removal of liquid and solid contaminants. Decontamination 
is necessary to reduce casualties, to prevent the spread of contamination to clean areas, to return vital 
equipment to service and to allow for operations to be performed without the need to wear cumbersome 
protective equipment.
Author
Dan Kaszeta is Managing Director at 
Strongpoint Security Ltd.
Decontamination training of the US Marine Corps with the M26 Joint 
Service Transportable Decontamination System.
(Photo: USMC)
umbr_ESD_02_2017.indd   66
38
European Security & Defence · March 2017
  ARMAMENT & TECHNOLOGY
(delivered in 2011), further missiles were 
supplied in 2013 leading to an Israeli air raid 
on the Latakia warehouse where the mis-
siles were stored on the basis that the new 
missiles were to be passed on to Hezbollah. 
Now Hezbollah has the YAKHONT, though 
it is unknown whether they have complete 
Bastion systems or will configure their own 
coastal defence system, something they 
are capable of achieving. Why is this im-
portant? YAKHONT presents a formidable 
threat to Israeli naval units, merchant ship 
traffic heading to or from Israel will have to 
be routed away from the range envelope 
of YAKHONT, and Israeli gas extraction 
platforms in the eastern Mediterranean 
can be targeted by the missile. This is a big 
(3,000 kg on launch), high speed (up to 
Mach 2.5) missile capable of inflicting sig-
nificant damage on maritime targets.
The YAKHONT missile has a solid-propellant 
booster for launch and then uses a ramjet, 
guidance is via an inertial navigation system 
with a Granit-Elektron seeker offering both 
active and passive modes for the terminal 
phase of the engagement. Maximum range 
is out to some 290 km (dependent on flight 
profile selected). However, the Russian ver-
sion of the missile, the P-800 ONIKS, has 
a range of some 600 km. Russia deployed 
BASTION-P coastal defence missile systems 
to Syria last year, where the system dem-
onstrated its land attack capabilities. The 
YAKHONT has also been acquired by the 
Indonesian Navy in a four-missile vertical-
launch system (VLS) installation on a single 
AHMAD YANI class (ex-Royal Netherlands 
Navy VAN SPEYK class) frigate, OSWALD 
SIAHAN. According to the US Office of Na-
val Intelligence, Iran is currently negotiating 
to acquire the YAKHONT missile to use in a 
coastal defence application.
YAKHONT also provides the basis for 
BRAHMOS, the joint missile programme 
between India and Russia. BrahMos 
Aerospace, a joint venture between NPO 
Mashinostroyenia of Russia and the In-
dian Defence Research & Development 
Organisation (DRDO) was established in 
1998 and the first BRAHMOS missile was 
fired in 2001. Since then, the missile has 
single C-802/NOOR (Iranian version of the 
Chinese C-802 system) fired from a Hezbol-
lah coastal battery.
Then there is the example of the Iranian-
supported Houthi rebels in Yemen, who 
in October 2016 successfully attacked an 
Incat high-speed catamaran leased to the 
United Arab Emirates (UAE) military with 
anti-ship missiles fired from a shore battery. 
The Houthi then tried to engage a US Navy 
destroyer later that month, but were de-
feated by the defensive systems of the de-
stroyer. At end of January this year, a Royal 
Saudi Navy frigate patrolling off Yemen 
was hit in the stern by a Houthi suicide boat 
attack, showing another development in 
the asymmetric threat faced by navies.
Mention must also be made of further de-
velopments in terms of asymmetric threat 
in the Middle East, with Hezbollah in Leba-
non once more involved. Hezbollah is now 
credited with being in possession of the 
P-800 YAKHONT missile (NATO designa-
tor SS-N-26 Strobile) usually the missile is 
employed as part of the Bastion-P coastal 
defence missile system. Russia has already 
supplied Syria with the BASTION-P system 
F
or example, work on the EXOCET anti-
ship missile started in France in 1967 
and the first MM38 EXOCET, with a range 
of 70 km, entered service in 1973. While 
 EXOCET is still in production today, the lat-
est variant (the MM40 Block 3) is a far more 
formidable system with a maximum range 
in the region of 180 km. It might still be 
called EXOCET, but it is designed to incor-
porate a whole series of advanced technol-
ogies that were simply inconceivable when 
the original EXOCET programme started. 
The point to remember is to look beyond 
the name in naval missile programmes.
Proliferation Issues
There are also other factors that are impact-
ing on the evolution of the naval missile en-
vironment. The first of these is proliferation, 
not in the context of recognised navies, but 
in the development of an asymmetric anti-
ship missile threat from non-state actors. 
The first example of this was the 14 July 
2006 attack on INS HANIT, A SA’AR 5 class 
corvette of the Israeli Navy, some 18.5 km 
off the Lebanese coast. HANIT was hit by a 
Naval Missile Evolutionary Trends
David Saw
Naval missile systems in the context of anti-ship and air defence systems are undoubtedly a broad 
area to cover, but there is obviously linkage between offensive and defensive naval missile systems. 
Superficially, it might seem that the naval missile market place is characterised by limited, incremental 
improvements.
EXOCET MM40 Block 3 is the new generation long range anti-ship 
missile system from MBDA.
Photo: MBDA Systems
15.03.17   11:51
 ARMED FORCES
30
European Security & Defence · March 2017
gian and Dutch ships frequently exercise in 
a combined group of ships.
The Next Step
As the M-frigates and minehunters ap-
proach the end of their service life, bi-na-
tional cooperation in replacing the ships 
had been anticipated. But when Brussels 
announced new budget cuts in early 
2015, this cooperation was in doubt. The 
budget cuts caused deep concerns in The 
Netherlands, because a cancellation of 
the Belgian procurement would have had 
enormous consequences for the Dutch 
Navy. However, in late 2015 Belgium de-
cided to invest €9.4M until 2030. The 
investment plan included two new frig-
ates and six new mine countermeasures 
vessels. 
The decision came as a relief for the Bel-
gian and the Dutch navies. But quite a 
few challenges remain. Although the two 
navies are in fact merged, the procure-
ment processes are very different. When 
Belgium decided to replace the eight 
ships, The Netherlands had already con-
ducted studies on the new ships, even 
though a Dutch political decision on the 
Belgium and the frigates in The Nether-
lands. The four frigates underwent the 
same mid-life upgrade in Den Helder. On 
top of that the military staff of the two na-
vies are combined, the Admiral Benelux is 
the Commander of the Royal Netherlands 
Navy and the position of Deputy Admi-
ral Benelux is held by the Commander of 
the Belgian Naval Component. Of course, 
both navies cooperate closely at sea. Bel-
T
en years ago the first of two Belgian 
M-frigates, BNS LEOPOLD I, was 
commissioned for the Naval Component 
of the Belgian Armed Forces. The frig-
ate had served for 16 years in the Roy-
al Netherlands Navy as HNLMS KAREL 
DOORMAN. When the second Belgian 
M-frigate followed one year later, the 
programme was completed and an im-
portant milestone was reached. From 
then on, Belgium and The Netherlands 
operated the same frigates, the same 
 TRIPARTITE minehunters and had or-
dered the same NH-90 helicopter.
To operate with identical equipment 
was an important goal for the two na-
vies which have cooperated closely since 
1948. Especially in the last decade, the 
two navies have cooperated in all do-
mains and on all levels. Belgian and Dutch 
navy personnel are trained in bi-national 
schools in both countries. Dutch and Bel-
gian minehunters receive maintenance in 
Belgian Modernisation Plans in 
Cooperation with The Netherlands
Jaime Karremann
In 2016, Belgium and The Netherlands embarked on a large bi-national naval programme which will result 
in at least 16 new naval vessels. Moreover, Belgium wants to equip its new frigates with missiles that can 
intercept ballistic missiles in space.
Author
Jaime Karremann is the editor-
in-chief of the Dutch naval website 
 marineschepen.nl.
Belgium and The Netherlands ordered the same NH-90 helicopter.
Photo: BAF
The TRIPARTITE minehunters are the first ships to be replaced by the 
Dutch and the Belgian navies.
Photo: MoD Belgium
umbr_ESD_02_2017.indd   30
ESD –  
for the step  
beyond thought 
leadership

90
European Security & Defence · December 2017
Firms & Faces
He will join the company at its Americas 
headquarters in Herndon, Virginia, early in 
2018, as Airbus Americas Chairman and 
CEO. He will be responsible for the Airbus 
commercial aircraft business throughout 
the Americas and for the company’s heli-
copters and space and defence businesses 
in North America. With more than 5,000 
employees, Airbus Americas is the US-
based operation of Airbus, encompassing 
the regional corporate offices, engineering 
centres, training facilities, MROs and spare 
parts distribution centres, as well as manu-
facturing facilities producing commercial 
aircraft, helicopters and satellites.
ESSOR Waveforms for  
Bittium Radios
(ck) Finnish company Bittium is part of Oper-
ational Capability 1 (OC1) phase that contin-
ues the ESSOR (European Secure Software-
defined Radio) programme. During the OC1 
phase, the operational capabilities of ESSOR 
High Data Rate Waveform (HDR WF), meant 
for joint operations between defence forces 
of different countries, will be enhanced. The 
contract partners for the OC1 phase are an 
industry consortium on the one side (Bit-
tium, Indra, Leonardo, Radmor, and Thales) 
and on the other side OCCAR (Organisa-
tion Conjointe de Coopération en matière 
d’ARmement) representing the ESSOR par-
ticipant countries. The ESSOR HDR WF is 
also part of Bittium’s TOUGH SDR handheld 
and vehicular radios. These radios, together 
with the waveform, enable broadband data 
transfer, joint operations, and direct com-
munication between defence forces of dif-
ferent countries in international operations. 
With the development of the operational 
capabilities of the ESSOR HDR WF during 
the OC 1 phase the new functionalities will 
be available also for Bittium radios. Bittium 
radios can flexibly use the most appropri-
ate waveform, offering the best fit consid-
ering the conditions and the mission, says 
the company. The wide range of frequency 
bands improves combat usability, and using 
several waveforms, often simultaneously, 
improves compatibility and enables opera-
tions at different levels and on different mis-
sions. The duration of the ESSOR OC1 phase 
is 45 months and the value of the contract is 
around Euros50M. The value of the contract 
is to be divided between the five participat-
ing companies. 
Naval Surveillance  
for Vietnam
(ck) Controp Precision Technologies Ltd., a 
company specialising in the field of electro-
optics and IR defence and homeland securi-
ty solutions, will sell a significant number of 
maritime EO/IR payloads to the Vietnamese 
Navy. This is a follow-on order to an order 
placed three years ago. CONTROP’s iSea-
40HD will be used for surveillance. Delivery 
will commence in 2018. The iSea-40HD 
Maritime EO/IR Payload, weighing 29kg, 
has a thermal camera with continuous 
AFCEA Hybrid Combat Conference
(gwh) At the AFCEA Europe TechNet Europe 
conference which took place 9-11 October 
2017 in Stockholm, participants discussed 
the relationship between cyber and hybrid 
military threats. The hybrid military threat in 
Europe is related to developments in cyber 
technology. Cyber can both favour hybrid 
warlike activities and bolster situational 
awareness and swift reaction. Defending 
a modern society, which depends on social 
media and critical infrastructure, requires a 
well-trained cyber defence force. The event 
was supported by the Swedish Minister of 
Defence Peter Hultqvist who opened the 
conference by sharing his experience of 
how blackmail, insinuation and fake news 
increase political tension. He said that im-
mediate, well-informed reaction is key to 
winning this battle. Most Nordic and Baltic 
countries have a comprehensive defence 
concept which links military capabilities de-
signed for wartime operations with civilian 
cyber defence, law enforcement and the 
cyber security industry to ward off criminal 
or state-sponsored attacks and maintain 
or regain information sovereignty. Featured 
speakers included John A. Zangardi, acting 
US Department of Defense Chief Informa-
tion Officer; Udo Helmbrecht, Executive Di-
rector of the EU Agency for Network and 
Information Security; and Kevin Scheid, 
General Manager of the NATO Commu-
Photo: AFCEA Europe
New CEO for Airbus Americas
(ck) Aerospace industry 
veteran Jeffrey Knittel, 
formerly both Chief Ex-
ecutive of C2 Aviation 
Capital and President 
of CIT Transportation 
Finance, will join Airbus 
early next year, taking 
the reins of the com-
pany’s business in the Americas and suc-
ceeding Barry Eccleston, who is retiring. 
Photo: Airbus
Eurofighter Companies to Make 
an Offer to Belgium
(ck) Four companies from the Eurofighter 
nations have made a formal offer to the Bel-
gian government: If Eurofighter TYPHOON 
is selected to replace Belgium’s existing F-16 
fleet, those companies will support the 
establishment of two National Innovation 
Centres for Belgium, one in Flanders and 
one in Wallonia. The Eurofighter partner 
companies - BAE Systems, Airbus Defence & 
Space and Leonardo, along with missile sys-
tems business MBDA - signed the formal en-
dorsements to support the development of 
these centres. BAE Systems is supporting the 
UK Government in offering the Eurofighter 
TYPHOON as a multi-role combat aircraft to 
replace the Belgian fleet of 54 F-16 aircraft. 
The agreement was signed during a visit of 
the UK’s Minister for Defence to Brussels. 
The innovation centres are part of the Eu-
rofighter industrial commitment to develop 
the Belgian defence and aerospace industry, 
and would focus on advanced manufactur-
ing and additive layer manufacture, bringing 
around 1,800 new jobs into Belgium and 
building on some 40,000 jobs sustained by 
the Eurofighter companies in Belgium al-
ready.  Equally importantly, the Eurofighter 
proposal would give Belgium direct input 
into decisions and developments affecting 
Europe’s biggest-ever defence project, and 
would sustain high-tech jobs and capabili-
ties within Belgium.
Photo: Belgium Innovation Centres
nications and Information Agency, who, 
together with others, brought insights into 
various activities and challenges. In con-
junction with the conference, Europe’s first 
capture-the-flag-style AFCEA hack-athon 
took place, in which several international 
teams competed over two and half days.

optical zoom, a full HD day camera, four 
gimbals for high stabilisation, and an op-
tional laser pointer and laser range finder. 
The iSea Family of maritime EO/IR payloads 
consists of a variety of payloads in different 
sizes for different maritime missions. These 
camera payloads are designed for Coast 
Guard and Naval surveillance.  All of the 
CONTROP iSea day/night camera payloads 
have an interface to NMEA0183 radars for 
slewing the EO/IR camera to the detected 
target. CONTROP specialises in the devel-
opment and production of Electro-Optical 
and Precision Motion Control Systems 
for Surveillance, Defence and Homeland 
Security. The company’s main product 
lines include high performance stabilised 
observation payloads used for day/night 
surveillance; automatic intruder detection 
systems for coastal and border surveillance, 
port/harbour security, the security of sensi-
tive sites and ground troops security; and 
thermal imaging cameras with high perfor-
mance optics and state-of-the-art image 
enhancement features. 
Airborne EW Training from 
France
(ck) Défense Conseil International (DCI) 
has been responsible for the “international 
transfer of French military know-how” on 
behalf of the French MOD for some 45 
years, and has recently developed a training 
course to improve Electronic Warfare (EW) 
protection of helicopters and, more gen-
erally, of slow airborne platforms such as 
combat helicopters and tactical transport 
aircraft. Provided for the first time to Bel-
gian and Austrian officers, this training has 
been developed in agreement with military 
staff to meet their specific requirements. 
Jean-Michel Palagos, Chairman and CEO of 
DCI, said: “Owing to the rapid changes oc-
curring in electronic warfare threats, equip-
ment and technologies, knowledge must 
constantly be updated. We are very proud 
to have developed this electronic war-
fare training, an area in which the French 
armed forces excel, for partner countries 
such as Austria and Belgium.” The one-
week course from DCI improves detection 
of threats and their identification, and ap-
propriate responses via acoustic, infrared 
and electromagnetic protective systems. 
Instructional software illustrates opera-
tional missions in an EW environment. To 
develop the course, DCI worked with a 
number of experts from defence, industry 
and research, thus covering technological 
trends currently emerging in order to inte-
grate threats that are hard to detect such 
as physically small devices in urban areas. 
IAI Wins Airbus D&S Contract 
(ck) Israel Aerospace industries (IAI) has 
won a contract from Airbus Defence & 
Space to supply 16 ELM-2022A maritime 
patrol radars to Canada. Canada is pur-
chasing 16 C295MSA aircraft from Airbus 
Defence, equipped with sensor systems to 
support Canada’s Search and Rescue (SAR) 
operations. The key surveillance sensor to 
be installed on board the C295MSA is the 
ELM-2022 radar system developed by ELTA 
Systems Ltd., a subsidiary of IAI. The ELM-
2022 is multi-mode radar for detection, 
localisation, classification, and tracking of 
targets over water and land in all weather 
conditions, day and night. It will assist in Ca-
nadian SAR missions. The ELM-2022 radar 
provides 360° azimuth and sector mode 
operation from an antenna located under 
the fuselage. ELM-2022 provides a cost-ef-
fective solution for missions in the maritime 
theatre, such as maritime surveillance and 
EEZ patrol, maritime law enforcement and 
fishery patrol, Air-to-Air surveillance, Air-
to-Ground (SAR and GMTI) intelligence, 
and reconnaissance and surveillance (ISR) 
Photo: IAI
Indonesia Selects NASAMS
(ck) Kongsberg has signed a contract worth 
US$77M to supply a NASAMS air defence 
system to the Ministry of Defence of In-
donesia. The contract comprises delivery 
of a complete NASAMS system with com-
mand posts, radars, launchers, radios and 
integration, and training and logistics sup-
port. AMRAAM missiles will be provided 
in a separate government-to-government 
agreement between Indonesia and the US. 
NASAMS defends high-value civilian and 
military assets on the ground against 
threats from the air. The flexibility and 
modularity of NASAMS makes it a world 
leading solution to combat modern air-
borne threats, according to the company, 
as well as having the ability to integrate 
with a variety of sensors and weapons. 
Several nations have chosen NASAMS, in-
cluding Norway, Finland, The Netherlands, 
USA, Spain, Oman and now Indonesia. 
Photo: Kongsberg
“We are very pleased that Indonesia, as 
the first nation in its region, chooses NA-
SAMS for its homeland defence,” said 
Eirik Lie, President of Kongsberg Defence 
& Aerospace.
•	 Mobility vs. Protection
•	 Remotely Controlled Weapon Stations
•	 Armoured Ambulances
•	 East European AFV Capabilities & Programmes
•	 6x6 SITREP
•	 Land 400
•	 Electric/Hybrid Technology Options for AFVs
•	 AFV Self-Defence Systems
•	 Light Armour
•	 Situational Awareness
•	 Discreet Uparmouring of Commercial Vehicles
ESD Special Issue  
"International Armoured Vehicles"
Publication Date: 22 January 2018
Mittler Report Verlag GmbH
Baunscheidtstr. 11 · 53113 Bonn, Germany
Phone: +49 228 35008 70 · info@mittler-report.de
www.mittler-report.de · www.euro-sd.com
Preview

92
European Security & Defence · December 2017
Firms & Faces
missions. Modular hardware, flexible inter-
faces and antenna design allow ELM-2022 
radars to be installed on a wide range of 
fixed- and rotary-wing, manned and un-
manned aircraft. To date, more than 250 
ELM-2022 Maritime Patrol Radars have 
been sold to customers in more than 25 
countries. 
Lithuania to Acquire NASAMS
(ck) Norwegian NASAMS manufacturer 
Kongsberg has signed a contract worth 
€109M with the Ministry of National De-
fence of the Republic of Lithuania to sup-
ply the NASAMS air defence system. The 
contract includes two air defence batteries 
and a logistical maintenance package, as 
well as operator and maintainer training 
from Kongsberg. Upon the completion of 
the project, Lithuania will have acquired a 
complete and integrated medium range air 
defence capability. The system is new and 
unused except for the launchers which are 
being bought after being used by the Nor-
wegian Armed Forces and which will be re-
stored to the manufacturer’s specifications. 
On 21 October 2016 Lithuania announced 
an agreement with the Norwegian Min-
istry of Defence for the procurement of 
NASAMS components, and by 2021 all the 
parts of the systems are expected to have 
been delivered to Lithuania. By that time all 
personnel are expected to be trained and 
all the components integrated to make up a 
system capable of carrying out air defence 
tasks: monitoring and controlling airspace, 
alerting ground units to any air threat, and 
destroying targets, if necessary.
IAI Supplies Air Defence Radar 
System to European Customer
(ck) Israel Aerospace Industries (IAI) has also 
supplied an advanced 3D air surveillance 
and defence radar system manufactured 
by ELTASystems to a European NATO coun-
try. The contract includes several mobile 
3D Air Defence Radars, integrated within 
the national and NATO air and missile de-
fence capability.  The mobile radar provides 
close-to-the-force air defence support 
while detecting a variety of airborne plat-
forms, including low altitude high-speed 
fighter aircraft, hovering helicopters, UAVs 
and low speed ultra-light aircraft. The ra-
dar provides accurate range, azimuth and 
elevation measurements for each target, 
differentiating between fixed-wing aircraft 
and helicopters and providing coherent 
data for associated weapon systems.
Indra and Lockheed Martin
(ck) Spanish technology group Indra and 
Lockheed Martin from the USA have signed 
an agreement to expand their collaboration 
in the development of a state-of-the-art 
S-band active electronically scanned array 
(AESA) radar for the Spanish Navy‘s F-110 
programme, and to provide a framework 
for the commercialisation of this solid-state 
radar for other air defence capabilities 
worldwide. The F-110 frigate is the Spanish 
Navy‘s future multi-mission surface vessel, 
which is due to enter into service in the next 
decade. As production is expected to begin 
in 2018, the first F-110 frigate, equipped 
with the first Aegis weapon system to in-
tegrate the new solid-state S-band radar, is 
scheduled to be operational in 2023.
Kelvin Hughes SharpEye Radar for 
Hyundai Heavy Industries (HHI)
(ck) The Philippine Navy Frigate Acquisition 
Project (FAP) contracted Hyundai Heavy In-
dustries (HHI) in October 2016 to build two 
2,600-ton frigates for handover starting in 
2020.  For this project, Kelvin Hughes will 
supply HHI with two SharpEye navigation 
radars, together with multifunction bridge 
radar displays. HHI also contracted Kelvin 
Hughes to supply the Integrated Naviga-
tion Bridge System (INBS) for the Royal New 
Zealand Navy (RNZN) Maritime Sustain-
ment Capability (MSC) Vessel.The new na-
val vessels for the Philippine Navy will have 
enhanced survivability, seakeeping and ma-
noeuvring capability, will be operable in up 
to Sea State 5 and will also feature stealth 
characteristics. The vessels will have a low 
Radar Cross Section (RCS) design because 
of the upmast radar sensor carbon fibre 
housing and antenna-turning unit. The 
reduced probability of intercept by ESM 
equipment, a characteristic deriving from 
the SharpEye’s 300W low power output, 
complies with requirements of the HHI 
HDF-3000 frigate design.SharpEye radar 
systems deliver a navigation and situational 
awareness capability - through transmis-
sion of a low-power pulse sequence ena-
bling short, medium and long-range radar 
returns to be detected simultaneously - that 
can provide early warning not only of the 
presence of larger objects but also small 
targets and asymmetric threats with a low 
RCS such as RHIBs, small wooden boats, 
USVs and jet skis. Operating in I and E/F 
Band, the new radar will enable the Philip-
pine Navy frigates to distinguish between 
targets and environmental clutter even in 
adverse weather conditions. 
(FMV) camera supports the identification of 
surface vessels. These sensor contacts are 
correlated with the Automatic Identification 
System (AIS) to verify target identity. General 
Atomics Aeronautical Systems (GA-ASI) is a 
manufacturer of Remotely Piloted Aircraft 
(RPA) systems, radars, and electro-optic and 
related mission systems, and managed the 
MQ-9 for the exercise.
Photo: Kongsberg
Kongsberg and TKMS Form  
Joint Venture
(ck) thyssenkrupp Marine Systems (TKMS), 
its subsidiary Atlas Elektronik and Kongs-
berg have formed a 50:50 joint venture to 
build command and weapon deployment 
systems for conventional submarines, with 
the goal of establishing the “reference” sys-
tems in these areas. The company, named 
“KTA Naval Systems” becomes the exclu-
sive supplier of C2 and weapon deploy-
MQ-9 PREDATOR Sub-Surface  
Detection
(CK) An MQ-9 PREDATOR B Remotely Pilot-
ed Aircraft (RPA) successfully detected and 
tracked submerged devices during a US Na-
val exercise over the Southern California Off-
shore Range west of San Clemente Island in 
October 2017.  During the exercise, US Navy 
helicopters deployed sonobuoys from which 
acoustic data was used to track underwa-
ter targets: the data was transmitted to the 
MQ-9 and processed onboard, then relayed 
to the MQ-9’s Ground Control Station (GCS) 
several hundred miles away from the target 
area. The exercise successfully paired sono-
buoy receiver, supplied by Ultra Electronics, 
and data processing technology, provided 
by General Dynamics Mission Systems-Can-
ada, onboard the MQ-9: a track solution 
was calculated and transmitted from the 
aircraft to the Ground Control Station (GCS) 
via SATCOM. This technology might provide 
long-range patrol capabilities to the MQ-9 
and give the US Navy new maritime patrol 
capabilities that include anti-submarine war-
fare. The MQ-9 was also equipped with GA-
ASI’s LYNX Radar. The LYNX radar operated 
in its Maritime Wide-Area Search (MWAS) 
mode, which detects maritime surface tar-
gets over a wide area with Inverse Synthetic 
Aperture Radar (ISAR) for target classifica-
tion. The aircraft’s Electro-Optical/Infrared 
(EO/IR), high-definition Full-motion Video 

93
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
MBDA and Safran in Australia
(ck) MBDA and Safran Electronics & De-
fence are partnering to support the devel-
opment of Australian sovereign industrial 
and strategic capabilities. Safran Electron-
ics &Defence is a manufacturer of optron-
ics, avionics, electronics and software for 
both civil and defence applications. The 
company’s products are deployed on more 
than 500 ships, 7,000 armoured vehicles 
and 10,000 aircraft worldwide. Safran 
Electronics & Defence Australasia, a Safran 
subsidiary that has been operational for 
over twenty years in Australia, will be deliv-
ering optronic and navigation equipment 
to Australia’s armed forces.  MBDA and Sa-
fran are offering the MMP multi-purpose 
guided missile system to the Australian 
army. The MMP (Missile Moyenne Portée) 
was developed by MBDA for dismounted 
applications and for integration onto ar-
moured fighting vehicles. The system has 
been ordered by France for its infantry and 
combat reconnaissance vehicles as part of 
the SCORPION programme. It will be fitted 
onto the French army’s new JAGUAR com-
bat vehicles along with Safran Electronics 
&Defence’s PASEO advanced sighting sys-
tems. Qualification of MMP was completed 
in July 2017, and deliveries have now start-
ed. With the MMP missile system Safran 
is responsible for critical optronic elements 
such as dismounted firing posts, sensors, 
command system and missile seekers. Sa-
fran’s PASEO sighting system has also been 
ordered by France and integrated onto the 
JAGUAR combat reconnaissance vehicles. 
pilot that the equipment is working as de-
signed. However, throughout the life of an 
aircraft problems can emerge undetected 
as the aircraft is maintained and operated 
- for instance RF antenna head sensitivity 
can degrade, or they can be mistakenly 
wired into the wrong aircraft quadrant – 
and these type of issues cannot be picked 
up by BITE.  This leaves a gap where the 
equipment is technically operational, but 
could still endanger the crew as the installa-
tion is not operationally effective and could 
provide limited or incorrect information to 
the pilot. Leonardo’s ‘capability assurance’ 
equipment and training closes this gap. This 
UK-designed and -built capability assurance 
solution is already in service with the UK’s 
TYPHOON, TORNADO, C130J, WILDCAT, 
MERLIN and CHINOOK fleets, making the 
A400M the 7th UK platform to benefit 
from using the kit. 
ment systems for TKMS. In June 2017, the 
German and Norwegian Governments 
reached a bilateral agreement for the joint 
development, procurement, operation and 
maintenance of submarines and naval ord-
nance. Following the invitation to submit a 
proposal, TKMS and its partners are devel-
oping an offer to supply four submarines to 
the Norwegian Navy and two submarines 
to the German Navy. A joint contract for the 
new Common Design Class 212 submarines 
(„CD“) is currently planned to be signed in 
2019. The submarines might be delivered 
from mid-2020 onwards. The company will 
supply the Command and Weapon Control 
systems for the new 212-CD class as well 
as for future TKMS submarines as part of a 
joint procurement programme of the Ger-
man and Norwegian Navies. Such a system 
enables the submarine crew to fully capture 
their environment, identify objects and ana-
lyse the situation in detail. It brings all the 
information together to provide fast and reli-
able situational awareness. The cooperation 
between the German and Norwegian Navy 
will reduce maintenance, training and lo-
gistical costs. The future submarines will be 
based on Class 212A and specially tailored 
to the requirements of both countries: Class 
212CD combines low 212A Class signatures 
with greater range, speed and endurance to 
support worldwide operations. 
Pre-Flight Simulation of  
Radar Threats 
(ck) Leonardo has signed a contract with the 
UK Ministry of Defence to provide equip-
ment to simulate radar threats to the RAF’s 
new A400M transport aircraft prior to 
take-off. By simulating threat radars while 
the aircraft is still on the ground, command-
ers will be able to ensure that the complex 
defensive aids suite fitted to the A400M 
will function correctly during flight and 
can, therefore, make an evidence-based 
decision on whether or not to commit to 
a mission in hostile territory. The threat 
simulation equipment uses special Radio-
Frequency (RF)-emitting ‘hoods’ which 
will cover the A400M’s sensors while the 
aircraft is still on the ground, stimulating 
its RF sensors with real radar energy. The 
UKMoD has procured one full system with 
through-life support, with additional orders 
anticipated as the RAF’s fleet size grows. 
The kit ensures that the A400M’s defensive 
aids suite is working properly on a mission-
by-mission basis, providing ‘capability assur-
ance’ throughout the operational life of the 
A400M. Most defensive aids suites, includ-
ing that on the A400M, come with ‘built-in 
test equipment’ (BITE), which signals to the 
MBDA VP DiCarlo to lead Strategic 
Business Development 
(ck) Nancy DiCarlo 
has joined MBDA as 
Vice President, Stra-
tegic Business Devel-
opment where she 
will be responsible 
for the planning and 
execution of long-
term business devel-
opment 
strategies 
for MBDA. Ms. DiCarlo recently left the US 
Missile Defence Agency (MDA), where she 
served as the Director of International Af-
fairs. She was a key US government senior 
executive with personal engagement in a 
wide array of negotiations and transac-
tions in Europe, the Middle East and Asia. 
In addition, DiCarlo worked with leading US 
and international defence companies. She 
has more than 30 years of leadership ex-
perience in the Department of Defense, in 
international affairs, strategic planning and 
acquisition programme management, and 
she also served ten years as a member of 
the Department of Defense Senior Executive 
Service, most recently as the Director, Inter-
national Affairs in the United States MDA. 
Ms. DiCarlo also served as the Chair, NATO 
Ballistic Missile Defence Committee and 
the NATO Missile Defence Project Group, 
leading 28 NATO nations in the oversight 
and management of NATO’s Ballistic Mis-
sile Defence Programme. She holds a BA in 
Management from the University of Notre 
Dame of Maryland, and a MSc in National 
Resource Strategies from the National De-
fense University, Industrial College of the 
Armed Forces. 
Photo: MBDA
New Helicopter Pilot Training  
Facility in Slovakia
(sb) Slovak company MSM GROUP, in co-
operation with the Czech company Euro-
pean Air Services, will run a new helicopter 
pilot training centre at the international air-
port in Košice, Slovakia. The Slovak Train-
ing Academy (STA) will be operational from 
December 2017. Students from all over the 
world will attend this unique centre for 
supplementary training of helicopter pilots, 
which offers 15 helicopters, including four 
American Sikorsky UH-60 BLACK HAWKS, 
as well as a flight simulator. “Training will 
take place in the sense of European legisla-
tion. We are glad that we can provide theo-
retical courses for the STA project, and due 
to it, we can continue the long tradition of 
training of aviation personnel in Košice,” 
said Stanislav Szabo, Dean of the Faculty 
of Aeronautics of the Technical University 
of Košice, which cooperates on the project.
Although the Ministry of Defence of the 
Slovak Republic is not participating in this 

94
European Security & Defence · December 2017
Firms & Faces
remote-controlled weapon stations, naval 
systems, aerial attack guidance systems, 
and more. Rafael has also signed agree-
ments with Australia‘s Bisalloy for the 
supply of metals for the manufacture of 
military systems and with Varley for joint 
production of SPIKE missiles.
has chosen to form a small and tightly-knit 
team to boost development of the group. 
Alain Guillou underlines that „The aim is 
to transform Naval Group into a profitable 
international group to offer to our custom-
ers the ships and equipment able to ensure 
sovereignty and possessing technological 
and operational superiority.”
project, Juraj Lauš, STA Director, plans to 
offer the Slovak Armed Forces the possibil-
ity to use the STA: Slovak soldiers have so 
far been trained in US Armed Forces train-
ing facilities: „We will be glad if the Ministry 
of Defence accepts our offer. It is a great 
project, also appreciated by our partners 
abroad. We are proud to be the only civilian 
operator of Sikorsky UH-60 BLACK HAWK 
helicopters in Europe,“ Lauš said.Construc-
tion of the STA, including the purchase of 
helicopters, cost several tens of millions of 
euros and was realized without any State 
aid. The international airport in Košice also 
welcomed the founding of the STA. „Sev-
eral regions strove to gain this project, so 
we are very pleased that our infrastructure 
will also be used for such purposes. It is 
another piece of the mosaic of developing 
Košice as a modern metropolis of aviation 
in eastern Slovakia,“ commented Michael 
Tmej, Executive Director and Chairman of 
the Board of Directors of Letisko Košice.
MyDefence Partners with Boeing
(ck) Danish counter-UAV specialist com-
pany MyDefence has signed an agreement 
with Boeing Defense, Space & Security 
(BDS) under which MyDefence will con-
duct and support research and develop-
ment activities on future defence projects. 
MyDefence has expertise in developing 
counter-UAV technologies for mitigating 
the threat of small commercial unmanned 
vehicles. Boeing intends to draw on this ex-
pertise within the fields of aerospace and 
advanced research and development. BDS 
has already previously partnered with other 
Danish companies, including SkyWatch, 
which develops UAV systems. 
Naval Group Announces New EVP 
(ck) Naval Group has 
appointed Alain Guil-
lou as Executive Vice 
President for Interna-
tional Development. 
His mission will be 
to boost internation-
alisation in terms of 
business 
develop-
ment. Guillou, who 
is 58, spent most of his career in positions 
with an operational dimension and linked 
to social-change management, industrial 
management and international coopera-
tion. At a time when discussions on a pos-
sible industrial alliance with Fincantieri have 
been initiated and Naval Group‘s interna-
tionalisation has become a strategic prior-
ity to counter the competition of new en-
trants, Hervé Guillou, PDG of Naval Group, 
Photo: Naval Group
Navantia and BIW to Collaborate 
on FFG(x)
(ck) Navantia and General Dynamics Bath 
Iron Works (BIW) have signed an agree-
ment to collaborate on the US Navy’s next-
generation FFG(x) Guided Missile Frigate. 
The Spanish and the US shipyards will col-
laborate on designs evolved from Navan-
tia’s family of AEGIS Frigates, which include 
the Spanish F-100, the Norwegian F-310 
and the Australian HOBART class ships. 
The objective of this agreement is to be 
positioned to bid for an initial US Navy pro-
curement plan of 20 FFG(x) frigates. The 
detailed design and construction award is 
anticipated to occur in 2020. The key at-
tribute of this Spanish-US partnership is 
the ability of Navantia to provide smaller 
warships but with the same capabilities. 
“Bath Iron Works evaluated many US and 
foreign designs suited to the FFG(x) require-
ment and found that the family of frigates 
designed and built by Navantia is an ideal 
match,” said Dirk Lesko, President of Bath 
Iron Works.
Photo: Navantia
Rafael Opens in Australia
(ck) Rafael Advanced Defense Systems has 
opened a company in Australia as part of 
an expansion of the company‘s operations 
in-country and of Rafael‘s marketing ef-
forts towards armaments programmes of 
the Australian armed forces on both land 
and sea. The new Melbourne-based com-
pany will be managed by an Israeli and lo-
cal team. In addition, the company will be 
engaged in deepening the inter-industrial 
relationship between Rafael and Austral-
ian companies to create joint ventures and 
joint production and marketing of systems. 
Several Rafael systems have been in use for 
years by the Australian Army, including 
TSA Certification for  
Rohde &Schwarz 
(ck) Rohde & Schwarz, a company manu-
facturing test and measurement, commu-
nications, and broadcast equipment, has 
received TSA Advanced Imaging Technol-
ogy (AIT) detection certification for its R&S 
QPS200 millimetric wave technology. TSA 
certification validates that the R&S QPS200 
meets the TSA’s aviation security detection 
requirements. The R&S QPS200 security 
scanner uses millimetric wave radio fre-
quency technology to screen passengers 
automatically for concealed threats while 
protecting passengers’ privacy. This is 
the first Rohde & Schwarz AIT system to 
achieve TSA detection certification: it has 
achieved certification by the European Civil 
Aviation Conference (ECAC) and is in use 
at airports across Europe. Millimetric wave 
technology is based on the company‘s 
expertise in developing test and measure-
ment equipment. The QPS system requires 
only a few milliseconds to scan passengers, 
which can speed up checkpoint-screening 
operations. Privacy is protected by the use 
of a generic outline of a person to indicate 
to operators the location of an alarm. Scan-
ning is easy as individuals stand in front 
of the technology with their arms held 
slightly away from the body and the sys-
tem detects potentially dangerous objects 
on the body. The QPS200 millimetre wave 
technology produces no more transmission 
power than a mobile phone. 
Alkassar to Depart Rohde & 
Schwarz Cybersecurity 
(ck) Ammar Alkassar, CEO of Rohde & 
Schwarz Cybersecurity GmbH, will leave 
the company at the end of the year at his 
own request. Alkassar had taken over his 
tasks within the technology group as part 
of the acquisition of Sirrix AG by Rohde & 
Schwarz in 2015; Alkassar was the person 
who originally founded Sirrix. As part of 
the integration of various corporate acqui-
sitions within Rohde & Schwarz Cyberse-
curity GmbH the management will be re-
organised. The second executive director 
and CFO, with equal rights at the special 
provider of IT security, Reik Hesselbarth, 
will manage the company alone until a new 
CEO is appointed.

95
December 2017 · European Security & Defence
United Kingdom 2017, 192 pages, £ 35.00; 
ISBN 978-1-5267-2009-2 (Hardback), ISBN 
978-1-5267-2010-8 (Kindle), ISBN 978-1-
5267-2011-5 (ePub)
air vehicles; Land Systems, which includes 
manufacturing military vehicles; Weapons 
& Missiles - including ammunition -; and 
Defence Electronics, which includes radars 
and sensors, communication systems and 
electronic warfare.SAMI is wholly owned 
by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s Public 
Investment Fund (PIF), and will be a major 
contributor to achieving the goals set in Vi-
sion 2030, which states that 50% of Saudi 
Arabia’s military procurement spending will 
be domestic.
Andreas Schwer New SAMI CEO
(sb) Saudi Arabian 
Military 
Industries 
(SAMI) has formed 
its Board of Direc-
tors, chaired by H.E. 
Ahmed Al-Khateeb. 
The Board has per-
manent status and 
will play an active 
role in overseeing 
SAMI’s growth. SAMI’s Board members 
are HH Prince Faisal bin Farhan Al-Saud, 
HE Eng. Khalid Al-Falih, H.E. Dr. Ghassan 
Al-Sulaiman, Dr. Ghassan Al-Shibl, Mr. 
Abdulaziz Al-Sowailim and 3 defence in-
dustry experts who will join the board at a 
later stage. SAMI has signed MoU agree-
ments with defence companies including 
Boeing, Lockheed Martin, Raytheon and 
General Dynamics as well as Rosoboro-
nexport to support the development of its 
four business units: Air Systems, Land Sys-
tems, Weapons and Missiles and Defense 
Electronics.SAMI has appointed Dr. An-
dreas Schwer as its Chief Executive Officer. 
Schwer brings industry experience and an 
understanding of managing international 
defence and aerospace companies. Schwer 
will be responsible for the management of 
SAMI’s operational business, focussing 
on the achievement of key milestones as 
defined by SAMI’s Board-approved busi-
ness strategy. His priorities include the 
selection of a senior management team, 
drawing from accomplished profession-
als, taking the aforementioned MOUs into 
full partnership agreements, and seeking 
new partnerships. Prior to joining SAMI 
Schwer was President of Rheinmetall Inter-
national and CEO of its Combat Systems 
Division, with more than 6000 employees 
and US$1.5Bn revenues. He will start work-
ing as SAMI’s CEO at the end of 2017. The 
Saudi Arabian Military Industries (SAMI) 
company is a new national military indus-
tries company that will provide a platform 
to deliver military products and services. 
SAMI‘s mission is to develop cutting-edge 
technology and deliver integrated solu-
tions to drive the Kingdom of Saudi Ara-
bia’s military industry forward and keep the 
Kingdom and its allies safe.SAMI has three 
main goals: to increase the local content of 
military products and services; to invest in 
strategic, profitable areas; and to ensure 
that the military industries contribute to 
the wider economy. SAMI will manufac-
ture products and provide services across 
four business units: Air Systems, which in-
cludes maintenance of fixed-wing aircraft 
as well as manufacturing of unmanned 
Photo: SAMI
Naval Forces on a Global Scale
(jh) As the only yearbook on global devel-
opments in the naval arena Conrad Wa-
ters‘ Seaforth World Naval Review is now 
firmly established as an authoritative but 
unbiased source of information. The book 
combines regional surveys with expert as-
sessments of new naval units whereby also 
considering other elements of relevance 
to modern naval forces, such as aircraft, 
weapons, sensors, etc. Apart from an in-
troduction and survey the new 2018 edi-
tion‘s contents are organised according to 
„World Fleet Reviews“, „Significant Ships“ 
and „Technological Reviews.“ Features 
of this edition include an analysis of the 
Republic of Korea Navy and the response 
to its aggressive northern neighbour. The 
biennial review of the British Royal Navy 
assesses whether 2017 lived up to the po-
litical „spin“ as the „Year of the Navy“. Be-
sides, there are geographical analyses of 
the maritime situation in North and South 
America, Asia and the Pacific, the Indian 
Ocean and Africa, as well as Europe and 
the Russian Federation. Significant Ships 
includes the USN‘s ARLEIGH BURKE Class 
destroyers, the Class F125 frigates of the 
German Navy, and the Royal New Zealand 
Navy‘s OTAGO Class OPVs. For anyone 
with an interest in contemporary naval af-
fairs Seaforth World Naval Review 2018 of-
fers highly qualified and distinguished read-
ing. Conrad Waters: Seaforth World Naval 
Review 2018; Seaforth Publishing, Barnsley, 
EU SECRET for SINA
(sb) Following NATO, the EU has now also 
approved the SINA Workstation H crypto 
client for “SECRET UE/EU SECRET” classifi-
cation. This makes German company secu-
net the only German manufacturer to meet 
NATO and EU requirements for IPsec solu-
tions to this high classification level. SINA 
Workstation H has been developed for us-
ers with high protection requirements: it of-
fers IPsec-protected transfer of data across 
Integrated Telekom Defence  
and Security Centre
(ck) Deutsche Telekom Security has opened 
its Integrated Cyber Defence and Security 
Operation Centre (SOC) in Bonn. Deutsche 
Telekom has combined part of its cyber-
capacities in this centre and monitors the 
IT systems of Deutsche Telekom and its 
customers around the clock from this, the 
master SOC and other national and inter-
national locations. By analysing the events 
with more than one billion safety-relevant 
events from 3,000 data sources every day, 
the centre detects irregularities (attack vec-
tors) and initiates countermeasures. With 
this, Europe‘s largest cyber defence centre, 
Deutsche Telekom ensures cyber security 
for its own operations and - as a service - 
for more than 30 DAX and medium-sized 
companies. Only an entire network of IT 
systems, authorities and users can optimise 
cyber security, and with the German Fed-
eral Office for Information Security (BSI), 
the German Armed Forces Cyber Com-
mand and the Fraunhofer Institute and the 
university close by in the former German 
capital city of Bonn the topography offers a 
promising environment for the SOC. 
Photo: Deutsche Telekom

96
European Security & Defence · December 2017
Firms & Faces
any IP networks - including those which 
are not secure – as a counterpart to SINA 
Box H, which has been approved for EU SE-
CRET for some time. It offers multi-session 
capacity: for example, with SINA Worksta-
tion H, open data and classified data up to 
SECRET can be processed in parallel ses-
sions, and stored locally with cryptographic 
separation. This feature is advantageous for 
use in the EU environment in particular, as 
users often need to process diverse classi-
fied information from a range of networks, 
and SINA Workstation H enables them to 
process this information on a single de-
vice, instead of – as previously – having to 
switch between several workstations. This 
is where the use of SINA, in addition to 
security advantages, also offers potential 
savings. SINA networks can be accessed 
using wireless or wired media. Professional 
applications used via commercial Satcom IP 
services such as BGAN require the cryptog-
raphy equipment used to meet significant 
technical specifications. Tests performed by 
the German armed forces found that SINA 
Workstation supports applications such as 
video conferences, even where double-
hop satellite connections are used.
•	 The Oil Price Crisis – Geopolitical Implications
•	 Singapore and the Asia-Pacific Security Environment
•	 The Swedish Air Force
•	 UAVs in European Service
•	 Tactical UAV Requirements
•	 New Police and Military Personal Weapons Developments
•	 Police and Military Ammunitions Developments
•	 Mortar Training & Simulation
•	 Joint Fire Support Trends
•	 Naval Ground Attack Missiles
•	 Helicopter-borne Weapons
•	 CBRN Stand-off Detection
•	 Short-Range Counter-Drone Options
•	 Mine Countermeasure Vessels
•	 Forecast: India and Europe
Preview
ESD 1/2018 · January 2018
Mittler Report Verlag GmbH
Baunscheidtstr. 11 · 53113 Bonn, Germany
Phone: +49 228 35008 70 · info@mittler-report.de
www.mittler-report.de · www.euro-sd.com
Hensoldt to Cooperate  
with Huneed 
(ck) Thousands of Korean aircraft, ships and 
air defence systems are to be upgraded 
from their current IFF Mode-4 to the new 
Mode-5 IFF standard. Modernisation will 
run until mid-2020 for all US and NATO 
Alliance troops, after which only Mode-5 
equipment can be deployed on joint mis-
sions. To this end, sensor manufacturer 
Hensoldt is strengthening its relations with 
the Korean defence through cooperation 
with Korean defence group Huneed Tech-
nologies. The two companies intend to 
Photo: Hensoldt
cooperate in future in the local (Korean) 
manufacture and integration of Mode-
5-enabled Friend-Foe Detection (IFF) sys-
tems. Hensoldt and Huneed have recently 
completed the “localization” (or in Indian 
usage “indigenisation”) of the LTR-400 IFF 
transponder: Huneed has demonstrated 
that it can manufacture and in-
tegrate transponders adapted 
to the military requirements in 
South Korea. IFF systems en-
able the identification of ships 
and aircraft by automatically 
transmitting interrogation sig-
nals, which are answered by 
transponders of friendly units; 
systems can distinguish friendly 
from enemy troops. In con-
trast to the previous Mode-4, 
Mode-5 IFF uses state-of-the-art 
encryption techniques to avoid 
signal manipulation. Hensoldt has signifi-
cant experience with IFF systems, in June 
2017 being awarded, together with Leon-
ardo, a contract worth some €300M to up-
grade the IFF systems of 450 aircraft, ships 
and GBAD systems of the British Armed 
Forces to Mode-5 standard. 



