
 
 
European Founders at Work 
 
 
 
Pedro Gairifo Santos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
European Founders at Work 
Copyright © 2012 Pedro Gairifo Santos 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or 
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any 
information storage or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the copy-
right owner and the publisher. 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-3906-2 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-3907-9 
Trademarked names may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark symbol with 
every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use the names only in an editorial fashion 
and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the 
trademark. 
President and Publisher: Paul Manning 
Lead Editor: Jeffrey Pepper 
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell, 
Morgan Ertel, Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Robert Hutchinson, Michelle 
Lowman, James Markham, Matthew Moodie, Jeff Olson, Jeffrey Pepper, Douglas 
Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, Gwenan Spearing, Matt 
Wade, Tom Welsh 
Coordinating Editor: Jessica Belanger 
Copy Editor: Kim Burton 
Compositor: Mary Sudul 
Indexer: SPi Global 
Cover Designer: Anna Ishchenko 
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 233 Spring 
Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax 201-348-4505, e-mail 
orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com.  
For information on translations, please contact us by e-mail at info@apress.com, or visit 
www.apress.com.  
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or 
promotional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more 
information, reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at 
www.apress.com/bulk-sales. To place an order, email your request to support@apress.com 
The information in this book is distributed on an “as is” basis, without warranty. Although 
every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the author(s) nor 
Apress shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the information contained in this 
work. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
For Nastia and Evan. 
The two stars in my universe. 

 
v
Contents 
Foreword 
...........................................................................................................................vii 
About the Author ............................................................................................................. ix 
Acknowledgments.............................................................................................................. x 
Introduction.......................................................................................................................... xi 
Chapter 1: Jos White, Notion Capital, Founding Partner................................................ 1 
Chapter 2: Barton, Inghelbrecht, Mukherjee, and Wang, Shazam.....15 
Chapter 3: Lars Hinrichs, XING................................................................................41 
Chapter 4: Bernard Liautaud, Business Objects .....................................................49 
Chapter 5: Iain Dodsworth, TweetDeck .................................................................................59 
Chapter 6: Giacomo Peldi Guilizzoni, Balsamiq................................................71 
Chapter 7: Olivier Poitrey, Dailymotion...................................................................91 
Chapter 8: Richard Moross, Moo.com...................................................................101 
Chapter 9: Felix Haas, amiando................................................................................111 
Chapter 10: Peter Arvai, Prezi...................................................................................121 
Chapter 11: Saul Klein, Video Island (LOVEFiLM)........................................................135 
Chapter 12: Boris Veldhuijzen van Zanten, The Next Web..........................151 
Chapter 13: Reshma Sohoni, Seedcamp..................................................................163 
Chapter 14: Ilya Segalovich, Yandex........................................................................175 
Chapter 15: Richard Jones, Last.fm ..........................................................................187 
Chapter 16: Alex Farcet, Startupbootcamp................................................................201 
Chapter 17: Martin Varsavsky, Fon .......................................................................209 
Chapter 18: Brent Hoberman, lastminute.com...................................................................219 

 
vi 
Chapter 19: Loic Le Meur, Seesmic and LeWeb....................................................... 225 
Chapter 20: Eric Wahlforss, SoundCloud ................................................................ 241 
Index 
....................................................................................................................... 251 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
vii
Foreword 
The fact that there is a book about European technology founders is a mile-
stone and one we should take a moment to celebrate. Just like Founders at 
Work (Apress, 2006), Jessica Livingston’s US-focused predecessor, this book 
takes you inside the mind of some great European tech founders and helps 
you gain insight into the highs and lows of creating a business. If the next 
generation of European founders can make new mistakes rather than old 
ones, this book will be worth its weight in gold. 
When you read some of the stories in this book, it’s easy to feel we have 
made amazing progress over the last 15 years in Europe—especially since 
this book covers only the tip of the iceberg. There have been many great 
companies built and many great outcomes. But in the next 15 years, if we 
aspire to the creation of businesses capable of supporting hundreds of thou-
sands of new jobs and $10 billion in new revenue and enterprise value, we 
need to do more than just recognize, support, and reward innovation. We 
need in Europe (including Israel) to learn how to develop the conditions to 
create serious scale. 
Right now, Silicon Valley is peerless at both supporting innovation and creat-
ing serious scale. There’s been no master plan, but the 60-year interplay of 
government as an early catalyst; academia and established companies as 
early customers and sources of talent; and of course, investors willing to 
take risks and a long term view, have given entrepreneurs fertile ground to 
sow seeds and try to grow monsters with dragon’s teeth ready to conquer 
the world.  
You need every element of this ecosystem working perfectly to create 
monsters—and Facebook, LinkedIn, Salesforce, Twitter, VMware, and Zynga 
have all been recent beneficiaries there. 
In fact, the capacity for serious scale is almost part of the muscle memory of 
Silicon Valley’s residents. As a newly-minted founder, you have unparalleled 
access within a 10-mile radius to a living ecosystem of talent and investors 
who have been part of businesses in almost every technology sector. Some 
of these went from start-up to superstar—HP, Intel, Apple, Cisco, Oracle, 
and Google—the list goes on and on, each one at different speeds and with 

 
viii 
different approaches, creating tens of thousands of jobs, over $10 billion in 
annual sales, and over $100 billion of enterprise value. 
Of course, there are examples of extraordinary value creation driven by vi-
sionary founders who were able to build great organizations in the last 30 
years outside of Silicon Valley, including monsters like Amazon, Dell, and 
Microsoft. Even in Europe we can point to SAP. Start-ups can grow to mon-
strous scale in spite of their environments, but the chances of success—
which are slim to begin with—increase vastly with a supportive and a cohe-
sive ecosystem.  
The good news for Europe is we are now producing great founders in 
abundance. There are teams determined to go out and create monsters. 
They have been inspired by the likes of ARM, Autonomy, AVG, Business 
Objects, Checkpoint, Playfish, MySQL, LogMeIn, Skype, TomTom, and Qlik-
Tech. In fact, if you go to almost any European city, you can find independ-
ent start-ups like Criteo, Fon, Gameforge, Klarna, Moleskine, Privalia, 
SoundCloud, Spotify, vente-privee, YOOX, and Wix, all capable of global 
category leadership, creating thousands of new jobs, $1billion in new sales, 
and billions in new enterprise value. In London alone, you can see compa-
nies like ASOS, Badoo, Betfair, Graze, Just-Eat, King.com, Mimecast, Moshi 
Monsters, PhotoBox, and Wonga. 
This is serious progress. But the straight facts are that while we are unques-
tionably masters of invention in Europe, we don’t yet have the ecosystem—
or perhaps the attitude—to really support our current and future genera-
tion of founders to create serious scale.  
We are on a long journey, and to succeed we need more than just great 
founders; they are only the baseline for success. We will also need patience, 
vision, and long-term thinking from every part of the ecosystem to get to a 
place where we can produce monsters to conquer the world. For me, the 
big question is if we are truly able to do this. 
—Saul Klein, Founder of LOVEFiLM and The Accelerator Group 
 

 
ix 
About the Author 
Pedro Gairifo Santos is a co-founder of Beta-i, a 
NGO (non-governmental organization) based in Lisbon, 
Portugal, that supports entrepreneurship through a  
series of initiatives, including a seed-stage accelerator 
program. He is also the curator of the i9 Conference 
and a Startup Weekend organizer and facilitator. Santos 
holds an MBA from Rotterdam School of Management 
and he worked in the IT sector for ten years. 
 

 
x
Acknowledgments 
First of all, thanks to my wife, Anastasia Volkhovskaya, for her love, support, 
patience, and help in making this book a reality.  
Also, big thanks to my parents, as I was brought up being taught that any-
thing is possible if you work hard enough at it. And in reality, it is. Love you 
both; thanks for giving me all the opportunities in the world.  
Thanks to Ekaterina Sizova and Paul Jesemann. Without their support this 
project would not have been made. 
Thanks to all the founders that I interviewed for sharing their stories, 
knowledge, and time. I learned immensely from their experiences and liked 
to talk to them all. I was pleasantly surprised at how “down to earth” and 
friendly all of them were.  
Thanks to Saul Klein for writing the foreword for the book and to Peter 
Cohan for his quote and sharing his experience on publishing books.  
Thanks to Nuno Morgadinho, Ana Aires, and James Page for brainstorming 
with me about which founders were best to interview. 
Thanks to Jeff Olson and Jeffrey Pepper for believing in the value of this book 
and their willingness to publish it. Also big thanks to all the team at Apress 
that helped me turn this book into reality. Special thanks to Jessica Belanger 
for “holding my hand” all the way through the new world of publishing.  
Thanks to Ekaterina Zhilina for chasing down founders for me to interview. 
Even when they proved to be quite hard to track down, she found a way to 
do so.  
Thanks to everyone that helped with introductions: Clément Cazalot, Syl-
vain Theveniaud, Carlos Silva, Pedro Rocha Vieira, Robin Klein, Ricardo 
Sousa, Michael Jackson, Melissa Darker, and Samuel Mensah. 
Thanks to everyone at Beta-i and Startup Weekend for their amazing energy 
and commitment to bring entrepreneurship to the world. This book would 
not exist without them. I’m also thankful for the lessons I learned while in 
contact with these two great NGOs. 

 
xi 
Introduction 
The idea to write this book came from the knowledge that most books on 
start-ups focus on North American companies, and while I found great value 
in reading those books, it made me wonder how different, if at all, the per-
spective of European companies and their founders would be. It’s quite com-
mon to read about the differences between Europe and North America, par-
ticularly the United States of America, but is it really so different to start a 
company in the United States than in a European country?  
In isolation, this book gives founders’ views of starting a venture in  Europe; 
but in conjunction with Founders at Work, we see the differences and simi-
larities between starting a venture in the United States vs. in a European 
country. My view on this is that there are many similarities in the entrepre-
neurs’ mind-set, but that the context changes, leading to different decisions 
while creating and growing their businesses. 
In compiling this book, I noticed several patterns between stories. One was 
that entrepreneurs looked to capitalize on international markets very early 
because their home markets were usually too small. Some decided to ex-
pand using white labeling, others by changing the platform or raising more 
capital, but all with the vision that the only way to succeed was to grow in-
ternationally. One example of this is Shazam, which, until the rise of the 
iPhone, grew internationally using a white label strategy.  
The second pattern is that many start-ups began with an idea that morphed 
over time to its current state, or that the idea remained the same, but the 
method to turn it into a reality changed. Take Fon, for example, where the 
objective was always the same, but the business changed from an NGO to a 
hardware seller to a partner of their perceived main competitors. Then 
there’s Yandex, a giant company with the biggest IPO in the NASDAQ since 
Google, which got its start doing Bible search algorithms in DOS.  
Other recurring themes that I noted in the interviews included the position-
ing of companies as global companies—not as French companies, or Italian 
companies, or English companies, and so forth. Also noted is that there is a 
clear realization of the advantages of a having a foothold in Silicon Valley, a 
clear focus on profitability over expansion, and the view that it takes double 

 
xii 
the time to raise money in Europe than in the United States, but that there 
is plenty of money available for the right team and venture.  
As many of you will notice, there are many well-known European success 
stories that are not covered in this book. The reasons for this vary, but one 
particular case made a very strong impression on me because it showed 
how different European countries are. The son of the founders of Kasper-
sky, a very successful Russian company, was kidnapped at about the same 
time I contacted them to be part of the book. When I learned this, I was 
disturbed, and being from a country where this type of incident is unheard 
of, it made it very clear that albeit we all live in Europe, there are striking 
differences from one country to another. Fortunately, everything ended up 
well, with the police rescuing the teenager, but it made it quite clear to me 
why they were not interested in attracting further attention.  
There are many successful start-ups spread throughout Europe and there is 
no single large pocket of innovation. This has advantages and disadvantages. 
The European market is fragmented, with clients, entrepreneurs, and inves-
tors talking different languages, being in different circles, and meeting at dif-
ferent events. But this fragmentation also creates an international outlook 
from the start, a clearer focus on revenues—as investment is not readily 
available, and a close-knit start-up community in each of these lands. The 
entrepreneurs, and those who would fund them, are more and more con-
nected now due to programs like Seedcamp and Startupbootcamp, and 
events like LeWeb.  
Many of the founders interviewed in this book did “impossible” things, dis-
rupting entire industries along the way. It is worthwhile to notice that all did 
it with a passion to solve a particular problem, not with the purpose of get-
ting rich quick. You will notice in several interviews that most took a lot of 
time and went through quite a lot before they became successful. If anything 
stands out as a unifying characteristic between founders, it is the willingness 
to move forward and implement their visions and passions, even when 
things do not seem to go their way. Persistence, allied with adaptability, 
seems a common trait between most entrepreneurs. 
I hope you come to the end of this book with the view that it’s quite possi-
ble to build a successful start-up anywhere in Europe. Beyond that, I hope 
that you will learn, from a very unique perspective, a great deal about busi-
ness in Europe and throughout the world. Although the founders in this 
book did amazing things, they had doubts and false starts—just as any other 
entrepreneur. Perhaps this book will give you insights or even lead you to 
think, “I can do this, too.” 

C H A P T E R 
1 
Jos White 
Notion Capital, Founding Partner 
Jos White has co-founded four businesses and has a BA honors degree in English 
Literature from London University. He divides his time between New York and 
London and is currently a founding partner at Notion Capital.  
In 1992 Jos co-founded RBR Networks with his brother Ben White, an IT distribu-
tor that specialized in Cisco products. By 1998 RBR had become Cisco's largest 
distributor in Europe, with revenues above $140M, and was acquired by Datatec.  
In 1995, Jos White and his brother founded Star Internet as one of the UK’s first 
ISPs. Star is now one of the UK's largest ISPs and has expanded to become a 
broad-based cloud services provider.  
In 2000 Jos White, again with his brother Ben, co-founded MessageLabs where he 
served as Chief Marketing Officer and later as President of the US region. Mes-
sageLabs became the market leader for messaging and web security services. In 
2008 MessageLabs was acquired by Symantec for approximately $700M, mark-
ing the second largest transaction for a private company in the history of the IT 
security industry. 
In 2009 Jos White co-founded Notion Capital, again with his brother Ben and three 
other partners. Notion invests in next generation cloud computing companies. 
 
Pedro Santos: Tell me a bit about MessageLabs’ history. 
Jos White: The background is that my brother, Ben White, and I have 
founded four businesses. We founded our first one with Rory Sweet in  
1993, which was called RBR Networks. Originally we were buying and selling 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 1 | Jos White: Notion Capital 
 
2  
second-hand IBM equipment, which is a horrible business with very, very 
small margins— this business required a lot of wheeling and dealing and defi-
nitely attracted its fair share of cowboys! . So, it wasn’t really a technology 
business. But what it did is help us to come across the Cisco market very 
early on. - In 1993 one of our customers, BT, asked us for a Cisco router  
and we had no idea what it was. We were actually calling them “Kisko,” but 
we found it and supplied it to them and thought nothing of it. About a week 
later, BT faxed through this list of Cisco equipment—and again, it was just 
two of us in the office—I sourced it in the US and we supplied it to BT. I 
bought it about fifty percent off list price and I thought of trying to sell it to 
them at list price—it was about two hundred thousand pounds or something. 
They said, “Yeah, fine.” They didn’t even question it.  
So at that point we realized that something really big was happening in the 
market, which was a move away from the big, IBM mainframe systems with 
dumb terminals towards more of a PC-based wide area network. And this 
thing called the internet was emerging and Cisco seemed to be one of the 
companies that was driving this major shift in technology that happens every 
decade or so. At that point we decided to turn the company around and just 
focus on being a Cisco supplier.  
At the time, Cisco didn’t really have a presence in the UK, so the early buy-
ers of Cisco were the telcos like BT, and they had to buy from Cisco in the 
US. The problem with that was that it required a six-to-eight-weeks lead 
time, so they needed a supplier that was local, who could supply things im-
mediately. So, we became this kind of secondary supplier to the telcos and 
the early buyers of Cisco across Europe—like Siemens and Unisys, BT, and 
Deutch Telecom. … So, that was our real big breakthrough really.  
We were turning over more than £1 million a month, within six months, in 
Cisco equipment. The thing just went completely crazy. And then we did di-
rect deals with the company in the US that makes Cisco memory. … Cisco 
just puts their name on the memory. They don’t make it themselves but 
they make very good margins on it or at least they did back then. And we 
did deals with the company that makes Cisco cables and accessories and 
things like that. The company just exploded and from that point on we were 
learning on the job and trying to manage tremendous growth. 
And [then] we had a pretty rocky relationship with Cisco, because soon af-
ter we came into the market, they established their distribution model and 
we didn’t fit into it. So they couldn’t recognize our revenue and they didn’t 
really like that. They sort of saw us as mavericks in the industry. They tried 
to shut us down. They tried to send legal letters to our customers. But if 
anything, in Europe—and I think this is one of the differences between  

European Founders at Work 
 
3  
Europe and in the US—our European customers didn’t really like being told 
what to do by a US company. They didn’t like being told who to buy from 
and being controlled in that way. So when Cisco tried to suggest to our 
customers they shouldn’t buy from us, it made them even more loyal.. 
Europeans like to do their own thing.  
But we had a pretty rocky relationship with Cisco [and] we knew that the 
company would never be valuable unless we had their support and endorse-
ment. We eventually negotiated and they made us an authorized distributor 
in 1997. There are only four in the UK, so that is quite a big deal. We went 
on to become the largest Cisco supplier in Europe and our revenues were 
about £85 to £90 million in 1998 when we sold the business.  
That was our first business. But at the same time, we set up one of the UK’s 
first ISPs, which was called Star. We set up Star in 1995. I think we just liked 
the idea of having a recurring revenue business. The Cisco business was very 
much a case of every month you had to start again. It was a really aggressive 
sales-trading business. We were supplying Cisco equipment to the ISP indus-
try, so we had a good early view of the ISP industry and we felt that most of 
the ISPs weren’t doing a very good job. They were mainly focused on the 
consumer side or the large, corporate side. So, we set up Star to address the 
mid-market, the SMB market. We tried not just to provide a connection to 
the internet, but actually provide real solutions and real hand-holding to help 
small businesses get connected to the internet.  
Santos: What type of solutions did you provide? 
White: We released, with a single box, a solution to connect any network 
to the internet. It contained everything you need, like the mail server, a 
firewall, and a gateway. It was quite complicated to connect to the internet 
back then, so we tried to put it all into a single box. Then in 1998, we started 
looking into offering new services, one of which was an “in the cloud” antivi-
rus service.  
In 1998, the first virus that piggybacked on e-mail was released, which was 
called Melissa. And basically the virus problem changed overnight. Once vi-
ruses learned to piggyback on e-mail, the problem became much more sig-
nificant because viruses could spread really rapidly. Traditional antivirus 
software was designed in a pre-internet kind of world. You downloaded the 
software, and every week or every month you downloaded new updates that 
protected you against a new threat. But it’s very slow and reactive in nature.  
So, we thought that maybe we could build an antivirus system within the 
fabric of the internet where we could recognize new viruses without need-
ing an update, without needing an exact match, by developing a knowledge 

Chapter 1 | Jos White: Notion Capital 
 
4  
base of virus techniques and behavior.  We recognized viruses by looking at 
the reputation of the sender, the movement pattern and within the email it-
self for any indications of a virus based on previous viruses we had seen. All 
viruses are derivative, so we were able to identify new ones based on what 
we had seen before and continually expand our knowledge base. 
We patented a lot of  based pattern recognition technologies as we were the 
first company to do this. We realized that when an e-mail contained a virus, 
it always followed a specific pattern of movement. This meant we could rec-
ognize new viruses instantly, without needing a new update, by forming a 
point score for every e-mail and stopping the e-mail if it went above a certain 
threshold. So, we were able to recognize and stop these new e-mail viruses 
before anybody else and this service just exploded. We realized we needed 
to set up a separate company to take advantage of it. So we set up Mes-
sageLabs in 2000 to raise more money, to scale up the antivirus technology 
and to really build up the business on a global scale. That’s how MessageLabs 
came about. 
We then realized, when the spam problem came along, we could deploy 
much of the same multilayered, e-mail scanning technology to spam, as we 
had for viruses. So, then we had two services. And we were the first com-
pany to deliver antispam and virus services in the cloud. It was just a much 
better way of addressing the problem and now everyone is doing it like this. 
Santos: Did it start growing immediately? 
White: The business grew very successfully. I moved to New York in 2002 
to run MessageLabs in the US. That was an amazing experience for me. We 
had to go through a pretty steep learning curve of taking a European com-
pany to the US. We learned a lot, and the US, over time, became our larg-
est market in terms of users.  
We expanded on a global basis. By 2008 we had offices in fourteen coun-
tries. We were then scanning not just e-mail, but also web traffic and IM traf-
fic. And we realized with e-mail, we had these data centers around the world 
processing e-mail and … strategically we were in a powerful position. There 
were additional services that we could offer while the e-mail was passing 
through. So we offered encryption and archiving services to expand the 
product range. But antivirus and antispam were always the core services.  
So, by 2008 we had $160 million of revenue, and we were profitable, and 
we were still growing about twenty-five percent a year. We were actually 
the largest processor of e-mail in the world. We processed about three bil-
lion e-mails every day. We were gearing up for an IPO and had appointed 

European Founders at Work 
 
5  
bankers who would come in to every board meeting in 2008 and give us an 
upbeat report on how things were progressing.  
But by about May 2008, the bankers came into our board meeting and said, 
“Look guys, we’re not going to be able to IPO because of the problems in the 
economy.” You know, the downturn was starting, so unfortunately it just 
didn’t happen. But we had used the fact that we were going to IPO to elevate 
discussions with potential buyers. What often happens in tech, people like to 
buy you before you IPO—like Skype actually.  
So, we had three potential buyers, which were Symantec, Cisco, and IBM. 
Cisco and Symantec were quite far down the line, and we ended up doing a 
deal with Symantec in October 2008 for about five times the revenue. So 
we sold the business for about $700 million. That was, at the time, one of 
the largest exits in the European market and the second largest exit ever in 
the SaaS industry. A pretty significant exit. 
Santos: Was the sale a preferable option, or would you have favored an 
IPO? 
White: In a way, I would have liked to have seen the brand live on. I think 
we had a big enough vision and a big enough market to actually be the brand 
that consolidates. To be the consolidator rather than the acquired, but un-
fortunately the market timing was against us and it wasn’t meant to be. 
I worked for a few months in Symantec and then I left, had some time off, and 
then Ben and I, and three other guys, founded a VC called Notion Capital. 
We only invest in B2B, cloud-based businesses—really the market we’ve 
come from. The best way to add value and to be informed investors is to in-
vest in the market where you have direct experience. Notion was set up in 
2009. We’ve made eight investments and we are pretty excited about the 
portfolio that we have. 
Just generally, we were huge believers in this megatrend of cloud-computing. 
It’s a big sort of a tectonic shift in the tech landscape, and we want to try and 
take advantage of that by backing multiple businesses that are going to play a 
part in this transition.  
Santos: Going back to MessageLabs, where were you thinking of doing the 
IPO? In the UK? In the US? 
White: We had a big debate about this. I was in the US, so my preference 
was always a bit more to do it in the US. But I think that the bulk of our 
business, most of the management team, the largest amount of revenues and 
profits—because we did have more users in the US, but they weren’t paying 
us as much as users in Europe pay. You usually cannot charge as much for 

Chapter 1 | Jos White: Notion Capital 
 
6  
your service in the US, so you have to make it up on scale. Initially, the US 
can be a loss leader until you really build up the scale. So we did have more 
users in the US than anywhere else, but we still had Europe as our largest 
market in terms of revenue and profit. And most of our senior management 
team were still in the UK. And our operation center and everything. So we 
felt that the bulk of the business was still in Europe and, therefore, it didn’t 
make sense to IPO in the US because you can become a bit of an orphan. I 
think that the rest of the management team would have had to move to the 
US and start to be much more of a US business and we didn’t think that 
made sense.  
We were going to go out in London. Our bankers were Citi and JP Morgan 
and we were working with their teams in the UK. There is not nearly as 
much of an understanding about the technology sector in Europe. There 
aren’t as many analysts, not as much appetite for growth, vs. profits and fun-
damental financial performance. We definitely would have got a better value 
in the US, but we would have had to really change the face of the business to 
be more US-facing, and we didn’t think that made sense.  
Santos: Can you drill down a bit more on the move to the US and its steep 
learning curve, coming from a European background? 
White: I think, initially, I would sit there in front of a potential customer, 
Bank of New York, for example. Maybe I’m with another British guy, and you 
can see them looking at us slightly puzzled and thinking, “Hang on, you’re a 
technology business, and you are trying to sell to us, and you are from … the 
UK?” You can see them thinking, “Shouldn’t this be the other way around?” 
I think that Europe has a lot of credibility in certain sectors, particularly me-
dia and the creative industry, but I think that in technology, generally, most 
of the world’s biggest companies were founded in the US and, therefore, 
the expectation in the US market is that in technology, they are going to be 
talking and buying from US companies. When you are not a US company, 
that can be difficult because you are trying to break a perception. So I think 
it’s important to become a US team in the US market. I don’t think you can 
just bring some people over from Europe and just set up a sales operation.  
We actually really invested in a self-sufficient management team in the US. 
They were mostly US nationals. We also positioned ourselves as a global 
company with locations in the US and Europe, rather than a UK company 
that was expanding. We very much changed our message to be, “we are a 
global company.”  
Our US offices were in New York. We had a pretty senior and relatively 
autonomous US management team. I think it was a learning curve to be 

European Founders at Work 
 
7  
more of a US company and positioning ourselves as a global company rather 
than “this little company from the UK that is trying to expand into new 
markets.”  
Another thing we learned is that on pricing you can’t charge as much over 
here [the United States], and it’s a market where you charge less, but you 
hope to make it up on scale. It’s such a big market, but if the US is not your 
home market, then you can get caught in between not charging as much but 
not actually achieving the scale because you’re not a US company. So, you 
can end up in a loss-making position. I think you need to be prepared to 
make a pretty big investment in the US and you need to be prepared to 
build up the business for several years, in some instances, before you’re go-
ing to make money. You need to be prepared to commit to that kind of in-
vestment and timeframe if you want things to turn out well for you here.  
Santos: Going back to the beginning of the company, when it was founded 
in 2000, you said you raised some capital, £25 million. Did you do it in the 
UK, Europe or the US? 
White: We raised it in the US. We’d made up our minds; we wanted to 
raise money from US VCs. We thought that it would give us more credibil-
ity and it would also help with our US market entry. We did a couple of 
trips out to the US and we ended up going with two US VCs. One was 
Catalyst and the other Madison Dearborn. And I think it was the right thing 
to do.  
Santos: Yes, especially if it helps in the credibility part. 
White: Yeah, and back then, the VC market in Europe was relatively young. 
It’s a bit more built out now. But we were raising money at an amazing time 
as well. I mean, when we were raising money, MessageLabs was only one 
year old, and we were able to achieve a pretty significant valuation for the 
business because it was the dot-com era and valuations were very high. So 
we were able, to a certain extent, to take advantage of that. And I think, to 
be honest, the valuation was a little over-inflated and it gave us a difficult 
couple of years once the dot-com crash, and managing things with our inves-
tors.  
But we always built MessageLabs to not just be a hype-driven business, but 
to be a solid business that could make a lot of money. So we were able to 
get through the dot-com crash and come out the other side with a very 
strong business. But, we had a pretty hard couple of years after the dot-com 
crash. At times a valuation can be a stone around your neck. If you push for 
a valuation that is too high, it sometimes can be difficult. It’s an interesting 
balance to get that right. 

Chapter 1 | Jos White: Notion Capital 
 
8  
Santos: After that did you need to raise any more capital? 
White: We never raised any more. Star and MessageLabs were in the same 
group. Star had raised £10 million in 1999. Star was profitable pretty much 
[by] that time so, we were able to really focus on MessageLabs and we were 
relatively good at managing our cash. And, again, I think that European com-
panies are better at bootstrapping and better at managing their cash because 
they normally don’t raise as much money, so they sort of have to learn to be 
better at bootstrapping and cash management—so that sometimes can be an 
advantage, I think.  
A US company, you know, sometimes when you raise too much money you 
can become a bit like a trust-fund guy. You don’t really appreciate the money 
and you’re not really building for profitability and I think that can be danger-
ous. We actually had the situation, which I often talk about, which is Mes-
sageLabs was underfunded compared to our main US competitor, Postini.  
Postini was founded at the same time. They were founded in the Valley, they 
raised more money, and we ended up being twice their size. So, it shows 
that it can be done. That a European company can take on a company from 
the Valley, with less money, and still out-execute the US competitor. We 
were very proud of that.  
Santos: What do you think were the main differentiators that made you 
become double the size? 
White: One of the key things was our background in security. Our back-
ground was in viruses and malware and really having that depth of security 
expertise and technology that delivered a very high quality of service. So, 
for example, we had a 100% guarantee with our service, so if a customer 
ever received a virus, then we would pay out a portion of their contract 
because we were so confident in the effectiveness of our service.  
And because we were recognized as a true security company delivering a 
really, really good service, we were able to charge more than our competi-
tors. When customers challenged the price, we would say, “Well, if some-
one offered you cut-price brain surgery, would you go for that?”  
And they would normally say, “Well, no, I probably wouldn’t.” 
“And why would you do that?” 
“Well, I would want to be sure of the reputation and the track record and 
everything else of the provider.” So, that’s what MessageLabs is. Security 
can bring down the organization. It’s too important to cut the price with 
your vendor. You should go for the premium player.  

European Founders at Work 
 
9  
So, I think we were very good at that. With Postini, their background was 
more on spam and e-mail management, so they were never able to charge 
as much and they were never able to really be positioned as a true security 
company. They just resold other security software. So, I think we were just 
positioned differently in the market and we were able to charge more, to 
drive a much higher ARPU.1  
But I think also we were pretty good at sales and marketing. We were good 
at entering new markets, which again, I think it can be a strength for Euro-
pean companies. You can get good at entering new markets and under-
standing different cultures, languages, and stuff because in Europe, you have 
to be good at entering new markets because your own market is never go-
ing to be big enough on its own. Whereas companies in the US are often 
not good at entering new markets. So, I think Postini struggled outside of 
the US, whereas we entered new markets pretty successfully.  
And we were very good at managing the brand and positioning MessageLabs 
as a premium brand and company that appeared to be much bigger than it 
actually was. And we were very aggressive. We were very good with our 
sales strategy, and building the sales organization. So I think they were also 
key things.  
Santos: What were the biggest issues you had growing so rapidly? The 
growth pains? 
White: The biggest issue we had was that our network was designed in a lit-
tle, old office in the middle of nowhere in England, and then suddenly we be-
came the largest e-mail processor in the world. Our architecture hadn’t been 
designed to process such a huge amount of e-mail, and to be load balancing 
that e-mail, and to be making decisions on whether to pass an e-mail onto the 
customer or whether to archive the e-mail or whatever. So we had to keep 
up with not only the growth of the business but also the growth of e-mail and 
the growth of spam.  
It was sort of this perfect storm because the company was growing, e-mail 
use was growing, viruses and spam was growing. So we got to this situation 
where, in 2003/2004, our network was really under pressure from the load 
[of] trying to process such huge volumes of e-mail. It got to the situation 
where, for about eighteen months, every time there was a big virus, our 
network would slow down and our delivery of e-mail would slow down. 
Sometimes customers’ delivery of e-mail would take one hour or two hours 
to deliver. So, we would be saying to our customers, “Well, you’re not  
                                                
1 Average revenue per user. 

Chapter 1 | Jos White: Notion Capital 
 
10  
receiving viruses.” To which they would say, “Well, we’re not bloody get-
ting e-mails!” 
So, we had real problems. I would be on the phone with one customer after 
the other for hours and hours. That was a really tense time because if you 
start putting significant delays in the delivery of e-mail, customers are going 
to leave. I think you can do it once, but if you start to do it more than once, 
customers are going to leave.  
I think that managing that time while we re-architected the service to proc-
ess things more efficiently where we could load balance across all our data 
centers was a challenging time for the business. That was a very nervous 
time, a very difficult time for us, and definitely the most stressful time that 
we had. 
You know, we made lots of mistakes and that happens when you’re growing 
so quickly. I think we made hiring mistakes, and we made mistakes of think-
ing that hiring someone is better than hiring no one—which is always 
wrong. In the early days, we really had to invest the time and everything else 
into getting the senior positions right. Because, if you get the senior posi-
tions right, that kind of sets the gene pool for the organization. And I don’t 
think we always did that. Sometimes we rushed decisions or said that we 
were just better to take on lots of people rather than just the right person. 
So I think that sometimes we rushed decisions on recruitment rather than 
really taking the time on the key positions. And that caused some problems 
for us.  
And then in the US, initially we entered the US with a fairly small budget and 
we just thought we would have a sales team out there and see if we can do it 
that way. And it just doesn’t work. I think that in the US you really have to 
make a full investment into the market. You need to have a fairly autonomous 
management team. You need to be prepared to look at spending money for 
some time before delivering any profitability. So, our second go at the US 
worked well, but our first go really didn’t work very well. So, that was a big 
lesson as well.  
Santos: You eventually invested $15 million to move to the US, right? 
White: Yes, I think it was something like that. Before the business broke 
even, I think it probably cost us something in that region. It cost us a lot and 
it took a bit longer than we expected it to start to break even. It’s a difficult 
market because on one side you are selling to these huge customers—Citi, 
AXA and Motorola, [companies] like that were customers. Big, big custom-
ers. We had big customers and a big user-base in the US, but when you’re 

European Founders at Work 
 
11  
selling at a lower price, it takes time for that to translate into actual profits. 
And that was a real lesson for us. We had smaller margins in the US.  
Santos: And what were the lucky breaks along the way? 
White: I think you always need a bit of luck. I think that that is often why 
successful entrepreneurs actually come across as quite humble. Because I 
think that any successful entrepreneur knows that it was a combination of 
skill and attitude, with luck, that really leads to success. And there are very 
fine lines between success and failure, and you definitely need a little bit  
of luck.  
And I think that’s why you see entrepreneurs being quite humble because 
they know that it was a combination of all those things that led to their suc-
cess and that it could have gone in a different direction, no question. We 
certainly had some luck along the way. I think that one of our biggest pieces 
of luck was that our original office was in a place called Cirencester, which is 
basically a kind of small farming town in Gloucestershire in England. It has 
absolutely nothing to do with technology at all but in Cirencester, by com-
plete coincidence, was an IT training company called QA. And they were a 
very high-level training company and they liked being in Cirencester because 
it was a good place for people to come away from the office and away from 
cities to concentrate on training.  
And they did technical training and they had a very good reputation for doing 
high level technical training, so all of our three key technical people came 
from QA. Our CTO, Mark Sunner, was one of the senior trainers there. … 
Our Chief of Malware and Chief Architect also came from QA. QA had an 
amazing recruitment program and they attracted people who were very sen-
ior, very proven technologists, and so we were able to piggyback on that a lit-
tle bit. So, I think that finding those three people in the middle of nowhere, 
on our doorstep, was definitely a big piece of luck that was very helpful for us.  
I think that raising the money in the dot-com boom and being able to raise 
lots of money so that we didn’t have to worry about it again was lucky. So, 
that was a good bit of luck. And another thing, which was partly luck, was 
that we set up MessageLabs in January of 2000 and we were the first com-
pany to stop the LoveBug virus. We actually named the LoveBug virus and 
that was May of 2000.  
Little old MessageLabs with only, at the time, ten or twenty people in it. The 
timing of the LoveBug virus just couldn’t have been any better. We were on 
the front page of all the newspapers as the first company to stop the virus, 
the company that named the virus. The timing for that, it just put us on the 
map right when we needed it.  

Chapter 1 | Jos White: Notion Capital 
 
12  
I remember that the Daily Telegraph came up to our office and said, “Can we 
take a photo of the whole company, because we want to put it on the front 
of the newspaper?” So, I got the whole company out and there was literally 
about ten people, and [the journalist] said, “No, no, no. Can you bring the 
whole company out?” I quickly said that we thought we’d just bring out the 
engineers because they were really the guys that stopped the virus. That we 
left the sales and marketing and everybody else inside because they are just 
too busy dealing with the sales inquiries. But actually, it was the entire com-
pany at the time. So the Love Bug virus was really good timing for us and that 
worked really, really well.  
Santos: Do you have any other aspects that you want to highlight?  
White: I think it’s worth just saying that the way that my brother and I work, 
as brothers, is worth touching on. So, my brother is an amazing kind of crea-
tor, or innovator. He’s actually heavily dyslexic and he was expelled from 
about four schools. And he is a bit of a lunatic, really. But very often the peo-
ple that can really invent things think about things very, very differently.  
When I think about how I can improve on something, I normally take all of 
the context that surrounds me and then I think how I can improve on. 
Whereas a true inventor is able to take themselves out of what surrounds 
them completely and think about things entirely differently. Thinking about 
the future and not being  informed by what is already here, but really, genu-
inely thinking about new solutions to problems.  
And often you need a different kind of mindset. You need a different kind of 
intellect or a different kind of way of seeing the world to be that true inven-
tor. And Ben I think has that ability that is very difficult to define and it’s of-
ten people who fail at school and are very colorful characters, and real ec-
centrics or whatever, that can do that. And Ben can really do that. I actually 
have a background in English literature, so I was not in technology, but I was 
always able to take Ben’s ideas and turn them into actual strategies and turn 
them into products. So, I think that we work very well together in that way. 
And I think that is one of the main reasons why we have been successful.  
Santos: Did he come up with the actual idea for the virus scanner, or was 
it something that just grew out of Star team? 
White: I think that Ben really thought about it to start with. He just kept 
challenging the technical guys, saying that there must be a better way to do 
this, to address this virus problem. And antivirus software just seems so an-
tiquated. Seems like it doesn’t work anymore. We used to call it the world’s 
biggest protection racket! There must be a better way. Ben always uses the 
analogy that, with your water, you know that your water is filtered by your 

European Founders at Work 
 
13  
water company closer to the source, so by the time you turn on your tap, 
your water as already been filtered. Whereas, what was happening to vi-
ruses was that everybody was kind of having to boil their own water. So 
Ben was thinking, why can’t we be like a water company? Why can’t we fil-
ter e-mail in the fabric of the internet like a water company? So, by the time 
it reaches organizations and it reaches individuals, that it has already been 
filtered and individual users don’t have to worry about it. And that was 
really kind of revolutionary at the time—we were years ahead of our time 
That high-level concept was pretty much Ben’s idea, and then our brilliant 
technical brains came up with a way to deliver it. 

C H A P T E R 
 
2 
Barton,  
Inghelbrecht, 
Mukherjee, and 
Wang 
Shazam 
Chris Barton, co-founder and former CEO of Shazam, is currently at Dropbox but 
spent almost eight years at Google prior to Dropbox.  He and Philip Inghelbrecht 
graduated together from the MBA program at UC Berkeley. He also holds an 
M.Phil. from Cambridge University. 
Philip Inghelbrecht, co-founder of Shazam, is currently head of business devel-
opment at RockMelt, Inc. He is also the founder of Road Hero, Inc., which he 
started in 2010. When leaving Shazam, Inghelbrecht worked at YouTube/Google 
and was later also president, and instrumental in the development of, TrueCar, a 
publisher of industry data in the auto retail market.  
Dhiraj Mukherjee, co-founder of Shazam, is currently a Social Media Strategy 
consultant at Infosys in London. Previously he was Digital Director in charge of In-
novation at Bauer Media; a digital consultant with Viant where he started the Lon-
don office, and a strategy consultant with Bain & Company. He has a BA from 
Dartmouth College and an MBA from Stanford Business School.  
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 2 | Barton, Inghelbrecht, Mukherjee, and Wang: Shazam 
 
16  
Avery Wang, co-founder and chief scientist of Shazam, has over 20 years of in-
dustry experience designing high-performance multimedia signal processing systems 
for the consumer market and is the principal inventor of Shazam's recognition algo-
rithms and other key technologies. Avery holds graduate degrees in Electrical Engi-
neering and Mathematics from Stanford University, with a PhD at CCRMA on Audi-
tory Source Separation. He also studied Computational Neurosciences on a Ful-
bright scholarship in Germany. At Shazam his responsibilities include innovation and 
intellectual property. 
 
Pedro Santos: How did you start from an idea to the actual company? 
How did you evolve? 
Philip Inghelbrecht: This is kind of the sequence of events. There are four 
founders in Shazam and this is how it all came together. Chris Barton and I 
entered the MBA class of 2000 at UC Berkeley. In August 1998 we started 
our MBA in Berkeley and that was when the internet was hotter than ever. It 
was the dot-com boom at its best and it was very fashionable, if not almost 
required, that upon graduation you would turn down big job offers because 
you were going to start your own company.  
So, in a strange turn of events, and this shows how coincidental the world 
can be, in an MBA you have mandatory classes, but if you have taken that 
class and worked in that area and show you are proficient in it, you can take 
a quick exam before the class starts and possibly waive it. I had an invest-
ment banking background and Chris had a Masters in Finance from Cam-
bridge so we both did that exam and so we both did not have to take that 
class in our first year and we could choose any other class. The only other 
class available, and this is ironic, was Advanced Finance. So, on the first day 
of school, Chris and I found ourselves sitting next to each other, being the 
only first-year students amongst second-year students. So, in the class every-
body knew each other because they had studied together for a year and of 
course Chris and I were brand-new, so we found each other on the class 
benches and became teammates on the same project in that particular class 
and also we became very good friends quickly. It was not long before we de-
cided to start a company together.  
We were not sure what it was going to be… It’s kind of in our DNA to start 
companies and do something new and exciting. We had lots of ideas—some 
of them were actually good and I regret we didn’t pursue them, some of 
them were out of control and I would be too embarrassed to share them… 
So, in the course of 1998 and early 1999 we just brainstormed but didn’t ac-
tually do anything, it was all talk. Fast forward, as we approached late 1999 

European Founders at Work 
 
17  
and we had only six months to go until the end of our MBA, we said to our-
selves we had to make a decision and to go for something. You can’t pursue 
five companies at the same time—we had to pick and focus. So, the idea of 
Shazam was the one we went for. It was actually Chris’s idea and after some 
conversation we decided that it was the one we were going to try it out.  
Santos: I would like to ask Chris. Can you tell us about some of these ideas 
and why you actually decided to go through with Shazam? 
Chris Barton: Yeah, I think I was brainstorming. There were a bunch of 
ideas. Among the top two terrible ideas that preceded Shazam. One was, 
sadly enough—I don’t even know if Philip and Dhiraj know about this—to do 
with selling contact lenses on the web. I thought it was a big, high-margin op-
portunity. But it just seemed so boring that I quickly dropped that one. 
Inghelbrecht: I remember that one, yeah. 
Barton: Then the second one was one that some of my friends jokingly 
called “e-stalker,” which was an idea where I wanted to introduce the con-
cept of star power to web sites. As you know, a $100 million movie can 
spend $30 million having Tom Cruise in the movie. The idea is that movie 
stars would allow themselves to be tracked when they go to certain internet 
sites. Then if you were on Amazon and they were on Amazon, it would say, 
“Tom Cruise is on Amazon now, Madonna is on Amazon now,” that type of 
thing. Then it was selling that essentially to web sites. But anyway, that was 
also a crazy idea. 
Dhiraj Mukherjee: Yes. Chris is still talking about it. [Laughter] 
Barton: Yes. Then came the original incarnation of the Shazam idea. My 
thought was to identify music by monitoring radio stations. I was thinking, 
okay, what I would do is build software to help radio stations track all their 
programming and play lists. Then that would be useful to them. Then we 
would have exclusive ability to monitor what songs they were playing. Then 
with that, you could provide a Shazam-like service but of course it would 
only work for radio play. 
So the final tipping point for the Shazam idea was that I was taking a course 
at London Business School called Strategic Innovation. They encourage you 
to really think outside the box, so I had to come up with this idea from every 
angle. And I thought, “Well, if I built this exclusive network to radio stations 
and I was the only one who knew what they were playing, what could some-
one do that would get around me, even if I had that exclusivity?” It was at 
that point I thought, “Oh, my God. What if you could just know what they’re 
playing using the actual sound heard by the phone?” 

Chapter 2 | Barton, Inghelbrecht, Mukherjee, and Wang: Shazam 
 
18  
Then you wouldn’t even need this exclusive deal with the radio station, with 
the exclusive software. You would literally just be able to do it with the 
sound. I thought, obviously no one had ever done that. 
The first thing I did was I called my dad because he’s a nuclear physicist. I 
mean, he’s not an expert in this area, but he’s a scientist. I bounced the idea 
off him and just said, “Do you think that sounds like it could be feasible?” 
Santos: Why did it take three years to put this together?  
Inghelbrecht: Shazam is not your traditional start-up. I am not sure how I 
would explain it. If you think about it, most technology start-ups begin with 
the invention of a great technology. So, it is about how you can commercial-
ize it and create a market, and make money from it of course.  
We were thinking, “How cool that would it be if you could just recognize the 
song by holding up your phone?” But the music recognition technology out 
there but by no means was it fit for that particular scenario. We had to rec-
ognize ten seconds of a very noisy audio and in the matter of milliseconds out 
of the database with millions of tracks. So, we said: hey, what a great concept, 
let’s go build the company around it. That’s not how you start companies un-
less you are in biotech or something like that where you have ten years of 
clinical trials. So going a little bit back, it’s late ’99, there is Chris and myself, 
and by that time we had roped in Dhiraj Mukherjee. Dhiraj had set up the Vi-
ant office in London. So, the three of us sat on this great idea, but we really 
didn’t have anything.  
We didn’t even have a business plan and most importantly we didn’t have the 
implementation of the technology. The first few months of Shazam were 
spent trying to find the fourth person—the technologist, the engineer, who 
could implement this and “crack the code” on music recognition in a noisy 
environment. We literally went around the world trying to find that person. 
We would go to Xerox PARC, MIT Media Lab, Stanford University Center 
for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics. In all those places we would 
describe the problem and ask if they could build this. Most of the time we 
would be laughed away. People would say, “Ha, ha, ha, it’s not possible. You 
boys go take a job at McKinsey or something when you graduate.” 
 And we just kept going at it. People would say, “Very intriguing, very chal-
lenging but… yes, I guess you could build it, but it would require a computer 
park that every single search would cost you a dollar or two dollars and you 
can’t build a business around it.” That was the first three months of the 
company, trying to find that person. 

European Founders at Work 
 
19  
Santos: What was the main thing that made you pursue Avery out of all the 
others? 
Barton: Well, what we did is a bunch of research on the web. We found 
people who had published articles in digital signal processing. Almost all of 
them came from either MIT or Stanford. We then had a list. Philip and I had 
a list of probably about forty of these people or something like that. We 
then found Julius Smith. He was a professor at Stanford. Many of the other 
people on the list were PhD students or recent graduates. 
We tried to get to him a couple of different times. He actually ignored us 
the first few times. Then eventually, because we had another advisor from 
Berkeley named Dan Ellis… By having Dan Ellis as an advisor, that kind of 
opened the door with Julius Smith. 
He finally said, “Well, if Dan Ellis is involved in your project, then, sure, I’ll 
talk to you.” So we went and met with Julius Smith in his living room in Stan-
ford in Palo Alto. He loved the idea. He said that he didn’t know of any 
technology that could do this, at the time, but he felt like it could be feasible 
to invent it. 
Then in our second meeting with him, I brought the list of forty people that 
we had researched, who were all PhDs in electrical engineering, focused on 
digital signal processing. He knew almost all of them because it’s a small 
community. 
I basically said, “Julius, I want you to rank the five smartest people on this list. 
I want you to rank it not only for their ability in acoustics signal processing. 
Because we actually have to invent something, we don’t have to just engineer 
something, but we have to actually invent something. They need to be deeply 
theoretical at a mathematical and statistical level. So they need to be very 
strong in mathematics and statistics at the theory level, essentially.” 
Then finally, I wanted them to also have the ability to code and execute, be-
cause we’re a start-up and we can’t afford to have coders as well. 
Based on all those criteria, he ranked the five smartest and most recom-
mended people. Avery was the number-one ranked on that list. There was 
another guy who was at Liquid Audio at the time, I think, and I can’t remem-
ber who the other three or four were. But anyway, yeah, we met with Avery 
and liked Avery, and thought that he could invent the solution, even though 
he thought it was impossible. 
Inghelbrecht: Sometimes you need luck along the way so, Avery was actu-
ally living in Palo Alto at that time. His own company wasn’t really moving 
anywhere. So, we just went after Avery. Pitched him on the idea, on the 

Chapter 2 | Barton, Inghelbrecht, Mukherjee, and Wang: Shazam 
 
20  
concept and promised to make him the fourth fully-fledged co-founder. If he 
was going to do this, his contribution was going to be as significant as ours. 
That is when we finally had the team together. So, the first five to six months 
were spent trying to find and build the team.  
Santos: Avery, what were your thoughts when they came up with the idea 
for you? 
Avery Wang: From my perspective, I got an e-mail from Chris. Initially, I 
said, “Oh, whatever, some random person” and I ignored it. One thing about 
Chris is he’s incredibly persistent and basically doesn’t take no for an answer. 
Then he tracked me down and forced me to go to lunch with him at a cafe in 
Palo Alto, Cafe Brioche, which is now one of our favorite places, and kind of 
gave me a pitch about what he had in mind. 
Philip was there too. So I thought, “Well, okay. It’s sort of a crazy idea and I 
have no idea how to do this but I’ll give it a try.” Then I started out and I 
started working with Julius Smith. 
He’s actually one of the top researchers in digital music and audio signal 
processing. So we started thinking about how to do it and tossed around a 
bunch of ideas and for actually several months didn’t really have a solution. 
While this was going on, Chris was saying, “Okay, we need to have an algo-
rithm by this date and raise money by that date, otherwise we’re going to 
start running out of money and we’ll have to find other jobs.” [Laughs] Get a 
real job. 
Santos: When did you actually come to the conclusion that you have a 
working solution or you have an idea? 
Wang: That’s kind of interesting. I was working on this and not really get-
ting anywhere. The guys had already moved to London where we decided 
the business would be based. I was saying, “We need audio recordings.” So 
it took a while but the people in London got me some sample recordings. 
There’s a whole story behind the London crew as well, which I probably will 
defer to one of the other guys, possibly Dhiraj. 
Anyway, so I’d been working on this for a couple of months and then I heard 
the first audio recordings. Understanding how the service is supposed to 
work as it was envisioned by the other three co-founders, the audio was be-
ing recorded in a noisy environment with the music being in the background 
and going through a tiny little microphone on a mobile phone which meant it 
also went through voice compression. 

European Founders at Work 
 
21  
So by the time we got the recording on the other end of the phone, you 
couldn’t really hear much music in most of the cases. I was in despair. I was 
starting to think how to break the news gently to my co-founders that this 
was actually indeed impossible just like all the other professors had been tell-
ing them. 
Then Chris was following his timeline and saying “Okay, you need to get this 
done.” I think we were up against the deadline in our project plan. Then he 
went to Croatia, I believe, on vacation. 
Barton: That’s right. 
Wang: During that time, there was one afternoon where I was sitting in a 
café. Too much coffee and probably spending half my thoughts on how the 
other guys would feel after I let them down. [Laughs] I was staring at some 
graphs when I realized that I had the solution. There is a certain trace and a 
scatter plot of matching audio fingerprints. I could go into that in more de-
tail, but just leave it at that. Then I realized that it was a very strong statisti-
cal indicator of being able to detect music. I ran some examples and found 
that it was actually able to recognize music even in the very noisy cases 
where you couldn’t actually hear music in the recording with your own ears. 
Then Chris insisted that I fly immediately to London and help out with the 
fundraising. The good news is we were still essentially on Chris’s project 
plan. We weren’t really slipping schedule. We had essentially implemented 
the technology basically just in time so we could go and raise money. 
Santos: Impressive. 
Mukherjee: I polished off the business plan during that week while Chris 
was away and he came back and he said, “Wow! I should go away more of-
ten,” those were his exact words. [Laughter] 
Avery’s work was much harder, but now we could get into the fundraising. 
Santos: Just one question to Avery. Did you actually realize when you came 
up with that solution how good a solution it was?  
Wang: It wasn’t quite in my mind at that moment, I think. I realized that 
there were certain properties, advantages and disadvantages, of the solution 
and that it was largely focused on exact recordings, but I realized at that 
point that it could scale dramatically. I don’t know how much detail you want 
to go into. 
We knew it had to be able to scale to millions of recordings in a database 
and be able to handle perhaps hundreds, if not thousands, of recognitions 
per second without using some huge amount of servers. 

Chapter 2 | Barton, Inghelbrecht, Mukherjee, and Wang: Shazam 
 
22  
And also be able to handle a large amount of noise from the environment. So 
that was a pretty tall order. But when I saw that graph, I realized while think-
ing almost all those thoughts within a few minutes, that this would actually 
solve all those problems. 
Santos: I suppose this phase was all bootstrapped.  
Inghelbrecht: We didn’t really spend money. Our only expenses were 
phone calls and a little bit of travel. We couldn’t build anything, we were not 
engineers. I have to be honest with you, Dhiraj was really busy in London, he 
had a real job, but Chris and I were in our last semester in business school 
and we had plenty of time to kill. That last semester is either for partying or 
starting your own company. It is the time when school doesn’t really matter 
anymore. So, as Avery mentioned, he comes on board and we literally wrote 
the project plan.  
Santos: Slightly optimistic… 
Inghelbrecht: You can’t do this, this is just ridiculous. But Avery came 
through. Surely the first incarnation of the technology is nowhere close to 
what it is today. It wasn’t as scalable, it wasn’t as accurate, you name it, but 
the cornerstone was laid. And it was enough for us to start raising angel 
money, build a team and start building a real company.  
If you think about the Shazam service in the early days, the technology, the 
algorithm, was a very critical part, but it was only one out of three. Because 
you don’t only have a great algorithm, but you also must have a database of 
music to match against. You have to look at things in perspective. In late 
2000, there was Napster, but people were buying CDs, there were no 
iTunes stores. Digital music was very new. There wasn’t much out there. So, 
we had to go and build overnight so to speak the largest database of music 
fingerprints ever built. We had one chance.  
The other one, for this to work if we were going to launch in the UK on day 
number one, was to make the service available on all the UK operators. 
There were four of them at that time. And we had to have with all of them a 
single short dial code like 2580, because we couldn’t have multiple numbers, 
we had to have a system—what is called a reverse SMS charge. Once it has 
recognized the song and the text message was sent to your phone with the 
name of the track and the artist as a consumer, you would pay to receive 
that text message.  
So, we had to force their technology in that way and convince all those op-
erators, all at the same time that they would share that revenue back with 
us. I mean this is early 2000. None of these three things that I’ve have just 

European Founders at Work 
 
23  
mentioned—the algorithm, the music database, and the implementation with 
the operators—had been done by anybody before. I am still mesmerized and 
happy how some of the investors, angels and VCs believed that we were go-
ing to put all these pieces together and orchestrate it in one giant launch in 
2002.  
And we did it, we came through. Ten years ago you could start a company 
with a PowerPoint presentation. Eight years ago, with a PowerPoint presen-
tation and maybe a prototype and maybe we were at that area and we had 
that. Three years ago you could start it with beta product or a working 
product. Nowadays to raise money, you’d better not only have a working 
product, but you’d better demonstrate traction that you have—like one mil-
lion users. Otherwise you don’t raise money. Shazam, early on, was very 
capital intensive. We had to crack a few nuts that were never cracked be-
fore. And it took time.  
Santos: That leads me to a double question. One, you were all in the US, 
well three of the four founders were in the US, and you launched in the UK. 
What made you make this decision? Where did you raise the business angel 
funds—in the US or in the UK?  
Inghelbrecht: The company was always meant to operate in the UK. There 
were a few reasons for that. In 2000 you couldn’t even send an SMS cross-
network in the US yet. There was no “premium charge SMS” in the US. And 
our whole business was predicated on sending SMSs back to the end user,  
not to mention charging for it. That infrastructure was simply not available in 
the US mobile market. That is one. Also, the music market per capita in the 
UK is higher than anywhere in the world, actually. At least back then higher 
than Japan and higher than the US. So, that’s a good mix as well. So, those 
were two important details. Finally, investors in Europe understood consumer 
mobile businesses at the time whereas the US investors were not there yet. 
Besides we thought it would be fun to live in London for a few years.  
Now, Avery had a family. Dhiraj, Chris, and myself, our opportunity cost was 
low. Dhiraj had a nicely paid job. Chris and I never took a job after gradua-
tion, so we never tasted what it is to make a $100,000 or $150,000. So, for 
us, we didn’t really care what we did and where we moved, as long as we 
had fun along the way. For Avery, of course, it was a little bit more difficult. 
We had to appreciate and acknowledge that. From day number one it was 
well understood that Avery would stay in Palo Alto and it made sense back 
in the day, because he was really focused on the algorithm and as a deep 
theorist and truly an inventor, some of his best ideas are generated at three 
o’clock in the morning. We didn’t need him to stay in the office. Besides he 
bounced off a lot of his thoughts and ideas with Julius Smith, his professor at 

Chapter 2 | Barton, Inghelbrecht, Mukherjee, and Wang: Shazam 
 
24  
Stanford. So it was better to have them both together than across different 
time zones. So, it is weird, but it was actually the best for the company.  
Santos: It is a very unusual mix.  
Inghelbrecht: Very unusual and I’m not sure if I can recommend it to any-
body today.  
Santos: Well, now on to you, Dhiraj. You were the only one in the begin-
ning in London. 
Mukherjee: Yes. 
Santos: So how did you connect to the rest of the team? What’s the begin-
ning from your side? 
Mukherjee: Sure. Chris and I were good friends. When I lived in San Fran-
cisco in the ‘90s, he used to live in San Francisco as well. Then I was in Lon-
don in the summer of ’99 and Chris was there as well. He was an intern that 
summer and I had a job at Viant. We hung out and talked about starting a 
company together, but we didn’t have one specific idea in mind. Chris always 
said he had this great friend, Philip, who was his classmate at business school. 
He wanted to involve Philip in whatever we did together. 
So we basically agreed to start a company together, but we weren’t quite 
sure what. I continued my job, and Chris was back at business school when 
he came up with the idea for Shazam and we talked it over on the phone and 
agreed we would go for that one. 
So as it happens, it worked well to be based in London, as Philip mentioned, 
because the mobile market was much more advanced in Europe than in the 
US at the time—the usage and the capabilities. It was just coincidence that 
we were together in London at that time, but the location actually fit the 
business. That’s why after Chris and Philip finished business school, they 
moved out to London. 
It was lucky that—you heard the story from Avery—Chris and Philip were 
actually in the Bay Area and that’s in fact where Avery was, so it was just a 
lucky combination of circumstances. 
Santos: While Avery was developing the actual solution, you guys moved to 
the UK and you started trying to get all the other pieces together. What was 
the first challenge that you addressed beyond the actual solution? 
Barton: Without a doubt the challenge was attracting capital. Essentially, it’s 
that whole thing that to attract capital, you have to have addressed the key 
concerns of the people that are looking to invest. One of the key concerns 

European Founders at Work 
 
25  
was obviously getting interest from mobile operators. We had a lot of meet-
ings with mobile operators and the mobile operators were unwilling to jump 
on things at such a nascent stage given we could disappear overnight. 
We actually focused most of our efforts so that our initial set of investors 
were angel investors. We decided that we wanted to raise angel money, but 
we also decided that we wanted the money that we attracted to also validate 
the business. So we wanted high-profile angel investors. Specifically, we just 
decided to go after these famous angel investors.  
We ended up getting the former CEO and chairman of EMI, one of the ma-
jor record labels. The former chairman of BMG, one of the major record la-
bels. The founder of Amazon.com in Europe, amazon.co.uk. The inventor of 
the 56K modem. The former chief technology officer of British Telecom. All 
these different guys. The founder of Liquid Audio. All these people became 
angel investors. 
That was a big hurdle for us. We wanted them. We wanted their names be-
hind it because we knew it would help the VCs get more excited about us. 
We also needed the money because we had no money at all. That became 
our primary focus immediately after inventing the technology and filing the 
patent. 
Santos: You’re a small start-up with the technology completely brand-new 
and an unproven business model. How do you convince these top business 
angels to get on board and support you? 
Barton: I can jump in with a really simple answer on that. It’s all thanks to 
Avery. Because Avery built this demo. When you saw this demo at the 
time—I mean, now, music recognition has become mainstream. But we had 
something at the time that you could show people that they had never 
thought to be possible. Show this little demo and it literally was the thing—
combined with a PowerPoint, of course—that just won people over, includ-
ing the venture capitalists that eventually invested. 
Literally, in this demo, you would play a little audio clip that was recorded 
over a mobile phone. So we’d have that sound snippet that we had captured 
over a mobile phone. Then we’d run it and it would identify that song essen-
tially against a database of songs. 
We got to the point where we could do it actually with a limited number of 
songs right there, with a demo mobile phone. When people saw that, they 
just thought, “Wow.” It was like magic. That alone basically sold them. 

Chapter 2 | Barton, Inghelbrecht, Mukherjee, and Wang: Shazam 
 
26  
Wang: I don’t want to take all of the credit, because a lot of the momentum 
was starting already before I had actually implemented the technology. My 
fellow co-founders had already been leveraging their contacts. They’re fairly 
well-connected in knowing a lot of people who are in various strategic 
places. Then it was basically an exercise in leveraging credibility. 
You’ve got one guy who’s credible. Then another guy saying, “Oh, if he’s in-
volved, maybe you’re interesting.” Then building that up and basically boot-
strapping credibility, I guess that probably worked to some extent. But at the 
end of the day, you have to have something to show. 
So it’s certainly not just the technological innovation that built the company. 
Mukherjee: This was a voyage of discovery. So, we didn’t even know what 
kind of technologist we were looking for. We had to first discover that digi-
tal signal processing was the right field. And then we could track down 
Avery. Similarly, as he has described with the fundraising, you’d better have 
all of the different parts of the story come together. A big piece that we 
didn’t know about was the music database.  
Santos: So, you raised the angel money, you managed to have the algorithm 
done. How did you manage to get the database? 
Inghelbrecht: Here, I can’t give you the full details. Some of this is still very 
active and confidential. But back in the day, a company called Entertainment 
UK was the largest wholesaler of music in all the United Kingdom. If anybody 
had music in their warehouse, it was them. So, we started with Entertain-
ment UK. It is important to realize that if you look at Shazam, we don’t really 
need the music itself. To recognize music you don’t need full digital copies. 
We help the music industry… there is nothing more promotional than  
Shazam. 
Santos: It is free promotion for the artist.  
Inghelbrecht: It is proven. This is how we built the music database in the 
early days. And these were critical deals. 
Barton: There really were no digital music databases at the time that we 
could access, so we had to start from scratch. The other part of that is, in 
order to get that database, we needed to get the CDs because that was the 
way it existed. We wanted to avoid buying one hundred thousand CDs be-
cause you’re looking at a couple of million bucks. 
So, Philip was able to go do the world’s best start-up deal in history. He es-
sentially went and did the deal with Entertainment UK. Entertainment UK 
was the biggest wholesale distributor of CDs in the UK. The largest record 

European Founders at Work 
 
27  
store in the UK was Virgin Megastore, with about fifteen thousand or twenty 
thousand unique CDs. And Entertainment UK had one hundred thousand 
unique CDs. 
Philip’s deal basically said that you let us co-locate on site. We’re going to 
pick your CDs off your shelves. We’re going to create this database using 
your CDs. Entertainment UK was able to keep a copy of the database of 
metadata for their own purposes. We did that deal and co-created this data-
base with Entertainment UK, and it saved huge amounts of money. 
We also had twenty people on a seven days/twenty-four-hour basis, keying 
in all the metadata—the song titles, album titles, track lengths, you name it. 
Because you have to put yourself back in time—this was the early 2000s. 
The name of the game was to sell CDs online. The only way you could sell 
CDs online is if actually you could describe those CDs, right? And so Enter-
tainment UK didn’t have that metadata. And so we keyed it in and gave it  
to them.  
Santos: And the operators… did they receive you well or was it like, 
“Mmm, this small company is wanting to strike a deal with us?” 
Inghelbrecht: We definitely had to push them because, if you think about 
it, we had to get a reverse SMS charge and a revenue share. Chris has a long 
background in the mobile industry and he really positioned and pitched it 
better than anybody else where he demonstrated that this was some kind of 
new data revenue against voice that was going to become a commodity.  
And he pitched it so well that all the operators worked with us. They wrote 
us letters of intent so that we would have something to show for when we 
went to Series A fund-raising. I make it sound easy, but putting it all together 
and signing documents was hard work. But they were definitely cooperative. 
Even the recording labels were cooperative. Here is the company that hasn’t 
launched its product yet and has nothing really to show for it…  
If you are in the recording industry the best thing you can do is sit back and 
relax and let the CDs sell themselves and cash in the money. Don’t try to fix 
something that isn’t broken. Don’t move too fast with new distribution op-
portunities or radical business models. So, they really didn’t care much about 
it. So, when talking to the record labels about this, I think we had three types 
of response. We had “okayish.” And then people who went out of the way 
quickly, most people. The majority didn’t care—there was like one meeting 
and nothing would happen. And occasionally we would run into those I call 
the eternal optimists.  

Chapter 2 | Barton, Inghelbrecht, Mukherjee, and Wang: Shazam 
 
28  
I will never forget the meeting with [an executive at] BMG. So, we wanted 
to demonstrate technology to him, so the next thing he does … we had a 
prototype on our phone, he puts in one of his CDs, he plays the music, let’s 
say it was Britney Spears, and we tagged the song and the answer was that it 
was Christina Aguilera. That’s the worst that can happen. So, it’s his music 
and not only did we miss it, it’s the worst false positive. Despite all that, he 
stood up and said “Wow, this is amazing. I don’t care if it gets it or not, but 
it is still amazing.”  
Santos: You need people like this in the beginning because the company is 
still quite fragile.  
Inghelbrecht: You do, you look at some of our advisors—they were all 
great people. These were people who truly believed in it.  
Santos: And that makes them great advisors. They have the optimism that 
you sometimes need.  
Inghelbrecht: It reinforces your vision. When you put all these deals to-
gether… until then you didn’t raise any capital … once you had the deals 
with all the three components, you had the prototype, the database and you 
had the operators interested and then you went to raise cash. 
We raised a total of $1 million in angel money. In July 2001, we raised our 
Series A led by IDG Ventures Europe and two other VCs in Europe. So, one 
million in angel and $7.5 million from VCs.  
Barton: Just a quick story about a VC meeting. We were a teeny little start-
up with very little money, and so we rented a tiny little box-like office that 
was in a very cheap area. But we also wanted to be in a hip area. And so if 
you want hip and you want cheap in London, that puts you in Soho. The 
shady part of Soho. And so that’s where our office was and our neighbor-
hood had a little bit of a red-light district type of atmosphere. 
Well, it turns out, sadly, there was, I guess, a murder that occurred, actu-
ally, in a store that was directly below us in our building. So anyway, it just 
happened that the next day, we had scheduled some venture capitalists to 
come by and meet us at our office so we could pitch to try to raise money 
from them. 
Normally, we would visit venture capitalists in their offices, but I think these 
ones were visiting from Belgium. They came up to ring our door buzzer and 
as they pushed the buzzer, some policemen approached them and said, “Do 
you know anything about the murder?” They were bewildered. [Laughter] 

European Founders at Work 
 
29  
And the police were serious. So … the first impression of these venture 
capitalists is like, “My God. What kind of company is this?” 
Santos: How did that meeting end, actually? 
Barton: I’m trying to remember. Do you remember? Was that FLV? 
Mukherjee: It was FLV and they invested in us. 
Barton: Yeah, they invested. That’s hilarious.  
Santos: Any more VC stories before we move on? 
Barton: Well actually, I have another one. Shazam was working very well 
before in beta testing before release, except it seemed when tested by our 
venture capitalist, who was very nervous indeed. He kept trying it. And for 
him and him alone, when he tagged songs, it kept coming back always saying 
that it was “The Pogues” no matter which band he tagged. 
Avery dug and dug and dug, trying to figure out why this was. And then even-
tually we figured out it was because he was so eager to make it work that 
when he was tagging songs, he was putting his mobile phone literally right 
next to the speaker, so close to the speaker that it created a feedback 
sound. And that feedback sound was identical to the sound that was in this 
particular song by The Pogues. 
Santos: So you solved the database problem. You had funding. You had the 
algorithm. You still have to convince the music industry. Did you have any 
problems or issues with the music industry? 
Barton: Obviously, we were always hoping that the music industry would 
embrace us, they would promote Shazam, and you name it.  
In the early days, the record label executives would laugh us away. Obvi-
ously, that has now changed. If you’re a music industry executive and you 
don’t use Shazam, you’re toast. You know what I mean? So in the early days, 
it was very hard to get traction with anybody in the music industry. 
Mukherjee: We’ve always wanted to work with the music industry, and 
Shazam, to this day, does do promotions with the music industry. We were 
not reliant on the music industry in the way that other music businesses are 
that want to sell music or play music. 
Santos: And the telecom operators. How did you convince them to incor-
porate this new service into their networks? 
Barton: A lot of persistent phone calls. [Laughs] So the good news is that 
there were really only two things that we were reliant on the telecom  

Chapter 2 | Barton, Inghelbrecht, Mukherjee, and Wang: Shazam 
 
30  
companies for. One of them was a standard product. So the two things that 
we needed from them for an initial launch were premium SMS charging— 
that was a standard product. Almost any company can sign up and get pre-
mium SMS charging. That’s how we do it. We send the SMS to the user with 
the name of the song, and then the user would also receive a charge on their 
phone bill of fifty pence. Then we would get a revenue share on that. The 
really, really challenging thing, and that was the second thing we wanted, was 
not a standard product. We had to convince them to do something that they 
did not do with any other companies. And that was to give us the four-digit 
phone number or “short code.” 
We didn’t want to have a full, long phone number. We wanted to have a 
number like 911, 411, or 192. One of these short digit numbers. The one we 
went for was 2580, which happens to be the only four digits that went right 
down the middle of the phone, so it had a nice geometric, memorable com-
ponent to it. It was recommended to us by a talented user experience guy 
who Dhiraj knew. We had to convince them to give us this four-digit num-
ber and that was actually very, very challenging. We had many, many meet-
ings and lots of resistance over many months. 
Ultimately, our strategy was basically to try to get one, and once you get 
one, then you get two. And once you get two, then the third one—and they 
feel like they don’t want to be the only one missing out. We tried to hype it 
up and say this is going to be a really cool service. You don’t want to be the 
only mobile out here that doesn’t have it. 
Santos: Why was this four-digit number so important? 
Barton: First of all, we had to have one consistent number across all mobile 
operators. So that was one thing that was critical. Otherwise, marketing 
would be a disaster. Then secondly, if you don’t have a four-digit number, 
then that means you have to have a full phone number and a full phone num-
ber probably would have various charges associated with it, depending on 
where you call from in the UK, and it would also be very, very hard for peo-
ple to remember it, and so it would be very hard for marketing. So that was 
the reason. 
Santos: And this was all in preparation for the launch in 2002. How did it 
feel? How was it to each one of you to actually experience it? 
Mukherjee: Well, when we launched, it started off with lots of drinks. I do 
remember the launch party very well. 
Barton: Obviously it was fantastic. I think everyone was delighted. We were 
big believers in celebrations. Dhiraj introduced one of the most important 

European Founders at Work 
 
31  
fundamental philosophies at Shazam, which was that after a successful meet-
ing with a partner, we would have to go directly to the pub to have a drink 
and celebrate. 
Mukherjee: That was okay at six o’clock in the evening. At eleven o’clock in 
the morning, it was a little harder. 
Barton: I can remember going with Dhiraj to the outskirts of London and 
meeting with—I think it was T-Mobile, one of the mobile operators, and 
then after the meeting we were out there in the middle of nowhere and the 
first thing we did, it was probably around midday, we went straight to the 
pub and had a pint and celebrated just because it was a good meeting. Yeah, 
we’re big believers in celebration. Certainly the launch was very exciting. 
Mukherjee: One of my roles was to run the launch or to coordinate the 
launch with all the different pieces we’ve talked about in place: the music da-
tabase and the mobile operator deals and the actual technology, etc.  
We had just hired our new CEO. He started a couple of weeks before our 
launch. I said to him, “Look, who knows when we’re going to launch because 
it’s so hard to say when Orange is going to agree to give us this number. Can 
we just make it a moving target?” He said, “Nope. Can’t do that. You have to 
pick a date. You have to tell me when it’s going to be, and we have to launch 
then.” I said, okay. So we had this giant spreadsheet with every single thing 
that needed to happen. 
I came back and said, “Well, it’s going to be the sixteenth of August.” He 
said, “What day of the week is that?” So, I said Friday. He said that’s not a 
good day for a launch because it’s a Friday. How about we make it a Mon-
day? I said, “Fine, we’ll have it on Monday, the nineteenth of August.” 
On Monday, the nineteenth of August, everything was done. So all the pieces 
came together, we launched, the CEO was on television, and then Philip has 
already told you how we celebrated that evening. 
Inghelbrecht: I think there was one other detail there. Chris said, “Yeah, 
besides that’s my dad’s birthday, so that’s a good day.” Chris, is that right? 
Barton: Yeah, that’s right. It’s still my dad’s birthday. 
Mukherjee: Still your dad’s birthday? That’s crazy. 
Barton: Exactly. It really helps me remember his birthday, so it’s great. 
Mukherjee: I still celebrate even ten years later. I never fail to think of our 
launch when the nineteenth of August comes around. 

Chapter 2 | Barton, Inghelbrecht, Mukherjee, and Wang: Shazam 
 
32  
Barton: Philip’s wife Mekhala, who had joined us as one of the earliest em-
ployees at Shazam, still sends an SMS out to people saying it’s Shazam’s anni-
versary. It’s great.  
Santos: As Dhiraj said, a bit before the actual launch you hired a CEO, 
which now is not seen as a normal step. 
Inghelbrecht: It’s a funny world. Today there is a concept of CEO/founder. 
VCs only fund companies where the founders will become the long-term 
CEO. That’s what they want. They want the founder to remain the CEO un-
less it goes awfully wrong. Back in the day, it was more fashionable and it was 
also required from us that upon us raising our Series A, we would find a 
gray-haired, experienced CEO. And that led us to Jerry Roest.  
Some CEO candidates were pushed upon us and we really did not want 
them and we would fight that very hard. But the concept that the CEO 
would have to come in was the norm. That was how start-up companies 
came about back in the day. After raising money, you would hire a CEO. It 
was a fundamental belief it was a good thing because as a founder you should 
be very happy to step down if a guy or a girl would come on and turn us into 
a much bigger company. It was a belief that it was a better thing for the 
company. Nowadays, we’d be hard-pressed to do that.  
Santos: How hard was it, from your point of view, to actually find a CEO 
that you were happy with and to get everyone behind your new CEO, Jerry 
Roest? 
Barton: I would say it was very challenging. I remember interviewing multi-
ple CEOs and I remember there were ones I didn’t, actually we all didn’t, like 
and the VCs did like, and as Philip said, that was very problematic. But we 
always knew that we were very willing to hire a CEO. In fact, we even 
agreed to it right up front when we signed a term sheet with a venture capi-
tal firm, and we had no problem with it. But we wanted to make sure we had 
someone who is a great fit. 
Actually, I’ve read the Google story about how Larry and Sergey, they took a 
long time to find a candidate that they liked, as well. And just trying to find 
that right fit is so hard. When we met Jerry, we really, really loved him. He 
had a great, great energy. He’s a very smart guy, he picked up things very 
quickly, and he had been a proven CEO and leader. 
So we’re very fortunate, because after meeting a lot of other candidates that 
didn’t have that kind of connection, we were very pleased to have him join. 
Santos: What were the things behind the energy that somehow made him a 
good fit for you and the investors?  

European Founders at Work 
 
33  
Barton: I think the investors liked him because he was a blue-chip CEO. He 
had run CompuServe Europe, which was a large technology organization.  
He had been one of the senior directors at NTL, which is a humongous cable 
company in the UK. So he had all the big leadership experience. What we 
liked about him is that he came from a technology background, which was 
great. Shazam has a lot of passion in the business. It’s a consumer-facing busi-
ness. So you need someone who is not just a technology person, but some-
one who has a kind of energy. Because it’s music and it’s consumer-facing. 
And Jerry, his early career was actually in sales. He was a superstar sales guy 
and rose up to be one of the top salesmen at Xerox. So basically he had a 
sales-like personality. He was very, very skilled at building excitement with 
partners and also building a great sort of excitement within the culture of the 
company and amongst the employees. 
He’s very much of a people person and he’s one of the most talented peo-
ple I know in the world in terms of understanding and dealing with people, 
all types of people. And he can just walk into a room and, just like the best 
salesman on earth, he can just get to know who you are and what you want, 
how to connect with you. And he can do that across the employees of  
Shazam, as well as partners of Shazam. In that perspective, he was a huge, 
huge asset. 
Santos: Who did the search? You or the VCs? 
Barton: The VCs found one of the top recruiting agencies and through 
them, brought in all the candidates. 
Santos: Regarding the launch of the service, it didn’t go viral. Did you feel a 
lot of pressure from the investors and the people who backed the start-up 
because the growth was not as high? Or not really? 
Barton: I don’t think anyone expected it to go viral, but we definitely felt 
pressure because ultimately we had achieved everything we said we were go-
ing to achieve. I don’t think that there was an expectation that it would just 
be instantly a financial success. By the way, the investors behind us were al-
most as green in some ways as we were as entrepreneurs, so it was a learn-
ing experience for everyone. I think we were one of the first investments by 
this guy from IDG Ventures named Ajay Chowdhury. 
Once we had accomplished all these things, we recognized, “Oh, my gosh, 
we have a significant burn rate.” Meanwhile, the big, unknown, unforeseen 
event was that attracting capital became very, very difficult. As you know, 
2001, 2002, 2003 were tough years. 

Chapter 2 | Barton, Inghelbrecht, Mukherjee, and Wang: Shazam 
 
34  
When you have a high burn rate, a need for capital, and don’t have significant 
revenues, even though you may be achieving all of your milestones, which we 
absolutely did do, the revenues are king. You need revenues. It was definitely 
challenging. It was very, very challenging. I think everyone felt pressured, 
both the VCs and the entrepreneurs and the employees. I don’t ever recall 
people thinking it would completely go viral and we’d have it be instantly 
profitable. 
Inghelbrecht: We had prepared for launch. We had hired a VP of Market-
ing … and tied it all up. And the reality is that the whole concept of virality 
and social components simply did not exist then. It wasn’t as if we flipped the 
switch on Thursday and then on Friday traffic went through the roof and 
grew exponentially. It wasn’t like that.  
I will take a big step back now. Shazam, in its first incarnation, sampled the 
music through your handset instead of speaking. It was what is called an IVR 
or Interactive Voice Response system. The same way as you would call your 
bank and push numbers to navigate. It was a bit the same system and you 
would get a SMS back, limited it to a few characters, and you could not buy 
the track immediately. It was just an ugly experience. And when we 
launched, surely we had traffic but it wasn’t the traffic that we hoped for. 
And, really, it took the coming about of what we call the smartphone and, of 
course, the iPhone, when we became a much better user experience with a 
better business model, the freemium model, for Shazam to truly take off. We 
were way ahead of our time. We built, not to toot our own horn, the killer 
app for music—but there were no smartphones yet. It was five years before 
the smartphone came about. Obviously it gave us an early mover advantage. 
When iPhone did launch, we were there right at the start.  
Santos: But you still had to wait five years for that. 
Inghelbrecht: The company was growing and it got a lot of growth by 
launching in other countries outside the UK, very often on a white-label ba-
sis. But that is not what I would call a healthy organic growth or traffic. It 
took the smartphone to get us there.  
Santos: Were you ever worried that the company might fail?  
Inghelbrecht: Yes. As you may have noticed, I always make it sound as if it 
was all fun and peachy as we started the company. Part of starting a company 
is riding through the lows as you ride the high, as well. Surely, we had our 
very hard moments. We launched a service, it went okay, it did not take off 
like a rocket.  

European Founders at Work 
 
35  
At the same time the entire VC market imploded. In 2002, the whole market 
went to the gutter. We had to raise more money, we had up to seventy 
people, we had our layoffs, and everything like that as well. So! Your early 
hires become your friends because they go through thick and thin with you, 
they take almost as much risk as you do, and when those moments come 
that you actually have to lay off your friends—it is not a lot of fun. I don’t 
wish that to anybody. And surely we had those moments as well.  
Santos: Was it in 2002 that you had to fire people? 
Inghelbrecht: I think it was late 2003—early 2004.  
Santos: That part is always hard. 
Inghelbrecht: Yes, but there is nothing you can do. You can either all go 
bankrupt together or you try to minimize your burn rate and go on in sur-
vival mode. Some of these people are still friends today. They were not laid 
off because they were underperformers. It was just because we couldn’t pay 
them. It was just the brutal reality. They were all smart people and they got 
jobs very quickly. We tried to help them in everything we could. Looking 
back at the history of the company, some of my fond memories are about 
people that we hired and the stories around that.  
When we started Shazam, Dhiraj was part of the team running the Viant of-
fice in London. That was pretty much when the internet went downhill. Viant 
was an internet consulting company. It was even traded on the stock ex-
change and was doing really well. And, of course, as the internet went down, 
they lost all of their business. Shazam was like a hyena circling around Viant 
because as they went out, we literally took on their best people. We cherry 
picked them. So, from the first ten employees of Shazam, five were Viant 
people. Some of them were investors. When they closed an office, we would 
take over all their infrastructure, down to the chairs.  
Yesterday, I had dinner with one of the guys who helped to build the data-
base of music. We had to rip a lot of CDs to extract those fingerprints, so it 
was like a 24/7 operation when you had young kids flipping CDs day and 
night. You have to manage that. You need a strong manager for that.  
So, I actually hired a guy who had done similar work in the US before and he 
was an ex-military man. His name is Bart and I will never forget. We first in-
terviewed him over the phone. So, we thought the guy was good and very 
strict and he would be a good manager for those kids. I flew him out of the 
States, because he was there, to interview him here. And at the end of the 
interview, we all for some reason went to a bar, at four o’clock in the after-
noon, and they had tequila tasting. So we got into tequila tasting and I started 

Chapter 2 | Barton, Inghelbrecht, Mukherjee, and Wang: Shazam 
 
36  
to realize I still had to drive him back to the airport, so I stopped drinking. 
So Bart had all my tequila tastes himself.  
So, everybody was blissfully drunk as part of the interview, except me. This 
was getting interesting because I was getting a very sober view on what was 
going to happen. Bart helped himself straight through all of that. When peo-
ple get drunk, this is when you really get to know something about them. But 
Bart ended up well. I drove him to the airport and the next day Bart was 
hired and a week later we flew him out to the UK. So, he literally had the 
tequila test.  
Some other guys, as well. We had these three engineers from Viant, they 
were all in Germany, so we just hired them in one go. So, we told them:  
Viant in Germany is going to close but here is a job even before you lose 
yours. And we would fly them to London and called them the Dream Team 
because they were very efficient in what they did.  
In terms of employees, the very first employee, Mekhala, actually became my 
wife. She was a student in London and helped Shazam in the early days for 
free. So, she worked for the company, we became friends, from friends we 
became something more, and fast-forward, in five years we got married and 
now have two beautiful daughters, thankfully taking after their mom. So, Sha-
zam to me is obviously more than a cool service or company. I got my wife 
and children through it as well.  
Santos: It is life-changing in every sense of the word.  
Inghelbrecht: Pedro, we had this fun thing in the early days. Whenever we 
had milestones, we all had to dye our hair. So, I had green hair, red hair, blue 
hair, black hair. At one point or another there was always one of us who 
walked into the office with his hair completely dyed for whatever reason.  
Santos: That must have been interesting to go back to VCs and talk again. 
Inghelbrecht: We have pictures of that. I actually think it may have given us 
some credibility that we were really experts on the music market.  
Santos: How did you actually grow into new markets?  
Mukherjee: We hired an international director who was one of our original 
angel investors. He was older than us by about ten years. He had gray hair, 
gravitas, and a lot of experience. But he also loved to travel all over the 
world. He flew all over doing deals with mobile operators in some cases, 
with content companies in others, just literally traveling around pitching the 
Shazam story and looking for local partners—which is why we ended up with 
a huge mobile footprint. I think it was nineteen countries within a year after 

European Founders at Work 
 
37  
our UK launch, because wherever there was a deal to be done and partners 
interested, we established those relationships. 
We ended up being called by different names, in different territories, on dif-
ferent operators. But that was the nature of the beast at the time. Now, it’s 
good that Shazam is known as Shazam everywhere in the world. But when 
we started out, we just got on with it the best we could. 
Inghelbrecht: This actually really highlights how fortunate we were that the 
apps stores came about. Because that allowed the company to move forward 
under the trade name of Shazam, rather than the white-label name—music 
finder, music ID, and whatever names operators or licensees would give to it 
in various countries. The apps stores allowed us to proceed under the name 
Shazam, which obviously has become a brand in its own right, now. It defi-
nitely has made the company much more valuable than it otherwise would 
have been. 
Santos: What’s your advice to the readers of this book that want to follow 
in your footsteps? What have you learned from this amazing experience at 
Shazam that you would have liked to know from the start that would have 
prevented you a few mishaps? 
Wang: A few things come to mind. One is persistence and another one is 
friendship, which I think on both points, we’ve been very strong on. The per-
sistence part, there were many points along the way where things were 
looking very discouraging and we might have given up, but somehow there’s 
this “can do” attitude. This attitude of where nothing is impossible. That, I 
would say, was greatly exemplified by Chris Barton, who basically doesn’t 
take “no” for an answer.  
When I was working on the recognition algorithm I would come to these 
roadblocks and then I would just say, “I don’t think this is possible.” I sup-
pose this ties back to the development process of the algorithm that I was 
talking about before. Chris would, even though he doesn’t have a technical 
background, he would dissect my statement and say, “What are your as-
sumptions?” I would give some factors and he would take every single one of 
my statements and then drill deeper. Eventually, I would get to the point 
where I would say, “Because I have a PhD. Because I say so.” [Laughs] 
Basically, I would find that I wouldn’t really have a definitive reason as to why 
it wouldn’t be possible. Then he would say, “Okay. We’re going to do a pro-
ject plan and you’re going to solve this thing because you don’t have conclu-
sive proof that it’s not possible. You’re going to solve that problem.” He’d 
rip it down into little pieces and didn’t take “no” for an answer at any point. 

Chapter 2 | Barton, Inghelbrecht, Mukherjee, and Wang: Shazam 
 
38  
That worked really well. It’s also true for a lot of business negotiations and 
that kind of thing. I think all of us were very persistent. Philip did a bunch of 
deals with the recording rights industry. All of us were blazing trails where 
nobody had done this kind of thing before. A big challenge was creating new 
markets, which is quite difficult. Especially in a situation where—this is after 
the bubble hard burst in the year 2000, and we basically got started right af-
ter that happened. So that is very challenging and Chris, Dhiraj, and Philip 
were raising money in this environment. Going back to my point, their per-
sistence really paid off. 
Another one is friendship. Throughout all of this we’ve—even though we 
went through some challenging times—we remained very good friends and 
stuck together. There are some quite difficult situations where one would 
think that our goals might not be aligned. I’m not sure I want to get into that, 
but we stuck together and made sure that there was a fair outcome to a 
larger extent. 
Mukherjee: I would definitely agree with latter point—we enjoyed each 
other’s company, we were always fair to each other, and I think we put our 
friendship before the business in some sense. I think the first point—I agree 
with Avery as well. I think the Shazam story is a crazy story and I would 
strongly advise any entrepreneur not to try to follow this in any shape or 
form at all. 
Come up with an idea which is impossible then try to find somebody who 
can make it un-impossible and then do deals which have never been done be-
fore. It’s hard to imagine how one could set up a worse plan, but I’m just in-
credibly glad that we’re even in this conversation with you, because so far it’s 
all worked out. 
Santos: I think that actually comes in line with what Philip said, as well. That 
everything fell into place. 
Mukherjee: Yeah. So persistence was a good plan of attack, but trying 
something smarter would be another one. 
Wang: I think in general, we kind of do it both ways. Adding to what Dhiraj 
said, we’re blazing new trails in a couple different areas, technologically as 
well as business-wise. We were about five years too early in the mobile mar-
ket, I think. There wasn’t really a marketplace for apps at that time. It’s very 
easy nowadays to launch an app—for example the iTunes or Android stores. 
The thing is that it can go both ways, certainly trying to blaze new trails is 
very risky, but then one advantage there is that if you succeed, you’re a first 
mover in the market and you gain certain advantages there. But then it is 
higher risk because nobody has done it before. And then, if you fail on any of 

European Founders at Work 
 
39  
the points, like creating the technology or doing the business deals or if it’s 
not possible to actually make a profitable business, then the company is dead. 
It’s high risk and high reward. 
Mukherjee: I don’t know if the other guys know. When we agreed on the 
idea for Shazam, as Chris said and Philip said, there were other ideas on the 
table. So I basically did a spreadsheet. I looked at each of the risk factors and 
I looked at the probability of success for each one and I just multiplied out 
the answer. I think my spreadsheet said there was like a four percent prob-
ability that we’d make it. I said, “Okay, well, you know, I’m in!” Chris said, 
“But I thought you said your spreadsheet says there’s like a four percent 
chance of success?” I said, “Yeah, but it sounds like it’ll be fun. So count me 
in!” But actually four percent was a wild, wild overestimate. I think it was a 
fraction of a percent. So I’m glad we’re here 10 years later to tell the story. 
Santos: Why the name Shazam? 
Wang: I don’t know. Anyway, the working name for the company was going 
to be Aardvark. 
Santos: Aardvark? 
Wang: The reason for that was with the double A at the front, it would al-
ways be at the top of any alphabetical list. 
Santos: [Laughs] Okay. What made you guys decide to move to Shazam? 
Do you remember? 
Inghelbrecht: I don’t think anybody really appreciated the name Aardvark. 
 

C H A P T E R 
3 
Lars Hinrichs  
XING 
XING AG (named Open Business Club until the end of 2006) is an online social 
business community founded in August 2003 in Hamburg, Germany, by Lars 
Hinrichs. The platform was officially launched on November 1, 2003. The com-
pany went public on December 7, 2006 with an issue price of €30, raising a total 
of €35.7 million. XING became the first Web 2.0 company to go public in Europe. 
Expanding its presence in global professional networking, XING has acquired other 
business-oriented social networks, including eConozco and Neurona, both based in 
Spain, and Turkey’s cember.net.  
 
Pedro Santos: How did you have the idea [for XING] and how did you 
implement it? 
Lars Hinrichs: The idea was quite simple. It was the combination of more 
than one thing. I read a book, The Tipping Point1, by Malcolm Gladwell, on the 
one side. And on the other side, I always wanted to know the context of my 
contacts, because this is actually for business reasons a most important op-
portunity for making new business. The people you know, basically you know 
by one degree of separation. So this is how it comes. 
Santos: Okay, so you had that idea. How did you implement it? What steps 
did you take to make XING a reality? 
                                                
1 Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point (Little, Brown and Company, 2000). 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 3 | Lars Hinrichs: XING 
 
42  
Hinrichs: From idea to incorporation, it was just a week, and I just started. I 
knew this was the new thing I wanted to do. I started with building the com-
pany, setting up the legal structure, getting a production team inside. Three 
months later, we started with a public data. 
Santos: Okay. How did you finance that initial launch? 
Hinrichs: Completely bootstrap. 
Santos: And after the launch, how did you grow it? How did you grow the 
network? Was it just asking friends of friends to join in? Was it some mar-
keting campaign? 
Hinrichs: I just invited everybody I knew. A lot of them followed. I asked 
some friends of mine, who were also super connectors, to add their part. 
Santos: Yeah, Okay. You never did campaign for XING? 
Hinrichs: No, never. 
Santos: When did you actually raise money for the company, if at all? 
Hinrichs: I did, let me think. I did in May 2004. I did some things for the in-
surance and the rates at half a million euros. 
Santos: Okay, and the objective of that round of funding, was it to grow in-
ternationally? 
Hinrichs: The company was cash-flow positive as of ninety days of opera-
tion. So when I funded the company, the company was already cash-flow 
positive. I wanted to hire some more people. Since it’s a subscription busi-
ness, we had the issue of that we have liabilities on the one side. You can’t 
book the entire revenue you get into the months, so you have to have ac-
crual over the time. In bookkeeping, it’s a liability, and to solve this kind of 
liability problem, yes or no, it’s a theoretical problem—does it work? 
I decided to take the venture capital angel money. Half a year later, when the 
angels saw how good the system was, everything went well, they said they 
wanted to invest another time. 
I said, “Okay, if you go for the doubling valuation,” which was then ten mil-
lion pre-money, “then you can have something more.” Within the year, from 
XING Corporation, the valuation of the company was €10 million. 
Santos: Okay. Going back to the beginning, how did you actually get the 
platform? Did you build it yourself? Did you hire a team to do it? 
Hinrichs: I hired a team. 

European Founders at Work 
 
43  
Santos: Okay, so in those ninety days, somebody was building it while you 
were getting in contacts into the platform? 
Hinrichs: Correct. 
Santos: You did an IPO in only three years. Basically, can you explain a bit 
how an IPO process is, what were the requirements and so on, and why you 
did it so fast? 
Hinrichs: Before we did the IPO, we did a venture round in 2005, actually. 
And then in 2006, we decided “now’s the time to go IPO.” 
Santos: But what was the reasoning behind the IPO? Was it to raise more 
capital? Was it to take some money off the table? 
Hinrichs: No. IPO is never an exit event for the founder. It’s actually an-
other round of financing with people you don’t know. Back then, there was 
opportunity to make a buy and build strategy. So we bought it with the li-
quidity we got on the stock exchange. We bought three or four, I think, five 
companies. 
Santos: And those were the companies that you bought in Spain and Tur-
key, in order to expand the network, correct? 
Hinrichs: Yeah, correct. 
Santos: Okay. How different was it to run the company as a private-held 
company and a public-traded company? 
Hinrichs: I’m not really sure that there is a difference. I don’t see a big dif-
ference, because you have to run your private company according to statutes 
you set. So for us, it was not a big difference. Of course, you do some more 
investor relations. But during my time, the company I think close to tripled in 
the revenue. We grew from no margin to an EBITDA2 margin of thirty-five 
percent. The shareholders were mainly happy. 
Santos: Okay. Did your role in the company change after it went public, or 
you stayed in the same role? 
Hinrichs: Yes, it was more auditing stuff, but in the end my work was pretty 
much similar. You go on some road trips in between that. But it’s always fun 
to speak about your own company. I think it’s a very different position if 
you’re a hired manager to run a public company. 
                                                
2 Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization. 

Chapter 3 | Lars Hinrichs: XING 
 
44  
Santos: What were the main difficulties or important points, and what les-
sons did you learn along the way of creating XING? 
Hinrichs: I wrote down one hundred and twenty-eight lessons learned. 
Santos: [laughs] 
Hinrichs: From things which I did wrong, to things that I did right. Actually, 
there were some private lessons learned. I’m not going to share with you. 
But XING, I think the main point you should take from the interview is that 
after a company, I always write down things that went good and bad, because 
this is the only way you learn. If you visualize what it was, what have you 
done right and what have you done wrong? And admitting failure, I think for 
entrepreneurs, it’s always tough, but it’s really important that you do. 
Santos: Can you give an example of a failure that happened in XING, a pub-
lic one, not a private one? 
Hinrichs: A public one, which we had at some point, the idea that we lost 
focus of the customers. So right at the beginning, many corporations came to 
us and said, “This is so cool. We want this for our internet.” And we said no 
in the beginning, but more and more corporations came, and the checks 
were getting bigger and bigger. We said, “Maybe there is a business model.” 
So we developed, in the end, an ISP version of XING so that everybody can 
have their own XING. But the problem was that we lost focus of our real 
customer. The real customers are not the big corporations who pay you the 
big checks. It is the user in the end. It doesn’t make sense for the user to 
have the online business club. XING, the private one and then you have to 
register all once again. This was something we did wrong. 
Santos: Okay. You just mentioned the original name of XING. Why did you 
actually change the name right about the time of the IPO? 
Hinrichs: Yeah, why not? 
Santos: Well, I would expect that. 
Hinrichs: XING, Open BC was never possible to get a brand. So this was 
the problem we have with the name. It was just not possible. You don’t want 
to be an open club. We had the problem that BC in English stands for before 
Christ. We had suddenly copycats who named confessed themselves Access 
BC, Social BC, etc. There was no branding possible. 
Santos: But you chose quite a critical moment to change the name in an 
IPO. Wasn’t it a risk that it could devalue the IPO? Or was it exactly the op-
posite and it actually helped? 

European Founders at Work 
 
45  
Hinrichs: I never think it is a problem. I just do what I think, what is good. 
Santos: Okay. Interesting. When did you become aware of LinkedIn, and did 
it actually change your strategy in any way? 
Hinrichs: LinkedIn was in the same market as we, and they started like nine 
months earlier. But they had a completely different business model. When 
they saw us, they changed at that time their business model to ours. 
Santos: What was their business model then? 
Hinrichs: It was a job site, where you contact people you don’t know. It 
was just something completely different. And over time, they realized that 
networking and this degree of separation is the key thing and nothing else. 
So they copied … probably all our features. 
Santos: Yeah, Okay. 
Hinrichs: It’s things like who visited my page, that you can contact people, 
and to have management, groups, discussions, marketplaces, job ads, etc. I 
think we were the pioneer in close to everything. 
Santos: Okay. 
Hinrichs: They just had a better strategy. They had enough capital raised. 
So they went “grow, engage, monetize,” and we had “engage, monetize, and 
grow.” 
Santos: Yeah. Well, that’s a typical American tactic, right? To grow very fast 
and then to monetize it later. 
Hinrichs: Correct. 
Santos: Which leads me to my next question. What is your view of starting 
a venture like XING in Europe vs. in the US? What are the advantages and 
disadvantages, in your opinion? 
Hinrichs: I think you can build a great company everywhere, but you get 
more capital, in my estimation, in America than in Europe. You’re attracting 
different kinds of people. 
Santos: Yeah, true. Did XING ever try to enter the US market or was it 
focused mainly in Europe from the beginning? 
Hinrichs: I didn’t get your question. 
Santos: Has XING ever tried to enter the US market? 
Hinrichs: No, we didn’t. 

Chapter 3 | Lars Hinrichs: XING 
 
46  
Santos: Okay, so it was always Europe from the start? 
Hinrichs: Yeah, it was always European centers. 
Santos: Okay. Well, the next question is a tricky one. Some time ago, you 
sent a tweet that you’re the only founder of XING, but there are other 
people claiming themselves as co-founders. Can you elaborate a bit more 
on that? 
Hinrichs: I didn’t get the question. Can you repeat once again? 
Santos: Some time ago, I believe one year ago, you sent a tweet that you 
are the one and only founder of XING. 
Hinrichs: Ah, yeah. I think if you are successful, you have many people who 
also claim your success. Suddenly, I even met several people who stated offi-
cially that they are co-founder and a founder of XING. I’m just fed up with 
people who claim they are co-founders. 
Santos: Yeah, but are these people that worked for the company, that had 
any involvement with the company, or not at all? 
Hinrichs: The company didn’t have any co-founders. Some people were not 
even employed and called themselves co-founders of XING. 
Santos: Okay, that is not a good thing. 
Hinrichs: No. 
Santos: It was just to be sure. Now, after XING, you started Hack Forward. 
Can you talk a bit about that? 
Hinrichs: Sure. 
Santos: Yeah? 
Hinrichs: With Hack Forward, I am fulfilling my passion. I love to work with 
programmers, because they are actually the most creative people. I think 
that they’re actually the ones who are the artists of the twenty-first century. 
With Hack Forward, we want to free them from their day job and have them 
to create their own game-changing companies. You see, in Europe it’s quite 
difficult to start, as a tech guy, a company. People only want to invest in 
larger companies with proven business models. Actually, I would say that it’s 
quite difficult in Europe to do something like this. 
Santos: Yeah, it’s a very different model from all other accelerators, even in 
the US, as far as I understand. 
Hinrichs: Yeah, it’s completely different. I would say game changing. 

European Founders at Work 
 
47  
Santos: Can you just explain a bit how it works for the people of the inter-
view? I have an idea because I’ve read about it. 
Hinrichs: I think everything is transparent on this side, and there’s even a 
press section where I think that question is adequately answered. 
Santos: Yeah, true. 
Hinrichs: Then there are a few videos, like why I founded this and etc. I 
think watching the video on the main page is probably the best thing. 
Santos: Okay. What is your view on the European start-up community 
now? It has changed a lot since you started Hack Forward. 
Hinrichs: Absolutely, but it has changed for more than one reason. I think 
the mentality changed a bit in Europe. More people do like creating their 
own company. We have now eight, nine years of good funding opportunities, 
probably more like eight. We’re going to see [if] the financial crisis we have 
currently has an impact on entrepreneurship or not, or on financing or not.  
Then it changed that you can actually start with a lean start-up. There is no 
need to buy big expensive hardware or software like databases. Everything 
that you need today is free or close to free. 
In the end, you only need the manpower. To get the best people, you have 
to attract them with more than money. I think starting, co-starting, or help-
ing entrepreneur software developers to start their companies, I would say 
that this is really a challenging, new approach. 
Santos: Yeah. How do you attract those talents beyond the money? How 
do you? What do you think are the key points? 
Hinrichs: Oh, we attract them by … How to say it? They have to find us. 
Santos: Yes. You have a different model, right, which is through the net-
work of referrals? 
Hinrichs: Yeah, correct. They have to come to us. 
Santos: Okay, and do you think that’s the best way of finding the best? Or is 
it because the local ambassador knows who are the best? 
Hinrichs: No, we want a filter. 
Santos: Okay. So the local referrer is the filter? 
Hinrichs: Yeah. 
Santos: He knows the people and he’ll only refer the best ones to you. 

Chapter 3 | Lars Hinrichs: XING 
 
48  
Hinrichs: Yeah. 
Santos: How do you choose the filters, the referrers? 
Hinrichs: They’re people who are very well-known in other things. They’re 
software guys, advocates, or in academia. 
Santos: If they do it as volunteers, or are they connected to the program 
more closely? 
Hinrichs: Oh, they are all invited and they’re coming regular to our events. 
This one we engage them. Every three months we meet in New York or 
Berlin. 
Santos: Okay, fine. What advice could you give to aspiring founders that 
want to start today? 
Hinrichs: The main advice is just start. Many people have hundreds of ideas, 
but they never really start their own project. And if you fail, start again. En-
trepreneurship is, in my point of view, the best and the only way to personal 
development, to financial success and to happiness in the business sense. 
Santos: Yeah. 
Hinrichs: But most people actually don’t try. Then once you start, just start 
to learn. It’s a great endeavor. 
Santos: And if you did it all over again, would you do anything differently? 
Hinrichs: Oh, I would do tons of things differently. 
Santos: Can you give some examples? 
Hinrichs: Hiring even better people, don’t go for second best. Only go for 
world class. 
Santos: Okay, sometimes it’s hard to find out who are the world class vs. 
the second best. 
Hinrichs: Yeah, true. But you should. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
4 
Bernard Liautaud  
Business Objects 
Business Objects, a French enterprise software company, was founded in 1990 by 
Bernard Liautaud and acquired by SAP AG in 2007 for $6.8 billion. Bernard was 
the CEO and Chairman of Business Objects from 1990 until 2005, leading the 
company from zero to a multi billion dollar valuation. In 1994, Business Objects 
became the first French company to go public on NASDAQ.  
Today, Bernard remains an SAP Board member and is a partner at Balderton Capi-
tal, the leading European venture capital firm with $1.9 billion assets under man-
agement. The firm has invested in some of Europe’s most successful technology 
companies including, MySQL (acquired by Sun Microsystems for $1 billion), Icera 
(sold to Nvidia for $367m), Scansafe (sold to Cisco for $183m), bebo (acquired by 
AOL for $850m), Betfair (floated on the LSE in 2010) and YOOX Group (listed in 
Milan in 2009).  
 
Pedro Santos: How did the Business Objects idea come about and how did 
you go from idea to actually implementing the company? 
Bernard Liautaud: Well, it started when I was at Oracle in Paris, France, 
and I was in charge of product marketing. At the time, my friend Denis 
Payre was a regional sales manager for Oracle in France. In 1989, we met a 
developer named Jean Michel Cambot who had come up with an idea to 
create an interface which would facilitate the creation of queries on top of 
the Oracle database.  
Jean Michel approached Oracle with the idea that Oracle could be a resel-
ler for his product. At that time, the product was really something of a 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 4 | Bernard Liautaud: Business Objects 
 
50  
prototype and so we worked with Jean Michel on the idea and evolving the 
product. We showed it to a few customers, saw some interest, but there 
was a lot of work to be done and we spent about six months helping him.  
When we reapproached Oracle suggesting that we build a business around 
this product, Oracle was not interested. Denis and I decided to leave the 
company, negotiated with Jean Michel to create a company around his idea, 
bought the intellectual property of the product from him and got started, 
just like that. 
Santos: That was in 1990, right? 
Liautaud: The first discussion happened in the 1989, and then we started 
the company really in the summer of 1990. 
Santos: So, now you have a first product. How did you go from there to 
your first customer? 
Liautaud: Our first customer was a company called Coface, a government 
insurance business. At the time, Oracle was encouraging Coface to buy their 
products but was on the verge of losing out to a competitor, Sybase. Oracle 
needed a differentiator and Denis and I approached them about offering our 
product that was only available on top of Oracle’s systems as part of the 
package. In the end, Oracle—and we—won the deal, making Coface the first 
customer for Business Objects.  
It was a great win for Buisness Objects and triggered a sales process allowing 
us to do about six or seven deals in the following few months. Our second 
win was France Telecom in August 1990; soon after we also won EDF.  
Santos: From the beginning you got good traction. Can you describe a bit 
about the growth of the company? How it grew and a bit of the process 
from this first sale to 1994, and then why you actually decided to go public in 
NASDAQ, and not in France? 
Liautaud: In terms of traction, we grew really quickly at the beginning. From 
the summer of 1990 to end of 1991, we made about $1.8 million of revenue 
and in 1992, we made $5 million. The third year we did $15 million, and then 
in 1994, we grew to $30 million.  
Throughout this period, we also raised a total of $5 million of venture capital 
over three rounds. We received $1 million in 1991, followed by $2 million in 
1992 and a final round of $2 million in 1993. Funding came from a mix of 
European and US VC funds as well as some American business angels. Inves-
tors included Innovacom (the venture capital arm of France Telecom), 
Partech International and Atlas Ventures.  

European Founders at Work 
 
51  
In terms of our sales strategy, simplicity and focus were key. From the outset 
we simply targetted Oracle’s customers and sold them an essential, great-
value, easy-to-understand product.  
The strategy paid off. By September 1991 we had eight or nine staff in France 
and had opened offices in the UK and the US. As sales grew in these new re-
gions, we were able to continue expanding in Europe and Asia.  
At the beginning of 1994 we realised: okay, we are growing at 100% and we 
are starting to get profitable. At that point, Goldman Sachs approached us 
and we were able to start thinking about going public.  
In the early nineties, there was no European public market for a company 
like ours. European investors didn’t invest in technology in the way their 
counterparts did in the US and we were seeing far fewer technology compa-
nies list on European exchanges. We decided the best place for us to go pub-
lic would be NASDAQ and in September 1994, we became the first Euro-
pean software company to go public on the US market.  
Santos: In this period of time, because you grew so fast and in such an 
amazing way, what were the key lessons  that you think were really critical 
for this success? 
Liautaud: I would say there were three factors in our early success. Firstly, 
we built a team of the best possible people to accomplish our mission. We 
hired the best salespeople who focused on business development and kept a 
very lean management. Secondly, we had a strong focus on selling, as op-
posed to relying heavily on marketing or advertising. And thirdly, we never 
tried to build super-complicated products.  
Our success came from really understanding our customer needs and having 
a very efficient sales model to go after these customers.  
Santos: But with such rapid growth, wasn't there the risk of new hires to 
disrupt the culture of selling? 
Liautaud: Yes. There was indeed the risk, but we were very clear from the 
start about what we were building, the kind of values we worked by, and the 
kind of people we wanted to bring in. Our sales team, built on an Oracle-
type infrastructure, was confident and operated with a high sense of integ-
rity. Our R&D team was really focused on innovation and producing high-
quality products.  
There was a universal understanding that: yes, we had a grand mission, we 
had a grand vision, but it was only going to be possible if we executed our 
plans flawlessly.  

Chapter 4 | Bernard Liautaud: Business Objects 
 
52  
Santos: When entering the US market, did you encounter any difficulty in 
selling being a European company? Or was it just business as usual? 
Liautaud: Yes, there were some challenges. At the beginning, we didn't 
want to appear French at all and that's why we named ourselves Business 
Objects. Even to large French companies that were used to buying American 
software, we couldn’t see particular positives to being a French company.  
In addition, we experienced some internal issues initially between the French 
headquarters and the US subsidiary. Clearly some staff thought things were a 
bit ‘upside down’. Usually you have a US head office and French offshoot, 
particularly in software. The French thought the US guys didn’t understand 
the technology, the sales guys in the US thought that the French didn’t un-
derstand the American market. Tackling this element of mutual distrust, we 
set up a lot of swapping programmes where we took some French staff and 
put them in the US for a few months and vice versa. People began to realise: 
there are good guys on either side and everyone’s working as hard as one 
another. We generated a lot of mutual respect this way.  
I also relocated with my family to the US for the first year, which was very 
important to help the two teams unite.  
Santos: Business Objects started with one product, but it started expanding 
to other products, including Crystal Reports. Can you go through a bit of the 
process of the growth of those products? 
Liautaud: When we went public in 1994, we had expanded the product 
line, and everything went really well from 1994 to 1995. But then, we had a 
“near-death” experience in 1996 and the early part of 1997. We had decided 
to expand our product line significantly by rewriting our entire code base 
and building new capabilities but it didn't work out very well and made our 
product line “buggy”. Our new products were restricted to only working on 
the newest version of Windows. Our customers didn’t want to buy the old 
products but if they didn’t have the newest Windows platform too, our new 
offerings wouldn’t work on their systems.  
We saw a massive disappointment in sales. We were still growing at forty 
percent, but the market was expecting one hundred percent. We started 
missing expectations on Wall Street and our stock price got hammered. Our 
salespeople didn’t make their quotas and started to leave. Other employees 
were unhappy because their stock options were underwater and they 
started leaving.  
It was chaos in 1996. We went from a billion dollar valuation in 1994, all the 
way down to $100 million.  

European Founders at Work 
 
53  
Santos: That's a huge hit. 
Liautaud: We lost ninety percent of our value in a period of a few months 
and thought we were going to lose the company. I knew we had to make 
some critical decisions.  
First of all, we needed to shift the centre of gravity of the company from 
France to the US. At that time, the company’s management team was in Paris 
but I decided to move our senior executives, along with a new CFO, to Cali-
fornia to be closer to our customers and the US financial community.  
I also restructured the software development process, created a brand new 
internet-based business intelligence product and, over the next year and a 
half, we fixed the buggy product line which, in the end, was very attractive to 
customers.  
We started to grow again and over two years, our market cap went from 
$100 million to almost $5 billion. 1997 to 1999 was an amazing time for the 
company as we expanded into more and more countries. 
When the technology bubble burst, we emerged relatively unscathed be-
cause by then we were a large, stable, profitable company with thousands of 
customers. Our market cap dropped somewhat, but we were in good shape, 
and we felt that it was time to leapfrog our competition. We had been com-
peting against Cognos for a very long time and it was head-to-head. One 
year they were number one, another year we were number one. 
That's when we bought Crystal Reports when they were filing to go public. 
They had big expectations on their public offering. They were doing about 
$300 million of revenue, and we bought them for about a billion just before 
the IPO. 
It was a bold move. We took almost forty percent of the company’s market 
cap and some of the cash. However it was an extremely important and suc-
cessful move for us too. After a year of rapid integration, Business Objects 
was profitable, was doing about $800 million of revenue, had doubled its 
cash flow, and its market cap had almost increased by around fifty percent. 
Santos: Going back a bit to the near-death experience, can you go through 
a bit of your thought process as a founder, and your view on that? Because I 
can imagine that you, as a founder, were feeling this much more than most. 
Liautaud: Yes, it was very difficult. Firstly my business partner, who had 
been with me since the beginning, decided to leave the company for his own 
reasons. There was also a problem in our earnings. Because of a bad deal in 
Germany, we had to restate earnings on Wall Street. At the end of 1996, I 
found myself on my own and everything seemed to be going wrong. 

Chapter 4 | Bernard Liautaud: Business Objects 
 
54  
Personally, yes, it was a tough time and I was even questioning my ability to 
turn the situation around. Fortunately, I had great support from the board, 
which really believed I could take things in a different direction. 
Eventually, I said, “We can get through this but we can't just do the same 
thing and hope it's going to get fixed.” And that's why I made these very sig-
nificant decisions: we changed the team, moved management to the US, re-
vamped the structure, reignited innovation, and focused on transforming and 
turning around the business. 
Santos: So, it was a way of starting with a clean sheet, in a way. 
Liautaud: Yes. But it was also about telling the people in the company, “Lis-
ten, yes, we are experiencing serious difficulty but we have a plan to get out 
of it.” I was convinced that this plan was going to succeed and I had to ask 
employees whether they believed that or not. “If you believe, come with me 
and be part of this journey. If you are not sure, it’s better if you leave.” In the 
end people who really believed got on board and we had a fantastic ride in 
the following few years after. 
From a personal standpoint, it was probably some of the hardest years in my 
career. But afterwards, the rewards were amazing because the company felt 
different. When you go through a turnaround, the people who get through it 
feel that they've done something so remarkable. It creates a lot of resilience. 
Santos: I can imagine. So, you turned the company around and in ’99 you 
went public in France. 
Liautaud: Yes, we went public in France in 1999 to enhance our visibility 
and facilitate even further expansion in Europe. We could also increase our 
liquidity and enhance our market capitalization by being listed in Europe. In 
the five years since going public in the US, there had been a significant change 
in Europe. There were now European investors wanting to put money in 
technology. There were even some European tech analysts.  
Santos: But this was more or less at the same time that the bubble burst. 
Did it affect the IPO in any way? 
Liautaud: No, we managed to go through with the European flotation be-
cause our business was fairly untouched, relatively speaking. We continued 
to grow at thirty to forty percent a year, even through the downturn. 
Through that downturn however, we changed how we positioned our offer-
ings to suit our customers’ changing the requirements. Everyone was in 
some sort of cost-cutting mode and with the business intelligence that Busi-
ness Objects offered, customers could optimize their costs and see where 

European Founders at Work 
 
55  
the inefficiencies lay. So, we switched our value proposition from “make your 
business better, add visibility and increase revenue” to “make your business 
more efficient, see where you waste money and cut your costs.” That altera-
tion enabled us to keep selling in a difficult economy. 
Santos: So, from that period on, to the actual period that Business Objects 
was sold, can you walk us through a bit of that period? 
Liautaud: We acquired Crystal in 2003, integrated the business in 2004, and 
reached a billion dollars in revenue in 2005. We continued to expand and 
bought a few small businesses. By 2007 we saw about $1.5 billion in revenue.  
Business intelligence was becoming more and more important to the IT in-
dustry and a number of the industry’s biggest companies realized that they 
needed to be in it.  
Oracle decided to buy Hyperion in 2007. Actually Oracle had approached us 
before, but with price we didn't like. This acquisition triggered a wave of in-
terest from the likes of IBM and SAP and in the summer of 2007, we had dis-
cussions with both. At the end of the summer, SAP made a great offer to us 
that we felt would be almost impossible to refuse and we announced the 
deal in October 2007. 
Santos: And you left the company soon after, correct? 
Liautaud: Actually, I helped the management of SAP integrate the two 
companies for about six months and then I joined the board of SAP. I've 
been involved for the past three years, but as a board member, not as an 
operator within the business. 
Santos: Going back a few years to 2005, [when] John Schwartz joined as 
chief executive officer, which was your role until then. 
Liautaud: Yes. Until then I was chairman and CEO, then John joined as 
CEO. I still worked in the company while I was executive chairman involved 
in business strategy.  
Santos: Was it an easy transition, a natural transition? Or was it something 
that you felt had to be done so that you could focus more on the strategy 
part and not on the execution? What led to this decision? 
Liautaud: I had started the business in 1990 and I had run it as a CEO for 
fifteen years. We had been public for about twelve of those years. It takes a 
certain toll on someone [laughs].  
I felt we had reached a number of very important milestones. We were a 
billion dollars in revenue and the company was in great shape. We had  

Chapter 4 | Bernard Liautaud: Business Objects 
 
56  
succeeded in the integration of Crystal and we were number one in our 
sector. I always wanted to pass on the CEO baton at a moment when eve-
rything would be fine. And I still wanted to stay engaged with the company, 
but I didn't want to do the day-to-day anymore.  
We searched for a CEO, and when John came on board to handle opera-
tions it worked out really well. I modelled my transition after the one Bill 
Gates did at Microsoft when he became chairman and CSO.  
Santos: Was it very hard to find someone that you would consider to be fit 
for the job? 
Liautaud: Yes, it’s quite hard, certainly. And it’s hard to make it work, of 
course. As a founder, I knew the business so well and it’s not easy to have 
someone completely new come in. But I think we worked really well with 
one another. I tried to give him as much leeway as possible, and I think it was 
a successful combination. The business grew, from $1 billion to $1.5 billion in 
the following two years.  
Santos: What is your opinion of starting a European venture vs. a US ven-
ture? Do you think that Europeans have to do as you did in becoming a 
global company and try not to seem like a UK, German, French company? 
Or do you think that’s already no longer as necessary? 
Liautaud: It depends on the market segment. I would say that the IT sector, 
and especially enterprise software, is extremely global but remains domi-
nated by US companies. There are very, very few examples of European IT 
and software companies that have managed to go global. I believe, the only 
way to make that happen is to go global very, very quickly, as we did from 
the outset. 
At Balderton Capital we have over sixty companies in our current portfolio. 
We are a European venture capital fund but are geographically agnostic 
about the companies we invest in. Some are based in the US, others often 
are Europe-based but have development teams and/or senior management 
state side.  
Santos: So, looking back at the history and your personal seventeen year 
trip. What main lessons would you like to highlight to other entrepreneurs 
that want to follow the same route? 
Liautaud: To me, an entrepreneur needs to have a strong vision for his 
business. He needs to set the magnetic north in a very clear way, for him and 
for the people in the business.  

European Founders at Work 
 
57  
Ambition is very important and there needs to be a very clear execution 
model with it, which means knowing how you are financing the company. If 
you don't have the cash not the plan for resources, you can’t grow the busi-
ness at the right pace. 
The other element, which is probably the most important for me as an en-
trepreneur, is the team. I said it earlier, but hiring the best people and creat-
ing a great team are the most important things that a CEO-entrepreneur-
founder can do. There are very few founders that stay with their businesses 
beyond five years and quite often, in my opinion, it’s because they didn't 
manage to surround themselves with the right team.  
I think that’s one of the things that I did that I am most proud of—having the 
ability to surround myself with people who have, in many ways, pushed me 
up through these eighteen years. 
I always hire people who are much better than me in their field, and that 
kept me afloat [laughs] as long as I was able to manage them and orchestrate 
their work. This also enabled me to be the CEO for fifteen years and take a 
step back when I wanted to, as opposed to have the board ask me to. 
So, a lesson from me is: don’t hesitate to hire the best, don’t be afraid. The 
team is the most important asset that you will have. 

C H A P T E R 
5 
Iain Dodsworth 
TweetDeck 
Iain Dodsworth founded TweetDeck in London in 2008. TweetDeck is a per-
sonal “browser” that enables users to monitor Twitter, Facebook and other social 
networking feeds in a dashboard.  
Prior to TweetDeck, he worked as a contractor in London’s financial district. He de-
veloped TweetDeck to solve his own difficulties with too much information on Twit-
ter. Witnessing TweetDeck’s explosive growth, Twitter bought the start-up in 2011 
for a reported $40 million. At the date of sale, TweetDeck had more than 20 mil-
lion downloads.  
 
Pedro Santos: How did TweetDeck start? How did it start as an idea, and 
how did you go from there until you actually launched it? 
Iain Dodsworth: It started as an idea through trying to use Twitter to con-
sume a lot of the information that I found of value, and actually finding it 
quite difficult. As more and more of the data came through, it became harder 
and harder to actually ingest it all, and understand it, and keep up with it, and 
then obviously respond to it as well. So for me, personally, there was quite a 
problem using it, especially as it was growing in its user base, and therefore 
in its utility. This would have been around early 2008. And so in playing with 
it and finding these issues, I started thinking, “How could I just solve this 
problem for me?” 
It wasn’t really a case of trying to start a company, or founding a business. It 
was more the kind of excitement and satisfaction in solving a problem, my 
problem, not looking for somebody else’s problem, which I think is generally 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 5 | Iain Dodsworth: TweetDeck 
 
60  
the best approach to doing this kind of thing, and getting a level of satisfac-
tion from it. 
So I developed an app. I wrote an interface to Twitter which solved my 
problems. It also happened to solve my problems with Facebook and other 
social media as well. There seemed to be quite a lot that I could do with this 
interface, it felt extensible. 
I gave the app, which I called TweetDeck, to a few technical friends, in the 
same area of engineering as myself and they were impressed. So much so 
they ignored my instructions to not distribute it and sent it out far and wide. 
I was simply solving my problem which, of course, I thought was rather 
unique. The fact that there was no product that solved these problems al-
ready on the market led me to believe that there was no one else having 
these kinds of problems. So, it kind of shocked me to see people react as 
positively as they did. 
The thing that they were talking about that really made the product stand 
out was that it was very different from anything else. It was very dark. It had 
a lot of data moving around at the same time. It didn’t adhere to the conven-
tional wisdom that says you don’t create a black application because that’s 
bad for readability, battery life etc. I wasn’t creating something for anyone 
else, I wasn’t trying to create something huge. I didn’t have to adhere to any-
body else’s rules and that was important to making it stand out. 
Having no constraints and being able to just create whatever I wanted is a 
wonderful way of producing something, which is certainly an approach I 
would seek to adhere to in any future projects. 
So anyway, I gave it to a few people. They were quite blown away by it. The 
fact that it was full screen was another interesting feature they’d never really 
seen before. Some would ask why do you need a full screen application for 
something as simple as Twitter? 
Dodsworth: But, when users started to use it they saw the benefit of actu-
ally doing one thing very well, and actually giving yourself the maximum space 
to do it in as well. Again, this wasn’t really normal in the Twitter ecosystem 
as it was at the time. 
It’s become popular now, but I think quite a few other products have taken, 
should we say, inspiration from TweetDeck, and look somewhat similar. And 
so from there, it was a fairy tale in many respects. I had no interest in the 
product getting out there at the time or snowballing, but that’s exactly what 
it did. I had no PR and no push. 

European Founders at Work 
 
61  
I didn’t know anybody in the industry, and it just took off very organically, 
very naturally. Early adopters in Silicon Valley saw it and started talking about 
it, and were on the phone to me, asking to get a beta of it just to see what it 
was that people were making a bit of noise about. 
So that was a very interesting time. I think over a couple of weeks thousands 
of people were using it, but the right thousands of people. It was the early 
adopters, the influencers, and then other people who were listening too. So 
again, I think there was a certain amount of freedom in the actual design of 
the product itself and its functionality. 
But there was also very much a sense of luck because the timing seemed to 
be perfect as well. There appeared to be a lot of other people that had ex-
actly the same issues as me and were looking for this kind of product. 
Santos: How did you actually develop it, because you were having a full-
time job at the time, correct? 
Dodsworth: I was a contractor in the city here in London. I worked for 
several different banks, and my contracts had pretty much come to an end at 
much the same time. So I was having about six months off. But having that 
time off also gave me, again, freedom to sit down and play with a product, 
play with the system or a platform like Twitter, which was still very much in 
its infancy.  
Santos: So you got the first version out in less than six months in that  
period of time? 
Dodsworth: Yes, actually I built the first version in about two weeks be-
cause there wasn’t a huge amount to it and it was more a concept. It was 
about proving the concept than actually a fully fledged product, but that is 
what took off. 
Santos: And when was the moment that you actually realized there was a 
business here and let’s build it? 
Dodsworth: That’s an interesting question. Over the first couple of months 
it just ramped up in the number of users. I was bankrolling the project and 
there were a lot of people giving me donations just to keep me developing it. 
So that was a small signal that certain people had the kind of engagement 
with this product that they would probably pay for it. But it got me thinking 
around that time about monetizing it. I was actually more bothered about 
what happens when all these early adopters have the product, and perhaps 
some of them have donated generously. That’s very nice. What happens 
next? Is it literally just the iterative process of adding more and more fea-
tures? Or is there something a bit more to this? 

Chapter 5 | Iain Dodsworth: TweetDeck 
 
62  
I think over time it became very apparent that to keep up the iterative proc-
ess, I needed more staff. I needed help to just keep doing this. We needed to 
integrate Facebook, and LinkedIn, and more recently Foursquare. To make it 
more of a hub than simply a Twitter client. 
So, yes, it didn’t take very long for me to start thinking in that way. It did 
take quite a while to actually move on it though, to actually start turning it 
into the company. I got funding offers from a number of different sources. 
And again, part of what I consider my fairy-tale story with TweetDeck is that 
I didn’t have to go out and look for any funding, it came to me.  
There was nothing else to be proved—I just had to have the right kind of in-
vestor that didn’t require a business plan to get excited about the traction 
and where this potentially could go.  
Twitter was showing great growth and TweetDeck was showing its own 
traction as well. There’s a subset of people that are very interested in this 
kind of power product. I remember speaking to Betaworks, an investment 
and incubation group in New York, and they were extremely clued in. They 
had already grown Summize, which had been sold to Twitter and become 
Twitter’s search product. So they were in the same space. 
Their investment strategy at the time was around Twitter and its ecosystem. 
They were exactly the right team to invest in TweetDeck. In January of 2009 
we completed the seed round and four or five months later we started the 
second round of approx. three and half million dollars, and that got us to the 
point where we could get an office and expand. That started mid-2009 and 
really got things moving. 
Santos: Why an investment from New York, considering you’re based in 
the city that is the heart of the investment in London? 
Dodsworth: At the time it was very different. I mean, it’s only a few years 
ago but I think it was a very different place. There was nobody talking about 
investing in this kind of company in London at the time, at least not on my 
radar anyway. One of the first things Betaworks did was to introduce me to 
similar-thinking angel investors in London, they knew it was important to 
have investors on the ground in London. As for the lead investor I think it 
was less important that they were in the same town and more important 
they were on the same wave length.  
Santos: So, after you get the funding, how did you grow? And you, being a 
former contractor and now an owner of the company, what did it change 
for you? 

European Founders at Work 
 
63  
Dodsworth: It kind of changed everything. It’s quite a jump from being a 
contractor to running your own one-man business, to employing a team and 
raising funding.  
It certainly was exciting all the way, some very high moments and very low 
moments. Some of them not quite so important as I look back on it now, but 
obviously things that affect you as you’re running the business. 
It’s been a big learning curve for me but it seems to be something that I was 
good at. Never any question of replacing me or bringing in an experienced 
CEO—at its core TweetDeck was vision-led more than anything else. The 
board understood the vision and had faith in me that it was running well and 
that we were obviously on to something and going somewhere. 
Santos: You talked about the lows and the highs. Can you give an example 
of each? Something that pops into your mind. 
Dodsworth: What pops into my mind probably doesn’t sound like a low 
point but there was a very big decision to be made in between the first and 
second rounds of funding. Namely do we do another round of funding and 
build the company? I’d done one round of funding, a seed round of $300,000. 
And the impetus around that was to literally just keep me doing what I was 
doing, building the product, building the feature set, growing the user base, 
pretty much what one person can do on their own. 
Then there was an opportunity to raise a second, much larger, round quickly 
with the same investors and some new ones. But it would almost definitely 
change everything. It had been quite a ride until that point. I’m already talking 
mid-2009. 
The decision was a big one for me personally because it meant I would have 
to stop what I was doing, and raise money in order to get an office and a 
team and have a lot of investors relying on me to do something that I had 
never done before, which is build this company. That decision was basically 
made over a weekend. I was of two minds because I could easily just carry 
on doing what I was doing as a one-man band with little investment—and 
that appealed to me as well. 
Santos: What made you go forward with it? What was the main compelling 
reason? 
Dodsworth: It’s a bigger win, it’s a bigger risk. And in the end, after having 
thought about it all weekend with my wife, I actually just thought, “Let’s go 
for it. Let’s go for something a lot bigger than this already is, because there’s 
only so much that one person can do even with funding. There’s a much 
more exciting and risky element here.”  

Chapter 5 | Iain Dodsworth: TweetDeck 
 
64  
And I think we’d proved enough in terms of traction, that we had something 
that we can take much further forward. But I think it was more of a cavalier 
attitude, having thought it all through and not really come out to a real hard 
conclusion one way or the other. But just to think, actually the right thing to 
do is to just throw it all in the air and see what happens. Risk the lot. 
Santos: So once you raised this capital, you hired a team. Do you still pro-
gram on the tool or have you stopped all together? 
Dodsworth: No, I came off the engineering side completely. Because A, 
that made the product better, [laughs] in many ways. But also obviously you 
hire people that are better than you, especially in that main area of engineer-
ing, which is exactly what we did. It then freed me up to think more about, 
“So now we have all these engineers, and we have the design. And who’s ac-
tually thinking about the product, and where does the product go?” And that 
actually turned out for me to be the most interesting part of the whole thing. 
Rather than the operational CEO—which with fourteen people we didn’t 
desperately need—[we needed] more … of a product lead, examining the vi-
sion of this product. Where does it actually end up? How do we get there? 
So that’s what I moved into. That’s obviously what I’ve been doing anyway, 
but that sort of freed me up to do that full-time. 
Santos: And what was your vision for the company? Was it to be acquired 
as it was? Was it to grow and build other products? At the time, what were 
your plans? What did you think? 
Dodsworth: It moved around quite a lot, which I think is probably quite a 
common thing. The vision for the product has been very solid, but the actual 
company itself, where do we go with this, what do we do as a company, has 
definitely shifted around. I know everybody says you can’t rely on being ac-
quired. But at the same time, I think people are fooling themselves if they say 
it’s not even at the back of their minds. I was thinking about it, and thinking it 
would be a great research acquisition. 
So that never left my thoughts from a visionary standpoint. It was more a 
case of what’s the right company? What’s the right price? How do you price 
a start-up with millions of users using the product, but having no revenue? 
I never ignored the acquisition potential, but that wasn’t the main plan. Our 
real challenge was to figure out how to monetize TweetDeck going forward. 
And of course monetizing TweetDeck is also part and parcel of monetizing 
social media for power-users. That was the way I was approaching it. 
So the interesting thing [to me was]—how do you monetize this kind of user? 
This kind of user isn’t going to react very well to low quality, bad advertising. 

European Founders at Work 
 
65  
They’re going to be offended by that. But they might react very well to more 
experimental advertising and high quality advertising. 
So we started to go down that road, of thinking about, “We’ve got these 
columns. What do we do with them? Could we make the column itself an 
advertising vehicle? Could you have columns sponsored by certain people? 
Could columns appear in your TweetDeck and disappear based on where 
you are in the world or a particular event going on at the time?” So we were 
starting on that route to monetization, but very specifically to TweetDeck.  
Santos: And did you find the model that you were confident about? Or were 
you still searching, and tweaking, and testing different things? 
Dodsworth: We didn’t get to roll out any of these ideas. We had some 
great ideas around it—and, who knows—perhaps they’ll turn up in the future 
somewhere else. But we had some interesting concepts which we wanted to 
try. Not sadly, but we just didn’t get a chance to try them. 
Santos: About this, I wouldn’t say sadly as well. 
Dodsworth: No, no, no. That’s not what I mean. Definitely no sense of un-
happiness there. 
Santos: And so how did the proposal come from Twitter? Can you talk a 
bit about that? Was it one-way from Twitter to you, from TweetDeck to 
them? How did it come to fruition, the actual proposal and the negotiations?  
Dodsworth: Well, there’s not a huge amount I can say about that but the 
general approach from Twitter was pleasant. It was very much a case of they 
had shown interest and pursued it. It was fairly simple. No fascinating insights 
unfortunately it all just seemed to fit. 
Santos: And how many clients did TweetDeck have at the time of being 
bought? 
Dodsworth: We had well over twenty million downloads of the desktop 
client. We had a couple of million downloads of the iPhone client. And then 
our Android client was rapidly reaching the same levels as well. We’re focus-
ing now on the web version of TweetDeck, and so we’re trying to get the 
usage of that up to match those kinds of numbers. You just go to a web page 
and it’s there. That’s kind of what we’re working up. 
Santos: And what was the growth rate? Was it still very rapid as before or 
was it showing signs of slowing down? 
Dodsworth: No, it wasn’t slowing down, that was the interesting thing. It 
was really as you categorize hockey-stick growth very early on, and then it 

Chapter 5 | Iain Dodsworth: TweetDeck 
 
66  
went to a very steady upward tick. But it never deviated from that either. It 
sat at that growth rate for the couple of years it was out there doing its 
thing. So it’s very solid. I think that, anecdotally, what I used to see happening 
quite a lot was how as people got on board Twitter they started to play with 
it and some of them over time would require a bit more of a power tool, 
and they would start to look around [and say], “[What] else can I do with 
Twitter?” And they would find TweetDeck, and they would graduate to 
TweetDeck. Obviously not everyone “graduates”, not everyone requires 
more power. 
So we would always see this trickle of users, brand-new people every day, 
downloading, and using, and then starting to use TweetDeck. But quite rarely 
were these new Twitter users. These are almost always the power-users, as 
I said, graduated up to something a bit more powerful.  
Santos: Roughly in, I believe it was end of 2010 and beginning of 2011, there 
were rumors that TweetDeck was considering launching its own social net-
work. Is there any foundation to this? 
Dodsworth: No, no. Obviously we saw that as well, so it was quite interest-
ing reading that. I see why people would think that when they saw Deck.ly, 
which was a service that we introduced to post longer than one hundred and 
forty characters. And the impetus around posting longer than one hundred 
and forty characters was that our user base was asking for it. And so this was 
not an attempt to go against the core tenant of Twitter. But just that our us-
ers, who are big lovers of Twitter in pretty much every respect, every now 
and again were wanting to tweet a little bit longer to the same audience. 
So they didn’t really want to put it up on a blog post or put it somewhere 
else or on Facebook. They wanted this content to go to the same users. 
They wanted to use the same tool that they were using to tweet that they 
were already comfortable with. So, it seemed to make a lot of sense. 
And also, for us, we looked at this as a kind of, “Well, some people might 
not like this. Some people will love this. We have no idea how Twitter will 
feel.” But we wanted to see what the reaction would be and as an ecosystem 
company I think it’s healthy to push the platform every now and then. 
And also, starting to think about the more revenue-based side. If we have 
pages with these decks and posts on them, that’s a lot of landing pages. 
That’s a lot of SEO goodness coming through. We should put some ads on 
there, or at least be pushing our own products more to, say, people that 
aren’t using them. 

European Founders at Work 
 
67  
There seemed to be a number of different things inside Deck.ly which were 
of interest. Not fully fleshed out. We didn’t have a huge advertising model on 
the Deck.ly pages. In fact, we didn’t even get to the advertising on those 
pages. But we did have the pages up. There were millions of Deck.lys created 
a day. It was a very useful service. I can quite easily see how people can sort 
of misrepresent that or misunderstand that as kind of a play. 
It’s still an interesting concept, nonetheless. Starting up your own social net-
work for power-users is very interesting. It’s potentially flawed in that do 
people really want another social network. 
How many social networks do we need? Do we need more and more ge-
neric, big, social networks? Or is there actually more value in, say, if you’re 
going to join another network, is it a tailored, niche network that has func-
tionality on it for that niche, for that level of expertise? But you wouldn’t 
have that on Facebook or Twitter as part of the core platform because it 
would just feel very out of place. 
So I think there’s more interest there. And that’s an area that I’m interested 
in generally—niche social networks, very small social networks. I still haven’t 
seen that take off. It might not be an area that ever takes off. But it’s not just 
about grouping similar people together, as far as I’m concerned, into a niche. 
It’s grouping people together with similar interests into a niche and then giv-
ing them tools which no other niche would want or have any value with. 
You’re not going to supplant Twitter and Facebook and LinkedIn and Four-
square. That, to me, is not an interesting proposal. I don’t find any interest in 
trying to go out there and build something to destroy another product. I 
think that’s quite mediocre. What I would actually like to do is create a 
product that’s never been created before. I think niche networks potentially 
fill that gap. 
Santos: Did you have any misconceptions from Twitter’s side, regarding 
this? Or they just saw, understood the message, and then went in on the 
hype that was going on at the time about Deck.ly? 
Dodsworth: No. I mean, I never heard anything negative from directly. I 
don’t think they greeted the feature set with open arms and I don’t think 
they thought it was a wonderful idea, because obviously, it does go against 
the principle of their platform. But then they’re not looking at it, or weren’t 
looking at it, from our point of view. They were purely looking at it from 
their point of view, whereas I think now that we’re all one company, they 
can kind of see the impetus, the reasoning behind putting this in place. I think 
it never really met with any hostility. Certainly, they didn’t seem to think that 
it was anything more than it was. 

Chapter 5 | Iain Dodsworth: TweetDeck 
 
68  
Santos: So, I don’t know if you can talk a bit about how it is to run Tweet-
Deck now inside of Twitter, if you see huge differences, if you see huge op-
portunities or huge hindrances. What are the main differences of being, now, 
inside of this giant that Twitter has become? 
Dodsworth: I don’t have a huge amount of insight at the moment. I will 
over time, obviously. It’s only really been about a month or so since we were 
acquired. We are slotting into the organization. We are carrying on, essen-
tially doing what we’re doing and catering to our audience that we’ve grown, 
and also any kind of brand that comes onto Twitter in the future as well. It’s 
quite a continuation of what we were already very good at doing, but obvi-
ously, we’re doing it as part of a bigger company.  
I can imagine, I mean, I’m kind of realistic enough to realize that things will 
change. From the point of view of running the company itself, obviously, I’m 
now running the team as opposed to running the company. And then the 
product itself is a Twitter product. It needs to become a Twitter product. It 
can’t just stay as a third party. It needs to really feel, when you open the  
product, that it’s really something that Twitter has produced with the comfort 
and reassurance that being part an official product should bring to its users. 
So I can imagine there’ll be some changes there. Nothing, I would imagine, 
desperately drastic, but this is really what we’re working out now. It’s an in-
teresting kind of exercise, but I think it’s one that seems to take quite a long 
time. They’re very respectful of the fact that we are the experts in this field. 
We know how to deal with this audience.  
So I think it’s going to be fascinating. And obviously, couple this with the 
growth in the platform and the products. Twitter itself is still growing. It 
seems to be growing up hugely. And I’m excited. I’m excited because, for me, 
Twitter has become less of “this is what I had for breakfast,” and much more 
of “this is how I get my news.” 
For me Twitter is the news source, globally, locally, into certain niches. For 
example I love Formula One and motorsport in general. That’s how I get  
all my news, first and foremost. It’s all these different pockets of news 
brought into one platform, which leads me off to web sites and blogs and 
anywhere else. 
If that can get unified in a global way, then the sky’s the limit. The Twitter 
platform could be everything. And that’s quite a big claim, and I think a lot 
has to happen for that to really become material. But I’m very excited to be 
on the inside of that now.  

European Founders at Work 
 
69  
Santos: TweetDeck was based in London. Will it still be based in London, 
or are you guys flying to San Francisco now? 
Dodsworth: No. We’re all based in London. We are flying to San Fran-
cisco back and forth quite a bit, and will be. But what’s quite nice, is we re-
main the same team in London, working on the same products and new 
products and with the same audience. But there’s a little bit of stability 
there as well, because obviously an acquisition can be a fairly hairy time for 
everybody involved. You don’t know what’s going to happen with the busi-
ness going forward, and is anybody going to be sacked, and all these kind of 
questions that go through your mind, especially as CEO with a responsibility 
to your team. It’s nice for me to feel that, from a day-to-day standpoint, 
from the team’s perspective, not a huge amount of change. I think that’s 
quite settling for people. 
On the other side, as well, they have new opportunities in San Francisco if 
they so desire. 
Santos: Did you feel a lot of tension in the employees of TweetDeck at the 
time of the acquisition negotiations? Or did they take it easily from your 
standpoint? 
Dodsworth: I think there was certainly some tension. It’s fear of the un-
known, isn’t it? If this does become an actual acquisition, what happens next? 
How do things change? You hear about deals not working out as intended all 
the time. And I had it as well. Of course I had it. I was in the middle of it. So, 
yes, an interesting time to say the least. 
I don’t particularly class the acquisition itself as an enjoyable event, the actual 
negotiation, managing the team through it whilst keeping the product and the 
company moving forward. I didn’t enjoy that in the slightest. Obviously, the 
outcome is wonderful and I couldn’t be happier. I just expected to enjoy that 
process a lot more than I did. 
Santos: Well, yeah, there was a lot of negotiation and tensions between 
both sides, I’m sure. 
Dodsworth: Yes. The negotiation “game” takes on a very different aspect 
when you, the founder, stand to lose or win big on a personal level.  
Santos: Only when it’s done and dusted and you wake up the next day and 
you realize it’s true, I think, [laughs] then you can breathe. 
Dodsworth: [laughs] I’m still doing that now. Can’t quite believe it. But yes, 
exactly. Exactly. 

Chapter 5 | Iain Dodsworth: TweetDeck 
 
70  
Santos: How did you feel and what did you do the first day after? Did you 
go on holidays? [laughs] 
Dodsworth: Gosh, what did I do afterwards? I can’t quite remember. I do 
think I sat down with my wife for quite a while, quite stunned, a little bit 
shocked. I mean, it was a fairly lengthy process anyway, talking with different 
companies. It wasn’t a well-rigged kind of acquisition by any stretch. I think 
the biggest emotion was relief, rather than out and out joy, that it had hap-
pened. I think we’re only starting to enjoy it now. 
Santos: A relief that the negotiations were over? 
Dodsworth: Yes, relief that it was done. I mean, there were a lot of moving 
parts. We’d been talking to various companies for the previous six months. 
So by the time we’d actually got to completed acquisition that was a long, 
hard-fought process. You wonder if it’s ever going to happen and start to 
question if it’s even the right thing to do. As the founder it can be an emo-
tional response. But yes, definitely relief, without a shadow of a doubt. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
6 
Giacomo Peldi 
Guilizzoni 
Balsamiq 
Giacomo Peldi Guilizzoni is an Italian entrepreneur that founded Balsamiq in 
2008. Before becoming the CEO of his start-up, Guilizzoni worked seven years in 
the United States as a programmer at Macromedia and Adobe. He used the 
launch of Balsamiq to move back to Italy. Balsamiq is the market leader in web 
Mockups. In a period of only three years and with a very small team of nine peo-
ple located all over the world, it has generated more than $6 million in revenue.  
 
Pedro Santos: How did you have the idea for Balsamiq and what did you 
do to get that idea to actually to turn it into reality? 
Giacomo Peldi Guilizzoni: I have to admit, I went back to my old blog 
posts just a few minutes ago to refresh my memory, because it’s been such a 
ride. I feel like I’ve changed so much since the beginning, which was only 
three years ago really. But it’s been a very interesting time. The idea itself, I 
don’t really remember what it was. I think it just came over time. It was a 
need that I had for a while for my day job at Adobe. I was a programmer and 
I’ve always been a visual person. I need to draw what we’re talking about or 
I’m not going to understand it. 
So during all these meetings at Adobe I would just get up and go to the 
whiteboard and start sketching the user interface for whatever we wanted  
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 6 | Giacomo Peldi Guilizzoni: Balsamiq 
 
72  
to build. And that really facilitated the discussion, of course, for every feature 
that we wanted to build, etc. Lots and lots of people do this all the time. 
That was all good. I really liked to do that. The problem is that we started 
working with developers who were remote, mostly in India, and other re-
mote people as well. Then there was the problem of how do we communi-
cate with those people who cannot see the whiteboard? 
Even for the people who were in the same office, after doing the sketch on 
the whiteboard I always had to go take a picture and then rebuild it. Or 
sometimes you’d go home and then you’d come back the next day and 
none of what’s on the whiteboard makes any sense. You forgot what that 
meant because they’re such scribbles. 
Either you were in the meeting and your memory was fresh or you forgot it 
all. Because that’s what happens, whiteboards get messy pretty quickly. 
So there was this issue that was bothering me. What I saw happen over and 
over was that we had to write specifications and I noticed that most people 
just looked at the pictures. They never really read the words. I noticed that 
the more pictures I put in, the more effective they were, so I started doing 
specs that were mostly pictures. 
The problem is that it took a while to create those pictures. I used to use 
Adobe Fireworks, which is a great tool, but it’s not focused. It’s a generic 
drawing tool. So it took a long time to do these things. 
Sometimes I would just code the feature instead and then take a screenshot, 
do the bare minimum in order to have the screenshot ready, and take a 
screenshot. And that would also take time. 
Then what I noticed what was happening is that whenever you spend time 
with something, you start getting attached to it, and I saw it with other en-
gineers as well. 
They came up with a spec and it wasn’t very good. We had this feedback 
and they were resistant to make changes because it took so long to draw it 
up or to code it. Already they spent all this time on it. 
So in the end what would happen was that we reached compromises to 
use what was already there and change it only a little bit. The end result is 
software that is not as good as it could have been, for reasons that have 
nothing to do with the customers. They were internal reasons, laziness, or 
human nature. 
So I was like, “This is not good. The customers, in the end, are not getting 
stuff that we know can be improved. We should be doing our best, our 
very, very best.” 

European Founders at Work 
 
73  
So I wanted to find a tool that was as quick as the whiteboard, as low fidel-
ity so that people wouldn’t get attached to it, because it looked like it was 
just scribbled together, but also digital so that we could use it with remote 
people. 
The other thing that I noticed is that we worked with some product manag-
ers who had great ideas and knew exactly what the customer wanted, but 
didn’t have the right tools to express those ideas. 
They would just write down in text or spend hours in Excel or PowerPoint 
to try to create user interfaces. And it was just a waste of time. 
I saw the need for a tool for business people that was as easy to use as  
PowerPoint, but designed to do user interface sketching. 
I even taught a product manager that I knew how to use Flex Builder, which 
is an IDE1 development environment, but it has a little visual designer. I was 
trying to find a solution to this for a while. I didn’t really consider building 
something until something related happened—which is that we started 
adopting wikis within our organization, and I saw how amazingly productive 
the internal wiki made our team. 
It really made a huge difference to have the Web 2.0 way to work where 
everything is immediately editable within the browser. Nothing to download. 
So we installed a few wikis. And we landed on Confluence, which is the wiki 
made by Atlassian, and it was such a pleasure to use and so great. It had  
one feature that I’d never seen before, which was that it was extensible, so 
people could build plug-ins for the wiki. And there are many extensions 
now. One of these plug-ins was Gliffy, which was a visual equivalent. It’s a 
diagramming tool and it was a commercial plug-in. We had to buy a license, 
which I thought was interesting. In a way I was suddenly … I had this epiph-
any with the wiki and the new way to work within the browser. 
I felt like it was a no-going-back technology—like cell phones or hot water. 
Once you start working that way, you can’t really go back to e-mailing  
PowerPoint files back and forth. 
So I was thinking, “I’ve got to get down this wiki train somehow. This is so 
powerful. It’s a shift and I want to work on this.” 
Santos: And this was when?  
Guilizzoni: This was 2007. Late 2007. And so, I thought I had to figure 
something out, because I wanted to work on this thing. And I saw that there 
                                                
1 An integrated development environment; also known as integrated design environment. 

Chapter 6 | Giacomo Peldi Guilizzoni: Balsamiq 
 
74  
was a commercial plug-in vendor for the wiki that was built in Flash, which is 
Gliffy. I heard that it was two guys and they were doing okay. And I thought, 
well, two guys doing okay, one guy that’s very happy. [laughs] 
I had never considered finding a co-founder. This was something that I 
wanted to do by myself for a number of reasons. 
One was that you hear that ninety-nine percent of all start-ups fail, so I 
didn’t want to rope anybody into something that I was pretty sure was go-
ing to fail. And also, most importantly, because I was looking for a learning 
experience. I wanted to find out what it took to bring something from idea 
to market. All that it took. So, what are all the things required? I wanted to 
see what that was. 
At Adobe, I was always a programmer, but I considered going into product 
management because I wanted to be exposed to the marketing, the pricing, 
the sales, the support, the legal. 
There’s so much that goes on that is not code related that is fascinating to 
me. And I wanted to see what it was and how to deal with it, as I had read 
about in books. 
But after a while, I reached the point where I could tell that I wasn’t learning 
so much from books and I had to take the dive. To learn it on my own skin. 
So this all happened more or less at the same time I wanted to move back 
to Europe with my family, because I had a young baby and my family’s all in 
Italy and I wanted the support for a number of different reasons. Some were 
personal. And we decided to move back.  
The other thing that you hear as an Italian expat is that, “Oh, there’s no jobs 
in Italy. What are you doing? There’s nothing you can do in Italy if you go 
back.” So, I thought I’d better come up with something for myself. So, that 
was the spirit of adventure that got me to decide to move back and start my 
own company. 
Santos: Okay. And how did you implement this? So, you had the idea, you 
wanted to come back to Italy. After you decided to go back, how did you 
actually implement it? 
Guilizzoni: So, I think it was maybe September 2007 when we decided, 
“Okay, we’re going to move back.” And I’m going to try to build this com-
pany around this product in order to enable that move, and to live on it. 
And so, I knew that my project at Adobe would hit a big milestone and we 
were going to ship version one around April. March, April of 2008. And so I 
said, “Okay, I’ll finish this project, and then we’ll move.” 

European Founders at Work 
 
75  
And then the project was a little bit late, and so in the end, I ended up giving 
notice in April and working at Adobe until the middle of June. We moved 
back to Italy in May of 2008, and then, until the middle of June, I worked 
while they tried to hire a replacement and stuff like that. 
But, basically, starting in September, I started putting away as much cash as I 
could because I wanted to have enough of a runway so that I could live off of 
my savings while the product was taking off. And I wanted to have a years’ 
worth of salary in the bank so that we could maintain our standard of living 
for at least a year after moving. And so, I sold all my stock options, I stopped 
putting money into my 401k. I basically started to get as much cash in the 
bank as possible. 
So, in September until May there were eight months of doing this. Then I 
started working on the product at night every night from maybe eight o’clock 
to midnight. I would sit in the kitchen and start coding like crazy. And then on 
Sunday, we had this deal with my wife where I could work half a day until 
noon. So, I’d wake up at five and start coding, go to a coffee shop and code 
until noon, and then go back home. 
Santos: This was for ten months? 
Guilizzoni: This was for, yeah, about ten months. 
Santos: While working full-time at Adobe? 
Guilizzoni: While working full-time at Adobe. I didn’t want anybody to  
accuse me of slacking at work, so I did my best work at Adobe. I really put 
in one hundred percent there, because I loved what I was doing, first of all. 
It was really tough to leave. I was really happy at Adobe. It was a great job. 
I highly recommend people who are just out of school to go work at Adobe 
or some other company that is large and knows how to develop products 
and sell and market them. 
Most of what I learned, I learned there. It’s a wonderful environment for a 
programmer. You’re very sheltered. You’re able to have your failures and 
learn from them in a very good environment. So, I have nothing bad at all to 
say about my time at Adobe. 
For me, I didn’t want to move to Italy and work as a remote worker. Adobe 
wasn’t really set up for that so well. And I had this idea and I had this pas-
sion for the wiki, etc. So, I decided to take a stab at it. It was now or never. 
So, yeah, on the implementation, I wanted to make sure that I had some-
thing ready by the time I finished at Adobe. And so, June 15, 2008, was my 
last day at Adobe and June 19 is when I launched Mockups. 

Chapter 6 | Giacomo Peldi Guilizzoni: Balsamiq 
 
76  
Santos: So, four days after. 
Guilizzoni: Yeah, four days after. Because I’ve got a family to feed. I don’t 
have time. [laughs] 
Santos: [laughs] And this was already in Italy, right? 
Guilizzoni: This was in Italy, yeah. 
Santos: Balsamiq is actually an LLC. So, it’s an American company. Or did 
you create an Italian company and an American one? 
Guilizzoni: So, it started an LLC because I was still in the US when I started 
it. And when I moved to Italy, I started an SRL [Società a Responsabilità Limi-
tata], which is the Italian equivalent. And so, we now have two companies. 
The SRL owns the stock of the LLC. So it’s a micro multinational, basically. I 
wanted to keep an American company because half of our customers are 
American. And they like to call an American phone number if they have a 
problem, and they like to mail a check, in dollars, in the mail, to an American 
address. 
It’s just the way software business is done in the US. And so, when I opened 
the Italian company, I didn’t want to shut down the American company. I’m 
very happy that that is the case. 
And this helps also with hiring. We have a place in the US for employees of 
the American company and Italian employees, European employees who are 
employed by the Italian company. 
It was a lot of work to set it up, because accountants don’t really understand 
it when you go in and say, “I am a multinational. It is just me. I have custom-
ers in seventy-eight countries. I need your help.” And they would say, “No, 
you don’t exist.” So, it was a big, time commitment to set it all up and find 
accountants that would understand and were not too expensive. That’s done 
now, but it was a lot of work in the first year. 
Santos: Did you find those accountants in the US or in Italy? 
Guilizzoni: I went through maybe three sets of accountants in the US and 
in Italy we now have found somebody who has an American partner that 
they work with. And so, they follow Italian multinationals. We are their 
smaller customers. We were lucky enough to be able to grow enough to be 
able to afford these guys, but it’s worth the money. You should always get 
the most expensive accountants and lawyers you can afford, I think. It’s 
worth the money. 
Santos: Why actually set up two companies and not, for instance, make one 
the branch of the other? Does it bring tax benefits? 

European Founders at Work 
 
77  
Guilizzoni: I started with an American company because I lived in America 
when I started. Incorporating an LLC is a one-page form and takes no time at 
all, so that is what I did. Then when I moved to Italy to run the company 
from here, I spoke with my accountants, and realized that if I wanted to live 
here and grow the company here, it would be beneficial if I started a com-
pany here as well. That’s where the SRL came from and that’s how I was able 
to hire people here. At that point, there was an option to close the LLC and 
just have the Italian company, but the problem is most of our customers, I 
think fifty percent, fifty-one maybe, of our customers are American custom-
ers and in the US people like to buy by mailing a check in the mail. 
It’s kind of amazing that even the most industrialized country in the world 
still uses checks extensively. They like to mail a check to an American ad-
dress in American dollars. Doing business in the US is much easier if you 
have an American company there. 
What we did was to purchase the stock of the American company with the 
Italian company. Then the American company became a reseller, basically, in 
charge of the sales of the software, while the Italian company is the R&D 
branch. All the sales go through the American company. As far as taxes are 
concerned, there is no benefit by having this set up. 
I think we pay maybe ten percent more, ballpark, of what we would pay if 
we only had one company in one country, but at least we don’t pay two 
hundred percent. We don’t pay both here and there on all the revenues. It’s 
a very common thing that companies do. 
Google has a Google Ireland that is their sales branch, but it’s a separate 
company. It’s separate, but then not really separate. I don’t really understand. 
Santos: But Google does it so the tax footprint is very low. 
I think they pay … it’s something ridiculous like five percent or something 
like that. 
Guilizzoni: Well, we don’t do that. I like paying taxes. I think that they 
serve an important purpose. If you want roads and hospitals, taxes are im-
portant. I don’t like to try and evade anything. I also didn’t want to have to 
pay twice for the same revenue. With my accountants, we were able to find 
this setup, which I hear is very common. 
Santos: Okay. But couldn’t you just be an employee of the American com-
pany, but living abroad? 
Guilizzoni: That would mean getting a visa for myself and all the other Ital-
ians. It’s not easy. It’s so much easier to have two companies in both places. 

Chapter 6 | Giacomo Peldi Guilizzoni: Balsamiq 
 
78  
For instance, in the Italian company, we have an employee who lives in 
France, so for this employee we have to pay taxes in France, payroll contri-
butions in France every month, as well as in Italy. It’s just a lot of bureauc-
racy. We were able to hire the French employee from Italy because it’s part 
of the EU. There was no visa involved.  
As a company of one when I started, I couldn’t afford that. Even now it 
seems to be a disproportionate amount of effort to try and get everybody a 
visa one way or the other way. Instead, with R & D separated from sales, 
we’re able to hire people easily. 
We have payroll people and accountants and lawyers both here and there. 
It’s not easy to be a micro multinational I have to tell you. I had a few ac-
countants in the US that waved a white flag on us and passed us over to 
people with more expertise. We don’t really fit with the current legislation. 
Well, we do, but it’s not very common. When I walked into the accountant’s 
office and I said, “It’s just me for now. I have two companies, customers in 
seventy-eight countries, help me out.” 
They’re like, “You shouldn’t exist.” That’s one of the things I decided not to 
worry about when I started. I decided it would be like going to the dentist. 
You just have to do it. We’ll pull through. I consciously decided not to let 
that stop me. It took a good year and a half of talking to accountants and 
lawyers before I settled down finally. 
Santos: I can imagine. So, going back to the launch. So, you launched in 
June 2008, correct? 
Guilizzoni: Correct. 
Santos: And what happens? 
Guilizzoni: It pretty much blew up in my face right away. It was immedi-
ately successful. I’ve got to look at the numbers. It was profitable after two 
weeks. Basically, I got my lawyer fees and all the other money that I had put 
in before, which was maybe $2,000. I made it back in two weeks. And then, 
we made $10,000 in sales after six weeks. Something like that. I have to give 
you the right numbers, let me see. 
They’re on the company page. I keep forgetting. But anyway, it’s been grow-
ing and growing and growing and growing without stop since the beginning. 
So, I looked at the numbers for our third anniversary, which was last week 
or ten days ago, and we sold over $6.6 million of Mockups to over fifty 
thousand customers. And business is still growing. I got lucky. I don’t know 
what to tell you. 

European Founders at Work 
 
79  
It found this underserved niche that is growing, as well. More people are get-
ting into user experience and have web sites and web applications or soft-
ware that they’re building. 
So, somehow, I hit a sweet spot with the price and the feature list, and I 
guess we’re doing a good job. 
Santos: But when you launched, did you do a media campaign? Did you 
contact TechCrunch or whoever to get a lot of media attention? 
Guilizzoni: Yeah, I have a blog post about what I did. I didn’t have Tech-
Crunch because I was bootstrapped from day one. They’re more about or 
at least they used to be more about venture capitalists, start-ups that are 
designed to grow. This was never my intention. My goal was to build a little 
Italian restaurant on the web. Great quality, family-run. Not really just fam-
ily, but my employees feel like a family to me. 
Basically, they make their customers happy, generation after generation, and 
they love what they do. They do something that requires craftsmanship. 
That’s my ideal. That’s what I look up to. 
And so, it’s not really TechCrunch material, I don’t think. But I did write to 
a few bloggers that I admired, and I wrote to some bloggers whose audience 
I thought would be interested in Mockups. 
Then I did Twitter searches for keywords to see if people were interested 
in my tool. Basically, I did what I could do, as a single guy, unknown on the 
internet. But luckily, we had a product that did most of the work for me. It 
has enough character that people immediately recognize what it is. Or if 
they don’t, they’re like, “Hey, how’d you build that? That looks interesting.” 
I guess my best idea was to make the interfaces that you draw be hand 
drawn. My wife drew them on paper and then I scanned them in and made 
them stretchable. But the end result of the Mockups that you can build with 
my tool, look hand drawn, and the goal of that is to elicit honest feedback. 
They have to look bad. They have to look like you just threw them together 
so other people are not embarrassed to give you their honest opinion. 
Also, you can’t put in too much detail, because otherwise the human eye 
gets drawn into the detail. And then they give you feedback on the color 
gradient instead of the structure of the web site. So yeah, it’s been word of 
mouth I think, due to the product. That’s it. 
Santos: Okay, interesting. And you had, as you said—a huge learning explo-
sion. What were the major fears and problems that happened along the way? 

Chapter 6 | Giacomo Peldi Guilizzoni: Balsamiq 
 
80  
Guilizzoni: Oh, man. I mean, not a day goes by. [laughter] I had no idea 
what I was doing. I still don’t feel like I really know what I’m doing. It takes 
the ten thousand hours to become good at something, right? Everybody 
says that. 
Santos: Yeah. True. 
Guilizzoni: Maybe I’ve got three thousand so far. The biggest surprise was 
what an amazingly different job it is from being a programmer to become a 
CEO. It is so incredibly different, and how is that even something that people 
try to do? It’s common knowledge that it’s expected that you should be able 
to make the transition, because you start, the coding becomes what you do 
in your spare time. It becomes the easiest part of your job. The rest is legal. I 
have to write a license agreement. I never even read one. I accepted a million 
of them, but now I have to write one? [laughter]  
There are a lot of moments like that where you don’t know what you’re 
doing, but this was the whole point. I wanted to learn how to do it. So, roll 
up your sleeves, do your homework, read up on things, and just do your 
best. And then continuously improve everything that you produce. 
So, there were a lot of moments [with] the first big customers, and you’re 
on the phone with some CIO of some Fortune 500 company and they don’t 
know that it’s just you and three weeks ago you were this lowly program-
mer—seven steps removed from executives. [laughs] So there are a lot of 
moments where it’s really terrifying. 
Then the first venture capitalists call, and the first acquisition offer. I mean, 
these are terrifying things. 
Santos: You had VCs calling you, and acquisitions? 
Guilizzoni: Yes. 
Santos: But you are completely bootstrap, right? 
Guilizzoni: We’re completely bootstrapped. We got our funding from our 
customers. Through my favorite way. And yeah, I do have VCs calling almost 
every week. Right now, I have a pretty good spiel to say “thank you, but no 
thank you, maybe later.” But remember, the first couple of calls were, “Oh 
my gosh!” 
And then acquisitions offers. I can’t talk about them so much, but yeah,  
we came pretty close at some points. But I’m very happy with remaining in-
dependent. 
Santos: And so, you worked by yourself until when? 

European Founders at Work 
 
81  
Guilizzoni: Until launch, that was a good ten months, right? And then until 
maybe three thousand customers, which was six months, maybe? In March 
2008, I hired my first employee, Marco, as a programmer. Because all of  
my time was going to customer support and I didn’t have time to program 
anymore, so I couldn’t move forward. The speed of releases had slowed 
down to a crawl. I could only code on the weekend. After a while I woke up 
and I said, “If I keep doing this I’m going to be dead.” I wasn’t worried about 
growing bankrupt or anything. It was really about my life. [laughter] 
So I hired Marco to program while I did tech support, and then I hired Va-
lerie in the US to do support while I was sleeping. That was in April 2008. 
Then we’ve slowly, slowly been growing. Now there are nine of us, eight 
full-time employees, in three years. Which from the outside seems like it’s 
fast growth, but I’ve always been trying to stay as small as humanly possible. 
Optimize our back-end processes as much as we possibly can. 
My dream was to build this little team of five, six people. And it was actu-
ally hard when we reached six people, it was hard for me to let go of the 
dream and understand that we couldn’t really stay at six forever, because 
customers just kept coming and kept coming, and so we were working 
ourselves to death. 
That’s when I decided to hire two more people, and that was in October 
last year, 2010. Then one more person just joined. So now I’m no longer 
going to artificially cap the number of employees to fulfill my dream, which 
was an unsustainable dream. I’ve learned that now, but it took a while. 
Santos: You’re basically, as you said, multinational. Headquartered in Italy. 
What’s your view, from your experience, of how different it is to run a 
company in Italy vs. a start-up in the US? 
Guilizzoni: This is a hard question for me to answer, because I’ve never run 
a start-up any other way. I’ve never run a start-up in the US, and I’ve never 
worked in Italy. Right after graduating from college, I moved to the US to 
look for a job, and I was lucky enough to start working at Macromedia. So I 
don’t really know what it’s like to work in Italy, let alone run a company in 
the traditional sense in Italy. We’re a very special company in Italy, because 
we just happen to live here, but our business is all on the internet. 
We could be anywhere and we have very little contact with Italians. We 
have very few Italian customers. Other than paying rent to the office, it’s 
not like I know much about running a company. 
Or what it means to be an Italian company. In Italy, developers are not un-
ionized. It’s one of the few professions in Italy where there’s no union. Even 
that is no different from the US. It’s hard for me to answer this question.  

Chapter 6 | Giacomo Peldi Guilizzoni: Balsamiq 
 
82  
While on the internet. I’m running a company the way I figured out how to. 
My only other experience was with Adobe or Macromedia, which are super-
large companies and they are run in a much different way because of the size.  
I don’t know. Who knows? I’m sure there’s a lot of stuff that we’re not do-
ing, that we could improve, but so far, we’re having a good time and learning 
as we go. 
Santos: Balsamiq is known for giving away a lot of licenses to NGOs [non-
governmental organizations] and others. What made you be so giving? 
Guilizzoni: I don’t know. It was something that I wanted to do from the 
beginning. I think that one of the inspirations was … I had a lot of inspira-
tions. In San Francisco, I was introduced to the concept of volunteering and 
donation by my boss, Roberto Tatsumi, who was one of the inventors of 
Flash. He was always organizing the food-bank trips. That was the first time 
that I had any money to donate, as well. I really started enjoying giving back. 
I realized how privileged my life has been and how much even a little, little 
gesture can make quite a difference in someone else’s life. That became part 
of my life, to do that. When I started thinking about Balsamiq, I read this 
book from Guy Kawasaki. He has a little talk, where he says, “You should 
make meaning in the world. You shouldn’t start a company to make money. 
You should start it to make meaning. Which is, work on something that 
matters to you more than money. Change the world. Make the world a bet-
ter place, as much as you can.” 
Why not? If you’re not doing it for that, if you’re just doing it for the mon-
ey, you’re probably going to fail and that’s not the point. 
I absolutely agree. Money should be a side effect, not a motivation. So from 
the beginning I was thinking, “What can I do? Maybe donate ten percent of 
the revenue to some charity? How do I pick the charity? How does it work 
accounting wise?” I didn’t have any revenue at the time. So [laughs] that’s 
not going to do a lot of good.  
Then, some customers started writing me at the beginning. Some people 
started e-mailing me and say, “I could really use your tool but I can’t afford 
it and I’m doing this and it’s something good for the world.” I was like okay. 
If you think it’s going to help you. It doesn’t cost me anything to create a 
new license for you. I was really surprised that my software, itself, could be 
something that was worth it for people and that could help them. 
It takes me five seconds to create a new license and e-mail it to somebody, 
so, of course, I will give you a copy. There was some other company, Atlas-
sian. Atlassian itself, they donated to nonprofits and to open-source projects. 

European Founders at Work 
 
83  
I thought that was really nice. I instituted a very similar policy and I put it on 
my web site. When you went to the buy page, it said, “Wait! Don’t buy yet. 
You probably can get it for free.” [laughter] 
You had to read all the different ways you could get it for free and then 
scroll down, okay, if you don’t qualify, here, you can buy it, it’s cheap. With 
that, it started taking off and it’s a wonderful thing to do. We love it. We 
have a person whose job, half the time, is just to give licenses away. I don’t 
know the numbers offhand, but I think we give a good thirty, forty licenses 
every day. It’s such a wonderful feeling. You get the best e-mails. 
It does feel like we’re giving back a little bit. I wouldn’t stop it. It is a big in-
vestment of time, but I am very happy that this is part of who we are and I 
know that all my employees are proud to work at a company that gives 
back, as well. 
We also do donations that are not just software, we do company donations 
regularly. I guess the answer is, why not? It doesn’t cost you anything to do it 
and the benefits are wonderful for yourself and for the people who receive 
the licenses. Nonprofits should be using the little money that they have to 
feed people or do the things that they were born for. They shouldn’t be 
spending money on software, come on. 
Santos: Going back to the beginning, even with this explosive growth that 
you saw, was there any moment that you thought, “I’m just losing control 
over it” or “This is going to go all downhill?” Or did everything seem always 
just to grow and you only have to worry about the growth? 
Guilizzoni: I was definitely lucky enough to only have the problem of “crap, 
my customer service is going down because I can’t keep up.” From the very 
beginning the problem has been a very good problem, which is to try to rein 
in the growth until we were able to catch up. We say we like to compete in 
customer service and I truly believe that. Having too many customers has an 
effect on that. You need to hire people and train them in support and the 
product needs to be mature enough that not too many people write to sup-
port with bugs and stuff. 
So it takes time to provide good customer service. That was the problem 
that I had from the beginning. There were moments that I thought this is 
getting out of control, like when I decided to hire the first employee, which 
was a major, terrifying step. Then when I had to let go of my dream of hav-
ing a six-people company. 
Those moments were all because it was spinning out of control. I don’t look 
at metrics very much except for the revenue and the profits, and there are 

Chapter 6 | Giacomo Peldi Guilizzoni: Balsamiq 
 
84  
times where there’s a week that is slower than another. So you’re always a 
little bit worried. 
I don’t take anything for granted. I try to keep as much money in the com-
pany as possible because I am very much aware of how fickle people are on 
the internet. Just the fact that we exploded so quickly means that somebody 
else … a lot of people have been seeing the revenue that we are now mak-
ing. So tomorrow it could happen to us. 
Remember Myspace or Friendster? They were huge. They were the thing. 
The internet moves so quickly that I want to make sure that we have enough 
money in the bank in case revenue goes to zero tomorrow, we still have a 
couple years to figure out what else to do. 
The good thing is that I think I wouldn’t want to have that problem with any 
other team. I think that our team can come up with something if they need 
to, that the people are so great and I love to work with them that I wouldn’t 
want to be in a problem situation with anyone else. 
I think that’s the real asset that no one can copy. 
Santos: The team? 
Guilizzoni: Yeah, the team. I think, in the end, that’s the competitive advan-
tage of any company. 
Santos: The fact that you want to keep the team small is also good in 
terms of flexibility.  
Guilizzoni: Right, exactly. We have to stay as nimble as we can possibly be 
and keep our ears open. That’s a big part of my job is to read Hacker News 
and see what’s going on and learn about new technologies and try to get a 
sense of where the market is going. Those are things that I’ve had to learn 
how to do and I am still learning. The smaller and nimbler we are, the more 
we can be on our feet and adapt to things that will inevitably change. No 
software is forever. Nothing is forever. I’m very much aware of that. 
Right now we are at the peak. Well, I shouldn’t say we’re at the peak, but 
we’re definitely at a high. We’ll see what happens. I’m always assuming that 
it could go down tomorrow. 
Santos: Your perspective that it could go down is just because you think 
that the internet and people can change very quickly, right? 
Guilizzoni: Yeah, I think so. I’m always an optimist, but I’m also a realist 
and I guess pragmatic. I’d rather be thinking dead than thinking, “Oh, every-
thing is good, we’re good forever, let’s all buy a Ferrari.” I guess I’m very 

European Founders at Work 
 
85  
conservative and that might be a European trait, being a little more risk 
averse than Americans. But I don’t know. I don’t like generalizing. 
Santos: All products that Balsamiq now have are around Mockups. Do you 
expect to expand your product line and, if so, in what areas? 
Guilizzoni: When I first started, I thought Mockups were too small of a 
product to be able to pay the bills. I had this plan of building a new product 
every three months and then spending three months to market it and sell it 
and then do another one. It shows you how clueless I was. It’s been over 
three years now. We have nine people, all focused on Mockups and all its 
different variations.  
The product is the same, but we sell it in different ways: as a plug-in or as a 
web app or as a desktop app. Products are a little bit like children. They 
take a life of their own and you have to take care of them. While I do have 
ideas for future products, I also know that Mockups right now requires our 
full attention because we would be doing a disservice if we moved on to 
something else right now. 
I think that maybe we have about a years’ worth of development for Mock-
ups before we can consider it mature or implemented to the initial vision. 
The problem is I’ve been saying that we have a year ahead of us for over a 
year and a half or two years. It keeps growing. The landscape changes. The 
technologies change. The customers help us steer the vision. Define it better. 
It just takes time and people. Right now we don’t have any short-term plans 
or mid-term plans to expand into other products, but we do have a file, a 
text file, with product ideas. I call it a write-only file. We open it. We don’t 
look at what’s there. We just type up the new idea and close it because 
once we start thinking of new products, then our minds start spinning and 
we just can’t have that right now. 
We’re always thinking that one day, we’re going to have another product. 
Everything we do right now, with the integrations of other platforms, is part 
of that same strategy where all this work can be reused for our next prod-
uct as well. 
Santos: Those ideas are all in completely different areas? 
Guilizzoni: No. They’re always related. First of all, it’s what we love. It’s 
what we’re passionate about. It’s about usability and helping developers and 
designers and business people communicate with each other. Also because 
it’s much easier to sell into our existing customer base than trying to mar-
ket and find a completely different group of people. 

Chapter 6 | Giacomo Peldi Guilizzoni: Balsamiq 
 
86  
Santos: Yeah. Instead of starting from a blank sheet. You’re quite open in 
your communication. You have a huge amount of information in your blog 
and in the videos that you posted. Do you do that out of, let’s say, a thought 
process to help the company? Or you just do it because you just do it? It’s 
just the way you are? 
Guilizzoni: I think it’s definitely not calculated. If it was calculated I would 
be doing it more because it is very effective. It was a surprise. I’ve always 
blogged and I like blogging. It’s a little bit like having a diary. It helps me think 
through problems and the beauty of doing it in public is you get feedback 
from people who have been there already and they can help you. It becomes 
this sort of a community therapy session. So that’s why I was doing it. 
At the beginning, I was posting my revenue numbers because I couldn’t be-
lieve how good they were. Like I can’t believe this is happening to me. That 
resulted in people saying, “Oh wow, this is great, you’re so open.” No, you 
don’t understand. This is unbelievable. 
So it’s mostly for myself to think through problems and to vent sometimes. 
And, why not? I think that it helps to gain the trust of your customers. Re-
member, I was just a single person trying to do a whole software company. 
If I were a large company, I would have second thoughts about buying from 
some random guy. 
So, I was trying to gain the trust of as many people as possible by being as 
open and honest as I could possibly be, which also helps that that’s what I 
want to be as a person. Why not? Why not? The other thing is it’s another 
way to give back. I’ve learned so much from all these Spolskys [Joel Spolsky, 
blogger at Joel on Software] and all the different books that I read. 
If anything that I do works out for myself, of course I’m going to share it. I 
think knowledge is for sharing. It’s just a way to be a good citizen. 
Santos: Was there any moment this openness backfired? 
Guilizzoni: I don’t think so. No. No. I mean, there were some people who 
were saying, “Oh, this is all a fake.” People that were like, this is a PR move 
by Adobe to push Adobe AIR. I was like “Come on, really?” In one sense, 
what happened was that as people saw our revenue numbers and they were 
so good all these clones started popping up everywhere. Maybe they would 
have popped up anyway, but it seems like people saw our numbers and de-
cided “Hey, maybe I can do that too since he’s just one guy, I’m just one 
guy. Why not?” 
We have maybe, I don’t know, ten, fifteen clones or knockoffs, but it’s great 
for business for us. It pushes us up the ladder as the leader. 

European Founders at Work 
 
87  
Sometimes I wonder if those guys would have done it anyway had they not 
read my blog. The more the merrier. My view on competition comes from 
Tim O’Reilly, who says “Look at your competitors as people who are also 
trying to solve the same problem that you are solving.” 
If you look at it that way, we’re all rowing in the same direction. They’re also 
helping people build more useable software and that’s what I want. That’s 
what I want to do in the world is to get rid of bad software. That’s why I’m 
doing this. That’s what matters to me more than money. 
So if they’re doing it with my tool, great. If they’re doing it with another 
tool, also great. That really helps me think about competition. I like to think 
of competition in that way. 
Santos: Where do you think the company will be in ten years? 
Guilizzoni: This question makes me laugh a little bit because ten years 
seems like an infinite amount of time. Marco, my first employee who knows 
me quite well by now, made me realize that when I say something is forever, 
it really means the next three months. [laughter] 
My job in our company has grown so fast and everything changes so fast 
that it’s true that I can’t really plan after three months. I’ve changed jobs 
dramatically myself, as I went from a one-man company to now having nine 
people. Every three months it seems like it’s all different. Kind of like having 
a baby, where you think you have the hang of it and then they grow and 
they change completely. Then you have to start over.  
That said, I do know what I hope for the company, which is to still be around, 
first of all, as an independent, good, good software vendor that does products 
that people love in a way that is sustainable and employs a group of people 
that love working with each other and love doing great work.  
I always joke that I want to build a little Italian restaurant on the web, some-
thing that lasts for generations and makes their customers happy and goes at 
a good pace, but without too much stress. I don’t want to grow too much. 
Santos: Okay. Makes sense. At that point, or even later, might you consider 
selling the company? 
Guilizzoni: I don’t know. Not any time soon. That’s never been the plan. I 
really dislike people who have exit strategies. I think that means you’re not 
committed to your idea or you’re not doing what you love, so you shouldn’t 
even start. But I also know that nothing is forever. I spent twelve years of 
my life doing a web site for the Ultimate Frisbee community, which was 
huge. It was maybe the biggest web site for Ultimate for many years, and I 
thought that was going to be something that I did forever.  

Chapter 6 | Giacomo Peldi Guilizzoni: Balsamiq 
 
88  
But then, after twelve years of doing that, I got bored with it. I had a kid. My 
values changed a little bit. Then I did end up shutting it down. I know that 
even the biggest successes don’t last very long. I know that software in gen-
eral has a very short life span. There are only a few pieces of software that 
are twenty years old like Photoshop or Word. 
It remains to be seen how long a piece of software can live. I hope it will live 
as long as it possibly can, but in my expectations I try to be realistic. 
Santos: Would you like to add anything? 
Guilizzoni: The other thing that I struggle with is what I should tell Italian 
students, because sometimes I go speak at universities. Should I tell them 
well you have to go to the US and work at Adobe for seven years and then 
can come back? I wish I didn’t have to say that. I know that that’s what 
worked for me, but it’s something that is hard to receive because you may 
not be able to afford it, or who knows. 
And it’s a big move. Moving from Italy to California is a big move. In a sense 
I wish that I could say just take these classes, go work at this local company, 
and you’ll learn what you need. I don’t know enough about the European 
technology scene yet. That’s something that I struggle with. 
My answer is a little bit of a cheat. Go learn in the US and bring it back. 
Not ideal. 
Santos: Actually that question is the reason why I decided to make the book. 
It appears that no one has the answer. No one knows and everyone has dif-
ferent experiences. Just like you when you went to Adobe in the US, I went 
to London and I went to the Netherlands, and it completely shifted my mind. 
Guilizzoni: There you go. 
Santos: So, I think it’s just get out of your environment and try something 
new and see what happens. I think it’s an interesting question. Maybe I 
phrased the question wrong because the point of it is how different is it to 
be in the US because everyone has that idea of Silicon Valley and so on. 
Everything happens there. Then in Italy, Portugal, Spain, France, whatever, 
it’s viewed as an old business thing and it doesn’t have the same, let’s say 
“sugar” around it. 
Guilizzoni: Well, that I think is not true. You can be on the internet from 
wherever. In fact, I like not being in Silicon Valley. Every time I go back there 
I feel so stressed out. Everybody’s always running and running and running, 
and the next opportunity is always around the corner. It gave me an ulcer 
last time I went. I was like, “Oh, wow. I’m so glad I don’t live here.” I live in 
a place where people do understand the value of family/work balance. There 

European Founders at Work 
 
89  
are differences in the culture that somehow are reflected if you live in a 
place, even if you work on the internet. 
I’m very happy to be in Italy, but also I’m very happy to have the global team 
because that way we get all kinds of perspectives. 

C H A P T E R 
7 
Olivier Poitrey  
Dailymotion 
Olivier Poitrey is the co-founder and CTO of Dailymotion, the second-largest 
video site in the world after YouTube. Before starting Dailymotion, he worked as a 
systems architect for Lycos Europe. Dailymotion is headquartered in Paris, France. 
As of May 2011, the site experienced more than 114 million unique visitors every 
month and is in the top 30 most visited websites worldwide (source: ComScore). In 
January 2011, it sold 49 percent of its shares to Orange, the key brand of France 
Telecom, for €58 million. 
 
Pedro Santos: How did Dailymotion start? 
Oliver Poitrey: Benjamin Bejbaum—my associate—travelled to New York 
for the holidays and came back to Paris with a bunch of photos and videos 
on his new digital camera. He wanted to share those souvenirs with friends 
and family. He used Flickr for the photos but he couldn't find any online 
service offering an easy way to share of videos. Having a technical back-
ground, he managed to encode the videos and post them on a web site. But 
even for him it this was very time consuming. It was obvious that the web 
was lacking a proper service for this purpose. We were already working to-
gether at that time: I was helping him to scale the architectures of the most 
demanding customers of his web company (IguaneStudio). 
We talked about the project and he asked me to help him develop the serv-
ice. He had already started to work on a proof of concept but rapidly felt he 
wouldn't be able to build the whole thing alone. I immediately embraced the 
idea and took over the development. After one week of intense coding every 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 7 | Olivier Poitrey: Dailymotion 
 
92  
night at my home with lot of coffee and sushi, Benjamin and I got something 
working. Another week later, we had the first public beta of shortv.net (the 
codename for the project before we actually found a proper name). 
Santos: When did you launch the site? 
Poitrey: We started working on the site on March 2nd, 2005, coded the 
first beta in about two weeks, found the site name on March 15th and 
launched the first public version the next day. 
Santos: It was pretty fast. How was the acceptance? 
Poitrey: In the beginning it was only friends and families. And it grew expo-
nentially: we doubled the traffic every month. It was very exciting and a bit 
scary. My ex-coworkers at Lycos called me crazy as they thought we would 
never be able to survive the bandwidth costs. 
Santos: Was it word of mouth or did you do any marketing?  
Poitrey: We were so excited by the project; we were convinced it could 
become the next Flickr or Delicious. We always thought that if the product 
were good enough, it would spread with no need for marketing. 
The best idea we had to make the service known was to let everybody em-
bed our player on their site or blog. Every video on our platform could be 
exported that way. This feature quickly became very popular and brought us 
a lot of traffic.  
Santos: That’s great. And when you started, did you put in any investment? 
Poitrey: Benjamin had his web-agency/hosting company, so the web site was 
co-hosted on their platform. This allowed us to start with no cash. But after a 
month or two, the traffic and the bandwidth requirements were too big to be 
sustained by his company. We thus had to start looking for funds. 
We got our first funding on June 13th, 2005—three months without any 
cash: €50,000. It was a loan for 50% of the company. Yes you read it 
right!… It was a pretty bad deal. And at the time, we didn't fully realize how 
bad it was. After the dot-com bubble, nobody wanted to invest on a project 
without a clear business plan. We accepted this deal because we wanted to 
continue working on the project. This allowed us to buy some servers, but 
we quickly ran out of cash again. In September 2005 we received another 
€200,000 that bought us some more time. 
Santos: From business angels or VC companies? 
Poitrey: It was still business angels and even worse, it was only loan 
money. Our first real fundraising occurred in August 2006. We raised seven  
million from two VCs: Atlas and Partech. Until then we lived on a very 

European Founders at Work 
 
93  
short money leash. We had to be smart to build a free video sharing service 
that cost almost nothing. 
Santos: Did you have any revenue back then? 
Poitrey: Our first business model was not advertising like it is today. In 
2005, the advertising business model was not something you can sell, so we 
tried different B2B models. For instance we licensed the software and archi-
tecture behind the service to TF1—the first TV channel in France. This was 
pretty silly from us because we just helped them build one of our French 
competitors known today as wat.tv. We also built tons of white label ver-
sions of our site for different actors. 
At the same time, we saw a huge growth in the service. We needed cash 
because streaming videos on the web requires a lot of bandwidth, and 
bandwidth at that time was very expensive. We made every effort to build a 
very efficient  architecture. We internalized as much stuff as possible to re-
duce costs. During the days, we were developing the service and at nights, 
racking new servers in our datacenter, adding storage, fixing network prob-
lems, etc. We bought hardware only when we needed to and we constantly 
feared going bankrupt the next month. It was a very intense period. 
I remember a time when the site had less than 10 hours of storage left be-
fore it would begin to refuse new uploads. No suppliers were able to deliver 
new disks in less than 24 hours and for us it was even longer, because they 
insisted on additional proof of credit worthiness. I had no other choice than 
to go to Surcouf—a French computer store—and buy about two dozen 
hard disks just to cope with the demand while waiting for the supplier to 
deliver our order. Try lugging 20 hard disks around … it’s frakking heavy!  
Santos: How many people were there in the beginning, until you raised the 
capital? Was it only the two of you or did you hire people? 
Poitrey: In the beginning until the end of 2005 it was only Benjamin, Didier 
Rappaport—the man who found our first business angels—and I. The com-
pany was even not founded until August 2005 and there were no paid em-
ployees at all until the end of 2005. 
Santos: But you were at it full-time? 
Poitrey: I was leaving Lycos because it was closing its French branch. So I 
multi-tasked and used the money I received to live on for one year while de-
veloping the project. In November 2005, we hired our first developer. At the 
end of 2005 we were three people working full-time for the company with 
only one employee. At the end of 2006, we were ten people—we always 
managed to have a very small company for a very big audience. To give you 

Chapter 7 | Olivier Poitrey: Dailymotion 
 
94  
an idea, we only raised €250,000 when at the same time YouTube raised $8 
million. It wasn't exactly the same game. 
Santos: I see from your history that you raised a Series A in 2006, a Series 
B in 2007, and a Series C in 2009, but all of them from European partners.  
Poitrey: Atlas and Partech—our initial investors—re-funded the company 
at each subsequent round with some additional ventures like AGF, Advent 
and FSI. As you pointed out, they are mostly European ones with a French 
presence except Advent, which is American.  
Santos: What were the key moments for Dailymotion? You said in the be-
ginning that you never knew if you were going to survive one more month. 
So, what were the key moments that you thought, “Okay, we are going 
forward with it?” 
Poitrey: We tried not to think about what we were going to do in two 
months. We were always trying to fix day-to-day problems with the web 
site, the overwhelming growth, etc. We never thought it would be the end 
because we always thought that the project needed to succeed. It was obvi-
ous that people wanted this type of service. We always thought that a mira-
cle would happen the next month to help us find something to continue—
and we were right. This is also why we rushed for bad deals. Actually I can’t 
remember one moment when we felt safe. There was always something  
that could beat us the next day. But when you think about it, safety isn’t nec-
essarily a good thing because it doesn’t force you to constantly stay alert and 
efficient.  
Santos: How did you manage to do everything at the same time? Doing de-
velopment and at the same time trying to find the deals? 
Poitrey: I always focused on development and architecture, Benjamin on 
the product, and Didier on partners. This worked quite well but didn’t save 
us from spending a lot of time building partners sites instead of our own 
product. 
Santos: Was there any moment when your architecture or your network 
seemed not to hold the demand?  
Poitrey: In 2006 we had big issues with our database. We used a version of 
MySQL that was not very stable at that time but was containing features we 
needed to cope with our workload. Despite those quirks, the site always 
remained online. It was sometimes slow or in read-only mode—where you 
could only view videos, but not publish anything—but never underwent any 
big outage, like completely down for hours. 

European Founders at Work 
 
95  
Santos: It is quite impressive considering a team of three. When did you 
start to internationalize?  
Poitrey: The first version of the site was in English and translated into 
French, because we always knew that this kind of web site was not French-
only. We then added something like 16 languages in the course of 2006. As a 
result, even if France showed the biggest growth at the beginning, it spread 
toward other countries of the world as well. 
Santos: Did you hire someone to do that? 
Poitrey: Friends translated the different versions of the site for free in the 
beginning. We managed to do all the translations by ourselves at no cost,  
so it was not always top quality, but it allowed us to be present in many 
countries. 
Santos: You made a lot out of very little. 
Poitrey: We had to. And still today when we have more money to play 
with, we still have this natural habit to try to do things by ourselves first. I 
think it's in our DNA. I think it‘s a good idea to work as if you were on a 
tight budget even when you are well funded, as it forces you to be more 
creative and find better solutions. Doing more with less should be a mantra 
for most companies. 
Santos: So, from the point that you raised the first capital that gave you a 
bit of oxygen, how did the business grow, how did it change, how did it 
evolve to become what it is today? 
Poitrey: The first time we raised big money; we moved offices and hired a 
lot of people at the same time. We hired something like 50 people in a few 
months. If you want to hire the right people, it's generally not a good idea to 
rush it. But in our case, we found very talented people and some of them 
are still there to run the company. 
The venture capitalists also wanted us to hire some more corporate people. 
We first hired a CFO, then later they wanted to back Benjamin up with 
someone with more experience. 
All this was a bit hard for people from the beginning because we had to 
evolve from a family start-up to a more corporate one. 
Santos: Eventually Benjamin left the CEO role.  
Poitrey: The more the company was growing and the more we got politi-
cal in management, the more Benjamin was losing control. The investors 
understood that and wanted him to get some help from someone to lead 

Chapter 7 | Olivier Poitrey: Dailymotion 
 
96  
the company. I think Benjamin made an error at that point by not taking this 
threat seriously and not searching for someone by himself. As a result, in-
vestors imposed someone we didn't choose. I can’t really blame them, as we 
didn’t really manage to reassure them about our ability to lead such a fast 
growing company. 
This new guy started as a part-time co-CEO and chairman of the board. He 
had an oversized ego that I never imagined could exist. We quickly under-
stood that his main focus was to wipe out anything in the company that was 
done prior to his era. Founders were thus his logical primary targets and he 
managed to cut us from as many responsibilities as possible. This worked 
with Benjamin and Didier and they finally decided to leave the company. It 
never worked with me because I don't care about power—all I need are 
technical challenges. 
The new CEO was working part-time (3 days a week), so he let the CFO 
manage most aspects of the company. Trust me, you don’t want to have 
your company led by a CFO. The lack of vision quickly led the company to a 
period of chaos. They almost succeeded in destroying everything we spent 
two years to build between 2007 and 2008. 
Santos: There was a lot of tension, I see. 
Poitrey: At that time I was actually spending a lot of time fighting foolish 
decisions. For instance, our new CFO decided that everybody in the com-
pany would use Windows, because you know, every company uses this op-
erating system. Anyway, it was a bad period with a management split be-
tween founders and old-fashioned corporate men who couldn't understand 
each other. 
Santos: How was your relation with investors during this time? 
Poitrey: The new CEO managed to oust me from the board, so I had 
fewer and fewer contacts with investors. The only vision the board had into 
the company was through the lens of the new CEO, which for him was a 
way to fog the reality. Living on the company’s fast growth trend, it wasn’t 
difficult to convince investors he was doing well.  
During those two years, I continued to manage the technical part of the 
website, trying to ignore all the crap at the top of the company and keeping 
up with our goal. It was a bit depressing and I don't think I could have coped 
with one more year like that. 
It’s very important for founders not to lose the trust of their investors. 
When they start to lose confidence, they are forced to take quick actions 
that most of the time are bad for the company.  

European Founders at Work 
 
97  
Santos: Do you think it damaged the company outside of the internal fight?  
Poitrey: I think we missed lots of opportunities because we were focused 
on unimportant things. We also wasted a lot of money on things that were 
clearly not in our top priorities. For instance, our CEO thought that priority 
number one was to change our brand (logo, company name and site de-
sign/color scheme) at a time we should have been fighting for features and 
revenue.  
Many of us were desperate. Some decided to leave and some others stayed 
but lost a bit of their passion for the company. A good indicator was the 
number of people in the office after 7pm. Before this era, most employees 
were staying late at work. Dinners together around noon weren’t uncom-
mon. Engineers weren’t working only during office hours, but also during 
nights and weekends. But the new management didn’t like not seeing peo-
ple at the office at 9am so they tried to impose schedules. All they got in 
return was people working less for the company, and most importantly 
with less passion. 
Santos: I can imagine that seeing this as a founder is much harder than see-
ing this as anyone else. 
Poitrey: This is a bit like seeing your kids growing up the wrong way with-
out the ability to fix it because you lost your parental rights. Hopefully all 
those people have been kicked out of the company. It took some time for 
us to recover from this, but I can say we are back in the game now. We in-
novate again and we are seeing very good profiles joining the company.  
From this near-death experience, I guess we can learn that founders must 
stay at the helm. If they have to relinquish some control, it should be the 
founders who decide to whom they hand it to. 
Santos: And now you have Cédric Tournay in front. 
Poitrey: Yes, he managed to get a company that was on the verge of im-
plosion and to make it successful again. We owe him a big one. 
Santos: Taking this into light—knowing what you know now about inves-
tors—if you changed something, what would that be? 
Poitrey: Difficult to say. We made some mistakes, but maybe if we didn’t 
make those, we wouldn't have been successful. Maybe we should have tried 
to find money differently and a lot sooner because cash flow was really our 
primary weakness. If we have had more money to start we would not have 
had to spend our time on white labels, licenses, etc., and would have devel-
oped our own product and our own audience exclusively.  

Chapter 7 | Olivier Poitrey: Dailymotion 
 
98  
Santos: Looking back, would you consider going to Silicon Valley instead or 
raising capital there? 
Poitrey: I don't know. If we're still strong today and still standing in front of 
YouTube, it's maybe because we are European and we have something dif-
ferent to offer. Maybe the way we build Dailymotion is the way Europeans 
do things: small-scale, but with heart, style and passion. 
Santos: About YouTube, you actually started at the same time—you regis-
tered domain with one-month difference. When did you actually become 
aware of YouTube and was it ever any worry for you that they were from 
the US and had much more capital, and they will just be bought by Google? 
How did you see this from the outside? 
Poitrey: We discovered YouTube around June/July 2005, 3 months after its 
launch, and it was coming from nowhere. We didn’t know them before and 
they were already quite big. We thought they were faking their numbers 
because they were too big for newcomers. We even thought we could ac-
quire them a few months later once we had raised enough money. 
Santos: Can we talk a bit about copyright?  
Poitrey: It was the biggest issue we had to face in our history. It was a big 
issue for all video-sharing websites, especially YouTube and us. I think it 
started at the end of 2006, when we started to have more and more copy-
righted content on our web site. We didn’t have a way to control that. If 
you take porn videos for instance, we have a button that people can use to 
say it's not appropriate, so we can post-moderate, and it works quite well. 
But for copyright, nobody complains about it, so you can’t count on the 
community to help you. Even if they do, it's not always obvious that a video 
is copyrighted; our staff cannot safely recognize such content. Even worse, 
some content is copyrighted but allowed on our site. With tens of thou-
sands new videos every day you can imagine the problem. 
At the same time, some copyright owners wanted us to die. We started to 
get hit by a lot of lawsuits and we didn’t really see how to handle that. It 
was both a technical problem, because we had to find a way to detect and 
take down those videos, and a political one because we had to deal with 
copyright owners so they could provide us with the original content finger-
prints. We eventually integrated two different technical solutions (for both 
audio and video fingerprinting). 
Copyright owners could specify what they wanted us to do with each rec-
ognized video—like reject it, share revenues on advertising, etc. But some 
copyright owners didn't want to play that game and preferred to sue us. 

European Founders at Work 
 
99  
We even found that some of them were posting their own copyrighted ma-
terial to our service so that they could sue us. This took us a lot of time, 
energy and money to solve. 
Santos: And is it completely solved now, or is it an ongoing issue? 
Poitrey: We eventually got a court order saying that Dailymotion and 
YouTube (and all these UGC sites) are hosting companies and that they are 
not responsible for what they host, if they make sure there is a way to 
complain and make it technically possible to protect the copyright owners. 
This problem is now behind us. 
But in 2007, we had to be very conservative with copyrighted content. We 
put in fingerprinting very early, a lot sooner than YouTube. We removed a 
lot of copyrighted material that way. On the other side YouTube left this 
kind of content on their site because it generates a lot of audience. They 
could do this because they had Google behind them to pay in the event of 
big lawsuits. This was a smart move but far too risky for an independent site 
like us. 
Santos: And the fingerprinting technology, was it yours? 
Poitrey: We partnered with two companies that have studied this technol-
ogy for years. The first is Audible Magic, which focuses on audio fingerprint-
ing. They don't only offer a fingerprinting technology, but also a library of 
fingerprints as well. The second partner is INA, a French company that fo-
cuses on video fingerprinting. We use both solutions in a complementary 
fashion. 
Santos: And what was the initial vision for the company? 
Poitrey: In 2005, blogs were already there to ease article publication, but 
writing isn't something anyone is good at. Talking in front of a webcam, film-
ing an event near you or showing your skills on video is something every-
body could do with little knowledge or budget, but hosting these videos was 
complicated and expensive. This is why we wanted to streamline the whole 
process and just let everyone express themselves with video on the web for 
free. 
Santos: And you? Looking back, what did you learn or how did you evolve 
in your way of thinking and seeing things? 
Poitrey: First, I learned that the game is never over: you should never give 
up, stubbornness is somehow a requirement to lead a company to success, 
and the road to success is inevitably paved with failures. When things start 
to go wrong, the worst thing to do is panic and change everything in a 

Chapter 7 | Olivier Poitrey: Dailymotion 
 
100  
hurry. Just because something doesn’t work at a certain point does not 
mean that everything you did before is necessarily wrong. 
I also learned how hiring the right people from the start is key: the very first 
people to join will shape the company’s personality. And finding talented 
people you are pleased to work with is very important to generate emula-
tion from new hires  
 
 

C H A P T E R 
8 
Richard Moross   
Moo.com 
In 2004 Richard Moross founded Moo.com in London. Prior to Moo, he worked 
in a range of creative businesses, from start-ups to global organizations. His career 
includes a position as strategist at Imagination, the world’s largest independent  
design company; as well as positions at sorted.com and the BBC. Moo.com prints 
“MiniCards” and other stationery products that feature unique, personalized pho-
tos and designs that can be uploaded or accessed through Flickr, Picasa, and other 
partner sites. Moo raised $5 million from Atlas Venture and Index Ventures in 
April 2006 and has since sold “several million cards” to customers in more than 
180 countries. 
 
Pedro Santos: How did you go from the idea [of Moo] to the actual launch 
date? 
Richard Moross: The company launched officially the seventeenth or eight-
eenth of September 2006. It was rather a long journey. So, I left the last 
business I was working with in May 2004 and the original idea for the busi-
ness was something quite different from what we are today. The original idea 
was kind of a mixture of Facebook and business cards. The idea was that the 
business card has been around for hundreds of years, an incredibly successful 
piece of technology. You can call it kind of analogue technology and it is used 
around the world by pretty much everyone in business. And there was no 
consumer version.  
So, my vision was to take the business card and essentially repurpose it for 
consumers, updated for the internet generation. Connect it to the web 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 8 | Richard Moross: Moo.com 
 
102  
somehow and make it a relevant tool for people who wanted to share their 
identity in person. So, in a way which when people meet in a non-business 
setting, to easily communicate their e-mail, their blog, their photos, Face-
book profile or whatever it would be. The initial idea was to create this 
brand and this online service with the physical product and this online serv-
ice. People would buy cards and they would get an online profile where they 
could store other information about themselves and they could share it—
some online-offline combination of those two things.  
And I left my job. I was working in a design business called Imagination and I 
got very excited about becoming an entrepreneur and I wrote a business 
plan. I showed it to some friends and I decided that to do that I had to quit 
my job, which I did, and I went out to the market looking for money.  
In around the time that I left, I started having conversations with people. I 
remember talking to my dad, who is not in the technology industry or the 
venture capitalist industry. He works in property. And I asked him if he knew 
anyone who funds businesses or helps people take their ideas and turns 
them into businesses, and he didn’t, but he said he would ask some of his 
friends. And it turned out that my dad’s business partner’s neighbor knew 
someone with a very spurious link into the venture capitalist industry.  
He recommended I go and visit a chap called Robin Klein, who of course you 
know. I went to meet Robin one morning in 2004 and Robin seemed quite 
excited by the idea. I actually went to meet Robin’s son, Saul—he is now also 
a VC, but at that time he was running a business called Video Island, which 
went on to become LOVEFiLM. And they both seemed excited by the idea 
and keen to help me turn it into a real thing.  
They funded the business in August 2004. I think it was about £150,000 that 
they put into the business, which was really enough for me to pay for the 
web site to be developed. I did most of the stuff myself, although I am not a 
coder. I designed the web site, I wrote everything, did the trademarks, and 
set the office up, and that kind of stuff. But we paid an agency to actually 
build the web site.  
By February 2005 we launched that web site. The original name for the busi-
ness was nothing like Moo, it was terrible. The idea that I had was to basi-
cally subvert business cards and create a personal alternative, so I wanted it 
to have the name that would be the opposite to a business card. And I was 
looking on the web for ideas and I saw that Richard Stallman, the software 
activist, had used the term “pleasure cards” before. I thought it was a funny 
name that clearly distinguished them from business cards. The same way 
when you go to an airport when you are traveling, and they say, “Are you 

European Founders at Work 
 
103  
“Are you here on business or on pleasure?”… so, I thought I would call 
them pleasure cards.  
It was my idea for the name, which was in retrospect a terrible idea. But I 
called the business Pleasure Cards. After launching the site it was very clear 
that people loved the cards, but hated the web site that made them. They 
wanted to put their own photos on the cards. They wanted many more per-
sonalization options than I could offer them and the problem was I didn’t 
have a technology team to change the site or do any testing. I didn’t have any 
money to pay the agency to make any changes, so I was somewhat stuck in 
the situation where part of the business worked and part of it didn’t and I 
couldn’t really change things.  
So, it was at an impasse. I think there were other problems as well. The 
Pleasure Cards brand and the Pleasure Cards marketing plan were quite im-
mature, I think. If I look at how we do things with Moo today, it is very much 
a rejection of the principles that I exposed earlier on the Pleasure Cards 
days. In the 1.0 phase, the way it worked was I researched the list of people 
who I felt were influential and it was a hand-researched list of journalists, 
prominent internet types, taste makers—people who might like the product 
we talked about—and I sent them all personalized types of cards and a cover 
note from myself and a brochure detailing why it was the next big thing.  
And I think it was too much of my brand—I don’t mean my personal 
brand—it was too much of wanting to be like a fashion label or something. 
Wanting Pleasure Cards to be the brand on the cards that people wanted to 
use and I think when I spoke as a brand, I came from the perspective that it 
was kind of looking down its nose a little bit. It was an inflated sense of its 
own significance to the world before it had proved anything. And I think that 
positioning, coupled with the pseudo-spamming nature of the products that I 
sent out, didn’t get people particularly excited. I think it rather pissed people 
off. So, it was a case that when people did like it, they loved the cards, of 
which there were many, and they really wanted to do many more things with 
them—and the technology just wouldn’t let it happen.  
It was clear by late 2005 that the business was either going to disappear and 
die out for lack of money or it needed to change and reinvent itself. So, I got 
fantastic advice from Robin and from Saul. During this period they did a 
share swap with Index Ventures, who essentially became a shareholder in 
the business without having to invest in it. With the combination of Saul, 
Robin, and Index’s input, we made a decision to fundamentally change the 
business model.  

Chapter 8 | Richard Moross: Moo.com 
 
104  
There were lots of things happening in the world at that time. Social net-
works were exploding. We hadn’t quite run into Facebook yet—that was 
still hidden away behind closed doors. But things like Myspace were really on 
fire, Flickr was growing at an incredible rate, blogs and other things were ex-
ploding, and Second Life and World of Warcraft, and all these things where 
many, many millions of people were creating their online identities.  
And the idea then was to pivot the business and essentially not white label 
but I guess partner with those businesses and help them monetize the rela-
tionships that they had with their customers by offering a canvas for their 
customers to put up their photos or avatar. So, with the same vision of iden-
tity and personal communication to use the contents from other people’s 
social networks and the growth of other people’s social networks.  
I must say I was quite reluctant at first because I still believed we could have 
done it. I think we had extremely good advice and very sound input from In-
dex, Robin, and Saul—and I capitulated, thank God, at the last moment—and 
we started talking to all of these other businesses. I think around that time I 
met with the business called WeeWorld, an avatar business originally from 
Scotland, who had been on an absolute tear, and everyone in the world was 
creating these little cute avatars. And I managed to convince them to do a 
deal with us, so they could offer their customer who wanted to make a little 
set of cards with their character on it and wanted to put their e-mail and so 
on. They could do that with WeeWorld brand and WeeWorld packaging. 
Those guys got pretty excited about it and that was essentially my prototype 
in preparing for the rest of the world and offering it.  
Just before that, I met a couple of very interesting technically-led people. 
Again, I went back to my dad. It was quite funny. My dad, with the few con-
nections he does have, came up with trumps on a couple of them. So, I came 
to him and said, “Look, I really need a technology person to help us join our 
online ordering process with other websites.” And he said, “This guy came 
to pitch this property business the other day. Really geeky guy.” I think that 
was what he said and that was exactly what I wanted. And he said, “Just give 
him a call.”  
The chap was called Stefan Magdalinski. So, I called Stef up and invited him 
out for a drink, after five minutes we were finishing each other’s sentences. 
We started talking about the potential and Flickr and where the world was 
going. I think he got very excited with the physical nature of the business and 
he spent ten years working in pure internet businesses. He said he would 
help and essentially he came on board and worked for free. He managed to 
find a great developer called Berhane who could programme Delphi, the lan-
guage the original software had been built in, that did all the rendering and 

European Founders at Work 
 
105  
printing and stuff. So, he came on board as well and they both worked for 
free, and it was an amazing gift to the company.  
Berhane quickly reverse-engineered our code and built-out a micro-site that 
would allow the creation of WeeWorld MiniCards, a working prototype. 
We switched it on and soon had a bunch of orders, which was great.  
I built up a big pipeline of partners that we could work with, starting with 
WeeWorld, the next one on the list was Flickr, and after that was Skype, 
then I think LiveJournal, one of the biggest blogging platforms, and so on. I 
had probably ten companies on the list I had talked to. 
I designed a new investment presentation, and we went back to the market 
and said that within the last eighteen months we had one working prototype 
and one partner in the UK generating revenue, and I had a sales plan that 
clearly showed that if I delivered these deals, this business could be generat-
ing millions of pounds in revenue before long. That got VCs very excited.  
We had a very clear strategy. I had made a lot of mistakes very cheaply and 
very quickly, and the business was then ready to hire up a team, execute, and 
start rolling out these partnerships very quickly.  
In January, February 2006 I went to a meeting with Atlas Venture, who had a 
UK office then, and met with a couple of the partners there. They were very 
stony-faced in the meeting, but I was flying later that day to New York and I 
remember landing and they had instantly come back to us with an offer, 
which obviously was very exciting to me because the business by that point 
was running on my credit cards. So, we agreed on all of the terms and both 
Atlas and Index invested around £2.75 million into the business.  
We would have never made it without that money. We hired up a team. We 
were probably about six people, when in September 2006 we finally launched 
with Flickr. We generated more revenue in the first day than we had in the 
entire combined life of the business to date. It was just this tremendous 
overnight success.  
I must say I was so worried the day that we launched, it was so difficult to 
get people to generate any revenue, to get off the first stepping stone, but 
we had great investors who really believed in me and believed in the busi-
ness. We had a fantastic team who had built a wonderful web site, great de-
signers, great folks, and we changed the brand so much in the marketing and 
the message that when we did launch, Moo launched as this very friendly, 
very humble, unassuming brand that had fun at its heart and a bit of mischief 
on its mind. I think it really resonated with people.  

Chapter 8 | Richard Moross: Moo.com 
 
106  
We worked with some of Stef’s friends to help us test the product when we 
were testing it online. When we launched, they all blogged about it and it 
was that initial buzz coupled with the blog post on Flickr that allowed us to 
be selling to a hundred different countries by the end of the first week. It 
really was an amazing time—unprecedented from my perspective. I was so 
worried that it wasn’t going to work. But it did. It was really a testament to 
the belief of investors and strength of the team I was lucky enough to pull 
together. We had this fantastic launch and really haven’t looked back since.  
Santos: That’s quite a story. When you actually launched you started with 
MiniCards. You chose not to follow the normal format. 
Moross: There’s a word that a famous blogger and marketing guru, Seth 
Godin, always uses, which is “remarkable.” And it was very much at the core 
of the business that we did things that were remarkable, worth talking about 
or that stood out in some kind of way or another. And I really believed that 
if we were going to do something that people talked about, that we needed 
to have a form factor that was different. So, rather than going with a tradi-
tional business card, the original reason that I designed the cards the way 
that I did was that if you take off the business details from the business card, 
then you end up with quite a lot of white space. So if you take off the fax 
number and the address and all other things that people cram into their 
business cards, then you are just going to have the name and e-mail. Then 
the card looks very empty. So, I wanted to make it smaller so that it looked 
more appropriate because you are only sharing a small bit of information 
that a person can go and look you up and find other things.  
The very specific shape and size that it was, was actually engineered to be 
optimal from the print perspective. So, the machines that we used to print 
the MiniCards could take paper of a certain size only and if you go with this 
aspect ratio that we went with, the very precise dimensions of the cards 
were designed to up the gross margins of the business. Specific shape, size, 
and paper meant we could generate very high gross margins per sheet. The 
form factor in general was about standing out and having the right ratio of 
text and white space, but the very specific dimensions—twenty-eight millili-
ters by seventy milliliters—and the layout was really to do with enabling us 
to have many more cards per sheet. And also, if competitors tried to repli-
cate that and change the size, they would lose margin—so it was really very 
carefully engineered to that size in the end. But yes, having it different, I 
think, was imperative.  
One of the things that Moo has consistently been over these four and a half 
years that we have been trading, is trying to do things that help people to 
stand out. When we were more of a consumer business, and even when we 

European Founders at Work 
 
107  
were a kind of a B2B business, which is more what we are today, our pri-
mary goal is to help whoever is shopping with us to make a good impression 
with whoever they give their card to. And I think that having this unique 
form factor—I mean it is just a different size was not rocket science, but it 
really helps those people get noticed. And even if they have seen it before, 
there was a funny phrase that I saw somewhere that people were calling 
MiniCards the “web 2.0 secret handshake,” and I thought it was really inter-
esting. It was like you were a part of the club when you had them and I think 
those kinds of things also helped, virally, to expose the brand to the right 
kind of people in the right kind of way. I am really glad that we started with a 
unique form factor. We do a lot of different shapes nowadays. 
Santos: Another thing that you have from the beginning is the possibility of 
cards having all different images in them.  
Moross: It is a technology that we call “printfinity,” and that was an idea 
that came actually very early on. We do our printing in-house now, but in 
the early days we had a partner who did the printing for us and he was tell-
ing me about how it worked and I was thinking how we could do something 
that was really cool rather than giving everyone the same color and the 
same design, so kind of varying it.  
I created a way to organize the files and the production workflow in a way 
that each card could be manufactured with a different design on it and could 
easily be packaged and everything afterwards. So, we patented the process, 
and I think it is a really fun technology. People get a huge kick out of it when 
they realize that they could do that, and I think as a result we were the only 
people in the world who could actually do that.  
Santos: Now going a bit more into the expansion phase of Moo, how was it 
to be a European company expanding to the US? When did you do it and 
why did you do it? What did you learn from it? 
Moross: We always had customers in America and America has always 
been our biggest market from the first day that we launched with Flickr. All 
the orders were coming from the US. And I think Americans thought we 
were an American business because why wouldn’t you? We were selling on-
line. We didn’t put our address on the web site, and people could order 
stuff and they got their orders very quickly, so we were considered an 
American brand.  
When people did find out we were British, they thought it was charming. So, 
we always had traction in the American market and we felt as though we al-
ways knew that at some point we would have to expand our production to 
the US. Quite apart from the implications of shipping something such a long 

Chapter 8 | Richard Moross: Moo.com 
 
108  
distance, it would take time for customers to receive orders and we wanted 
customers to get stuff very quickly.  
So we made a decision, which was really driven by Brian Murphy, our COO, 
who we brought over from the US. He spent about three years with us in 
the UK and he was a real catalyst behind our drive to the US—and right he 
was, absolutely. He helped set up the office and he essentially runs the US 
operations and manages the UK operation from a distance. I guess getting 
over there was pretty simple in the sense that he moved back to the US. 
We didn’t have to hire someone on the ground. He just moved back and 
did that locally.  
We found a print partner in the US that we could work with and then we 
began to hire up a team to get an office and so on. And that was managed in-
credibly smoothly, I think. He did a superb job of that. It is not quite the 
same as setting up an internet company in the US. There is much more pro-
duction and warehousing and things you need to consider, but it all happened 
very easily. We essentially split our web site in two, so we had a UK web 
site and US web site, which were essentially separate stores, so there were 
some products that we didn’t initially offer to the American customers be-
cause we couldn’t manufacture them in the same way as we did in the UK, 
based on our paper or print partner. But we are now a complete mirror, so 
almost all things are the same in both stores. But we had to figure out how 
to take the US credit cards in the US and how to get the whole infrastruc-
ture set up… There was a lot of work involved, but people did an amazing 
job of getting it all organized and we have actually just taken a new office in 
both locations, so we now have about fifteen thousand square feet in Lon-
don, which includes in-house printing, and we have about fifteen thousand 
square feet in East Providence, Rhode Island, and we do printing and every-
thing in-house as well. In my first office, when we were back in the Pleasure 
Cards days in 2004, I was in about two hundred feet. So, the business has 
grown by hundreds of times in size in six years or so.  
Santos: In the first few years you had a lot of challenges. What were those 
key moments, those moments that you thought that the business was either 
going to break or going to explode? Was there any moment that you really 
doubted? And how did you go over it? 
Moross: There were several moments. I think that one of the things that I 
have been lucky enough to be born with is optimism. I think there were  
opportunities to have been really down and worried about what was hap-
pening, but I have always been a fairly optimistic person and capable of pick-
ing myself up, focusing on getting back on my feet and moving forward, so 
there were plenty of times where it seemed that things were not going to 

European Founders at Work 
 
109  
work. Probably a few weeks into Pleasure Cards launch, the money just 
wasn’t rolling in, the budget that we set was completely unrealistic, and it 
was clear that things needed to change, so I think those gave me a lot of 
cause for concern, but as I said previously, I was surrounded by very, very 
good, experienced people like Robin, and Index [Ventures]. That provided a 
lot of confidence that the business would be fine and we just needed to find 
the right solution and that things would work out.  
There was a funny moment when the financial crisis hit and we were still a 
loss-making business. We broke even and have been profitable since 2009, 
but in 2008 there was a lot of worry about what we were going to do if we 
ran out of money, what if we were not able to raise more money, and I think 
it was more about the macro environment than whether we were doing 
[things] right or doing wrong, but nevertheless I think it did give us pause and 
cause for concern around where we were going, how the end goal might 
look like, that we might have to change tactics, or it could have been a very 
serious challenge for us. But we worked it out.  
You know there are always worries in everyday life, inside the team, in mar-
keting challenges, in financial targets, but I wouldn’t say we had anything re-
sembling a crisis. I think we have been lucky enough to avoid that. And I 
really put that down to being lucky enough to have had a really good senior 
team working for me, people who I have absolute trust in and who really 
know what they are doing and also having the confidence of the board and 
their support. I was confident that if we had something like that, we would 
get through it. 
Santos: My final question is very simple. Where does the name “Moo”  
come from? 
Moross: [laughs] Well, in a funny way it actually doesn’t come from any-
where. I wanted a name that would be a complete rejection of Pleasure 
Cards. It was not going to mean anything bad, it didn’t have a particular in-
dustry connotation, it didn’t have “print” in it or anything like that—it was 
friendly and it was quite funny, quite silly and very memorable and short. So 
when people thought about the company, they could easily recall what we 
were called. And when they talked: “Oh, there is a business called Moo.” 
“Oh, what’s Moo?” …If we were called “So-so Print” or “print” something—
people wouldn’t ask…  I think the very fact that people ask me where it 
comes from, that it has done its job. I think also having two Os in your name 
is good luck, like Google or Facebook. I used to say Yahoo! but that’s less 
lucky I guess today. Two lucky Os is a good thing.  
 

C H A P T E R 
9 
Felix Haas  
amiando 
amiando is the European pioneer in online event registration and ticketing. It pro-
vides the platform for tens of thousands of event organizers to handle operations 
that range from invitation management, online promotion, and attendee registra-
tion to integrated billing and entry-management. amiando has received several 
awards, including a TechCrunch Europas European Startup Award, a BITKOM In-
novators Pitch Award, an eco Internet Award, and a spot among the Red Herring 
Top 100. amiando was acquired by XING, a business social network company, in 
December of 2010. 
amiando was founded in 2006 by Felix Haas, Dennis von Ferenczy, Sebastian 
Baerhold, Markus Eichinger, Marc Bernegger and Armin Bauer. Felix Haas is CEO 
of amiando and began founding companies when he was a university student. He 
owns multiple patents and is a frequent speaker on internet innovation. 
  
Pedro Santos: My first question is how did amiando start from the idea to 
its launch? 
Felix Haas: From idea to launch: It was back in 2006. The last year of uni-
versity study I spent in the Silicon Valley and came back to Munich at the be-
ginning of 2006. I assembled a couple of friends of mine in my living room to 
talk about business ideas and business plans. That was while we were doing 
our final university theses. We were close to finishing our studies. We sat in 
the living room every day to talk about business ideas. One of those ideas,  
by the way, was to start an airline: We wanted to start an airline based on 
micro jets, very small private jets, in order to offer a point-to-point air taxi 
throughout Europe. 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 9 | Felix Haas: amiando 
 
112  
That plan didn’t go far. We then switched that to a restaurant franchise and 
to all other kinds of ideas. It was a very fun period because we were all still 
studying and it was a really creative time in my living room every day. Then, 
together with two of my co-founders, we organized a big party in the garden 
of my parents. 
The party was on the first day of the soccer World Cup in 2006, which you 
might remember. The whole of Germany was crazy about soccer. It was 
Germany against Costa Rica. 
We invited one hundred friends, but it turned out that four hundred came. 
It was a great party. Friends invited friends and then friends of friends of 
friends—it became viral a little bit. The problem was that we didn’t have a 
chance to track who was coming and who already paid their €10 for the 
beer and the grill. 
So it was a mess. And afterwards we had a big loss financially because we 
didn’t collect the money from all the people because we just didn’t know 
who paid and who didn’t, or even who was there. 
The days after that soccer-watching party we sat down in my living room 
again and then we had an idea. Hey, why not build a tool for invitations so 
everybody can manage and organize events online and can send party invi-
tations. 
Then Facebook. I’m not sure if they already had an event function, but if yes, 
nobody knew Facebook or very little back then. It was not as well known as 
today. There was no really easy way to invite people to events back then. So 
we dropped the airline thing, focused on that idea and sat down every day in 
my living room to build a prototype. 
We had six founders, four of us are programmers and we sat down and 
coded the first prototype of amiando, which was really ugly because none of 
us were designers. We were all coders and logical guys. Nevertheless, the 
system worked so that you could track your own events page and then you 
could answer yes or no or maybe. 
So it was very simple functionality, but it worked. It was not really yet a 
business. It was more like, okay, it’s functioning and let’s see what we can 
build out of it. Of course, there was this dream that this thing would go viral, 
but primarily it was still a fun thing also because we already had some job of-
fers in parallel. You know, we all finished the university and Dennis and I al-
ready signed with a very well-known consulting company. So life was good. 
We were not yet sure if jumping into the risky option of creating a company 
was the right thing. 

European Founders at Work 
 
113  
By then, I organized a founder who joined us from Zurich in Switzerland, 
Marc, and looked up a good, old friend of mine, Dennis, who came from 
Berlin back to Munich to join the amiando team. The point of no return was 
when a headhunter called from Spreadshirt,1 which is a kind of like a Euro-
pean CafePress. And Lukasz Gadowski is a quite well-known entrepreneur 
from Germany and now our business angel. The headhunter wanted me to 
become VP of engineering of Spreadshirt. So I came into contact with  
Lukasz and only talked like two minutes about the job: “The job is very nice, 
but here, Lukasz, have a look at amiando.” He thought it was a very nice 
business idea. He invited us to see him and there was an immediate chemis-
try between us and him; as such he immediately offered to be lead investor 
for the seed round. 
With that backing, we suddenly we got offers from all kinds of business an-
gels, including Dennis’s partner from McKinsey. We told him, “We want to 
do our own company.” and he was very supportive and even became a busi-
ness angel for amiando. Our supporter network increased and we picked up 
another five or six business angels. So, we had a very nice round including  
Lukasz Gadowski, as I mentioned, from Spreadshirt, or Stephan Glaenzer 
from London, Rodrigo Sepulveda Schulz from France, and several others 
from Germany. 
During university studies, I worked with Wellington Partners Venture Capi-
tal company as a student. So I knew them, and they knew me. They some-
how heard that we’re going to start a company, so they invited us to pitch it. 
It was on a Friday. They said, “Hey, we hear you are doing a company. We 
hear you already have seed funding, so please come and visit us on Monday, 
very informal, for coffee, and tell us about it, okay?” We were “Okay, sure, 
we’ll come by on Monday.” 
On Monday, after the weekend, we stopped by Wellington, opened the door 
and it was ten partners, waiting for a formal, official two hour pitch.  
So, we went to the partners meeting and pitched there for two hours. They 
offered us a few €100,000 in seed funding afterwards, this was really an effi-
cient and lean process. We then had everything needed to start: Founders 
team, a great investor team, and a compelling idea, centered around birthday 
invitations and private parties. We decided to trash all those jobs offers and 
to go for amiando. So, we jumped into it, and that’s how we started with the 
first version of amiando. We launched on December 8, 2006. 
                                                
1 Spreadshirt is a German company that offers an online platform for individuals and organiza-
tions to design, buy, and sell custom apparel. 

Chapter 9 | Felix Haas: amiando 
 
114  
Santos: As you said, you have six founders. Why so many founders, and 
how did the team dynamic work in the beginning, and how did it change 
over time? 
Haas: Yes, it’s a lot of founders. But the secret was that we were very com-
plementary in our capabilities. So, we were able to really step on the gas, just 
full speed from the very beginning. As I mentioned, like with Markus and with 
Sebastian, we already brainstormed ideas throughout the last year or so at 
the university. Armin, the CTO, I got to know as I was introduced to him at 
the worldcup party that I mentioned earlier. A joint girl friend of ours intro-
duced us to each other. Dennis joined the team very shortly afterwards. 
Marc joined fulltime in early 2007. 
Santos: In the beginning, as you said, you launched focusing on birthday par-
ties and private parties. Now it’s completely different. How did it change? 
How did you realize that your focus shouldn’t be there and ended up doing 
the events as it is now? 
Haas: Yes. We initially started with a private focus. It was full of wishful 
thinking that we would dominate the world within a year. [laughter] Because 
everyone has a birthday, it must be viral, right? 
Santos: Yes. 
Haas: Most of the people do birthday parties, so our idea was that this is a 
viral driver for our growth. The assumption was correct, because on average 
people invite thirty-four people to their birthday parties. Of those thirty-four 
average guests, about seven to eight can remember amiando as the tool for 
the invitation and then use it for their own party invitations. So, it was a 
really nice viral funnel. But the problem, which we didn’t think about, was 
that everyone only has a birthday once a year. 
So, you have an average delay of half of a year for the next generation of  
users. That was a problem, and that became evident a few weeks after it 
launched. So, as you can imagine, that initial good mood and happiness 
turned into something like, “Why did we do this? Why didn’t we just take 
those great job offers?” That kind of thing. But then in February 2007, al-
most three months after we launched, within a week, two professional 
event organizers called us. One was the chief of a very well-known nightclub 
here in Munich. He said “I was invited for a birthday party for a friend of 
mine with your amiando tool, but I would like to use amiando to do an on-
line pre-sale for my professional parties. I want to do an online pre-sale. I 
want to sell tickets. So, please, can amiando do it more professionally, less-
private stuff? If you do it more professionally, add something with ticketing, 

European Founders at Work 
 
115  
add professional money management and so on, then I will use you guys to 
sell tickets for my events in my club.” 
He hung up and we were thinking about this and then again a second profes-
sional event organizer called and it was the conference organizer for the 
Next Conference in Hamburg in our building, a very well-known conference 
in Germany. 
They called us and said, “Hey, I just heard about amiando. I was invited to a 
birthday party. We would like to use amiando for our conference, but can 
you please do it a little bit less-private, a little more professionally? Please 
add money management, add ticketing, and invoicing, and so on, and then we 
will use you guys for ticketing for the conference.” 
Then it was like “Hey, cool. This is a much better business model”. So we sat 
down again. We worked six days a week, sixteen hours every day, and then 
coded again and changed amiando from this private focus to include more 
professional functionality with ticketing. That’s how we launched it in June 
2007, three months later, four months later. 
Santos: Interesting. 
Haas: I think it was very good that we were agile at the moment—that we 
didn’t stick to the original business model hoping that at some point things 
would change. Luckily we trusted our customers who gave us the hints and 
the feedback that we had to change our focus and that’s what we did. 
Santos: That’s an interesting lesson. Now in 2011, how many events were 
already organized in amiando in total? Do you have any idea of the number? 
Haas: It’s a six-digit number. Six digits. 
Santos: Just to have an idea of the scale: When did you decide to interna-
tionalize and how did you start doing it? 
Haas: That was actually really quick. After a few days, in June 2007 when we 
launched the ticketing, as we just mentioned, I got into contact with Loic Le 
Meur. He’s a well-known blogger. He’s running the LeWeb conference. 
Santos: Yes. I want to interview him as well. 
Haas: Actually I’ve had a few interviews with him when I tried to get in con-
tact with him. Back then I didn’t know him, so I sent him a few e-mails saying 
that LeWeb is a great conference, “Can we help you guys sell the tickets on-
line?”. I didn’t get any reply, but I was really sticky so I asked all our business 
angels, “Hey, can you introduce me to him?”. So I approached him from mul-
tiple angles, but still no reply. Then I found out that he’s a pilot as well so 

Chapter 9 | Felix Haas: amiando 
 
116  
then, “Hey Loic, I just heard that you’re a pilot as well, so maybe you we can 
talk.”. Finally he sent back “Okay, I give up. I tried to ignore you. Let’s chat.” 
So then I talked to Loic and we convinced him that amiando would save him 
a lot of time to sell the tickets for LeWeb. 
Then at the end of the call he demanded that amiando’s shop is available in 
both English as well as in French - it was only German back then. Everything 
was German. I promised Loic that this is going to be no problem: “The week 
you want to start the sale, everything will be in French and English.” 
Again, seven days a week, sixteen hours a day. Armin coded day and night in 
order to convert the platform into a multilingual system. We asked our pri-
vate friends to help us translate pages on amiando. Suddenly amiando was 
available in French and in English. Then it was just a matter of a few days to 
do the Spanish version. So, that’s how we got to our international and multi-
lingual platform. 
By the way, LeWeb also almost caused a severe shutdown of amiando serv-
ices. Due to quickly rising ticketing volume due to LeWeb, amiando’s pay-
ment processer threatened to shut down all credit card acquiring services 
within 48 hours, which would effectively put amiando offline. Luckily, Sebas-
tian was able to handle the situation by negotiating contracts with a new 
payment processor within the given deadline. 
LeWeb was a very important driver. It was a very important first customer 
because it provided amiando with a lot of visibility and credibility, and it led 
to many, many more events. 
Santos: Yeah, I can imagine. LeWeb is the biggest conference in Europe 
probably now. Do you go only by word of mouth or do you actively market 
in specific markets? I realize that you did, for instance, some events in the 
US, which is not your main market. I suppose Europe is your main market—
or am I wrong there? 
Haas: Yes. Europe is our main market. Well, our growth marketing consists 
of a portfolio of several things. Of course, the viral driver is very nice. When 
people use amiando, they see amiando and the beautiful thing about our 
product is that people really see that this is amiando. 
Santos: Yeah. 
Haas: So, event organizers buy tickets and they think “Hey, that’s a cool 
thing. I’ll try this out.” That’s a very important thing. I think in hindsight, we 
waited too long to really work with that. We just started to optimize that 
funnel, like, two years ago. But we should have done it very much earlier. I 
think it would have supported our growth more. But, okay, that’s just how it 

European Founders at Work 
 
117  
is. It’s a lesson learned. Then, of course, we have traditional search marketing, 
advertising, search optimization. Then we did a lot of PR. It was a very strate-
gic thing that enabled us to grow. I was traveling like mad and gave speeches 
to make sure that amiando was always somehow mentioned somewhere and 
is present. PR was a great driver in early visibility. The visibility was very im-
portant in the early days to get more events. 
Then it kind of spiraled, so more and more events generated even more 
events. It was very beneficial that we had several founders, so, we could split 
the workload among us and jointly work at a really high pace. 
Santos: One very specific thing with amiando—I believe it is the only tool 
that has the viral tickets. 
Haas: Yes. 
Santos: How did that idea come about and how did you implement it? Be-
cause it’s quite an interesting concept. 
Haas: Yes. That’s also a very interesting question, because also this is linked 
to Loic Le Meur. He said “Hey, you should build something where people 
can turn into events promoters themselves.” So, Loic was the guy who gave 
the original spark of the idea. As a team we then developed it, and put it to 
market. 
So it was driven by customer feedback. I think we did a great job of just lis-
tening to what guys like Loic were telling us and also other event organizers. 
Loic wasn’t the only one who provided very good feedback. We then just 
did it. 
Santos: It’s an interesting tool. 
Haas: People were telling before that, hey, it would never work, and don’t 
even spend time with that. But that’s entrepreneurship: To make your own 
decisions on what is really worthy of working on, and what is BS. Sometimes 
external advice is helpful as it prevents you from doing unnecessary or stupid 
things. But in other cases, you have to ignore external feedback. 
Santos: When did you actually become aware of Eventbrite? And how did 
that, if at all, affect amiando’s strategy? 
Haas: Some time in 2007 we heard of Eventbrite for the first time, and 
thought that this is quite similar. Back then they were still calling it Molly-
Guard and they later changed the name to Eventbrite. We fretted a little  
bit because back in 2007, 2008, and 2009, Eventbrite copied almost every 
feature of amiando. To me it was quite clear the first time I saw them that 
they were going to be one of the main competitors in the US for us.  

Chapter 9 | Felix Haas: amiando 
 
118  
Santos: Yeah, they became quite well known very quickly. Did it change 
anything for you, or was it just yet another competitor? 
Haas: No. Well, it maybe changed the awareness a little bit or the sense of 
paranoia. Do you know what I mean? 
Santos: [laughs] 
Haas: You have to be paranoid a little bit. You have to make sure that your 
organization is constantly paranoid about threats like competitors or other 
things. Don’t overdo it, don’t be frightened too much. But make sure that 
everyone’s like “We have to crush our competitors”. You have to make a 
decision: Do we want to battle them in the US or do we want to enforce 
Europe? So, of course, we always spent time with our competitors. However 
ultimately, you also shouldn’t overdo it. You shouldn’t spend one hour a day 
looking at what your competitor is doing because the most important thing 
is to do something good for your customers. 
Santos: On to the customers. In August 2010 you actually launched the free 
tickets for free events, which weren’t available then. What made you come 
to that conclusion? 
Haas: Yeah. Dennis digged into our data in summer 2010 in high detail and 
afterwards we found that free events are a really important driver for 
growth. Although we don’t earn any money with them because they’re free, 
they are an important driver to get more ticket buyers into the platform, 
which then in turn, for a certain percentage, turn into event organizers 
themselves. So it’s an important driver and we realized that it makes more 
sense for us to make it free for free events. It had a revenue impact, which 
was planned, but on the other side now, on the long term, we will have very 
healthy growth. 
Santos: In 2010 you were recognized by the World Economic Forum as the 
technology pioneer of 2010, which is quite a big honor. Did it have a huge 
impact on the company in terms of visibility, or was it just, you felt, a recog-
nition of a job well done? 
Haas: Yeah, definitely. We had some really great moments in our journey, 
one being the World Economic Forum Technology Pioneer 2010. I also once 
hosted Mark Zuckerberg from Facebook into the amiando office for a very 
nice evening in October 2008. So both things, of course, make the team in-
credibly proud and really help to form the unique culture of amiando, which 
is why we’re really passionate about what we do. Of course, having Mark 
Zuckerberg in the office was fantastic also for the IT guys - they were moti-
vated for months. 

European Founders at Work 
 
119  
Santos: Yeah, I can imagine. 
Haas: It’s very interesting to see how Facebook is changing and growing. 
Also, the World Economic Forum award provided amiando with a lot of visi-
bility outside the internet sector in traditional business and in the media. It 
was a huge booster. Equally important was the impact on the team. It really 
brought everyone together again: Hey, we are amiando, and we build some-
thing cool. 
Santos: What is the average annual growth for amiando? 
Haas: In the last three years we always approximately doubled our revenue. 
Santos: That’s quite amazing for a five-year company to keep that growth. 
So, in December 2010 XING buys amiando and you become a public com-
pany. How did that come about? And why did they decide to buy, what did 
they think to bring, and how did it change amiando? 
Haas: Back in 2010 we originally planned to do a Series B funding round to 
support more aggressive growth, also international growth. My CFO, Sebas-
tian, and I spent months traveling: seeing venture capitalists, doing presenta-
tions, and so on. At the end, we had two term sheets for funding. Just the 
moment before we decided to take one of those, the CEO of XING called 
and asked, “Shouldn’t we talk about joining forces to develop the European 
event market?”. We already had a working relationship with XING because 
we already had a corporation agreement to integrate the amiando technol-
ogy into the XING platform. The idea of joining forces to combine a social 
network like XING and amiando was very appealing to us. 
So, it was a great fit. Thus we decided to go into talks with them and XING 
provided the four active founders, Armin, Dennis, Sebastian and myself, an 
attractive package. Also for the employees and customers it was a well-
rounded package and right decision. 
As I mentioned, the vision of the deal is to marry social networking with 
ticketing and merge those things to build things like viral tickets even more 
effectively. 
Santos: Does it change the fact that you’re now a publicly-traded company? 
Haas: Yes, it changed things a little bit. Before that we were able to com-
municate externally independently and I could freely speak externally. to rep-
resent the company. We can’t do that anymore. Having a parent company 
which is public means that you can’t give any guidance of the future because 
the only communication is done through shareholder meetings and through 
investor relations calls, so everything is more formal. 

Chapter 9 | Felix Haas: amiando 
 
120  
You have quarterly numbers, so there’s more reporting. So, things are, a bit 
more overhead, but it’s manageable and a great learning experience. 
I now have a phone call with the XING CEO every week, which is very good 
and very effective. Before that, I had a call with the supervisory board every 
three months or so, and basically it was them asking, “Hey guys, are you guys 
still alive?” 
“Yes.” 
“You guys have a nice day.” 
So we have a lot of freedom running amiando within XING. That’s very im-
portant for us. 
Santos: [laughs] Yeah, that’s right. So it’s good for both parties? 
Haas: Yes and we have a great working relationship. XING and amiando are 
a natural fit. 
 

C H A P T E R 
10 
Peter Arvai 
Prezi 
Prezi is cloud-based presentation software that allows users to make zoomable 
presentations that are completely different from slides; the old technology that Prezi 
is working to replace. It was founded by Adam Somlai-Fischer, Peter Halacsy, and 
Peter Arvai in Budapest in 2008.  
Adam Somlai-Fischer is an internationally-renowned architect and visual artist who 
has worked with zooming presentations since 2001. In 2007, Peter Halacsy con-
vinced Adam to develop an editor so that anyone could make zooming presenta-
tions. After creating a prototype, they invited Peter Arvai to join the team as CEO. 
Prezi was launched in April 2009 from Budapest, and has investments from TED 
Conferences and Sunstone Capital.  
Before joining Prezi, Peter Arvai founded omvard.se, a healthcare company that 
compared treatment outcomes of clinics based on performance data. He was also 
vice president of product management at Mobispine, a mobile internet start-up. 
 
Pedro Santos:  Can you tell me how you came to know Adam [Somlai-
Fischer] and Peter [Halacsy], and at what point did they actually talk to you 
about joining the team and to build Prezi as a company?  
Peter Arvai:  Yeah. I got to know Peter two companies ago. Since I fin-
ished university, I’ve been with two start-ups. The first start-up I was with 
was a mobile internet start-up based in Stockholm, where I was the first 
employee on the business side. So I became VP of product management 
there and part of my job was to find complementary code to fit in with our 
product, essentially. I came across code that Peter Halacsy had done. Back 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 10 | Peter Arvai: Prezi 
 
122  
then he was doing research in natural language processing and we were in 
need of that. This company also had a development office in Cluj, Romania. 
When you go to Cluj from Stockholm, you fly via Budapest. My parents are 
from Hungary actually. When I went to Cluj, I would stop for a day in Buda-
pest and say hi. And that’s what I did. I figured since I’m in Budapest I should 
try to actually meet this person who had done this interesting code. 
So I hunted him down and managed to meet him. We had a great conversa-
tion. He actually ended up doing some consulting work for Mobispine, the 
company back in Sweden that I worked with. That was really it. And then we 
didn’t have much contact until he and Adam started seriously thinking about 
building a company. 
At that point he started reaching out to me asking me for advice on how to 
go about building a company, and then after a while they came to the conclu-
sion that they actually need someone with more experience closer to them, 
and that’s when they asked me if I wanted to join as CEO. 
I went down to Budapest in 2008 to meet them, and to see if this seemed to 
be a good thing, and we just had a great time. I felt like I wanted to really 
work on launching Prezi, so I decided to move to Hungary at that point, al-
though I had just gotten my own company off the ground back in Sweden.  
That was a big step for us. Yeah, when I had met Peter and Adam, I felt very 
passionate for the product and the company. 
Santos:  So, you just started a company and you dropped that company for 
Prezi at the same time? 
Arvai:  Well, we had worked on omvard.se for two, two and a half years, 
maybe. But really we had gotten sort of a breakthrough a little bit before. It 
was important for my decision that I felt that there is a good person in the 
company taking over after me. But it was a tough decision, because it was 
very much based on my own idea and my baby so to say. On the other hand, 
I felt very much related to Prezi’s mission because I love sharing ideas, and I 
thought Prezi could be a fantastic platform for doing that.  
Another thing that was a big motivator for me was regardless of whether you 
were in Hungary or outside it, people always think that this country is sort of 
a gray, former communist, boring place where nothing fun can be done. 
So, in fact, when I was going down to meet Peter and Adam, I was picked up 
by a relative, who immediately started saying, “Oh, there’s no great compa-
nies coming out of Hungary. Can you name a Hungarian brand?” I couldn’t. 
“There’s all these Western companies, they buy up old factories. Everyone is 
just outsourcing to Hungary. That’s what Hungary does”, he said. 

European Founders at Work 
 
123  
I hated to hear that picture of Hungary and I’ve hated it ever since I grew up, 
because I always thought that there was a ton of potential there, and I think 
this idea can change very simply by creating a few successful companies. I felt 
very strongly also about wanting to create some sort of story where we 
show, “Yes, you can start a company in Hungary, and yes, you can go global 
and create a global brand” 
Santos: Can you give some examples of questions that Peter would ask be-
fore they invited you to be a CEO?  
Arvai: Yeah, they had just started working on a prototype for Prezi and so 
primarily it was feedback on the prototype itself. And then it became ques-
tions of, okay, how could we go about launching this? If we were to do a 
product like this, how could we launch that on a bigger scale? And then all 
the way to financing, how do you finance a company like this that has a great 
idea but is not ready to go to the market yet? 
Santos: When you started with Prezi as CEO, what was the first thing that 
you actually did to start the company?  
Arvai: The first thing I did was to convince the guys that we needed to 
change the name. 
Santos: What was the name?  
Arvai: ZuiPrezi.  
Nobody could remember or understand or hear what you said when you 
said this. 
So, the first thing we did was to change name, to simplify to Prezi. 
Santos: So you launched the company, as you said, in Hungary. In eight 
months’, you opened an office in Silicon Valley, where you’re based now. 
You as CEO, not the company. 
Arvai: Well, I travel back and forth a lot. So, in the last five months, I think 
I’ve traveled almost every month. 
Nowadays we have operations in both places, but I think my job includes be-
ing in both places, at the moment. But I’m trying to actually cut down on the 
traveling. Yeah, we have all our product development in Hungary and we 
opened up an office in the US as it is the main stepping stone in going global. 
In my experience, if you come from a smaller European market, like Hungary 
or Sweden, you tend to think that it’s a nice next step to go to UK or Ger-
many because from Hungary they are seen as large markets. The issue is that 

Chapter 10 | Peter Arvai: Prezi 
 
124  
if you go to the UK, for example, and you become successful there, the UK 
is still only a sixth of that of the US market. 
So, if you get a US competitor, you immediately become a regional player in-
stead of a global player. So, very early on, I said to the guys that we shouldn’t 
even be thinking about opening up offices in Frankfurt or in London because 
the way to make it globally was to first prove that we can make it on the 
world’s biggest market, which is the US. 
That’s going to be the truth at least for the next ten to fifteen years. So, 
that’s why we opened up offices in San Francisco. Because this is a place 
where we have most of our potential competitors and partners and this is 
also a good place to establish our credibility for the US market. 
SantosIn the US market, are you seen as a Hungarian company or are you 
seen as a global company?  
Arvai: I don’t know if you’ve seen the tutorials, but some of the tutorials 
are made by this Indian American girl called Angelie, who’s employed here in 
the San Francisco office. So some people think we’re an Indian company be-
cause of that. So there’s many ways of answering that question. I think any-
one who talks to me or talks to the founders realize very quickly that the 
origins of this company are from Hungary. Because it’s an idea that we’re 
proud of and we don’t hide in any way. 
I think it depends on in what way you find out about the product. As I men-
tioned to you, if you just see a tutorial with Angelie and her Indian looks, you 
might think that this is an Indian company. And some people think that we’re 
a San Francisco company. For us, the most important part is still the product 
and not our nationality. 
But, as soon as we talk about the company itself, we try to emphasize our 
Hungarian background. Because, I think that we all feel strongly that we want 
to be a part of changing the image of Hungary as, actually, a good place to in-
novate and do nice IT products. 
Santos: What were the key moments in the beginning of the company? 
When you moved to Silicon Valley, what were the key moments that hap-
pened there and were there key moments also in Hungary?  
Arvai: We only established the office in San Francisco a full year after we 
had worked on Prezi. So, I wouldn’t say that that was a key moment. Well, 
okay. There was a key moment there. 
When I moved down to Hungary, we started really thinking about, okay, 
how do we go about creating a product out of this prototype? At that time 

European Founders at Work 
 
125  
we had something that looked a little bit like Prezi does today, but we had 
no concept of how to create a business model, how to present the idea to 
other people, what the strengths and weaknesses were. Adam and Peter had 
started making money on building custom presentations for CEOs but that is 
not scalable or sustainable in the long run.  
So my first job was to idientify our long term vision. 
We had offers from various different kinds of backgrounds of people who 
wanted to put their video content in a Prezi. So, television channels wanted 
to put their videos into a Prezi-like environment. And so we could have 
been, more or less, an OEM kind of company or we could have even become 
a company that just delivers UI innovations for large hardware manufactur-
ers, for example. In fact, some people suggested to make Prezi the new OS 
for computers. 
But, the first thing we had to figure out was what was our passion and why 
did we work with Prezi? That was a journey of really trying to understand 
what the real drivers are for Adam, for Peter, and for me. I think if I were to 
summarize it in a few sentences, for me, I’ve always yearned to change and 
improve the world. HP always wanted to create products that people actu-
ally use, and Adam always believed that you could create better communica-
tion tools than what we have today, where we could decrease conflicts with 
the right communication tools. And he believed that Prezi could be a part of 
it—a more conversational, open exchange of ideas which Prezi was better 
for than, for example, PowerPoint. 
These three factors together turned into a very global vision of how we 
wanted to change the world: to make it more fun to exchange ideas. There 
was not one moment in time when that happened, but it was something that 
was my main job task during the first year. To nail down our direction for 
where we’re going with this. Once we had that, going to the US was just a 
means of achieving our vision of create in product that could be adopted by 
the world. Does that make sense? 
Santos: It makes a lot of sense. 
Arvai:  But there were a lot of milestones along the way. I think it was at 
the end of December that we launched the Prezi web site with the new 
name. In April of 2009 we launched the first version of Prezi everywhere you 
could actually start paying for Prezi. Back then it was denominated in euros 
and so… Actually, one of the lessons that we had pretty early on there was 
that, for example, Americans didn’t understand what a euro was. One reason 
why we needed to establish a US presence was to be able to charge for our 
product in dollars. Because Europeans knew what a dollar was, but not vice 

Chapter 10 | Peter Arvai: Prezi 
 
126  
versa. So we actually kept the same prices, but started just denominating our 
product in dollars instead of euros. 
Santos: You mentioned several different directions that you thought about. 
Did you actually test any of the other directions, or was it just an internal 
discovery process? Did you go out to customers? 
Arvai:  No, no. I mean we were in discussions with several companies and 
we talked to them, because it was, of course, a way of getting inputs for our 
internal conversations. But we never went as far as to have an established re-
lationship with these other companies. Because once we started reflecting 
on these options, we realized that this wasn’t why we were doing this. But it 
was a good way of informing our conversations internally.  
Santos: You’ve got a seed investment from Magyar Telekom. How did you 
meet them and in this agreement, what terms did you get with them? 
Arvai:  That was actually something that was inherited, you could say, by Pe-
ter’s and Adam’s history. They had been involved with a project before, 
called Kitchen Budapest. 
This Kitchen Budapest is a media lab, a little bit in some ways similar to the 
MIT Media Lab, which you may or may not be familiar with, and Hungarian 
Telecom sponsored that project. 
So, they had already had an established relationship with Hungarian Telecom 
and when they got started working on Prezi, Hungarian Telecom felt that 
Prezi was an interesting project as well. And that’s how they got involved 
with Prezi. 
Santos: And €100,000 for a seed investment. Are you okay with saying 
what kind of valuation they gave the company at that time in such an initial 
phase? 
Arvai:  To be honest, I don’t remember. I could potentially look it up and I 
would have to think about disclosure, but the honest truth is I don’t re-
member. 
Santos: The valuations are so different when you are from one country to 
another.” What are your thoughts on that? 
Arvai:  I’ve written about this. If you are interested in learning more about 
my thoughts on this, you can actually look it up in the [Venture Capital Journal]. 
I’ve written an opinion piece there, where I describe my experiences. I mean, 
I agree with you that the venture capital market is extremely different in 
Europe and in the US. I think that it’s about critical mass. Nowadays there 

European Founders at Work 
 
127  
are actually quite a lot of venture capitalists even in Europe. But the problem 
is they are so fragmented on different markets and many European enter-
peneurs and investors still don’t share the forums. So this makes the deal 
flow much less open and much less comparable. 
So, I think that the only place that I found that the words “capital market” 
truly applied is here in the US. Because here I think it works much more like 
a market. What I mean by that is that there are buyers and sellers who go 
to a place and they promote their goods. So both entrepreneurs and VCs 
compete for the right offer here. Sometimes that’s an unusual perspective if 
you come from a small European country where these deals are being made 
behind closed doors and much more dependent on your established net-
work, etc. 
Santos: When you got the financing from Magyar Telekom, what did you in-
vest in with that money? Where was the focus? Was it in product develop-
ment or was it in business development? 
Arvai:  That was only product development. Essentially it paid for the salaries 
of a couple of developers. When I moved down to Hungary Peter and Adam 
had already gotten the Hungarian telecom seed investment, so that money 
was already there when I came down to Budapest. Peter and Adam had not 
left their jobs, partly because there wasn’t so much money yet and there cer-
tainly wasn’t much security in an idea like this. Remember we had not clear 
direction back then. So when I moved down to Budapest, I quickly realized 
that there wouldn’t be any sense in me taking out the salary from this. 
I just figured that I would live off of my savings and the first thing that I set 
out to do after changing the name was to convince Peter to leave his job. He 
was working on his PhD at the time, but there was no way we could really 
make Prezi happen with Peter being distracted by other things. 
Santos: He was also a university professor at the time, right? 
Arvai:  Right. So the first thing was to get him to feel that he was able to 
and willing to leave his job. I helped to secure a contract with gave us a little 
bit more money so that wouldn’t be too much of an extreme decision for 
Peter to join, and then as soon as he had joined, which was I think around 
the end of 2008 or beginning of 2009, I started working on convincing Adam 
to leave his job, because he was also not working with Prezi. 
Santos: The financing you said you secured was from Sunstone Capital? 
Arvai:  We did a new round of financing, that’s right, in the summer of 2009. 
We had launched a product three months earlier and then we did a new 
round of financing with Sunstone Capital, and TED Conferences. That’s right. 

Chapter 10 | Peter Arvai: Prezi 
 
128  
Santos: Well, Sunstone Capital I can understand. A VC company, although a 
Danish one which gives it a bit more color because there are already four 
nations in here. But why TED Conferences? How did you get to meet them 
and talk to them about Prezi? 
Arvai:  Well, I had been a huge TED fan ever since TED launched their vid-
eos on the web. So, when I was still back at that mobile internet company 
that I mentioned to you earlier, one of the projects I was working on was to 
make these videos available on your mobile phone. It was really some of the 
most valuable content that exists still today on the web. Actually, the format 
is quite good for the mobile phone, too. The lectures are not too long. If 
you’re in the subway and you have a fifteen-minute ride, you can more or 
less go through one of the TED talks. 
Because of that, I had contact with one guy who helped me to figure out 
how to make these videos available also in a mobile format. When I joined 
Prezi my first thought was that they should really take a look at Prezi be-
cause it would be just a more engaging way of doing the presentations. 
When I moved down to Budapest I sent over an e-mail to my contact men-
tioning, “Hey, by the way, I just joined this incredibly cool company. I think 
we have a very interesting way of presenting ideas and I am curious to hear 
your feedback.” Really I didn’t get any response to that. 
But then after we had launched the product in April or May, yeah in April 
2009, I got an e-mail back from the guy saying, “Peter, how was it? Did you 
join Prezi?” I said yes, yes, I tried to tell you this about nine months ago. 
Then he said, “Some people here were wondering about what this new thing 
is and maybe you can tell me more?” I said yeah, I’d love to do that. My idea 
was that, okay, maybe if we can get some sort of collaboration in place, of 
course this would be great for Prezi to be able to be seen in an environment 
like TED. 
So we set up a meeting and I booked a flight to New York. On my way to 
New York, we were actually in the middle of negotiating an investment with 
Sunstone and I realized that having a Prezi presentation at TED is cool, but 
why don’t I try to convince the TED folks to actually invest in Prezi because 
that would be twice as fun? 
But when I got to New York, my meeting with TED was canceled. And I had 
a couple of other meetings with people I knew before, and I was, of course, 
disappointed, but during those three days I was trying to figure out a way of 
trying to meet them anyway. 

European Founders at Work 
 
129  
Somehow I managed to guilt-trip the secretary of Chris Anderson to realize 
that I had come all the way to New York to meet with them and that I must 
meet them. Just before I was going to leave to the airport, I got twenty min-
utes with Chris Anderson, who is the curator for TED, and fortunately those 
twenty minutes were enough to actually get Chris interested in Prezi and 
feeling like our values and our mission were really the same in the sense that 
we are working to spread exciting ideas around the world. 
So they ended up investing in Prezi based on those twenty minutes that  
we had. 
Santos: Quite impressive. 
Arvai:  I would say that that it was the most successful twenty-minute pitch 
that I ever did in my life. 
Santos: I can believe you because it’s quite an achievement for one. I’m sure 
that in the meeting he didn’t have that expectation, probably. 
Arvai:  No, I don’t think he did. And also, just to give another perspective 
on it, as far as I know TED has not invested in a company before or after 
Prezi. 
Santos: Yeah. It just reinforces what you said before. How did this affect 
the negotiations with Sunstone, because you were in the process of negotiat-
ing with them? 
Arvai:  I think they were just happy about that. That just made them feel re-
assured that we were a good team with the right values. 
Santos: When you raised your Series A round, it was announced that you 
would get Jack Dorsey as an advisor. How did you meet him and convince 
him to be an advisor? Now he’s no longer an advisor to the company or 
listed as an advisor. 
Arvai:  Well, Jack Dorsey, but also Evan Williams actually. We had e-mail 
contact when we launched Prezi because they really liked the product essen-
tially. And so, we kept in touch via e-mail. As I was coming out to San Fran-
cisco to figure out how to set up offices here we just said that we would 
meet up. And we did continue to meet on regular occasions. The reason 
why Jack Dorsey is not listed any more as an advisor is: because he’s so busy 
with both Twitter and Square. 
Santos: Can you give me an example of an advisory conversation that you 
had with him that really had an impact on Prezi? 
Arvai:  I think that Jack was and is a guy who is really all about a great prod-
uct, and he really strengthened my sense that we shouldn’t spend too much 

Chapter 10 | Peter Arvai: Prezi 
 
130  
time figuring out how to market Prezi or how to find secret backdoors into 
people’s hearts. Instead, we should really just focus on making the best pos-
sible product and the simplest and best user experience that we can. If we 
do that, then people will like what they see. That resonates very strongly 
with me too.  
At the same time though, once you start get to builda real business, all sorts 
of other pressures come in from customers, from partners, from investors, 
and everyone has sort of different expectations on what you are supposed to 
do. But to this day Prezi is spending very little effort on traditional marketing. 
Our marketing guys work mostly with support, training and only a limited 
outreach.  
Santos: When you actually launched Prezi, you put the site up and what did 
you do? 
Arvai:  I went to a conference in Amsterdam, the Next Web Conference, 
and they had a start-up competition. We came in number two in that com-
petition. We launched that day, so April 2009. 
Santos: And that was your marketing for the launch? 
Arvai:  Right. 
Santos: How did it go? Did people pick it up immediately, or did you have 
to do additional efforts? Did you continue to go to more competitions to get 
more exposure? 
Arvai:  No, not really. No, we didn’t do that. 
Santos: So, the growth of Prezi was mainly word of mouth? 
Arvai:  It was and is. It’s always been and is. 
But it was a great moment. I was given a five-minute pitch to talk about Pre-
zi, and after my pitch the host of the conference asked the conference, how 
many of you would pay to use Prezi? And half of the audience raised their 
hands. It was just a great feeling. 
Santos: Were you disappointed that you were number two? 
Arvai:  Of course I was disappointed, but I got so much positive feedback 
from the participants at the conference. So, in many ways I felt like a winner 
anyway. 
Santos: Can you talk a bit about revenue? Can you give an idea of when the 
company became profitable and what kind of growth of the user base and 
the revenue you’ve seen from the beginning? 

European Founders at Work 
 
131  
Arvai:  We reached our first millionth user after eighteen months, so eight-
een months after that April time. We’ve been growing exponentially ever 
since, so right now we’re at 4.3 million users. (Today we’re at 6M) Regarding 
the money part, I actually don’t want to comment at the moment. 
The only thing I would say regarding that is that we’re a freemium model, 
and like many other freemium models out there, we have a part that con-
verts to paying. I think we don’t do worse or better than the average com-
pany in this arena, and if you look into how these companies are doing, then 
you will get a pretty good idea. 
Santos: Until now, what were the main lessons for you, and what would 
you consider to be the hardest challenges you faced until now? 
Arvai:  There’s been a lot of different challenges along the way, as I told you 
in the beginning. The first challenge was to figure out what we even wanted 
to do with this innovation. Then, later on, how do we execute on a global 
strategy and get the finances to add up? How can we make sure that people 
actually have salaries to live off? Right now, I think our biggest challenge is to 
grow our engineering team with the right people. We need to find really tal-
ented engineers, and really that’s right now a pocket that can’t be too full 
right now, it seems. So, we are growing it in a way that puts challenges in 
terms of not just recruiting, but how to organize our efforts, etc. 
Santos: Where do you actually hire the engineers, in Hungary or in Silicon 
Valley? 
Arvai: In Hungary. We have all product development in Hungary, as from 
the start. 
Santos: What advice would you give to European tech companies that are 
starting up now? Is it to stay in Europe?  
Arvai: I don’t think our way is the way for everyone. I think each company’s 
strategy has to start with a goal and the vision of what they’re trying to 
achieve. I think for us it was an important step to create a US presence be-
cause, as I mentioned to you, we believe that our biggest market is in the US.  
And also we are very much a consumer-facing product. So having presence 
in the world’s largest consumer market is necessary for us. I don’t think that 
that’s necessary for all types of businesses.  
Really you have to begin with asking, “Who are we, and why are we doing 
what we’re doing?” Because if that’s clear, the rest becomes just a function 
of how you achieve your goals. And I think that that is really important  
because, of course, there’s going to be a certain glamour attached to being in 

Chapter 10 | Peter Arvai: Prezi 
 
132  
San Francisco or in Silicon Valley. But I think that that is not sufficient to 
build a serious business off. So I think it’s good to reflect on these questions. 
Having said this it could be with adding that I have lived in three continents 
and seven countries by now. And I have to admit that those experiences 
have really impacted the way I see the world. I believe that for any entrepre-
neur to have some sort of experience outside their own comfort zone when 
they think about how to create a product that’s really good. In my case my 
traveling experiences has shaped my views on the global potential for Prezi. 
So what I mean by that is not necessarily that you have to go and live in Asia 
to be a successful entrepeneur. It can be that maybe you need to have expe-
riences from working in elderly care and realize what kind of problems there 
are there. But having the ability to see things from different perspectives I 
think is actually very helpful in shaping the way that you look at the world. 
Probably that’s will influence the way you run your business in many indirect 
ways. That’s just something that you have to continuously develop.  
But I don’t think that you can get a business idea then go to India and see if 
it’s a great product for India. Or you can, but usually these are very long-
term learning processes. At least for me.  
Santos: Is there any other topic that we didn’t discuss that you find relevant 
for future entrepreneurs? 
Arvai: Something that may be interesting to discuss is the question of the 
different leadership styles and the different company cultures that these en-
trepreneurs that you talk to have utilized. 
In my case, and I think I alluded to this if I’ve not said it directly, I’ve been 
very concerned with not building a company where there’s too much of a 
feeling that there’s an A and a B team. And naturally you’d think that the A 
team is in San Francisco. That is the cool place where everyone wants to be. 
And the B team is in Budapest, this former communist, gray country—and 
that’s where you outsource people. This is how most people tend to look at 
the world, and it’s a view that bugs the hell out of me.  
And so what can you do as an entrepreneur is to try to work on those pre-
conceptions. So one thing that we do, for example, is a fellowship program. 
The fellowship program allows Prezi employees to work in the other office 
and Prezi sponsors the travel and the living costs for the person if this is 
within, of course, the three-month visa restrictions that are allowed. So this 
means that people can experience the different places with all of their 
strengths and weaknesses. 

European Founders at Work 
 
133  
Another thing is, so far we’ve had a semi-annual power week. I don’t know if 
we will be able to keep this up, but during this week we collect the entire 
company in one place and so far it’s always been Budapest because that’s al-
ways where we’ve had more people. This was probably a very important 
moment in Prezi history as well. 
I think a lot about about build our company culture. When I moved down to 
Budapest, it was summer and then came fall and then as always with winter, 
the usual question came up to have a Christmas party or not. 
I’ve always been quite resistant to these Christmas parties. What I observe is 
that partly the management feels like, oh, this is a must and that if we don’t 
spend enough money on it, then people are going to think that we’re cheap. 
It’s something compulsory. On the other hand, I think that most people that 
go to these parties feel the same way. 
They don’t go because “oh, I’m really looking forward to this Christmas par-
ty,” but because “oh, it’s a compulsory party. I need to go too” and then the 
evening ends up with people drinking a lot, getting very drunk, and maybe 
doing things that they, the next week, don’t want to talk about. 
I’ve always felt like I don’t understand why companies do these parties where 
instead we could do something that is closer to the spirit of what Christmas 
for me is about. So I found a social agency in the poor parts of Budapest and 
I asked, “Do you think there’s a family here whose living conditions are so 
terrible that we as a group could come there and change it dramatically?” Of 
course there was, so we spent two days renovating this flat. At the outset, 
some thought that this was one of the most unconventional to as a company 
of tech guys,to go in and do manual labor. And what if they will be ashamed 
of us coming and helping them? 
We all had doubts and it was very strange to go into someone’s home and 
start renovating. But the outcome was far better than all of us had expected 
and ever since then we have continued doing these renovation projects. 
It turned out that not only did this family get a proper house to live in for 
Christmas, because it was in terrible conditions that they were living in, but 
it turned out to be the best team-building activity I think we ever did. We 
changed roles. I was painting the walls the two full days and one of our de-
velopers was project managing the entire thing. 
We got to know each other in new perspectives and got a deeper relation-
ship with each other. I think it really energized everyone, including the peo-
ple we helped in the end. Although everyone around told us we shouldn’t do 

Chapter 10 | Peter Arvai: Prezi 
 
134  
this, it’s not proper for us to do this. But when we took some time and sup-
ported each other, then we could overcome these challenges quite easily. 
I think that those sorts of metaphors that can really set the norm of what it 
is that this company is trying to achieve. First of all, that if we workd to-
gether then yes, we can have a great impact on the world. Then second, hav-
ing fun while we contribute to make the world better. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
11 
Saul Klein   
Video Island (LOVEFiLM) 
Saul Klein was the founder and CEO of Video Island, which after several mergers 
became what is now LOVEFiLM International, the leading European film subscrip-
tion service acquired by Amazon in 2011 for $312 million. After Video Island, 
Klein was part of the original executive team at Skype. In 2007, he co-founded 
Seedcamp, a European based micro seed fund for Internet technology companies.  
Klein is also the co-founder of The Accelerator Group (TAG), a London based seed 
fund for investing in early-stage Internet services, e-commerce, and digital media 
businesses. The TAG portfolio includes investments in companies such as Bit.ly, 
Dopplr (Nokia), Erply, Fizzback (NICE), Graze, Last.fm (CBS), LOVEFiLM (Ama-
zon), Mind Candy, MOO, TweetDeck (Twitter), Wonga and Zoopla. Klein is cur-
rently a partner at Index Ventures.  
 
Pedro Santos: In 2002, 2003, you started Video Island. Why did you start 
it and were you aware of Netflix? 
Saul Klein: I wrote a long blog post at the time of the Lovefilm sale to Ama-
zon that there were many companies started who contributed to the business 
that became LOVEFiLM. LOVEFiLM had a complex history. There were three 
start-ups just in the UK, and there were others in Scandinavia, and others in 
Benelux. And ultimately all of these start-ups were amalgamated under the 
umbrella of LOVEFiLM International. I think there are between five and ten 
people who could credibly say that they were co-founders of what became 
LOVEFiLM. 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 11 | Saul Klein: Video Island (LOVEFiLM) 
 
136  
I think there are some interesting lessons. People very often focus on the 
single or the dual founder story. The Steve Jobs/Steve Wozniak story, that 
then just becomes the Steve Jobs story. Or the Bill Gates/Paul Allen story 
that then becomes the Bill Gates story. Or the Larry Page and Sergey Brin 
story, which is still the Larry Page and Sergey Brin story. Or the Jeff Bezos 
story, which is just the Jeff Bezos story. Or the Reed Hastings story. 
But the reality is, before we got into the questions of how Video Island 
started, it’s really important to understand that fundamentally no great com-
pany is ever just created by a founder.  
Whether it’s people like your wife, your girlfriend, your boyfriend, your par-
ents, or your sister who you bounce your initial ideas off of, or even your 
friends in the park, the journey between having an idea and starting a com-
pany and then building a company and selling a company is a journey that 
many people take together. While founders are mythologized in the media in 
books like Founders at Work, the reality is, even if you look back at Hotmail, 
Steve Douty or Scott Weiss, who were around employee number 15, were 
probably as fundamental to the success of Hotmail as Sabeer [Bhatia] and 
Jack [Smith]. 
I want to get that out of the way, because I think although I can definitely 
tell a part of the LOVEFiLM founding story, but you can also get five or ten 
other narratives that are also very interesting and important. 
Santos: I completely agree with that view. Actually, reading the LOVEFiLM 
story, it would be very interesting to have all points of view, but the point  
of the book also is not mainly to create this myth, but to show how it can 
be done for people who want to start something. How they can go and 
start something. 
Klein: But I guess what I’m saying is one of the most important things is 
this: you don’t really start anything by yourself. 
Santos: True. 
Klein: And you certainly don’t grow anything by yourself. One of the inter-
esting things to me about LOVEFiLM is that the different people who co-
founded the different businesses which ended up making up LOVEFiLM have 
all gone on to start other businesses. And many of the key contributors at 
Video Island, at ScreenSelect, at Boxman, at LOVEFiLM, have also gone on to 
either co-found or start other businesses. Actually the companies that end up 
being successful are not just the ones that are successful in and of themselves, 
but who also spawn other successes through the founders and through the 
core team that go on and do interesting things. 

European Founders at Work 
 
137  
But to answer your question, yes. I was aware of Netflix. Not only was I 
aware of Netflix, but at the time, this was 2002, I just moved back to the 
UK from New York. I had been in the States from ’95 to 2002. I had re-
cently met my wife. We got engaged. She was living in Johannesburg. I was 
living in New York. We decided that we would move to London, and I 
knew I wanted to start a company. And I started looking around for good 
businesses to start. 
I had seen Netflix in the US. I thought, “This is a great business. It’s a great 
consumer value proposition. It’s a problem and an industry that I can per-
sonally relate to. It involves technologies that I’m very familiar with.” The 
whole aspect of personalization and collaborative filtering had been some-
thing that I had been involved with in the mid-’90s at a company in Boston 
called Firefly, where I’d been a part of the founding team, not the founders, 
but the founding team. 
We built what was the web’s first personalization technologies for music, 
for movies, for books, for web sites. This notion of recommending movies 
or as Chris Anderson at the time (around 2002) was talking about, Netflix 
being a great example of a long-tail business. I really understood that, be-
cause it was stuff I had worked on six, seven, eight years before. 
And then moving to London and wanting to start a business and raising 
money for a business, it was at a time when basically the funding market for 
Internet companies was non-existent. Not just in Europe, but even in the 
US at the time. 
The bubble had burst. Everyone thought the Internet was stupid. And if the 
Internet was stupid, then certainly the consumer internet was really stupid.  
The great thing about Netflix was not just there was a clear business model, 
a clear proposition, but the company had been public for at least a year, 
year and a half. There were several quarters of analysts’ coverage of data 
that you could look at. You could point to both yourself and also to a po-
tential investor and say, “Hey, this is actually a real business. It’s working. It’s 
generating revenues. There is a clear revenue stream. You take money from 
people. You send them discs. And as long as you keep offering them a good 
service, you’ve got a good business.” 
People at the time really understood, this was in a down economy, that a 
subscription business was a very good, predictable revenue model. People 
looked at mobile phone companies. People looked at cable companies and 
said, “Okay. I understand the economics of a business like this.” In terms of 
“Is there a need? Is there a market? Is there a good business model?”—it 
ticked all the boxes. 

Chapter 11 | Saul Klein: Video Island (LOVEFiLM) 
 
138  
Santos: So, you decided to go forward with this business. What was the 
first thing that you did to actually put it on the ground? 
Klein: I did a lot of research. I was lucky. It wasn’t like starting a business 
where there was no comparable. I could do a lot of research in terms of Net-
flix. I did a lot of research internationally to see if anyone was building busi-
nesses like this in the UK, in Europe, internationally. And I came across a few 
businesses. There were two in the UK in particular. One called DVDsOnTap 
that had a subscription model similar to Netflix. That was started by a very 
talented young guy who was just nineteen-year-olds at the time, Graham Bo-
sher (who went on to start Graze) and an older business partner. There was 
another business called MovieTrak, which had also started with more of a 
conventional rental model on a pay-per-disc basis. 
Then I saw in Australia there was a business. I can’t actually even remember 
what it was trading under, but their company name was Riverdale. They had 
also developed a version of Netflix in Australia. The interesting thing about 
what they were doing, they’d spent a lot of time and energy actually building 
software to automate the picking of the DVD on the back-end logistic side 
of things. 
Obviously, what was interesting and challenging about a business like this 
was it wasn’t just the front end of a web site. You have to think about all of 
the back-end systems in terms of purchasing, inventory management, logis-
tics, customer care, CRM, etc. I looked at all of this stuff. Originally my view 
on the market was, “Why don’t we find a team to back?” 
This was my father and I, because we had been doing seed investing together 
for a couple of years through something called The Accelerator Group, 
TAG. We looked at DVDsOnTap. We looked at MovieTrak. We looked at 
the Australian software. And we came to the conclusion that no business had 
gone far enough, that actually starting with a blank piece of paper was the 
best way to go. 
We raised a very small amount of angel money. Half of which came from us, 
half of which came from a business partner in the movie space, because I felt 
like I understood consumer Internet. I understood technology. I knew abso-
lutely nothing about the movie business. What should we put in our library? 
Who to talk to in the studios? 
I was introduced by a friend of mine to a guy in London, Simon Franks, who 
had just had a very big success as a producer. He had been the producer of a 
movie called Bend It Like Beckham. I don’t know if you remember that movie. 
Santos: Yes. I remember that movie. 

European Founders at Work 
 
139  
Klein: It was a very independent movie. Low budget, but did incredibly well 
and really put his company on the map. They were both the producer and 
also distributor of movies. He knew that industry very well. Because Simon 
was a young, entrepreneurial thinking guy, he was very open to new distribu-
tion models for the movie industry. We basically co-founded, if you like, this 
business. In that they were, along with us, the founding investors in this busi-
ness. They were called Redbus. They later sold their company to Lionsgate. 
Together we put in, and I think, I don’t remember the exact figures, £250,000 
or £300,000 to get the business going. 
I said, “I will run this business for the first couple of years to get it going, to 
get it off the ground.” The intention was that I would get the business going. 
And then ultimately I would hire a team to take the business forward and 
scale the business. That was the beginning. 
I didn’t have a technical co-founder, so I reached out to actually an old high 
school buddy of mine, Matthew Taylor. He had a background in computer 
science and had been involved in a number of very good start-ups as a CTO. 
The two of us set to work on doing a first release of the product. 
Santos: During the first year, how big did the team get? 
Klein: It’s hard to remember. Going back to the first few months, it was me 
and Mat. We made the decision that we felt that there were going to be a 
number of other people wanting to be in this market. We were concerned 
that Netflix was going to enter the market. We knew that there was 
DVDsOnTap. We thought they had a really good service. We knew that 
there was MovieTrak. I had spoken to William Reeve, who had been an 
early investor in MovieTrak. I had spoken to Alex Chesterman. He and I 
were at high school together, so I knew he was looking at this business and 
starting to talk to William. 
We decided we had to move fast, and as a result, we actually decided that 
we would license the technology to get up and running from these guys in 
Australia. Because we thought that a big differentiator was going to be this 
automated logistics component that they had built. 
Little did we know that this was the stupidest idea ever. But at the time, it 
seemed like this was a great idea. It would get us to market quicker. We 
would have this competitive edge in terms of technology and logistics that no 
one else would have. Basically, Mat went ahead and worked with these guys. 
We hired a project manager, Pam Burton, in London to help us think 
through just everything: office management, building the DVD library, deal-
ing with marketing materials. We hired Dave Webb, a New Zealander and a 

Chapter 11 | Saul Klein: Video Island (LOVEFiLM) 
 
140  
back-end developer, who was going to help us with the integration with the 
guys in Australia. Both Dave and Pam are actually still with the business. 
Basically we rented some space from Mat’s brother, who was running a web 
agency in London in their basement. The agency was called Oyster at the 
time. It’s now LBI, the big digital agency. We were basically their tenant in 
their basement. 
We cobbled together the beginnings of a library from some of the DVDs we 
had at home, my wife and I. Like Blade Runner and a couple of other things. 
We bought some secondhand DVDs from one of the partners that Redbus 
had introduced us to. A now defunct DVD rental business called Apollo that 
had like five or six stores in London. We didn’t have to spend a lot of mon-
ey on inventory. 
We put our heads down and we tried to get the site up. It took us three to 
four months to go live with the first version of the service. At the same 
time, I went out and I raised the first round of capital for the business from 
Index, and from … Benchmark, now Balderton.  
Santos: Two things: you launched the product—how did it go at launch? 
And how did you actually get the message out that you had the product? 
Klein: I think one important piece of research that I’d done and one very 
important strategic direction that we decided to take with Video Island that 
the guys at DVDsOnTap and ScreenSelect weren’t taking into consideration 
was this notion that very big players were likely to come into the market. 
And there are two responses for that. One is go it alone and out-execute 
them, which was the approach that ScreenSelect took and DVDsOnTap. The 
approach that we decided to take, and some of this was based on the fact 
that in the US that I had seen that Walmart had started, and Blockbuster was 
starting to enter the market to compete with Netflix. My hypothesis was 
that if Walmart was competing with Netflix—because they were the biggest 
retailer of DVDs, and Tesco in the UK was the Walmart-equivalent and was 
the biggest retailer of DVDs in the UK—that they were likely to want to 
compete with us. 
Several months before we launched our service—I guess this is what Steve 
Blank today calls “customer discovery”—I went and I tried to talk to a 
number of big partners or potential partners. Everyone from Lastminute to 
Brent Hoberman, who was still running Lastminute, to the guys at Tesco 
and Argos, the biggest retailers in the UK. To talk to these guys and try and 
figure out is this was a market they’re interested in. Are they likely to 
launch a service in the space? 

European Founders at Work 
 
141  
If they’re going to launch a service in this space, are they going to try and do 
it on their own? Or would they be open to doing it with us? Because I felt 
that ultimately … Netflix was going to come into the UK or Blockbuster 
was going to become aggressive. And to be honest, I didn’t really think 
about Amazon at the time, although I probably should have. But I was more 
worried about Netflix and Blockbuster. 
I felt that if someone like Tesco was working with us—they had muscle in 
terms of both … the marketing side and on the buying side with the stu-
dios—that we would never need to be afraid of anyone because they were 
much bigger than Netflix would ever be in the UK. And they were much big-
ger than Blockbuster would ever be in the UK, and actually they were much 
bigger than Amazon probably will ever be in the UK. 
I just felt like if we could secure a relationship with the biggest retailer, the 
biggest online company, the biggest media company, then we could work 
with many other distributors to get our product out there. Then that would 
be what would create awareness within the UK. That this new way to rent 
DVDs was available. 
I felt as a start-up brand, especially at a time when no one wanted to give 
you any money for marketing it was going to be very challenging for us to 
create category awareness. Here was a new way to rent DVDs. We took a 
very deliberate approach of targeting the biggest players. 
My goal was to get Tesco to let us power Tesco DVD rentals. We aimed in 
online for MSN, because they were the biggest portal at the time. We aimed 
in media for ITV, because they were the biggest commercial TV channel. 
Then we aimed for the Easy Group, because they were doing lots of new 
products. Easy Hotel. Easy Office. 
I felt that Stelios [Haji-Ioannou], his brand and his personality would elevate 
the awareness of the sector. We could also test a slightly different model 
with him than with the other guys where we were doing subscription serv-
ices. With Easy DVD rental we did the traditional £1.99 per movie that 
people were familiar with from just going to the local video shop. 
A very fundamental part of our strategy was to create a platform that we 
would run our own brand on, Video Island. But really, we put most of our 
emphasis initially on bringing volume and big brands onto our platform to 
raise awareness. 
It was an incredible experience as a start-up to have someone like Tesco as 
a partner. Because they hold your feet to the fire like no one was ever going 
to do for us, even our investors. It was very good discipline for us. But it 

Chapter 11 | Saul Klein: Video Island (LOVEFiLM) 
 
142  
meant that we were building a technology platform and an operations plat-
form in terms of customer support, in terms of packaging, in terms of our 
DVD inventory that was able to support them. 
So we had to be able to support multiple brands, not just one. It was a fun-
damentally different strategy from ScreenSelect, which was much more capi-
tal efficient, they were going to have a simple, clear, Netflix-clone proposi-
tion. And they executed on it incredibly well. They had software geared to 
do one thing very well. 
DVDsOnTap, effectively having been acquired by Arts Alliance, renamed 
their business LOVEFiLM. They took, over time, more of a hybrid approach. 
At Video Island, we were very much the platform player more or less from 
day one, if you like. 
Santos: How hard was it for Tesco to actually receive you as a new start-
up and to negotiate with your partnership? Considering that you were not  
a known brand, a known company, how hard was it to get the deal then 
with them? 
Klein: It was really difficult. I remember Mat and I taking Tesco on a tour of 
our warehouse, which was effectively half the size of a student’s bedroom at 
university in the back of a rundown video rental store, on a high street, in a 
suburb, in the south of London. And just thinking to myself, “There is abso-
lutely no way these guys are ever going to work with us.” But for whatever 
reason, they did decide to work with us. We delivered on time, and they 
ramped up slowly. They tested us to a small base online and then when they 
got more confident they sent an e-mail out. And they had two million e-mail 
addresses on their database. 
That first day the e-mail hit, our systems basically fell down. Then as they 
became more confident, they marketed us in-store. And they marketed us 
to their club card database, etc. We did the best job that we could to an-
swer all of their questions. And actually having investors, VCs, in the com-
pany made a big difference at that stage. 
I remember we had made the decision having launched in December using 
the Australian software in terms of getting to market quickly. We knew 
immediately it was the wrong thing to have done. If you don’t own your 
own technology, if you’re not building your own technology and you’re a 
technology company, you’re screwed. 
We had basically made the decision that we’re going to launch this thing,  
but in parallel we’re going to start building our own platform and our own 
systems. We’d also realized that the whole automated logistics that the  

European Founders at Work 
 
143  
Australian guys had developed were completely wrong. Totally on one level, 
overkill, and on the other level, totally unsuitable for a scaled-up system. 
We basically had to redo everything from scratch. My co-founder Mat was a 
real open-source advocate, so we built our platform on the LAMP stack. 
Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP. We had to go into Tesco and say, “Hey guys” 
because they did the full technical due diligence and security due diligence. 
And they were very uncomfortable, because we were running all of this on 
our servers. That it was going to be running on an open-source platform. 
My investor, Danny, now my partner in Index, Danny Rimer, came up with 
me to Tesco. And he was actually also on the board of MySQL, so it was 
nice to have access to the guys at MySQL. The guys at Tesco, all they knew 
was Oracle and Microsoft. To have an investor saying, “We’ve put money 
into these guys, these guys are going to be in business in two years’ time. 
We’ve put money into this open-source company. They’ve got big custom-
ers like NASA and the US government. Don’t worry about it.” That made a 
big difference to us in terms of being able to calm people like Tesco down. 
Santos: I can believe you. One year after Video Island started running, you 
decided to merge with ScreenSelect?  
Klein: Yeah. One year, eighteen months. I don’t remember the exact time-
line. Basically, all three companies—start-ups that had broken through. 
DVDsOnTap now LOVEFiLM, ScreenSelect, and Video Island. We all knew 
each other very well. I went to high school with Alex from ScreenSelect. I 
got to know William in the whole due diligence process on the industry. 
The guys at Arts Alliance, who acquired DVDsOnTap. Thomas, who is the 
principal at Arts Alliance, I’d known since ’95, ’96. When he was at Harvard 
Business School, he became best friends with one of my old high school 
friends, a guy called Simon Levene. We knew each other. Adam Valkin, who 
worked for Thomas and led the acquisition of DVDsOnTap, he and I had 
known each other since literally he was born in South Africa. 
His parents and my parents are good friends. His sister actually introduced 
my wife and I to one another. Then we had looked at, as TAG, my father 
and I, in investing in DVDsOnTap. We all knew each other extremely well. 
On some level it was only a question of time and how you would break up 
the pie. But it was inevitable. 
We all knew the real competition was Blockbuster and Netflix, and increas-
ingly potentially, Amazon. And that there was very little point in the three of 
us beating one another up. It made us stronger and it was really good to 
have great competition, and we all had slightly different approaches. 

Chapter 11 | Saul Klein: Video Island (LOVEFiLM) 
 
144  
Video Island, we’d raise more money from top-tier VCs. We had big part-
ners like Tesco. We’d spent more time and energy working with the studios. 
I’d hired someone from Blockbuster to help us negotiate those relationships.  
The guys at ScreenSelect were much scrappier.They’re like, “We’re just go-
ing to raise angel money. We don’t care about talking to the studios. We 
don’t care about partners. We’re just going to execute really well on the 
service and build our own technology.” They did a great job.  
Then the DVDsOnTap, LOVEFiLM guys, they’d been in the business the 
longest as DVDsOnTap. And then they started to build a really good team at 
LOVEFiLM and Arts Alliance put some real money behind it. 
I think we all came to the conclusion that we’re going to be better off to-
gether. From ScreenSelect’s perspective, from William and Alex’s perspec-
tive, joining forces with Video Island meant that they were able to access our 
investor base, Index, and Balderton. I’d also then gone out and raised a sub-
sequent round, bringing in Cazanove Private Equity, now called DFJ Esprit. 
We’d raised money from three top-tier VCs. The guys at ScreenSelect 
started to see it was going to be a very expensive journey, and it is. To build 
a business at that scale is a really expensive journey, and together we knew 
we would be much stronger. 
We recognized early on the different strengths and weaknesses of both of the 
businesses. To William and Alex’s credits, William is probably one of the 
most methodical, detail-oriented, executionally, operationally strong people 
I’ve ever worked with. He really had a good vision for how on a detailed 
level—software, operations, etc.—to bring these two businesses together. 
Alex is extremely talented commercially and strategically. 
For the time that we were together, the three of us were a good team.  
So I really enjoyed that period of raise the money, get the product out, hire 
the team, generate our first five, ten, fifteen million dollars in revenue. But 
really, I felt that my heart lived elsewhere and the person who was going to 
be able to take this from a business doing $10 million a year in revenue to 
$100 million a year in revenue and scale it across countries, was a different 
person than myself. 
This is when having done the deal with ScreenSelect we actually then identi-
fied the Nordics as an international expansion opportunity. We went out 
and we hired a CEO who could operationalize and scale this business and 
take it to the next level. This was Simon Calver, who to his credit did ex-
actly what we asked of him, which was to grow the business 10 times in the 

European Founders at Work 
 
145  
last four years. In fact, he probably grew it fifteen times to twenty times in 
that time. 
Santos: What kind of deal was made with ScreenSelect?  
Klein: When we acquired ScreenSelect,it was a two-thirds/one-third 
merger. What was great is we got their technology platform, which was 
awesome. We got William, who is amazing. We got Alex, who is amazing. 
We got their head of technology, Simon Kain, who is amazing, who went on 
to start Zoopla with Alex. We got Fern Wake, as she then was their opera-
tions director, who is still the operations director of LOVEFiLM. They got 
our capital. They got our investors. They got our relationships with Tesco, 
with ITV, etc. Together it was a really powerful unit. And then, we knew that 
we were acquiring these businesses in the Nordics. And then LOVEFiLM 
started to acquire these businesses in the Nordics. We knew the two busi-
nesses were going to need to come together. 
On a number of different fronts for me personally and professionally, I knew 
I wasn’t the person who was going to be able to do that. I think it’s very 
hard when Alex and William were founders. I was a founder. It was less dif-
ficult at LOVEFiLM, because although Graham was a founder, the business 
hadn’t been run by Graham for two or three years. It had been run by Mark 
Livingston, Simon Morris, and Jim Buckle. 
But it became clear that actually Simon Calver was more than capable of 
taking the business from where we all had it up to this point. He had run a 
billion-dollar P&L at Dell. He had been a VP of supply chain at PepsiCo. The 
guy had an amazing résumé, but the reality was that not only did he have an 
amazing résumé, he had really, prior to joining us, got his hands dirty in a 
turnaround situation in a private-equity-backed business called River Deep. 
He had seen the good, the bad, and the ugly, as well, as like: “How do you 
scale things?” We needed someone like Simon, not only for the business, 
but also because you needed an outsider to bring all of the businesses to-
gether. And move it on from a founder-staged businesses to businesses run 
by an executive management team. 
Santos: But you stayed always connected to LOVEFiLM as a shareholder? 
Klein: Initially, I was on the board when I joined Skype. It just soon became 
clear in terms of my role at Skype that I was just so involved and so busy at 
Skype that it was not practical. We were growing like crazy at Skype: we 
went from thirty to four hundred people in a year, from two hundred thou-
sand dollars in revenue to sixty million in revenue, from two offices to sev-
enteen locations. I had no time to think about LOVEFiLM, to add value as a 
board member.  

Chapter 11 | Saul Klein: Video Island (LOVEFiLM) 
 
146  
Perhaps one of the best experiences I had in terms of the narrative of being 
a founder, was sitting in one of the first board meetings after Simon had 
taken over. I was at Skype and just watching the rest of the team present. 
Seeing the investors around the table and just thinking, “This is an incredible 
bunch of people and they are running this business that I still have a stake in. 
Aren’t I lucky?” 
Santos: One question about Skype. You passed from a founder’s role to a 
VP role in another company. And at the same time, you have the investor 
background. It doesn’t seem like a very normal move. What convinced you 
to go to Skype? Which became a huge success, as everyone knows. 
Klein: Look. I think you have to trust your instincts in all of the important 
things in life. My wife and I decided to get married after four days of really 
knowing each other, and eight, nine years later we’re very happy with two 
kids. And that was good instincts. As far as Skype goes, I’ve never been 
someone who was hung up on titles. I’m hung up on responsibility and how 
much I can learn. I knew that at Skype, even if I was sticking stamps at enve-
lopes, I would have joined Skype. I just thought that this was the most excit-
ing piece of software I had seen since I downloaded in ’94 the Netscape 
browser. 
When my friend Danny said to me, “Hey, take a look at this thing. I’m 
thinking of investing in it and I’d love you to meet the founders. They’re 
coming through London and they’re thinking of moving here.” I just said to 
him, “This is fucking incredible. This is a rocket ship to the moon. How can 
I get involved?” 
I spent three, six months probably, every few weeks sitting down with [Zenn-
ström] while I was still running Video Island. Talking to him about some of 
their business challenges, advising him on some stuff. And over time he said, 
“We’d love you to come and join us.” 
I said, “I’ve got a business to run. But if I can find someone great to run the 
business, I would love to do it.” Not just because I thought it was an amaz-
ing company and we could do really well, because I could learn a whole new 
raft of things. First of all, this was the first company outside of Silicon Valley 
that was ever a global consumer web business—and this was in my backyard 
in London. That’s incredible.  
Secondly, even though I hadn’t fundamentally day to day done a marketing 
job for seven or eight years, marketing was my primary background and I 
felt that the challenge of defining the Skype brand, of marketing through 
multiple channels because we had hardware. We had software. We had re-
tail partners. We had online partners. 

European Founders at Work 
 
147  
Santos: Yeah, the works. 
Klein: The works in every country, in every language, with virtually no re-
sources was a really, really exciting challenge and learning experience that I 
couldn’t pass up. The other thing was Niklas knew I was an entrepreneur 
and I think he wanted entrepreneurial people on his core team. And I knew 
that in a company growing that fast, there’s no shortage of things to do. 
Your responsibility, whether you’re senior or junior, is basically limitless be-
cause you’re growing so fast. Even if you’re a twenty-one-year-old kid, 
you’re going to get responsibility that most forty-year-olds don’t get, be-
cause the company doesn’t have enough time to worry about what you 
know. It’s just you sink or you swim. 
Santos: True. Okay. 
Klein: Just to go back to what we first talked about. I fundamentally believed 
that no company is started just by the one or two people who have the 
spark of the idea. Every person who is the first one hundred, one hundred 
and fifty people at Skype are founders. 
By the way, as genius as Niklas and Janus [Friis] are in terms of the business 
idea and the product idea, the technology is all the guys in Estonia. They are 
like superheroes. 
Santos: Yeah. They built an amazing technology that’s still the best today. 
Klein: Yeah. By the way, they also implemented the product and the opera-
tions. Skype’s heart is still in Estonia. Microsoft, I hope understands that. 
The only person I think in the last five years that really understood that was 
Josh Silverman. 
Santos: We’ll see. Time will tell. I had some more questions not related to 
the ScreenSelect or Video island, because of your very particular experience 
in the Seedcamp, and being an entrepreneur and investor at the same time, 
and being in Europe and with links in Israel and the US. Basically, what do 
you think are the biggest differences, challenges, and opportunities for Euro-
pean entrepreneurs vs. US entrepreneurs? Because there is this Silicon Valley 
vs. the rest mentality. What’s your opinion on that? 
Klein: I think I really don’t like that notion. I think it’s a very cheap idea that 
is only sort of useful for getting re-tweets and blog headlines. I think the real-
ity is that it’s not about Europe vs. Silicon Valley. The best entrepreneurs in 
Europe understand Silicon Valley very well. They have spent time in Silicon 
Valley and developed relationships in Silicon Valley. Take all of that and all of 
the value that comes from that because you’re a fool if you think that Silicon 
Valley isn’t the most sophisticated, vibrant place for technology start-ups on 

Chapter 11 | Saul Klein: Video Island (LOVEFiLM) 
 
148  
the planet. It probably will continue to be so for the next twenty-five to fifty 
years because of the network. And the ecosystem is so profound there and 
keeps on getting stronger with Zynga, with Twitter, with Facebook, etc. 
I think any European entrepreneur or any entrepreneur in this space that 
doesn’t want to spend time or learn from Silicon Valley is foolish. But I think 
there’s a lot of things that you can learn and be aware of as an entrepreneur 
if you’re not in Silicon Valley, that you can use to your advantage. I think 
many times there is a groupthink that emerges in Silicon Valley. 
The main argument is that there are many people in Europe who have fun-
damentally changed industries. From Niklas and Janus in the telecom space, 
to Daniel Ek in music, to Martin Mickos in enterprise software, to the guys 
who reinvented anti-virus software at Message Labs and AVG, Ventee 
Privee, Wonga—the list goes on. That’s just tech companies. Look at Zara. 
Look at H&M. Look at IKEA. These are companies in the last twenty, 
twenty-five years that have fundamentally disrupted massive industries 
through Europe. I think there’s no shortage of European entrepreneurs and 
this notion of “us against them” is pathetic. It’s a waste of people’s time. 
I think European entrepreneurs should figure out their advantages, which is 
that you’re more likely to be able to think outside of the box. You’re going 
to be more culturally attuned to a global market because of multiple lan-
guages, because you have no home market that’s big enough to satisfy you. 
And because you have less access to capital, you actually have to be smarter 
to be successful. So, if you can be successful in Europe, you’re damn good 
basically. 
Santos: Interesting. It comes in line with most entrepreneurs that I inter-
viewed until now. 
Klein: As an investor, both at Index and TAG, it’s why we’re so excited 
about Europe and Israel as places to invest. 
Santos: Yeah. It’s because there’s plenty of untapped opportunities. 
Klein: Yeah. And great entrepreneurs and they’re just getting better every 
year. 
Santos: Yeah. But Israel has a very specific ecosystem, doesn’t it? 
Klein: What do you mean? 
Santos: It’s also a hotbed in the sense of the entire country is very techno-
logically advanced, where Europe has some spots like London, Denmark. 

European Founders at Work 
 
149  
Amsterdam also has some interesting things, but Israel as a country has a lot 
of concentration. 
Klein: I think Israel is a national start up. It’s sixty-five years old and over 
thirty percent of its exports are technology. The country relies on the  
technology industry, not just for innovation, but for its fundamental impact 
on the Israeli economy. This is a society where, like in Silicon Valley, it’s not 
unusual for people to know someone who works in a start-up. It’s not un-
usual for someone to start a company. It’s not unusual for someone’s family 
member to start a company. Everyone knows someone who knows a VC. 
There are huge American companies from Cisco to IBM to EMC to HP to 
Google to eBay that have big, mainstream R & D centers here. 
Not like outsourced, offshore R & D but cutting-edge R & D. Clean tech, 
life sciences, medical devices. You have world leadership here. Very edu-
cated country. Highest number of patents per head of population. It’s sort 
of like Silicon Valley as a country. 
Santos: How do you use your entrepreneurship skills in the investment 
world? 
Klein: We haven’t talked much about investing, but this isn’t a book so 
much about that. Although one of the things that at least at Index we think 
of, and at TAG and of course Seedcamp, is that you have to invent the VC 
model in Europe as well. The way I’m putting my entrepreneurial energies to 
work nowadays is in founding and developing venture and investment vehi-
cles, rather than companies, because that allows you to touch fifty, one hun-
dred, one hundred and fifty, two hundred companies. The most important 
thing I believe, as I said in that LOVEFiLM blog post, is that no business that 
becomes worthwhile is the result of one or two or three or four or even 
five people’s work. 
The way you build great businesses is through founding teams. Even if you’re 
a single founder or co-founder, you’re spending a lot of your time bouncing 
ideas off your family, off your friends. And you wouldn’t be allowed to be 
entrepreneurs if you didn’t have their support as well. 
I think people take a very one-dimensional view of what it’s like to be a 
founder often. 
Santos: Until they actually start and then they realize. 
Klein: Yeah. The role that a team plays, the role that your friends play, the 
role that your family plays is very fundamental. [Laughter]

C H A P T E R 
12 
Boris Veldhuijzen 
van Zanten 
The Next Web 
Boris Veldhuijzen van Zanten is a serial internet entrepreneur, a blogger, and 
a guest speaker. He started his first company, V3 Redirect Services, in 1997 and 
sold it two years later. In 2003, he started a Wi-Fi hotspot operator, named it 
HubHop, and sold it just eight months later to KPN. 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten is also the founder of Twitter Counter and The Next Web 
conference and blog. The Next Web blog is among the top, most influential tech-
nology blogs in the world.  
 
Pedro Santos: You started your first company, V3 Redirect Services, in ’97 
and sold it two years later. What led you to start the company, and what 
lessons did you learn from this first experience? 
Boris Veldhuijzen van Zanten: I was studying at the Art Academy here 
in Amsterdam. I found out about the World Wide Web, and I thought it 
was just very interesting, what was happening. I really felt like it was the be-
ginning of a new era in the world. Because it was new, I thought, “I have to 
play a role in that.” I didn’t know what that role would be, and I thought, 
“Maybe I can play a role as an artist, or as an entrepreneur, or some other 
way, but I have to be involved in this.”  
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 12 | Boris Veldhuijzen van Zanten: The Next Web 
 
152  
Then, one day, I read an article about a company in Iceland, and they had 
used the domain extension of Iceland, which is .is, and registered a domain 
named “This.” The domain name was “This.is.” Then they started a re-direct 
service so you can register “This.is/Bjork,” and re-direct it to Bjork’s page, 
or this is “This.is/Boris,” and re-direct it to my page. 
I thought it was a very clever use of technology, because it was sort of a mix 
of poetry and technology. It had never occurred to me to use a domain sys-
tem like they did, with making actual words. I started looking around and 
found that there was another country with a great domain extension, and it 
was Tonga. Tonga had the domain name extension .to. I felt that’s even bet-
ter, because you can register “Come.to,” and “Surf.to,” and “Travel.to,” and 
“Welcome.to,” and “Go.to.” 
I borrowed my father’s credit card, and bought my first seven domain names 
there, and just started with a re-direct service, very simple at first. That’s 
how it got started, so I just wanted to be involved in something, in this new 
thing that I thought was going to be huge. 
Santos: Did you start immediately to think how to make money out of it, 
or was it just an experiment? 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: Well, yeah, a little bit. One of the first things I 
did … I had just a homepage at the time and it was popular, had a few visi-
tors a day. I wanted, “This.is/Boris.” So I e-mailed the guy, and I said, “Can I 
get ‘This.is/Boris?’” He said, “Yes, but it will cost you €1,000 a year.” I felt, 
“Okay, that’s just stupid,” because the internet economy is not about just 
charging a lot of money. It makes more sense to give something like this 
away, and then show some advertising when people use the service.” I did 
see the business potential, but I didn’t start it because I thought, “Well, this 
is going to make a lot of money right from the start.” I thought that this is 
just a great opportunity to do something and I’m sure there will be a way to 
make money in the end, but charging €1,000 a year is not the solution. 
I did see the potential, but it’s not an easy way to make a quick buck. 
Santos: Okay, so you sold it two years later to Fortunecity. What did you 
learn from this experience, from creating the services to actually selling it 
two years later? What do you think are the main lessons that you took out 
of it? 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: Well, I learned an awful lot, because, of course, 
it sounds very straightforward, just starting a company growing it and then 
selling it. But there was a crisis every day, every week. It was really difficult 
to keep up the growth. The service demanded more investment all the time. 

European Founders at Work 
 
153  
We had to pay with money that we didn’t have. We had issues with scalabil-
ity. So, it was just a roller coaster for two and a half years. And the com-
pany that bought it was the fifth or the sixth company that we were negoti-
ating with. So we had several negotiations where, just at the end, the deal 
didn’t go through, or either we walked away or the other company decided 
not to buy. 
So I think I learned how to negotiate better because, the first negotiations 
we did, we just had no idea what we were talking about or how you’re sup-
posed to sell a company. And then, slowly, as we did more negotiations, we 
got better at it, less emotionally involved, and it became easier to walk away 
from a deal. 
So I can’t begin to say how much I learned in those first two and a half years. 
It’s really hard to isolate one thing that I’ve learned. It’s always a lot harder 
than you think. Everything is. So I guess, what I picked up on the most was 
that, from the outside, it always seems simple, straightforward, easy. But then, 
when you get inside, there’s always chaos, stress, tension, and desperation. 
Santos: If you didn’t start it by generating revenue, how did you pay the 
bills for the two and a half years? Did you get investment, or was it self-
funded and you were holding yourself up with the other things you had go-
ing on? 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: It was self-funded. And for the first two years, I 
think, we just paid everything ourselves and used the little revenue we had 
to just pay for servers and everything. And just near the end, I think, about a 
month before we sold the company, we had an investor who agreed to in-
vest. But then, we sold the company and we essentially bought off the in-
vestment with the money from the exit.  
And I still believe that it’s really smart to start companies that don’t really 
need funding. And a lot of the companies don’t need funding. There are a lot 
of companies that raise funding. But usually, it’s just so much better if you 
can raise funding to grow an existing company instead of raising money to 
start a company. 
So I fundamentally believe that most companies are sort of started in one 
weekend. Right? Maybe a week. But the basic idea is that you don’t take a 
lot of time to get from nothing to something that you can show people, that 
it’s viable. That shouldn’t take more than a week. Even if it’s a really com-
plex problem. And once you have that, and you can show a little bit of suc-
cess in just one detail of your plan, then you can expand on that. 
So a lot of people think we should raise money and do it just exactly right 
the first time and build the whole system with a lot of features because you 

Chapter 12 | Boris Veldhuijzen van Zanten: The Next Web 
 
154  
need everything to be perfect or else you can’t sell. But that’s not the way I 
do business. I like to build something small and see if people like it. And if 
they like it, you expand based on what you think is the next logical step for 
the company. 
And if you look closely at other companies—even Google, right? Because 
they have a million servers. But they started off with just a simple thing, and 
they worked on it together, just two developers, to see if it would work. 
And when they saw that something worked, they spent more time and en-
ergy on it. And it took a few years before they got their first funding, be-
cause they just were working together and you don’t need a lot of money 
when you’re students and just working on your own stuff. 
Santos: Since then, you’ve created several companies. What were, in your 
view, your biggest successes of those companies? 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: There are two ways of looking at it. You could 
say, “What are the companies that you sold, or which ones are successful?” 
But that’s the short list and also not the most interesting thing to talk about. 
So I think what’s more interesting is that I’m in a position to continuously try 
new things and find out what works and what doesn’t work. So I’m equally 
proud of the projects that we set up and then found out that they didn’t 
work, because at least we successfully tried them and showed that they were 
unsuccessful. But we still had a chance to try them. 
I set up a Dutch Wi-Fi hotspot service [HubHop], and we sold it to Royal 
KPN, the mobile operator of the Netherlands. From start to sale, that took 
less than eight months. That was a record, setting up the company, growing 
it really fast. And then, before we almost got started, we’d already sold it. 
That was very successful. 
I once started a company called Twitter Counter, which is the biggest statis-
tics provider for Twitter. I came up with the basic idea on a Thursday and 
started coding on it on Friday. Worked the whole weekend, showed it to my 
partners on Monday, and then we worked on it on Tuesday and Wednes-
day. And Thursday morning, just exactly a week later, we launched it and it 
was really successful. It’s an independent company now. We’re very profit-
able, with a few people who work full-time. So I’m really proud of that com-
pany too. 
Then there’s The Next Web blog, which is a top-ten blog in the world. 
We’ve got twenty-five people who work there, and they’re all over the 
world. That’s a very successful project too. I am very proud that it’s become 
so much bigger than just the sum of the founders. 

European Founders at Work 
 
155  
Santos: What do you consider to be your biggest failures, not necessarily 
the companies? 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: I think as an entrepreneur you fail all the time. 
You’ve got failure built into your business. Right? So you don’t really keep 
track of failure. You never really fail. It’s like if you would ask a scientist, 
“What’s your biggest failure?” They wouldn’t really understand the question. 
Because if you were doing experiments, you get results and that’s either posi-
tive or negative. But the result is always interesting and you’re always glad 
that you did the experiment, even if the outcome is unexpected. It’s the same 
here. We do projects all the time. There’s one joke that I tell, that we once 
raised some money and we started an anti-spam company. Usually, anti-spam 
companies are judged by the amount of spam they stop. So a not-so-effective 
spam company might perform ninety-six percent, and a really good one does 
ninety-nine percent. I think Gmail does 99.9 percent. They stop spam. 
We built a solution, we launched it. Pretty quickly, we found out that we 
stopped, like, one hundred and thirty percent of all spam, meaning all spam 
and one third of your real mail just all disappears. Then after six months, we 
went back to the investors and we said, “Well, this is not going to work. 
We can either just keep doing this, or stop the whole thing, give you back 
half your money, and then we’ll just call it a day.” 
The investors were so happy that we were honest about the whole thing 
and that they even got half their money back—that most of these investors 
then again invested in new projects that we did. When I look back at that 
project, I’m still very proud of the way we handled it. I’m glad that we got 
the chance to find out if it would work. Then, when we found out it didn’t 
work, we were able to quickly damage-control the whole thing and even 
ended up with a better relationship with the investors than we had before 
we started the company. 
If you talk to other people, they’re like, “Wow, but it was a huge failure, 
right? It didn’t work at all. You lost a lot of money.” Still, I have a very posi-
tive feeling when I think about the company, and even the investors have a 
positive feeling about the company. 
I think that’s essential when you’re an entrepreneur, that you’re not afraid of 
failure. You embrace failure. Your whole business is based on trying out stuff, 
being ready for stuff to fail and just taking the next step as soon as you fail. 
Santos: Going a bit back, you mentioned HubHop, which is the Wi-Fi serv-
ice. Was it designed to be sold so quickly? How did you come to actually 
create the service and eight months later, sell it one of the biggest giants in 
the Netherlands? 

Chapter 12 | Boris Veldhuijzen van Zanten: The Next Web 
 
156  
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: When we pitched it to the investors, and we 
had a few informal investors, we didn’t have a lot of money, and they asked 
us, “What’s going to be the exit? Is this just going to be a great company, or 
are you going to sell it? Is it going to be an IPO? If you’re going to sell it, who 
are you going to sell it to?”  
We said, “Well, we are certainly going to sell it, and probably to a mobile 
operator.” Our strategy is to just compete with 3G networks, and they we-
ren’t deployed yet then. We said, “This is going to be so hugely expensive, 
and Wi-Fi’s going to be a lot cheaper, so we’re to scream everywhere where 
people will listen to us that Wi-Fi is the future, UMTS or 3G is never going 
to be deployed. And that’s going to be so annoying for the mobile operators 
that they will eventually buy us.” So that was the whole strategy. 
And we just started doing that, and I think six months into the company, I 
met a guy at a birthday party, and I asked him what he did. And he said, “I 
work at KPN.” And then I told him, “Could you ask around and find out 
who is responsible for the Wi-Fi strategy at KPN, because I want to buy a 
license to put Wi-Fi antennas on all the payphones in the Netherlands that 
are owned by KPN.” And he said, “Yeah, sure. I’ll find out.” 
This was just one hundred percent bluff, because we had no funding at all. I 
knew we wouldn’t be able to afford the license, even if they would offer it. 
And I knew they would never offer it, because it’s a major asset to them to 
have those locations. So they would never sell access to that to a third party. 
But the reason I asked was because I thought it’s a great way to find out if 
they have a Wi-Fi strategy at all. And if they do, then we’ll have a major 
competitor. And it’s a great way for them to get to know us. Because it will 
mean at a corporate level they’ll say there’s this company that wants to buy 
a license. What do they do and what’s the strategy? So I knew at least they 
would talk about it. 
Within two weeks, we got a call from KPN, and they said, “Could you come 
over and could we have a talk about your business?” And we went over and 
they just said, “This is very interesting what you want to do. And would you 
consider selling?” And we said, “Well, no. But what are you thinking about?” 
And we started talking about money, and eventually we sold. 
Santos: Was there a time where you thought of creating a bigger company 
and not sell it? 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: Yes, in this case, we said, “We are going to build 
a one hundred million-dollar company, and it’s going to take four years. And 
we’re going to do a few rounds. And the first round is just an informal round, 

European Founders at Work 
 
157  
and then we’re going to do a bigger round later, maybe after a year.” So that’s 
how we set up the company. But then, when KPN started talking to us after 
eight months, we had some conversations with the investors, and we said this 
is just such a great opportunity. And it’s not the exit that we were dreaming 
about in four years, but on the other hand, it is an exit and it is now and it’s 
real money. So we were all in favor. 
And some of the investors agreed, and they said, “It’s a great return on the 
investment. Let’s just do it.” And some said, “I am just as willing to wait four 
years and build a real company.” 
And then, one of the investors said, “You should also look at just what it 
means for you personally. There’s the money, which is important, but also 
what it means because it will be the second company you sell, which will 
make you a successful serial entrepreneur, which is very valuable for the 
rest of your career, too. You did it once, which is cool, but it might have 
been an accident. But if you did it twice, you showed the world that you’re 
capable of doing this.” 
So in the end, just everybody was happy to do this exit. 
Santos: So, on to The Next Web. As you said, it’s one of the top blogs in 
the world, and it also has a conference that’s very well-known in Europe. 
But the less well-known part is that it has an incubator. What led you to de-
sign The Next Web with these three components all in one? 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: I could give you a bullshit story about the whole 
strategy of the thing, but really it’s all one big happy accident. So we once 
had a company, just a separate start-up that we wanted to launch, but we 
couldn’t afford to go to a conference and sponsor it. We just didn’t have the 
funding for that. So then we felt well, let’s have our own conference. We can 
be the main sponsor. And then even if we lose money, it’s still cheaper than 
sponsoring somebody else’s conference. So we did, and we broke even, so 
we didn’t lose money, and we had a great event. But by the time we had the 
event, the start-up wasn’t ready to launch yet. 
In that sense, it was a failure, but we loved the conference. The start-up 
didn’t really work out, and we started doing other things. And the confer-
ence was the binding factor that kept it all together. So you could say that 
the incubator was the first thing that we had, and then the conference was 
to promote what was a start-up in the incubator. 
And then we had the conference and we thought it’s always so hard to 
promote a conference, as you’ve got to persuade the other journalists to 
write about it. Maybe we should just have our own blog so we can write 
about technology all year. And use that as our media channel. 

Chapter 12 | Boris Veldhuijzen van Zanten: The Next Web 
 
158  
We always had a blog to promote the conference and right about that time, 
we looked at how the blog was doing, because we started writing just two 
or three months before the conference. It was really just a conference blog. 
But then we looked at the traffic of some of the biggest conferences in the 
world, and we noticed that our blog was so well read that we had five times 
the traffic of the biggest internet conference in the world. 
So we thought, “Okay, apparently we were doing something right with the 
tone of voice, or there is something that attracts people to the blog.” So we 
hired an editor. We said, “You’ve just got to write four posts a day the rest 
of the year and we’ll pay you for that.” And then traffic started growing. 
And I remember very well the first day when we had more people visiting 
the blog in one day than we had visitors to the conference, which was easy 
because we only had one thousand visitors at conference, of course. But 
still, for us, it was just an amazing thought that we had so many people visit-
ing the blog. 
So we started investing more and hiring more editors, and so now we’ve got 
twenty-five editors, and they’re all over the world. And only two percent of 
our traffic is from the Netherlands.  The rest is just the rest of the world. 
And I remember maybe a year ago when our editor in chief, Zee, in London, 
said, “I want to be in the top one hundred on Technorati.” 
I think we were at forty thousand at that time, and I just thought that was 
just so unrealistic. I would like that too, but there’s just so many blogs in the 
world. And then, within two months, we entered the top one hundred. 
Then, I think a few months later, we broke into the top ten. And now, every 
day it’s sometimes we’re eight, sometimes we’re twelve, but we’re always 
around the number ten in the world. 
Santos: Do you see a big difference between Europe or the US in reader-
ship? In Europe it’s a very well-read blog. 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: Yeah, in the US, even more. So most of our 
readers are in the US, and then the rest of the world. London is very big. 
Canada, too. Australia. But also Asia. And there’s not a country in the world 
where people don’t read The Next Web. So that’s even at the North Pole 
and the South Pole, people are reading The Next Web. We had an article a 
while ago where we showed all the visitors over twenty-four hours on the 
map, and there was one dot on Antarctica, and then we got an e-mail from 
somebody, and he said, “Hey, I can see myself!” And we’re like, “What?” 
“Yeah, because I’m at the research facility on Antarctica.” And I saw a blip, 
and that’s got to be me. So, yeah, there’s not a country in the world where 
they don’t read it. 

European Founders at Work 
 
159  
Santos: That’s very funny. All the companies that you started are based in 
Amsterdam, and some that we didn’t talk about, like feestje.nl, which is com-
pletely focused for the local market. But for the others, you have a clear tar-
get, it’s worldwide. For instance, Twitter Counter. How hard is it to create a 
global company from a country like the Netherlands? 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: Well, I think it’s actually easier to start an inter-
national company than a local company. The World Wide Web is worldwide, 
by definition. So it feels strange to limit a web site to just one geographical 
region. And I definitely prefer to have companies that have a worldwide po-
tential, and don’t restrict themselves to just a local area. So feestje is an ex-
ample where we did look at local, because it’s basically the local version of 
Foursquare, where I thought if it’s location-based, it makes sense to focus on 
the location. But I have more affinity, more interest in the start-ups that are 
simply technology. Basic stuff that people can understand and that potentially 
can reach the whole world. 
Santos: And what would you say are the advantages and disadvantages of 
being based in the Netherlands, in this respect? 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: So if you’re looking for advertising dollars, ninety 
percent of that market is still in the US. And as with the blog here, you’re 
very dependent on advertising. So it makes total sense to do business in the 
US. All the international markets are very underdeveloped, clearly. On the 
other hand, if I go to the Valley and I e-mail people and I say, “I’m from Am-
sterdam. I’m only here for a week,” it’s just a lot easier for me to get ap-
pointments than it is for people who live there. And just being from Amster-
dam gives you sort of an edge. I think the Netherlands is a very stable coun-
try. It’s got a nice little economy. It’s safe and it’s good living here. But you’ve 
definitely got to look beyond the borders. Because it’s so small, it’s sort of in 
our genes to look at the rest of the world and do business internationally. 
So I wouldn’t tell people and say, “Oh, if you want to be an international 
entrepreneur, you should live in the Netherlands.” But I happen to live in 
the Netherlands, and as an international entrepreneur, I think it’s great to 
be here. 
On the other hand, two weeks ago we rented an apartment in Spain. And 
we just all got in a plane and went to Spain, and worked from Spain for a 
week. Excellent swimming pool. And we can, because everyone works from 
a laptop. So if you want to work somewhere else, it’s just perfectly possible. 
So I think it’s the interesting thing about the time that we live in, and the 
technology we use, and the kind of country we are, that we can just say, 
without blinking an eye, we are an international company. We have people 

Chapter 12 | Boris Veldhuijzen van Zanten: The Next Web 
 
160  
working for us that we’ve never seen before. I wouldn’t recognize them in 
the street, but they’ve been working for us for the past two years in places 
I’ve never been to. And there’s no problem at all, there’s no challenge. It 
just works. 
Santos: And will you continue to start this small, fast experiment in your 
company all the time, or do you think one day you’ll just focus on integrat-
ing one big, large corporation? 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: Well, we think of The Next Web as an umbrella 
company under which we can do whatever we want. So it’s very exciting to 
have a blog that reaches the whole world, and being able to use that to pro-
mote your own stuff, to host events, to visit people everywhere in the 
world. And it’s great to have the TNW labs, which is the name of the incuba-
tor, where we can just start our own projects. And if one weekend I think 
we should really do this, I’m in a position where I can build my own proto-
type. And if it works, I’ll launch it on the next web blog and get the develop-
ers in pretty quickly. 
So I don’t think I’ll ever work on just one thing. I really like that we’re able 
to do more than one thing in this one big company. 
Santos: How do you manage to keep so many balls in the air? Because 
there’s always so much things going on. 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: Well, the trick is to have great people who 
manage everything. The one big misconception with starting entrepreneurs is 
that they sometimes think, “We’re going to start our own company, we’re 
going to hire a lot of people, we’ll be successful.” But the whole thing is that 
hiring great people is the biggest challenge. And every person you hire has a 
huge impact on the direction of the company and the atmosphere of the 
company, and how innovative you’re going to be. So I think the thing that 
makes great companies is just hiring great people. So we’re always looking 
for new people who are entrepreneurial, who fit our company profile, and 
then we build companies based on these people. 
Coming up with new ideas is really simple, and building something that works 
is a bit simple too. But then finding someone who can make this company 
big, that’s the real challenge. 
Santos: What advice would you give to a new entrepreneur? 
Veldhuijzen van Zanten: I would say “just do it.” And that’s a simple thing 
to say, but it’s the biggest challenge for a lot of people. Most people say that 
they want to be an entrepreneur, but don’t actually start and they’re stuck 
with just wanting to be an entrepreneur. And if you think about being an  

European Founders at Work 
 
161  
entrepreneur and things you want to work on, then usually you’ve got a 
whole bunch of reasons why you cannot start today. Because you’ll say “I 
first need funding.” Why do you need funding? Because I want to build the 
whole thing. Why do you want to build the whole thing? Because I want to 
make a great first impression. And then you think that’s a whole bunch of 
reasons, just excuses, not to start today. 
But if you bring your idea down to the essence of the idea, and start learn-
ing to program today, then you can be a good enough programmer within a 
month to build a simple version of your service, and then you can see if 
your friends like it. And if your friends like it, they’ll tell their friends, and 
within forty-eight hours you’ve got more users than you could have hoped 
for. Because that’s how viral growth works. 
So I always try to get people, to persuade people to just get started, and 
don’t think about how it could be better. Just take away all the limits that 
keep you from starting today. 

C H A P T E R 
13 
Reshma Sohoni 
Seedcamp 
Reshma Sohoni is the CEO and co-founder of Seedcamp. She co-founded the 
program in 2007 with Saul Klein and it has been considered the top European 
accelerator in 2011.  
Seedcamp is an organization to accelerats startups by connecting entrepreneurs 
with a network of seed investors, serial entrepreneurs, product experts  such as 
HR specialists, marketers, lawyers, recruiters, journalists and venture capitalists. It 
acts as a micro seed fund and it invests during mini Seedcamp events that are 
held all over Europe. Its flagship event is Seedcamp Week which is held in London 
in September. Following Seedcamp events, startups that received investment get 
support for 12 months. Seedcamp’s standard investment is €50k. 
Reshma holds a MBA from INSEAD and a dual undergraduate degrees in Engi-
neering and Business from the University of Pennsylvania. Prior to Seedcamp 
Reshma worked as part of the Venture team at 3i. 
 
Pedro Santos: Where did the actual idea for Seedcamp come from and 
how did you implement it? How did it start? 
Reshma Sohoni: Saul [Klein], had been watching what was happening in 
the US. And he had been noodling around some ideas in his head and named 
this idea, Seedcamp. It ultimately became much bigger than, probably, even 
he had in mind. It was his idea very much, and I, at the time, was at 3i and Iit 
wasn’t a great fit for me. I really wanted to do things really early-stage and 
they were doing things more later-stage and moving more later-stage. 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 13 | Reshma Sohoni: Seedcamp 
 
164  
I just had very simple ideas around, “Why isn’t there a place where people 
can really mentor and meet entrepreneurs?” and “Why is it that every time 
you see an entrepreneur for the first time, it’s when they’re coming to pitch 
to you?” 
Why isn’t it just a conversation? And so you could bounce ideas back and 
forth and then get to know them over a few weeks and then have them 
pitch. 3i had a huge office building and people would leave work at six p.m. 
and I just thought, “Well, that’s a waste of space. Isn’t there something you 
can do with all this office space? 
Maybe have start-ups apply for spots on a calendar system, using tungle.me 
or whatever, just so we can set up some time for mentoring? And I would 
be happy to spend a few hours a week doing that. 
So these were all ideas in my head and I met Saul through Michael Arrington 
very briefly, but as we were just having a conversation, I think he realized he 
and I had quite similar kinds of thoughts, though I didn’t put a name to them. 
I thought he was really visionary in some of the things that he was thinking 
about. So, when he came around to talk to different investors about Seed-
camp, and it was just a few PowerPoint slides, I casually mentioned, “Hey, I’m 
happy to work on it as much as you want outside of regular work hours.” 
As it happened, very quickly after I decided to, basically, leave 3i. And I think 
3i was quite happy with me leaving, as well. But they said, “Why don’t we 
support you for the next six months? You seem to enjoy this more, why 
don’t we support you for the next six months on kicking this off?” 
So, as it happens, a bunch of us basically met up several times over the next 
few weeks and the ideas started to take much more shape into a longer- 
term program. I think the original idea, even Saul had, was a summer kind of 
a start-up program. So something very much long-term and I really wanted 
to do something like that long-term. 
It started to take shape like that and, basically, in a very, very intense six 
weeks, we got some funds together, we got the web site developed, we got 
the application system up. Those were the three core things: the app sys-
tem, the web site, and the investors, the core investors. 
Santos: Yeah. So it was really quick. How much time before the actual 
launch of the first program in 2007? 
Sohoni: I think just about eight weeks before, or something like that. One 
of the biggest things that I really wanted to do was, I felt that conferences 
are really great, but they’re often VIPs up on stage and the entrepreneurs 

European Founders at Work 
 
165  
and a lot of people who want to talk to the VIPs are in the audience. I 
wanted to flip that around. I wanted it to be the entrepreneurs as VIPs and 
such, and also the mentors as VIPs, but I wanted them to be on the other 
side of the table almost. That’s why the format is very much like the entre-
preneurs are the center of gravity and the mentors rotate from one to an-
other around that center of gravity. 
Santos: And this first six weeks that you had, did you come to the model 
that you are following still today, or did it evolve even more after that? 
Sohoni: Sometimes when you’re sort of thinking through problems for a 
long time, often if you hit on something that looks like a solution, sometimes 
it’s actually very, very good. We haven’t really played around with the core 
elements because I think they came from a very good place in our heads and 
our hearts about putting entrepreneurs in the center of gravity. So a bunch 
of those ideas we haven’t changed.  
The investors we have in Seedcamp are very relevant investors because in 
eighty percent of the cases, when the company raises follow-on funding, at 
least one Seedcamp investor is involved. So a lot of those core tenets and 
things we really believed in, we haven’t changed and haven’t needed to 
change. 
Santos: Okay, let’s break it down. That initial, very intense period, where 
most of the things were done, how big was the team then? Was it only you 
and Saul or did you have more people? 
Sohoni: In terms of team and operations, yeah, it was just Saul and me. But 
I think you can’t discount all the other early investors that came on board, 
and you have Venrex, Eden Ventures, Atlas Ventures, and Robin [Klein], ob-
viously with Saul, they really got in there early. Having those few guys early 
on to say, “No matter what, we’re putting some money on this and we’re 
going to make it happen.” 
It has a huge impact of galvanizing the community. Index, Atomico were real-
ly the first ones. They were just phenomenal in helping get things off the 
ground. So knowing I could really rely on them to pitch in and help made us 
look like we were several people. Each of them were helping part time, and I 
was, of course, doing it full-time. Our early advisory board as well, Paul Bird, 
Sara Murray, Jason Goodman, Paul Birch, Sumon Sandhu and a few of those 
people were really great people. 
Santos: So the investors, if I understand correctly, they basically felt the 
same problem that you were trying to solve and they were very easy to 
convince to actually help you going forward. Correct? 

Chapter 13 | Reshma Sohoni: Seedcamp 
 
166  
Sohoni: Yeah, I think some of them continue to be. Eden Ventures, the 
other guys I mentioned, just continue to be leading edge and visionary and 
want to support new innovations. It’s great to have those kinds of investors 
in Europe. 
Santos: How about the mentor’s network? How did you build that up? 
Sohoni: At the beginning I think, I obviously had a smaller network back in 
2007, because I came from Vodafone really before that, so definitely in the 
venture ecosystem my network was smaller. So we really had to rely a lot on 
this advisory board and also the investor group to help with their networks 
and their portfolio companies. And Niklas Zennstrom from Skype was—
having just started Atomico at the time—was great to have as one of the 
biggest success stories in Europe and really get behind Seedcamp, as well. 
So just having Brent Hoberman, as well, I mean, having people, Marc Sam-
wer, Brent Hoberman, having people like that who are super 
well-recognized and lending their name to this at the beginning was abso-
lutely very, very helpful. 
Santos: How many mentors did you have in the beginning? 
Sohoni: Such a good question. I think, I’m sure we at least had a hundred 
or a couple of hundred? 
Santos: Really? 
Sohoni: Yeah. 
Santos: That’s an amazing number for such a little… 
Sohoni: Time. Absolutely. Absolutely. At least a hundred and fifty, I want to 
say, maybe not more than that, but definitely around one hundred and fifty. 
Santos: When you launched the actual web site to get applications in, you 
already had some investors on board, some mentors on board, I suppose? 
Sohoni: Exactly. 
Santos: So, how did you actually spread the word to convince the entre-
preneurs to apply for the program? 
Sohoni: Folks like Spark PR and Ballou PR also came onboard very early as 
supporters. They have their huge networks; Ballou in France particularly, 
Spark PR in the US and UK. What we did was really reach out to Tech-
Crunch and FT [Financial Times] became big partners early on and we just 
worked through those networks of bloggers and journalists and writers and 
thought leaders in local communities to help spread the word. We continue 

European Founders at Work 
 
167  
to use those same channels today. So, once again, we’ve grown that, of 
course, but we’ve stayed very connected and true to the initial folks, like the 
bloggers, etc., who helped us spread the word. 
Santos: And how many applications did you have in the first program com-
pared to now? Do you get many more applications now that it’s a known 
brand than in beginning? 
Sohoni: Yeah. I think it’s grown almost like ten times. 
Santos: That’s a big difference.  
Sohoni: Huge. 
Santos: How different is the process of setting up a program, now that 
you’ve done four years of it, against this first one? Is it much more stream-
lined, organized, the same? 
Sohoni: Definitely. Sort of the beauty of what influenced in that first event, 
and we have it still to this day, is we don’t use a fancy stage. This is an event 
for start-ups and start-up mentors and it’s got to have a bit of organized 
chaos. So we continue to have a bit of that element to it, but, absolutely, it’s 
become very much a military operation. In the sense of some of the basics. 
We can see weeks and months in advance what needs to happen. Little 
things that now mentors notice, three or four years later, that happened 
like clockwork because we got that process in order and they notice that. 
But the energy and a little bit of being easy-going and that mentality you def-
initely need to have. Because you need to have that openness to say, “Wow, 
here’s a disruptive start-up and I’m going to bend my mind around what 
they think about the world.” 
So in order to have that: you’ve got to talk openly and the ambiance needs 
to be gung-ho, quite energetic. That’s why we work a lot with universities 
and, generally, tech spaces, rather than any sort of fancy space. 
Santos: Until now, in the history of Seedcamp, what were the main chal-
lenges or difficulties that you had to overcome? Or that you still have? 
Sohoni: I think it’s people who don’t know us and it’s their impressions. 
You’re kind of always hoping that the material you communicate and things 
you communicate are well-understood by people. But, every now and then, 
it jars you when someone hasn’t quite understood it the way you thought 
you communicated something. Those are challenges. That’s a lot around 
communications and content and we continue to work through that. 
Then, in terms of start-ups, as well, we’re always trying to make sure we’re 
always attracting the best of the best potential start-ups to apply. That’s  

Chapter 13 | Reshma Sohoni: Seedcamp 
 
168  
always, of course, challenging. Making sure they really understand our value 
proposition across all the different facets in which we operate to help them. 
And, of course, just grow and raise their next round’s funding or finding cus-
tomers or distribution channels. Those three things are probably the most 
challenging things. But I imagine it makes sense to you. 
Santos: They make sense. But Seedcamp is a very small team. How can you 
keep up with all of startups? How can you help after all they go through the 
program? 
Sohoni: Yes, actually, we have some fifty start-ups that have been funded by 
Seedcamp now. The help you give, there’s two elements to it. There’s some 
very immediate help in the three to six months after they win Seedcamp 
[win the Seedcamp 50K investment] that they most often need. And it’s a 
lot about the way they think about building their business and getting them 
set up to be able to bring on a team and bring on investors and bring on 
business. So getting a lot of that set up and cleaned up and all that. There’s a 
lot of intensive work in those first three months after we fund. Obviously, 
that has a cycle of its own. We never completely leave those businesses. I 
still, in other people I’m meeting, whether it’s larger corporations, indus-
tries, I always run into people where a company from 2007 is as relevant to 
them as a company from 2011. 
So we never miss helping them out. We help them out every chance we can 
get, but when they do raise follow-on funding, whether that’s with angels or 
VCs, that’s the whole purpose of angels and VCs coming on board, is invest-
ing money and investing a lot of their time and energy into it. In a way, 
they’re graduating from Seedcamp and into the ecosystem and realm of 
these angel and VC investors. 
Santos: Talking about ecosystem, how different is the ecosystem in Europe 
from the beginning when you started? You were one of the first accelera-
tors of this type in Europe, but now, there are quite a few already. 
Sohoni: We are very happy with the fact that the ecosystem’s developed 
hugely in four years. I see much more cross-border deals, cross-border in-
teraction, the composition of teams being much more across different geog-
raphies, mentors, as well, going across different countries. Whether it’s in-
vesting or mentoring, or advising in some way, companies from very differ-
ent sectors and different geographies. One of the big goals that we had was 
trying to break down borders. I think that’s come a long way in the past 
four years. So I definitely see that. 
Secondly, the quality of entrepreneurs we see continues to improve. I still 
think there’s a long way to go with entrepreneurs in Europe, kind of a 

European Founders at Work 
 
169  
commercial sense for things, and also usability design of products, but, again, 
from where we started off four years ago, it’s a huge improvement. 
Thirdly, ambition. You definitely see entrepreneurs being extremely ambi-
tious. You might have seen the announcement Erply made. One of the com-
panies from our 2009 group, that’s doing extremely well in point-of-sale. 
They made a huge announcement this week and are going after some pretty 
big guys. It’s good to see that kind of ambition. 
Santos: And that ambition was not as visible in the beginning? 
Sohoni: Yeah, I think so. 
Santos: You think that’s changed? 
Sohoni: We hear that from the guys we’ve backed. Now that they’ve be-
come role models in their own local geographies, it’s amazing to see them 
inspire future entrepreneurs and I hear those stories over and over again. 
Santos: Going back a bit, when you started, Y Combinator and TechStars 
already existed, and in the blog post when as you mentioned, Saul was think-
ing of the idea, he actually looked into them. In the beginning, in those talks 
that you were defining the model for Seedcamp, did you think to follow, 
more or less, the same model? Why did you choose different values, a differ-
ent model, the Mini Seedcamps? What led to this difference? 
Sohoni: Inspiration always comes from both seeing things that trigger ideas 
in your head. But I think you have to be a bit smarter and apply them in a 
way that makes sense to whatever problem you’re applying them to. So we 
tweaked a lot of things because the cross-border issue was huge. So you re-
ally needed to make sure you’re going into local geographies and we couldn’t 
just sit in London and say, “Come to London, or come to Berlin, or come to 
Paris.” We really needed to work hard and go into each and every regional 
geography across Europe. 
Because the fragmentation that everyone talks about, and the border prob-
lem, the cultural border problem, across Europe is rife. That’s one of the 
huge changes we made in applying the Seedcamp model. The second is, as I 
said, in Europe I kept seeing such a class difference, almost, between money 
and entrepreneurs, between VCs and entrepreneurs, between the serial en-
trepreneurs and first-time entrepreneurs, and we wanted to break down 
that social caste system. 
So having a much more laid back and almost a university atmosphere for the 
events was really crucial, and, again, putting entrepreneurs at the center of 
gravity really was a big shift in culture here. 

Chapter 13 | Reshma Sohoni: Seedcamp 
 
170  
So I think that was crucial to do as well. One of the biggest things we’ve 
done is we invest per company three times as much as any other, Y Combi-
nator or TechStars, do. And we take roughly the same amount of equity that 
they do. That was the other thing. Companies here need a longer runway to 
raise follow-on funding. I think that’s probably changed in the last four years, 
but at the time we started, they needed a longer runway and you couldn’t 
just invest $18,000. [laughs] It would definitely not have the same result. So 
that was the big difference, as well. We changed an originally inspirational 
idea in fundamentally different ways in order to apply it to Europe. 
Santos: Interesting the point of the €50,000. Why do you offer more than 
other accelerators? 
Sohoni: Yeah, in Europe, generally, on average, it takes them twice as long 
to raise half the money. 
Santos: Yeah. But you also tour with your start-ups in the US, correct? 
Sohoni: Yes, and that has had a great positive impact. Because, again, trying 
to break down borders, it’s allowed US and European investors to come to-
gether and invest in European start-ups. For our companies, it’s certainly 
given them access to US investors and US businesses. 
Santos: Now going a bit more into the details behind Seedcamp. Seedcamp 
is also a company, so it has to pay its own investments. If we look at it, 
you’re taking the same equity, you’re offering more money, and you’re even 
touring with the teams that go through the program in the US. Is that com-
petitive in the long run against programs like Y Combinator, TechStars, or 
other things in Europe, or is it still an unproven model? 
Sohoni: Granted, yes, it’s more funding per business, but we’re not in here 
to build very small businesses. We have a global ambition and it’s building 
globally relevant and globally-sized businesses. And in that sense you’re 
coming in quite early, right? And you’re coming in for small amounts of eq-
uity, but you’re definitely coming in quite early. So, I still think, in terms of 
return on investment, it’s very attractive. 
Our view is what you have to do is support these guys in order that they 
can survive long enough to get the next round of funding and be in a posi-
tion to bring on the best people, as well. I think if that bet works, then I 
think the larger bet on whether you’re building global businesses works, and 
then the model works, as well. 
But in terms of all the costs you mentioned, that’s why our sponsors are  
essential—it’s sort of unique. Because we do have events. We have event 
sponsors and annual sponsors. Microsoft and Google have been our biggest 

European Founders at Work 
 
171  
sponsors from very early on, so they deserve a lot of recognition for being 
with us for the past three-plus years. 
In recent days, PayPal has been very active. Qualcomm, as well, will be com-
ing on board as sponsors. The sponsors are really helpful to us and they 
know that, as well. 
Santos: In your role as mentor of a start-up. What mistakes have you seen 
constantly being made by the start-ups that go through the program?  
Sohoni: One is, very much, around momentum. One of the biggest mistakes 
is not leveraging the momentum that they get, from either a Mini Seedcamp 
or Seedcamp Week, into something longer term. Where they kind of go 
back to what feels more natural to them or go away into their vacuum and 
just continue to code and work on their product without really leveraging 
the big burst of momentum that they’ve gotten. So that’s one of my biggest 
things. Where we see companies succeed and do well, whether that’s like 
uberVU, Zemanta, Erply, Base Kit, is to really take that momentum and really 
push it to the next level. And Profitero, Editd, I mean, all those guys really 
take that momentum. Garmz, which is now called Lookk. 
It’s incredible to watch them operate vs some of the others who kind of go 
hide away again. I just don’t understand that. [laughs] It’s crazy to me. I want 
to shake them, sometimes. 
So, that’s probably one of the biggest mistakes. The second one, also, I see, 
is building the team. If they’re quite scared to part with something ... like 
when they’re quite scared to part with equity or bringing on mentors who 
become advisors into the business. And just being quite, sort of, closed with 
their equity. I go back to like, “Do you want to be a big fish in a small pond 
or a big fish in a big pond?” In order to do that you need to bring others on. 
That’s your team. That’s your investors. That’s your advisors. That’s several 
people in the ecosystem. Again, it’s not just about you and one or two oth-
er people. 
So, that’s the other, second, kind of mistake I see, is where they’re too 
closed with their equity and they try to do everything. One or two people 
try to do everything when, as they’re growing, when they start seeing initial 
growth and growing fast, they just don’t bring on people fast enough. 
Then, thirdly, not understanding your users and what they’re telling you. And 
measuring everything and making intelligence or sense out of everything 
you’re measuring as well. That’s like the third mistake I see—it’s just not re-
ally listening. And not just not listening, not even asking users in the first 
place. So that’s probably a third big mistake I see, as well. 

Chapter 13 | Reshma Sohoni: Seedcamp 
 
172  
Santos: As you identify these mistakes, do you have ways that you try to 
help the start-ups, specifically, with these mistakes? Is it more general? Will 
the mentoring focus a lot on teams trying to avoid exactly this kind of  
mistakes? 
Sohoni: What we do is pair the new guys with some of the older Seedcamp 
companies as alumni. So that…the alumni guys can share their war stories 
with them and talk about how to use the momentum.  
Santos: And for you personally, what were the biggest lessons from creat-
ing Seedcamp? 
Sohoni: I think the biggest thing was probably that if you have just enough 
of the right positive people around you, you can create something very, very 
big. Because there were loads of people who were quite negative about 
Seedcamp—or just saying that it won’t work. There aren’t good European 
entrepreneurs. There aren’t good European investors. There aren’t good 
mentors, so there are a bunch of people who had lots of negative things to 
say, and more about the eco-system than about specifically what we were 
starting. 
But I think the key to me, it was pretty incredible to have just a few of the 
right people early on and then, four years later, it’s quite staggering what 
we’ve built. 
Santos: How do you react to the negative people? How do you keep your-
self positive? 
Sohoni: Good question! [laughs] It’s hard sometimes. No, again, some of 
those successful people, you see how they’re always coming up with new 
things and making successes out of those. I don’t think it’s about surround-
ing yourself with just positive people, because they might be very unsuccess-
ful positive people. But surround yourself with positive, successful people. 
And we measure ourselves constantly, and we keep ourselves honest, so 
they know what we’re accomplishing and we’re measuring ourselves against. 
So more of those successful positive people start to come to us as well, and 
so it’s really about that kind of cycle, keeping that cycle going. And you’ll al-
ways have a bunch of negative people, as well. 
Santos: Can you give me an example of things that you would use to meas-
ure yourself in the beginning? You, as a team? 
Sohoni: Yes. I mean, when we started four years ago, it was just how many 
mentors, how to see mentor growth and seeing number of applications 
growth. I think now, four years later, we’re seeing where we rate mentors, 
actually. We look at the quality of the top-notch mentors who are coming, 

European Founders at Work 
 
173  
not just mentors, but we’re attracting the best mentors, and we also don’t 
necessarily look at number of applications, but we look at the rate. We  
have judging scores, and so we look at how high those scores were per city 
as well. 
So, obviously, you move from…when you have zero you look at quantity, 
and when you have quantity you really start to go deeper into quality. 
Santos: How do you actually measure quality in a start-up in such an initial 
phase? 
Sohoni: In terms of our start-ups, proving quality is, certainly, how many of 
them raise follow-on funding and how many of them raise follow-on funding 
from our investors, which we think are very good investors. And then, how 
many of them break the million revenue barrier, how many of them are ge-
nerating revenue, how many are profitable, and so forth. So, we measure all 
of that. 
Santos: And what were your biggest success cases until now? And why do 
you think they made that difference? 
Sohoni: One of them was, certainly, Mobclix, which sold for a little over fif-
ty million. Just, again, super…quite a complementary, comprehensive team 
to begin with. They all brought in complementary skill sets. Most of their 
board members actually came from people they met at Seedcamp Week.  
So they had a very international advisory board and they really leveraged 
those guys. 
And then they were based in the US, they really leveraged the kind of cross-
border connections really well. And then, in the US itself, it just really kind 
of drove their business hard. 
And because each one had such a distinctive skill set, yet they were able to 
get along very well, they could just work on so many different dimensions of 
the business, right? 
So, those guys are great. I see the same with Zemanta as it’s been growing, 
with Erply and then uberVU and MyBuilder. MyBuilder, as early as 2007, was 
doing well and they'll have a very healthy profit this year, along with Rent-
MineOnline. 
So, these guys just sort of said, “All right. I’ve got a certain momentum and 
now I’m just going to build on that.” Like MyBuilder, for example, got brilliant. 
.They got some angel investors on board and they actually got the largest 
building company in the UK as a strategic investor and Channel Four, which  
is one of the largest media companies in the UK, as a strategic investor. 

Chapter 13 | Reshma Sohoni: Seedcamp 
 
174  
It’s a brilliant move because they need to get into the hearts and souls of a 
very, very broad audience that, as a TV viewer knows the building company, 
right? 
So, it was very smart, the kinds of investors they brought on. So, they ha-
ven’t raised any VC money, but they raised the right strategic money. So 
these guys all made very different decisions, but they made them quite spe-
cific to their businesses. 
Santos: Okay. Not a long time ago you were named the number-one ac-
celerator in Europe. How did that feel? 
Sohoni: It’s nice. 
Santos: [laughs] 
Sohoni: I wouldn’t want to be number two, so number one is great. Hon-
estly, it’s great, right? Of course, it’s great. Like I said, I don’t want to be 
number two. I think, ultimately, we’ll be judged by “did we accelerate busi-
nesses towards becoming billion-dollar businesses, towards becoming global 
businesses, and would it have taken them longer to get there and would 
they have even gotten there if we didn’t exist?” 
When we have those kinds of businesses, hopefully soon one day, I think 
that’s when we’ll know if we’re the number-one accelerator in Europe or if 
we’ve done a great job or not. I wrote this in the blog post about three and 
a half years [ago]. I think for some of the very basic things, we’ve already hit 
a homerun. 
Bringing the ecosystem together, giving the ecosystem a platform in Europe 
to meet once a month and really drive businesses to the next level, we’ve 
absolutely hit it out of the park and we’re extremely proud of that. As an 
economic model, the accelerator, there’s still time to tell. 
Santos: What advice would you give to the readers of this book? 
Sohoni: I think a couple things maybe. One is educate, read, be curious, get 
inspired, apply your inspiration in a differentiated, novel, useful way. Sec-
ondly, that it’s about bridging borders and it’s about working across different 
cultures and borders and so Europe is a great place to start-up for that. 
Seedcamp is a great place to do that because we don’t believe in staying very 
closed or just within certain geographies. We really try to work across US, 
Europe, Asia as well. So those are the two things. Really try to break those 
barriers, break those borders, and take inspiration from things around you 
and be curious, but apply it to problems in a smart, differentiated, useful way. 
 

C H A P T E R 
14 
Ilya Segalovich 
Yandex 
Ilya Segalovich is co-founder of Yandex, the leading search engine in Russian-
speaking countries. The roots of Yandex trace back to a company called Arkadia, 
which in the early 1990s developed software featuring full-text search supporting 
the Russian language. In 1993, Segalovich and Arkady Volozh came up with the 
word “Yandex” to describe their search technologies. The web site, Yandex.ru, was 
launched in 1997 and in 2000 Yandex was incorporated as a standalone company. 
In May 2011, Yandex raised $1.3 billion in an initial public offering on NASDAQ. 
It was the biggest IPO for a dot-com since Google went public in 2004.  
  
Pedro Santos: How did Yandex actually start? How did you start with the 
idea of a search, and how did it evolve to become Yandex.ru? 
Ilya Segalovich: The idea wasn’t mine. It was my very close friend from 
the  school, Arkady Volozh. He was a software engineer in a Soviet kind of 
institute. They were doing something like building pipelines, and one of the 
things that he was appointed to do was create a patent database. At that 
time, he had a friend working at the Academy of Sciences Computer Center 
in Moscow. They were working on language processing software for Rus-
sian. Actually, it was a thesaurus that would include allof the words in the 
Russian language. He came up with the idea of applying this linguistic soft-
ware to the database he was creating. 
The friend’s name, incidentally, was also Arkady, so calling their start-up 
Arkadia was only natural. Arkadia is a land of happiness in ancient Greece, or 
something like that. 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 14 | Ilya Segalovich: Yandex 
 
176  
Actually, I wasn’t part of the very early efforts. I came into it all on a perma-
nent basis in 1990, though. I started by doing small things in ’89. But in the 
late 1990s, I was already part of this team and was helping with shipping the 
first product they made. It was a search program for patent databases. It was 
very nice software for MS-DOS. Actually, probably the first software that 
was able to perform search on a small MS-DOS computer using a hundred- 
thousand-word dictionary. 
It was quite successful. We were selling this software for about two or three 
years, until probably 1993 when we ran out of money and we couldn’t sell 
the original product anymore. We were developing new versions of that 
product, but we couldn’t sell it, because by that time the industry had col-
lapsed. 
The patent industry of the Soviet Union was huge, because in the seventies 
and eighties, Russians were actually inventing everything from scratch. Every-
thing from shoes to rockets. From 1991 to 1994, the country’s industry had 
been disintegrating, first in engineering, and then in patent ability, so we were 
able to sell next to nothing. 
We almost dissolved. Luckily, Arkady is a great entrepreneur, and he started 
two companies in ’89. One company was started with his computer genius, 
and the other one he started with his friend from Boston, who was helping 
him to import hardware. Actually computers, PCs. 
Later, they changed from simple PCs to more advanced things like equip-
ment for computer telephony and wireless networks. They were trying to 
promote new technologies in the mid and late nineties. I joined this larger 
hardware company, along with some other people who worked on the soft-
ware, when our companies were kind of acquired, so we didn’t go away, but 
stayed with Arkadia and became a small part of this bigger company— which 
wasn’t all that big of course, but it was steadily growing. 
My idea was to make a demonstration product. Take some classical text and 
use it for a nice shell for Windows. We started to sell the Russian Bible in 
’95. It was a nice, very well-designed, product to search , and it also show-
cased our capabilities in language processing and search. 
That product got us some orders to create similar products, also for Win-
dows. I think that in ’96, after we had got the internet in ’95, we understood 
that it was time to go wider than that and start making real search for large 
data. In ’96, we created software to search web sites, and we called it 
Yandex. That was the launch of Yandex. Not Yandex.ru, but Yandex as soft-
ware to sell, to use as a search tool on a web site. 

European Founders at Work 
 
177  
In ’97, it was still in CompTek, a large hardware company. In ’97, we launched 
Yandex.ru, and the first idea for Yandex.ru was to promote the software and 
increase sales. The idea was, “Okay. We are so good in search, we have rele-
vance, we have language processing technologies. We have great, deep, nice, 
very fast, very clean results. Let’s just show people how good we are so that 
they start buying.” 
Santos: The software. 
Segalovich: The software, right. Actually, we had been using this model, I 
think, from ’97 to ’98 at least, and only in ’99, did we really switch to an ad-
vertising model, and started to seek venture capitalists. I think late in ’99, we 
found venture capitalists. They were running around in all markets, because 
then there was a huge boom, as you remember. Maybe NASDAQ was at 
about five thousand or something like that. We found investors late in ’99, 
and officially got the actual investments in March 2000. A few days before the 
first NASDAQ crash. And then a new story started. 
Santos: One question about the venture capitalists—where are they from? 
From Europe, from Russia, from the US? 
Segalovich: It was a mixed team led by Elena Ivashentseva. Baring Vostok 
Capital Partners and ruNet Holdings. Actually, there were two bodies that 
included different people and different groups of people. It wasn’t a single 
person. It was two groups of Americans, Europeans, Russians, all kinds. It 
was two teams. But both leaders were Russian. The person who made the 
decision and led this investment was Elena Ivashentseva, she’s Russian. 
BVCP is Baring Vostok Capital Partners. It’s a very successful investment 
fund in Russia. One of the most successful. 
Santos: What were the main lessons and challenges that you learned in just 
initial phase of Yandex? 
Segalovich: That was quite a hard time, and several things are important, 
and I think every small start-up experiences this. I think one of them is when 
you create a software product, you have to learn how to sell it, you have to 
learn how to make it a product. It’s a very basic skill. I think every engineer 
has to try that at least once, to sell the software he created, regardless of 
how bad it is. No matter how unpolished your product is, you have to try to 
explain why it is good for someone else.   
I was doing all kinds of things, like technical support, installation, distribution. 
Lots and lots of different things, including MS-DOS, Windows, then FreeBSD. 
And if you do all this stuff, it helps you understand what the product is and 
how to make it better. 

Chapter 14 | Ilya Segalovich: Yandex 
 
178  
And then the important thing when we started selling was that we had a 
very, very small audience because the Russian internet was quite small. But 
very soon, I think maybe in a year or half a year, we understood how impor-
tant it is to learn from interaction with users. We started a web forum and 
people started commenting on each feature we launched, and we worked 
hard to create the feeling that we’re constantly changing. We were con-
stantly updating the product. 
I think during the first six months, we changed our search about every two 
weeks. We had a very small team, maybe six people or something like that. 
But we were so eager to interact, try it and listen to people. In the early 
stages, you have to constantly change your product and see how people re-
act and how they like it. I think that was very important for us. 
And I think later, in 1999 or 2000, we had to choose between doing only 
technology or doing only web search, artificial intelligence, language process-
ing and provide search capabilities to other portals, or alternatively market 
ourselves as a portal. It was clear for us that the portal model has a huge ad-
vantage when you have servers, like, service interaction servers.  
So, without user feedback, we understood, we just couldn’t make it perfect. 
We couldn’t make it a really good product. So that was one of the things 
that we learned in a very early stage. 
Santos: And how was the move from the MS-DOS and Windows platform 
to the internet?  
Segalovich: Fortunately, we were trained to be quite perfect. We didn’t 
want to be dependent on Windows. We never had a code style that re-
quired using direct Windows system calls, something like that. We were 
writing C++ and we believed in algorithms more than in integration with the 
operating system. So when in ’96 we had to port from Windows and DOS 
to UNIX, it wasn’t a big deal. It took us just a few days. 
Santos: Days? 
Segalovich: Believe me or not. Several days to port everything to a 
FreeBSD in ’96. Yes, seriously. We were writing quite clean C++ code, very, 
very focused. Another example, I think it was ’98 or something like that, I 
don’t remember exactly. Because, as you remember, we were trying to sell 
search software for web sites, right? So we had Yandex.ru as a … 
Santos: A storefront. 
Segalovich: Yes. There was a company that had a server site more popu-
lar than Yandex. It was called InfoArt. They asked us to give them a search 

European Founders at Work 
 
179  
feature for their site. So we were trying to give them a site search, but they 
were purists. They were running Suns, okay? Sun Solaris. And they were 
saying, “No, no, no. No Linux, no FreeBSD, we accept only Sun code.” So 
it took me, I think, a couple of days to port everything into Sun, though Sun 
has that weird bit order. So with this weird bit order, it took me another 
couple of days to understand it. It’s really weird. 
I think we kept a big part of the code constantly ported to Windows. I know 
some people at Yandex aren’t happy about it, but we keep the Windows 
version, we keep the Sun version, we keep our code quite task centric, not 
operating system centric. If you do task-centric code, try to avoid depend-
ency on lower levels; that’s our kind of motto. This might not apply to every-
thing now, because now we have eleven hundred engineers writing code, so I 
cannot speak for everyone. But I believe a big part of it is still about writing 
algorithms and writing good code, not writing for a particular platform.  
Santos: Where does the name Yandex comes from? 
Segalovich: I think it was in late ’92 when I finished the first version of my 
own Linux processing code. It wasn’t good, so we tried to sell that with no 
success. We were quite depressed and it was a very low moment, when I 
got some inspiration reading an algorithm book or something like that about 
how to do it. Very quickly, with the help of Arcady, who helped me with 
some code, we made a new version in two weeks. It wasn’t doing everything, 
but the ninety percent it did was amazing, really nice speed, with one thou-
sand words per second on MS-DOS, which was amazing. It was really good. 
We were so happy about it and very quickly, in two or three months, we 
were basically finishing all essential components to start text searches with 
this new core. I think it was in May when I told him how good what we had 
at that point was. He was very inspired and he asked me to come up with  
a name. 
At that time I didn’t have an apartment in Moscow. I was staying in the office. 
The office itself was also a rented apartment. So I slept at night in the office. 
And in the morning, I didn’t sleep. I was writing down the names. 
I wrote a huge list of names. The first one was Yandex. Then Arkady looked 
at it and suggested that the first letter should be Russian or something like 
that. So he liked it from the very beginning.1 
Generally, it was the inspiration in how good a product we had and finding 
an appropriate name. 
                                                
1 Ya means “me” in Russian, so the name can be loosely translated to “my index.” 

Chapter 14 | Ilya Segalovich: Yandex 
 
180  
Santos: Was Yandex hit by the internet bubble when it burst? 
Segalovich: Fortunately, no. I have to praise Elena, who was extremely 
tough. She was always on top of things, very focused, and didn’t let any of 
the smaller investors run away. She kept us from this trouble. We had the 
money secured and we were slowly burning it, of course, because in 2001 
and 2002, we still had to spend. But we were working hard on getting to the 
peak here. Up and up. 
I think in 2003 we already became profitable and it was good. But at some 
point in mid to late 2000, it was very critical. Because, for example, our 
competitors, Rambler and Aport, were hit very severely by the burst of the 
bubble. Investors ran away and they were cut out of money. Aport had no 
money. Rambler was really bad. They didn’t have money for development. 
In our case, we had that money in the bank and we could do whatever we 
wanted with it. We were very smart in not spending just like that, but spend-
ing really carefully and trying to get profitable and develop as many services 
as we could to create a server farm. It wasn’t a farm. It was like a rack or 
something like that. Several racks. 
I think in May or June we decided to spend some money on TV advertise-
ments. The idea was that no internet services had been advertised on TV in 
Russia until we did a commercial in May of 2000. That was a cool move, just 
to show that there is such a thing as the internet somewhere out there. 
People didn’t even really know what it was, but they already knew that name. 
The advertisement was very fun, very good. 
Santos: When you entered the internet phase of Yandex, you started as a 
storefront and then you went into the advertisement model. Did the busi-
ness model evolve even more or did it stay with the advertising model 
throughout its history? 
Segalovich: No, the original idea was to have banner advertisements, all big 
brands, and we hired people whose job would be specifically to attract, bring 
big brands to Yandex. And it didn’t work well, actually. Banner advertising 
wasn’t working well. At the same time, I think in late 1999 or maybe late 
2000, when GoTo became Overture and started serving ads on all big search 
engines. Later, I think Google started doing it on the side. That was a big in-
spiration for us because I think we started with copying GoTo and then 
Google, not in the sense of actually copycatting them, but understanding how 
important it was to use. The power of advertising, right?  
I think in the summer of 2001 we already had very simple search, keyword-
based advertising snippets. Then I think it took us about two years to  

European Founders at Work 
 
181  
understand that we could do an auction model. Also in 2001and 2002, there 
were almost no advertisers. The internet was very small. 
In 2003, that was the year when we switched to the auction model and that 
was a different model for us. In about two years we started context advertis-
ing, which was also very important, that was in about 2005, I think.  
Santos: How did the search algorithm and how did the technology evolve 
with time? How did you measure accuracy and improve the search results? 
Segalovich: We started, as you remember, very early. When we launched 
web site search in ’96, we had very simple relevance measurements. I think 
in ’97 we made the first big effort to improve search quality. We created a 
corpus and had something what we could call assessors. We didn’t call them 
this at that time, but we had some ratings for each document that we did, 
that our systems could find. Based on those statistics, we made our first 
search function that was more or less purely text-based. I think it incorpo-
rated maybe five different features. Later, we added link analysis. I think in 
2000 and 2001. Then we added some other features.  
I think in 2004, we started collecting a database of assessor ratings. We 
started using it effectively to tune our algorithms. But probably until 2006 or 
2007, we didn’t have that level of focused development for different features 
or machine learning on top of that. 
Why is that? It is, I think, one of the reasons we were better than other Rus-
sian search engines. None of the important search engines, none of them 
were incorporating Russian language until 2006. 
So we didn’t care, because they just couldn’t find fifty percent, at least half of 
the pages that we could, just using simple queries. Typing one word on 
Yandex you could find twice as many pages as on any other search engine.  
Google, I think they made their first attempts in 2006. Then in 2007 they 
added Russian morphology and Russian linguistics. It hurt us quite signifi-
cantly because we knew that in many search aspects we were worse. 
So we started to effectively develop every missing aspect of our search tech-
nolgy, including user behavior analysis, and increased our effort in extracting 
many other factors and features out of texts, links, URLs, user behavior, 
general statistics, site statistics, everything. 
From 2006 to 2008, we were working hard on improving both the number 
of features and the way we ‘taught’ our search function to return the results  
we needed. I think in 2009 we made a big step forward when we introduced 

Chapter 14 | Ilya Segalovich: Yandex 
 
182  
something we call MatrixNet, which is a very robust and very quick machine-
learning algorithm that is highly pluralized, both in learning and in computing. 
Currently, we are performing machine-learned search rankings using, I think, 
one thousand features and hundreds of thousands of matrixes. It is the 
equivalent of trees, if you are familiar with decision trees. But this is decision 
matrixes. 
Actually, that’s how we now rank. We work hard to look at search, not only 
purely in terms of relevance ratings, but also at others of its many aspects, 
such as freshness, actuality, authority, originality. We work hard to improve 
every aspect of search, basically using machine learning and incorporating 
new features, new factors, and so on. 
Santos: You mentioned that Google, when it entered, was a threat. 
Segalovich: Well, they entered our market in 2001, actually. They con-
quered the whole world in 2001 and 2002. 
Santos: Yes, but they failed to conquer Russia, even today. 
Segalovich: Yes, they did fail. Because we were quick enough to respond 
with all of thesearch quality that we have now. 
Santos: Did you ever consider going after Google in their own territory? 
To attack the American market? 
Segalovich: Well, one of the biggest problems here, as I see it, is brand 
perception and user perception of the brand. We are unfamiliar to users 
outside of the CIS2. We actually, of course, want to be outside of Russia 
sometimes. We have made several small steps. We are big in the Ukraine. 
Also, we are big in Kazakhstan. We want to try something that is totally not 
Russian. For example, what we did recently was we launched Yandex in Tur-
key  in September. This will be a very interesting experience for us, because 
we want to offer high-quality search and high-quality services, other services, 
and see how people will react, if they like it. 
Will we be able to advance in that market? To what degree will we be able 
to do it? If we are successful, it will be a good sign for us. Of course, we 
want to be bigger than just a Russian search engine, definitely. 
Santos: Yandex has an office in the Netherlands. Why? Do you have devel-
opment there? Do you have sales there? 
                                                
2 Commonwealth of Independent States. 

European Founders at Work 
 
183  
Segalovich: We have a data center, but it’s quite new. A longer story is 
that we are incorporated there. Our lawyers are there. It’s because they 
have so many different investors from all over the world. They considered an 
option to make appropriate legislation in Russia, but some Russian laws are a 
little underdeveloped, especially in terms of shareholder agreements and 
shareholders’ rights. So that’s why. The Netherlands are not better in terms 
of taxes. Not better than Russia at all. The only reason to have a mother 
company in the Netherlands is just to have better protection and better 
transparency internationally. Even in terms of IP law, it was more important 
to stay in the Netherlands. 
Santos: It was a matter of credibility to the foreign investors? 
Segalovich: Right. 
Santos: I actually thought when I saw it that you were thinking of expanding 
and maybe using the Netherlands as a trial base. 
Segalovich: No. We are thinking about some European countries, but cur-
rently we only have Yandex in Turkey, and we’ll see. I think for us, Turkey is 
a model [for] expansion to new, unfamiliar European countries. If we are 
successful in this country, then we can go somewhere else. 
Santos: You recently IPO’d on NASDAQ. Why not in the Russian stock 
market, or in a European stock market? For instance, the Dutch one? 
Segalovich: There is a simple explanation. There’s better visibility on 
NASDAQ—more investors, more people. We will be reviewed better 
there. It’s a question of business. Higher valuation and all this kind of thing. 
Very technical, not political. 
Santos: What are the major differences for the company, between being a 
private company that it was until now, and now that you’re a public-traded 
company? Did you have to make any big changes? 
Segalovich: There are several things that have changed. One of them is that 
we had a relatively high compensation plan. We were giving options to about 
ten percent of our employees, and many of them became wealthy people 
now. With the market price that they have now after the IPO, we have to 
change options to some other instrument. Because now everything is trans-
parent, the price is transparent, everyone knows the price of Yandex. Every-
one knows the option price. It’s not established once a year or something, at 
the board of directors meeting or something like that. It’s all transparent, so 
we can use it more freely to stimulate our people. 
Another thing is, of course, acquisitions of companies. It’s very transparent 
now, having this price established and everything. 

Chapter 14 | Ilya Segalovich: Yandex 
 
184  
There are some negative impacts, such as me having to sacrifice three weeks 
[of my time] for the IPO in May, and maybe a week or two later in the year 
or something like that. That’s not good. Fortunately, I do not look at the in-
dex at all. I have an app for that, but I never use it. Honestly, I don’t know 
what Yandex costs now. I don’t know the price. I believe some people are a 
little bit worried about this. It’s not good if they’re just looking at this thing. 
You have to work, you have to create a product, work on the core services 
and make them better. That’s the main purpose, not the index or something 
like that. 
Santos: What were the hardest challenges of Yandex’s history that you 
faced, in your opinion? How did you overcome them? 
Segalovich: Actually, because the story of Yandex is long, there are differ-
ent periods. Each period has its own hard time. In the early period, I think 
one of the hardest times was 1995, when we already had that Russian Bible 
search, and we had product orders, so we could develop things. But the 
mother company was much more successful. There was some pressure to 
stop development of this low-margin software and move everyone to hard-
ware sales. That was a very critical moment, and we managed to keep that 
part working. 
Santos: How did you convince the rest? What was the selling point? 
Segalovich: Just because I didn’t want to go into sales. I had good credibility 
from Arkadia and Arkady. I think he defended me from all other members of 
the board and all the other people who were really hesitating, really. They 
were not believing in the future of search at all back in 1995. They just didn’t 
know it would work out. 
Another moment was I think in late 1999, when we were close to getting in-
vestments. At that time, we knew the race was on. For example, Rambler 
got investments, and they had one of the best language processing companies 
in Russia joining the regional Rambler team. 
That was a very strong team that we were quite afraid of, and they were 
number one in search. We were probably a distant third or something like 
that. We were small. 
But we managed to grow from ten people to one hundred people in three 
months, and create maybe ten services in half a year. Very important serv-
ices. From email to hosting, parallel search, lots of things. That was very in-
tense development, extremely intense, and also a very inspiring time. 
In late 2000 we became number one. I think another critical moment was in 
2006 or 2007, when Google finally added Russian-language development. 

European Founders at Work 
 
185  
They started focussing on the Russian market. They created a great Russian 
spellchecker, with a great search term suggestion [mechanism], everything. 
They were really focused on Russian search. At that time, we had to expand 
from maybe fifty search engineers to maybe three hundred. We did it in a 
year and a half and really reorganized the team because the original team had 
just me and some other guys. We were unable to develop and hire at the 
required pace. 
Everything had to be restructured. Without hesitation, we had to expand 
several times more, and really work hard without knowing where to go.  
Santos: When you went from ten engineers to one hundred engineers, how 
did you keep the culture in the company? With such growth, how do you 
keep the quality of the engineers? 
Segalovich: I think it was from ten people to one hundred people, so 
maybe from five engineers to fifty engineers. I think that was an interesting 
moment. Unfortunately, at that time, we went from one culture to three dif-
ferent cultures in the company, and we stayed with three different cultures 
through all these years. We were very liberal. We were very tolerant. Too 
tolerant. We did create the style guide for our search code, though, and we 
were quite cautious about keeping the team working on one code base that 
was universally compiled on many platforms and everything. In some other 
parts of engineering, they were more loose, more loose and more flexible. 
They were using different languages and everything. 
More or less, we got three different cultures, and they were mixing and  
going together. Portal services and email have one culture, banner system 
has a different one, and there is a special culture around our search. So, 
there are three different cultures. Yandex is a multi-cultured, multinational 
organization. 
Santos: If you could do one thing differently, what would it be? 
Segalovich: I have about five. And some bitter remorse every day. Why did 
I do that exactly like that? One mistake at an early stage creates these huge 
trees that you cannot merge at all. In engineering, I know my mistakes that 
are now deep in the infrastructure. They split everything. As for organiza-
tion, yes, that moment in 2000 when we were maybe too loose in some as-
pects of the company, maybe it wasn’t good. We should have been more 
unified in a way. It’s hard to say now. It’s history. I don’t know. 
Santos: What would you advise a new entrepreneur? What advice would 
you give him? 

Chapter 14 | Ilya Segalovich: Yandex 
 
186  
Segalovich: Actually, life now is very different, because I see how people are 
managing to create companies in a very thin way, with five high-profile engi-
neers. And all they do is just the algorithm. Everything else is outsourced in a 
way, from finance to lawyers, and more importantly, database system admini-
stration, everything is in the cloud. People are trying to use other companies’ 
APIs, other companies’ layers of services, as much as they can, concentrating 
sharply on what they think is good. Very rarely, is this thing a product. Some-
times it’s just some part of some weird product, some weird part. 
But sometimes it’s a standalone product. And if people stick to this goal, and 
find that others start using it as a complete product, they start expanding, and 
start putting more value into that, I think that’s just a great way to go now. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
15 
Richard Jones 
Last.fm 
Richard Jones is co-founder and CTO of Last.fm, a music recommendation serv-
ice that helps users discover music based on the songs they play. Jones founded 
the company in 2000 with Felix Miller and Martin Stiksel. In one of the largest 
Web 2.0 acquisitions in the United Kingdom, the company was sold to CBS Inter-
active in 2007 for $280 million. 
 
Pedro Santos: Can you tell us a bit about the story of how you started 
Audioscrobbler and how that led to Last.fm? 
Richard Jones: Okay. In 2002, I was studying computer science at the Uni-
versity of Southampton in the UK and I started working on Audioscrobbler 
for my final year project. In my third year of university we had to do an in-
dividual project. My original intention was to collect this data on what peo-
ple were listening to and then do a lot of collaborative filtering with the data 
in order to generate recommendations. So my original intentions were to 
build a music recommender. I saw the collection of that data as a means. I 
needed to get good data in order to be able to produce good recommenda-
tions. What happened is I wrote a Winamp plug-in. This was in 2002, so a 
lot more people had internet connections always on and Napster had made 
MP3 really popular and Winamp was massively popular still. 
So I wrote a Winamp plug-in and I wrote a plug-in for a couple of other 
things, and I put this web site online. I told some of my friends so I could get 
some data and they told their friends and they told their friends and it 
spread. It turns out people quite liked just having those stats on what they 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 15 | Richard Jones: Last.fm 
 
188  
listened to. They weren’t even interested in recommendations at that point. 
I didn’t really have a good recommender system for a long time. 
From your listening stats, you could click on an artist, and see who else had 
been listening to them. You could then see the listening stats of the other 
fans of artists you like. 
Just that system of connecting all the listening tastes proved to be really quite 
addictive. It spread by word of mouth. And then toward the end of my de-
gree, I started working on some collaborative filtering recommendation stuff. 
Obviously that all tapped into some latent interest that people have in stats 
on their music listening. So I knew that recommendations weren’t necessarily 
the main focus at that point. Not for a couple years after that did we have a 
really good recommender system. Music recommendation never really was 
my field, but I had a go at it, and then later on we hired somebody who knew 
what they were doing. 
I was kept quite busy just with keeping the service alive. We moved it around 
between hosts several times. I was getting free hosting from the university 
originally. And then there was a Slashdot article and I had a word with the 
university sys admin and he told me about how to properly index my MySQL 
database, that kind of thing. Then other people contributed free hosting. So I 
would move the site every couple of months to a new server. So it jumped 
around all over the place at the beginning. 
Santos: How did you come into contact with the other co-founders from 
Last.fm? 
Jones: Felix [Miller] and Martin [Stiksel]. There was an article in the BBC 
about Audioscrobbler, just before Easter 2003 I think it was, and they sent 
me an e-mail saying, “We’re in London, we were doing something similar.” 
Then they came down to meet me in Southampton. We went out for a 
drink in Southampton and had a chat about stuff. I was surprised to learn 
they were doing something similar, which had started around the same time 
independently. Their focus was very much on streaming. We’ll play some 
songs, skip the stuff you don’t like, and we’ll use that data to recommend 
even more songs to play you. Whereas my focus at that point was play your 
own music, we’ll collect the data, and recommend you stuff based on that. 
It was kind of two sides of the same coin really. Obviously once you can 
generate music recommendations for someone, a natural thing to want to 
do is just to play them all that music. It was quite interesting. We had a real-
ly long chat about possibilities of potential products. 

European Founders at Work 
 
189  
Once you have a music taste profile for somebody, what can you do with 
that data? What kind of products can you provide? We had lots of the same 
ideas about what the possibilities were, where we could take the products, 
and that kind of thing. Again, when I graduated around July 2003 I moved 
straight to London and slept on the floor of the flat they had as an office 
there and we started working on stuff together. 
Santos: At the time, did you decide to merge Audioscrobbler with Last.fm 
or were you running two parallel? 
Jones: We kept the web sites independent so they were still two different 
web sites. Last.fm was focused on radio and streaming and Audioscrobbler 
didn’t have any radio on it. Pretty much as soon as I moved up there we 
started working. Behind the scenes, the two web sites were sharing a lot of 
the same code, same database, all that kind of stuff. Although we were run-
ning two sites, long before we merged them officially we were powering 
them off the same technology behind the scenes. 
Santos: When and why did you decide to finally merge the two sites? 
Jones: We had been thinking about it for a while, and a lot of our users 
were using both sites, because your profile on one could be used on the 
other even before we merged them. And it just made sense at that time to 
merge them. It was too much effort for us to maintain both sites, and the 
distinctions were blurring, because people would use one and get all their 
stats. They’d go to the other, and they’d still have some stats there, and they 
could stream. So it just made sense in the end. The communities at that 
point knew of each other, and there was a lot of overlap. That must’ve been 
around 2005 when we officially merged them. 
Santos: When you actually launched Last.fm, how did it grow? Was there 
any advertising involved? Was it word of mouth? 
Jones: Audioscrobbler grew by word of mouth initially, for a long time. And 
Last.fm similarly. We know there were a couple of news articles in the 
Guardian and the BBC. People wrote about us, and people would write blog 
posts about us, but there was no PR effort or anything like that. And for 
quite a long time, because we basically had no money, the growth was what 
we were really struggling with, because more and more users meant we 
were collecting more data, and just storing and serving that data, just the 
hardware and the servers that we needed to run the site were a source of 
constant pain for us. So there was no way at that stage that we would’ve 
gone seeking more users or any more publicity. We were just trying to stay 
afloat, really. 

Chapter 15 | Richard Jones: Last.fm 
 
190  
Santos: As you were bootstrapping, how were you paying for server bills, 
and bandwidth? 
Jones: The other founders’ parents had put in a bit of money. Not a lot, but 
it bought us a couple of servers, and we were paying the rent with that stuff. 
Initially, I was living in a tent on the rooftop of the flat that we had, that we 
used as our office. So I wasn’t paying rent or anything.  
A friend who was running a data center in Austria gave us free hosting for a 
while. We had our servers in a dungeon in Vienna, with a load of fiber com-
ing out of the wall, and that was our free hosting for quite a long time. Free 
bandwidth too. I wish I had photos of that place; it was a make-shift data 
center in the dusty basement of a nice old building on a residential street. 
That helped us a lot. 
Santos: I can imagine. When did you hit the growth number where the 
company said it was too much bandwidth? 
Jones: I'm trying to remember the dates now. Obviously, that was never 
going to last because our bandwidth requirements were going up and up as 
we streamed to more people.  
We would've had to move at some point. One of the other problems was 
just getting hardware to this data center, and also when servers were having 
any problems. Since it was a sort of off-the-books data center, there was no 
technical staff there. We would have to call up the receptionist at their 
nearby office and say, "Could you please restart our server?” And I remem-
ber we sent flowers and things after that, but it was never really a good so-
lution. We bought a cheap power switch from eBay that let us reboot the 
servers remotely, so at least I got to see some of Vienna when we went to 
install it.  
At some point around that time we got some funding. Felix rented a car and 
drove the servers back from Vienna to London, and we moved them to a 
data center in London. It had security guards, key-fobs and hand scanners. 
Quite the upgrade. London data centers don't come cheap. 
Santos: And being the CTO, what were the main difficulties with that 
growth? 
Jones: We we churned out tons of code. We were working ridiculous 
hours at that point. But the main problem for us was, as I remember it, are 
we handling the scale? A lot of that was because we didn’t have enough 
money to spend on hardware. We were very frugal. As a result of the sys-
tem that we built, and the company culture, and the techniques we used, we 
were very much about squeezing every last ounce of performance out of 

European Founders at Work 
 
191  
the hardware that we could get. So we were very careful to make sure that 
we got absolutely the most use out of our hardware, because all that hard-
ware was very precious to us at that time.  
And looking back on that now, I mean, yeah. It’s much better to have money 
available to spend on hardware. If you can solve a problem by throwing a 
new server at it or spending, like, a month of programming, it’s pretty obvi-
ous nowadays that you would just buy a new piece of hardware. But initially, 
at least, we were very focused on optimizing and making sure we got the 
most out of every server. 
Santos: But eventually, you did raise a Series A run from Index Ventures. 
Jones: We did, yeah. We had some angel investment before that too, from 
Stefan Glaenzer, Joi Ito and Reid Hoffman.  
Santos: So when did you decide to raise capital, and what steps did you take?  
Jones: Well, it was painfully obvious to us that we needed to raise some 
money, because we wanted to grow the service. The service was growing 
quickly on its own, naturally. If we just wanted to keep up with that pace, 
we would’ve had to have some investment to buy hardware, and data cen-
ters, and so on. So we knew we wanted to do that. We didn’t know how. 
None of us had had any experience doing that.  
Stefan Glaenzer, who was the main angel investor, was basically the reason 
why we ended up getting VC when we did. He helped us with that process. 
None of us had done that before; it helped enormously. After meeting some 
of the London VCs, we took money from Index Ventures, which turned out 
to be a great decision. 
Santos: And then how did you meet him? 
Jones: We met Stefan because … I think he got in touch with us, so I imag-
ine he heard about us somewhere. He had been doing some successful 
start-ups in Germany before and other places. He must have heard about 
Last.fm at the time and gotten in touch. And then we met him in White 
Chapel Art Gallery near our office. I remember there was a thunderstorm 
when we agreed, “Yeah, okay. You can invest.” And so on. It was in the 
middle of a thunderstorm. I have quite a vivid memory of that moment. 
Santos: How was it for Last.fm to become international? Was it a simple 
thing, putting it up on the web available to everyone? Or harder because of 
copyright? 
Jones: Well, Last.fm had a very international audience from the beginning. 
Not necessarily who used the radio, but scrobbling [using Audioscrobbler 

Chapter 15 | Richard Jones: Last.fm 
 
192  
capabilities] and getting a lot of charts, and music stats and so on. So there 
were already lots of people all over the world using it.  
Streaming music licenses were a mixed bag. When we started doing this, 
there weren’t really suitable licenses in many countries and there still aren’t 
today. But we worked closely with the agencies in the UK to actually get an 
appropriate license that we could use for this semi-interactive radio. 
In fact, the best country I think for that would have been the US because of 
the DMCA1 and because you could pay this fixed amount. You didn’t have 
to go to each individual rights holder and get permission. In the UK at the 
moment when we were launching, there wasn’t really anything like that. 
So technically, the sort of correct way to do that would have been to ap-
proach every license holder and say, “This is what we want to do. How 
much would we pay you? Blah, blah, blah.” Obviously, that’s impossible. You 
can’t do that. It’s just infeasible. 
We ended up letting people upload stuff so artists could log in and upload 
their music. They’d just do a click through, “Yeah. You can stream it. That’s 
fine.” So we got a ton of content that way, but also it was all the major label 
stuff that we needed to have. I think we ended up getting a license at some 
point and back paying for the time when the license wasn’t available. 
But that was just the UK and then there was the rest of Europe. The situa-
tion was quite dire in Germany for a long time. Basically the European mar-
ket is fragmented. There isn’t a Europe-wide license for what we wanted to 
do, so it meant finding out what the state of the licensing options were in 
every European country and individually trying to negotiate and sort that 
out. It was a massive pain, really. 
Santos: How much time did it take to have it solved? 
Jones: Martin, one of the other founders, was basically doing that full-time 
for a long time in the early days. So he was dedicated to just getting our li-
censing situation sorted out. He hounded the various agencies and rights 
holders to get us the right licenses because we knew we needed to be li-
censed. We didn’t want to be seen as somebody who wasn’t paying license 
fees for streaming all this music. Because obviously, streaming music was a 
massive part of what we were doing. We wanted to be on the right side of 
all the labels and artists because we needed their content. So he just went 
after that tenaciously for a long time. 
                                                
1 Digital Millennium Copyright Act 

European Founders at Work 
 
193  
Santos: Did you ever have any court problems with any of the copyright 
holders? 
Jones: Nothing substantial, really. I think sometimes rights holders, espe-
cially in the music industry, will use court action or the threat of court ac-
tion as a sort of negotiating position. But, no. I think we managed to avoid 
anything serious in that regard. 
Santos: From the technical point of view, the actual recommendation en-
gine and statistics, how does that actually work? How hard was it to de-
velop it and tweak it? Did you change the approach many times? Did you 
have a clear idea on how to do it from the start? 
Jones: So initially when I was building it, we tried all sorts of stuff. I think 
what I was using for a long time in the beginning was just to use Lucene, a 
document indexing system. We just created fake documents of people’s 
profiles. Like, “artist’s name, artist’s name, artist’s name,” depending on 
how many times you’d listen to it. Basically that and we used existing 
search indexes.  
We tried all sort of crazy tricks. At one point we published a data dump of 
all of these scrobbling histories and some of our users at the time contrib-
uted various recommender strategies and said, "Hey, try this. I had quite 
good results with it." 
So for a while, we were piecing together ideas from the community. All this 
time, were mainly concerned with keeping the site afloat, keeping it fast, 
scaling up properly, and this sort of scrobbling data and radio. The recom-
mendation engine wasn’t brilliant to begin with. 
And then, we finally decided we needed to hire somebody who knows what 
they’re doing, who’s going to work on this full-time. We e-mailed some mail-
ing lists. We e-mailed the ISMIR2 mailing list. They’re a group who meet 
every year about music recommendations and information retrieval in music. 
We ended up hiring a guy called Norman, who was both a great scientist 
and understood all the algorithms and captive audience sort of things, but 
also an excellent programmer who was able to implement all these ideas. So 
we got really lucky. The first person we hired was great and he just took 
over. He chucked out all of our crappy recommendation systems we had 
and built something good, and then improved it constantly for the next sev-
eral years. 
                                                
2 The International Society for Music Information Retrieval 

Chapter 15 | Richard Jones: Last.fm 
 
194  
So we had some A/B testing, split testing systems in there for the radio so 
they could try out new tweaks to the algorithms and see what was perform-
ing better. You know, you try out any new algorithm and the more people 
or less people press the skip button, that kind of thing, on the radio. So that 
was one way to measure it. 
And it became a proper sort of science at that point. He built up a team and 
they were testing and improving the algorithm iteratively. 
Santos: When you hired him, did you already have capital or were you still 
bootstrapping? 
Jones: Let’s see. I think we had definitely had some angel investment and I 
think it was probably around the time we were getting VC. 
Santos: So you started to scale the team up when you got investment? 
Jones: Yes. We did have an income. We were using Google AdSense and 
things like that on the site at that point, and we had a bit of angel money. It 
really kicked off with the hiring once we had that money from Index. I think 
it was three million, something like that. Which nowadays doesn’t seem to 
be that much because if you look at what people are raising now with the 
Series A. I don’t know, I keep reading about people raising a lot more than 
that. We stretched it and made it go a long way and hiring was a big part of 
that. Hiring and infrastructure and hardware and data center stuff. 
Santos: How big did the team grow before being sold? 
Jones: Let’s see. When we were in our original office, I think we got up to 
about eighteen people maybe, squeezed into this studio apartment that we 
had. By the time we had that many people, we had had the VC. We had the 
studio flat thing, and Felix, the CEO, would cook for everybody at lunch. 
We had a rotation initially so everybody would cook one day at a time for 
everybody and then gradually people just gave up because Felix was a really 
good cook. He ended up cooking for everybody basically every day at lunch. 
Right up until we were about eighteen people or so people in the office we 
were still all squeezing in around the lunch table and he would be cooking 
stuff en masse to feed everybody.  
Then we moved into a bigger office, and were there for a year or so before 
CBS bought us. I think at that point we must have had around fifty people, 
mostly on the engineering side, but an increasing number of non-technical 
people too. 
Santos: So you kept the culture being very scrappy, as you said, until the 
sale? 

European Founders at Work 
 
195  
Jones: Yeah, and even afterwards to a certain extent. There are choices you 
can make on the technical side about whether you buy expensive hardware 
load balancers or do you do a lot of stuff just in software. Also once you 
have money to spend on stuff, certain problems just go away. You can solve 
them by buying the hardware that you need or investing in the right network 
gear or whatever. At one point, we chucked out some of our old assorted 
networking gear and bought a Cisco kit. That was great because we had a 
busy and increasingly complex network. It was nice just to unify everything. 
So that kind of stuff was a huge weight off our shoulders when you actually 
have the money to do stuff like that. But we made it work beforehand with 
what we could get our hands on. 
Santos: What was the initial business model when you thought about 
Last.fm and how did it evolve with the company? 
Jones: So in the beginning we weren’t thinking about the business model 
really. We were just thinking that we need to keep working on this because 
it’s getting really popular and we’ll figure it out later. Then Google AdSense 
was launched or it was suddenly available to us and we gave it a try. Until 
then we hadn’t had any ads on the site. I think we were all amazed at how 
much money we made off of Google AdSense. We would get a check in the 
mail for one month for $9,000 or something. Like, “yeah, all our problems 
are over, advertising’s going to save the day” kind of thing. In the end it was 
advertising. We never had a dedicated ad sales team or anything for a long 
time, not until after CBS for a while. We used AdSense, we used various ad 
networks. So we had the revenue from that. 
We also always had a subscription system so the users could pay a few quid 
a month and get various upgrades on the web site. There were steady 
sources of income from that as well. It didn’t rival the ad income but we had 
that from fairly early on as well. People would sign up to that and pay us a 
bit every month, not because they got an amazing set of new features but 
just because they just wanted to support the project and that they liked the 
site and that kind of thing. 
Santos: And how were you approached by CBS to sell the company? 
Jones: We were thinking about whether or not we wanted to raise a round 
of VC because we were growing internationally and with the licensing costs 
and all those kinds of things. We were thinking we could raise more VC, but 
at the same time we were trying to get our ad sales sorted out. So we fig-
ured the best way to have good income from the ads was to have direct ad 
sales and have our own ad sales team. Don’t use so many agencies. We met 
CBS to talk about ad sales stuff because they’re very good at that. They 

Chapter 15 | Richard Jones: Last.fm 
 
196  
have all the local radio stations and local sites and they sell ads for local ter-
ritories around the US. So we talked to them about that and it turns out 
they were interested in buying us. We didn’t know that at the time until af-
terwards. But that was when we originally met up with them. 
Santos: Did you have interest from other buyers before this? 
Jones: We had. We had interest over the years from various people. The 
CBS offer came at a time when we were thinking we can probably do with 
raising more VC to fill the growth and also what we saw then was a synergy 
because of their experience doing ad sales. We figured they’d be able to 
help enormously with getting ads on the site and earning us more revenue. 
Santos: How was the negotiation period? Because this being your first 
start-up, everything’s new. 
Jones: Yeah, it was quite an experience. We weren't on our own at that 
point. All of the previous investors and VCs were there to advise, and our 
interests and theirs were aligned (more-or-less) during the negotiations. It 
was a lot of back and forth. Nobody wants to necessarily be the first person 
to say a number so they'll try to get you to say, "Well, how much would 
you sell for?” It's a bit of a game of chicken for a while. Then even when you 
have a number in mind that everyone's sort of roughly in agreement with, 
then there are all these other conditions like, 
 “Okay, how much of that is actually in cash? What is the earn-out period?” 
and with other things. So there was a bit of back and forth, but it all worked 
out in the end when the sale went through. 
Santos: After you actually sold the company, what was that feeling like? 
Jones: It was pretty surreal. There was an enormous amount of press at-
tention, in the UK at least, because it was the biggest UK tech start-up to be 
sold to an American company like that for a while, in the UK at least, so it 
got quite a lot of coverage. It all died down fairly quickly, but for a while it 
was pretty crazy. Then almost as soon as that was over, life went back to 
normal in the office. We just got on with things. For the first year, really not 
that much changed. We took a few extra trips to New York here and there, 
but on the whole, at least from my point of view, we just got on with build-
ing the site, hiring new people, scaling things up. 
We were expanding internationally so we were hiring people to support the 
site in ten different languages. We were doing lots of translations. We were 
growing pretty quickly, streaming more and more. We just got on with 
building it. 

European Founders at Work 
 
197  
Santos: For you personally, what were the major lessons learned with build-
ing Last.fm and the Audioscrobbler? 
Jones: The major lessons learned. Well, when I started on this, I wasn’t re-
ally aware of what you would now call the start-up scene or that people did 
these things and they were called start-ups and all this kind of stuff. So I 
guess having that naivety in the beginning was very useful because we didn’t 
know we were allowed to fail. We just went at it. We didn’t know what we 
were getting into. There wasn’t so much of a start-up scene around London 
as well, so we were fairly isolated from other people doing similar things. So 
we just got on with it without really that much outside influence. I guess 
that’s a mixed blessing. For us at the time, it worked out. 
Now in London, there’s a lot more of a start-up scene. There are a lot of 
companies doing interesting things there. I think that would have been bene-
ficial for us to know more people doing tech start-ups because you can 
check if what you’re doing sounds sane, you can toss ideas around and 
things like that. I guess just go for it really. Don’t over analyze it too much. 
We knew we had a hit because of the attraction we were getting. Even 
without a proper business plan or any idea of how you’re going to run things 
in the future, we knew we had a hit because people wanted to use the site 
and they were telling their friends all the time. So if you get that feeling of 
“I’m onto something here, people are telling all their friends and we don’t 
have to lift a finger and people are doing our marketing for us”—that was 
the feeling that we had about everything. 
So we just knew we had to keep working on it for that reason without real-
ly any sort of long-term plan in advance of what we should be doing. The 
tools and software available now and the documentation and other expe-
riences you can read about are enormously helpful. Back in 2003 or 2004, 
there wasn’t quite as much of that, so we would do a bit of research to try 
to find out what the American start-ups were doing. 
We took infrastructure from other successful sites. Our architecture and 
tools were influenced quite a lot by LiveJournal and stuff that they pub-
lished. We were using Perlbal, we were using memcached, and we read 
some presentations about how they shared their databases—all very useful. 
There wasn’t as much of that documentation around, so the LiveJournal 
stuff really stands out as being really useful for us because it gave us some 
good new ideas, but it also validated what we were doing and we sort of 
thought, “Okay, we’re not completely insane because we’re doing it similar 
to those guys and they’re doing well and they have a big, busy web site.” So 
that was really useful. 

Chapter 15 | Richard Jones: Last.fm 
 
198  
So trying to find out and talk to other people who are doing similar things. 
That’s really great. 
Santos: What is the one thing that looking back you definitely would make 
different? 
Jones: I think hiring actually. On the whole, we did pretty well, but when 
you’re thrown into that position of owning a company like that, you have to 
hire people. We hired a lot of really good people. We hired people that we 
probably shouldn’t have hired. On the whole we did well. We didn’t really 
know what we were doing. It took us a while, a few people into the hiring 
process, before we started testing people in interviews actually, program-
ming tests, and we weren’t nearly rigorous enough with our hiring. We just 
wasted a lot of time because of it. 
So I think knowing what I know now, I would have had good programming 
tests and a much better process for hiring people. Because when you’re 
growing that quickly and you’re trying to hire a lot of people, it takes so 
much of your time every week trying to do the hiring side of things. That’s 
time you could be spending on making the service better, writing features, 
improving the scalability. With the experience I have now, I think the hiring 
would have been a lot smoother if I did it over. 
Santos: And what advice would you give to new entrepreneurs? 
Jones: Well, hang in there. Don't give up. I heard that most start-ups fail 
because the founders stop working on them. If we'd stopped working on it, 
we would have failed. We didn't. We survived. So I think it's important to 
stick with it if you think you stand a chance. Talk to others who are building 
similar things. Tons of people out there seem to want to give start-ups ad-
vice-[people] who haven't done start-ups. But just talk to people who are 
building similar things, using similar tools or have that experience somehow. 
Also, it can validate what you're doing. You know you're not completely 
crazy if people are doing similar things. Or at least you know everyone is 
equally crazy. 
And most importantly, it’s who you get on your team, who you work with. 
You’ve got to have amazing people to work with who are good technically 
or good for whatever they’re doing, but also love the products you’re build-
ing. We were lucky in that regard because we were doing something with 
music, which was a cool thing to be working on. 
We had a very technical early adopter user base. We used to advertise jobs 
on the web site.  

European Founders at Work 
 
199  
Everybody who applied for the first few years was a fan of the site, and a 
music fan as a result. So we got people who were really into the product. 
It's all about the team in the end. 
Santos: Would you want to add anything? 
Jones: Let's see. I told you about Felix cooking lunch. That really stands out 
because looking back, although scaling the technology was a big deal, it's also 
a challenge to grow the company and hire lots of new people. 
One of the inflection points was when the company got so big that we 
couldn't all sit around the table at lunch. It would be been good to hang 
onto those big team lunches as long as possible. It's hard to understate the 
benefit of casually finding out, over lunch, what people are working on. A lot 
of common problems just melt away in the right environment. 
Once the company grew out of that phase of all having lunch together, that 
was the time we needed to add a bit more hierarchy. So looking back, we 
should have taken some of that VC money we were pouring into hardware 
and data centers, and spent some on a bigger lunch table. 

C H A P T E R 
16 
Alex Farcet 
Startupbootcamp 
Alex Farcet co-founded Startupbootcamp in 2010 and it was quickly recognized 
as one of the top accelerators in Europe. The accelerator objective is a three-
month program to help start-ups grow as fast as possible by providing them with 
micro-investment and a network of mentors and investors. In exchange, the start-
ups are asked to give between 5 percent and 10 percent of their equity. Startup-
bootcamp became the first global affiliate of TechStars, the US-based start-up  
acceleration program considered to be the best in the nation. 
Prior to Startupbootcamp, Farcet worked for DHL, making the transition to entre-
preneurship after a one-year career hiatus. 
 
Pedro Santos: What did you do before Startupbootcamp and what led 
you to the idea of creating Startupbootcamp?  
Alex Farcet: My first real job was with a start-up in San Francisco way 
back in the early 90’s, so I definitely had the entrepreneurship bug. My sec-
ond objective was to travel the world, so I worked for DHL. I stayed with 
that company for twelve years and had posts in Hong Kong, Eastern Europe, 
Belgium and Denmark. I had a great time and I blinked and twelve years had 
flown by.  
The catalyst for a complete change was my son getting sick in 2006. I took a 
year off to take care of him. When I get back into action, I got sick, too. So 
there were two of us with cancer in the family at the same time. It wasn’t 
serious for me, but it was more him. My definition of risk changed and I just 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 16 | Alex Farcet: Startupbootcamp 
 
202  
had one of those epiphanies that it was time to do what I really wanted. Life 
is too short to not do what you really love. 
I always enjoyed coaching and working with entrepreneurs, probably even 
more than being an entrepreneur. I always enjoyed developing people when 
I had a big line-management role. I had four hundred people working for  
me and always enjoyed the people side. So when I discovered TechStars I 
reached out to David Cohen and asked, “Do you want to do Copenhagen 
TechStars with me?” He said, “No, we’re good in the US, but ask me any-
thing. I’m an open source.” So, we built a relationship that way. It wasn’t to-
tally planned, but when I saw it I knew this was exactly what I wanted to do. 
Santos: Okay, so you reached out to TechStars, who said no. What then? 
Farcet: Well, he said, “No, but…” 
Santos: And how did he pass from the “No, but…”? What did you do then?  
Farcet: Well, I met the right co-founders. That was Rainmaking. That is a 
partnership of serial entrepreneurs who built 14 startups in 4 years. They 
were thinking about how to handle their own deal flow and wanted to ex-
tend their brand. We just really hit it off. They had a lot of know-how on le-
gal and financial, and also resources. I had the sweat equity, the drive, and 
the passion to run an accelarator program (and you have to be a bit crazy to 
embark on such a journey). So we put it together and we said let’s try and 
do one to see how it goes. 
So, I found the right project and then I found the right co-founders. 
Santos: How did you find them? Did you know them already? 
Farcet: One of my projects at the time was startupdenmark.dk, an English-
speaking resource for entrepreneurs in Denmark. Instead of writing a blog, I 
was interviewing cool people. I was using that because I thought it was fun, 
but it was also a great networking tool. Then one day I got to interview 
Martin Bjergegaard, one of the partners at Rainmaking, and we just kept the 
conversation going, basically. I just met the right guys. Some of it is luck; 
some of it is being open to opportunities and forcing your luck. 
Santos: And you started the program in Denmark. What are the advan-
tages and disadvantages of doing such an accelerator program in Denmark? 
Farcet: Well, when we defined it, we never said it’s in Denmark. We al-
ways said it’s in Copenhagen. There is a subtle difference in that. When you 
say it’s in Denmark, you kind of imply that that’s your catching area. My first 
initial thought was let’s try and draw a one-hour flight circle around Copen-
hagen and you catch the Baltics and Scandinavia. Let’s see who we can get 

European Founders at Work 
 
203  
from that region to apply. Then, already in the first batch we had three  
Danish/Nordic teams and all the rest from all over Europe and the world. 
But in going back to your question, there’s a lot of technical talent in the 
Baltics, also in Scandinavia. There are a lot of resources for entrepreneurs 
who are well-educated. It’s super-easy to start a company. 
Denmark is consistently ranked as one of the top places to do business in 
by the OECD. It’s debatable whether or not it’s really entrepreneurial, but 
it was a great base, and frankly, that’s where we are. 
If you’re going to do an accelerator, you need to have a very strong home 
base because that’s where your ecosystem is going to be. It’s the foundation 
for recruiting the mentors, attracting the investors. And that’s where our 
base was and that’s where our base is. You don’t fly in somewhere and do 
an accelerator. You have to have a solid local eco-system to build from. 
Santos: Accelerators are a relatively new financing model. It may even be 
said it’s not even a completely proven model. How hard was it to convince 
the investors and the mentors to back the program? 
Farcet: Well, I think certainly TechStars and Y Combinator have delivered 
great results, there’s no question there. Whether thirty accelerators will be 
successful is another question. But our first existing group of investors are 
basically wealthy individuals and angels. Those kinds of people tend to want 
to touch their investment, what they invest in. So an angel is, by definition, 
fairly hands-on. It was a hard sell because I was saying, “Trust me. We’ll 
have ten really good teams in six months. Can I have your money, please?”  
You’re really selling yourself and you’re selling your ability to put together a 
great program. We did it but it was not easy. So I certainly have the fund 
raising scars to show the teams we work with. 
We’re changing our funding model now that we’ve expanded in a number of 
cities. We’re going for slightly larger investors and corporate partners to 
fund a multi-city multi-year program so we get more runway and don’t have 
to be fund raising full time. 
Santos: And the mentors, why did they join the program? How did you 
convince them? 
Farcet: The first twenty or so are the most important. They’re lending 
their good name and get the snowball rolling. So I was very focused on get-
ting the right names on board and they understood that. It was six months 
of effort, really working like a headhunter and tapping into our network. 
When they meet you they have to think “This guy looks like he’s probably 

Chapter 16 | Alex Farcet: Startupbootcamp 
 
204  
doing something serious. I’ll take a chance and let him use my name.” When 
you get cool mentors, you’re more likely to get good teams, and it snow-
balls that way. But it’s meeting by meeting, coffee by coffee, convincing peo-
ple to join the project. 
Santos: What are the advantages for an investor that supports the pro-
gram, instead of just waiting for the results of the program? Did you have 
that kind of question from an investor? 
Farcet: No, we don’t. We don’t give formal privileged access to our inves-
tors. In some cases it happens naturally, because maybe a couple are men-
tors as well. They get to interact with the teams earlier, but we don’t tell 
investors, “You get privileged, early access.” That would be counterproduc-
tive anyway because we tell our teams to focus on building stuff, not on rais-
ing money during the program.  
Santos: Yeah, but from an investor point of view, what’s his advantage? Or 
in the way that you were trying to convince him, what’s his advantage of in-
vesting in the program instead of just waiting for the end of the program? 
Farcet: Well, obviously, for a relatively small amount of money, you get a 
not insignificant percentage in ten companies that are diversified, highly se-
lected and accelerated. So you spread and lower the risk. We attract really 
cool projects that you don’t have to spend time doing due dilligence for. For 
that type of early stage investment it’s still risky but definitely a safer bet 
than your own deal flow if you’re an angel.  
Santos: Once the program finishes, how do you provide help to the start-
ups? How do the investors keep in touch with the start-ups? 
Farcet: I keep the investors updated on what’s going on with the teams 
when our they raise money. In terms of helping the teams, we tend to get in-
volved when there are term sheets flying around, if they want our help. We 
don’t have board seats. We don’t have any control over the start-up. We 
want to be perceived as friendly co-founders or early investors. But we con-
tinue to make some matchmaking with investors. We get more and more 
frequently invited to suggest teams to attend investor and pitch events. We 
always have a good list of start-ups to join those. It’s much less hands-on, but 
it’s a lot more basically focused around the investors. And we’re now run-
ning our first road show in London and Silicon Valley so we’re expanding our 
investor outreach. 
Then we make noise when there’s an announcement. We have a big com-
munity of followers and fans. If one of our teams is launching an update, a 
new product—we get involved in that. 

European Founders at Work 
 
205  
Santos: Don’t investors require a more hands-on look into the companies? 
Because it seems they’re very hands-off. 
Farcet: No, the investors are investing in us. Then we invest in the compa-
nies. I send updates regularly, to all the investors. Then sometimes an inves-
tor will ask for more details but in general they’re fairly hands off. The over-
all budget is small and we break that down into even smaller tickets. These 
are not large investments in the investors’ portfolios. 
Santos: What were the main lessons you learned by putting this program 
together? 
Farcet: Initially I thought I could do this on a part time basis. So the first 
lesson was: it’s a lot harder to pull off than it seems. It’s a much bigger pro-
ject than most people think. You have to fund raise, recruit top notch men-
tors, attract and select teams, get the logistics in place, set up a structure 
and legal framework. You have to be a bit nuts and really love it. 
I’ve had someone call me from just about every capital in Europe and say, “I 
want to do this.” I’ve tried to be as open as David Cohen and Brad Feld 
were with me. I’ll answer any question, even about our budget and contracts. 
So I’ve helped a lot of people. I helped Le Camping in Paris for example. 
But there’s no secret sauce, as usual it’s all about execution. My standard 
answer now is “call me back when you’ve got your first twenty mentors on 
board and part of your budget secured.” That sorts out the vast majority of 
people and that’s how Dublin and Amsterdam have come on board, those 
guys were just on a mission, unstoppable. 
Santos: And did the program change from the first edition to the second 
edition? 
Farcet: Yeah, definitely. 
Santos: What are the main differences? Is it because you started expanding 
internationally from Copenhagen to Madrid? 
Farcet: No. We always learn things from the programs we run. It’s like 
when you do your first start-up weekend versus your fifth. There are a lot 
of subtleties in the process, little tricks. Just having the confidence of having 
done a cycle and knowing what works, being able to talk credibly about 
what’s going to happen, what an investor is like, etc. I made some changes in 
the scheduling of mentors, how we engage, and how much mentoring there 
is. I’ve put more air in the program, more space for people to be able to di-
gest input, instead of cramming everything in at the beginning. I’ve definitely 
learned a lot. 

Chapter 16 | Alex Farcet: Startupbootcamp 
 
206  
Santos: And in terms of expansion, you started expanding to Madrid and 
Dublin? 
Farcet: Yes Madrid, Dublin, and now Amsterdam. We’ve also declared that 
we’re going to do Berlin and London in 2012. We don’t know yet how and 
with whom. But definitely, it’s in the books. 
Santos: Are you planning to expand even further, even outside of Europe? 
Farcet: Absolutely. I’ve had conversations with people in China, Brazil, and 
India. It’s just not a priority right now. We want to get a really strong home 
base here in Europe. But it’s definitely something we want to do; imagine 
being able to tap our European teams into those BRIC markets? And vice-
versa, that would be huge. 
We’re building a community. In the last 14 months or so we’ve produced 30 
startups. That’s almost 100 entrepreneurs who are engaged alumni and am-
bassadors. Doing that globally is very exciting. 
Santos: And how do you think the ecosystem in Europe has changed from 
the beginning, when you were just starting out the program, and now?  
Farcet: I ran the first program only a year ago so that I don’t have that 
much of a comparison point. What I do see is a positive shift away from the 
never ending obsession of trying to duplicate Silicon Valley to focusing on 
what’s good about Europe. London is doing a lot around the Silicon Round-
about and government focus, Berlin is being hyped as a great base for start-
ups, Copenhagen and Dublin are definitely recognized as strong ecosystems 
and we’re now connecting them all.  
Santos: What are the main mistakes that you saw the teams that ran 
through the program doing? 
Farcet: Classic stuff like not focusing on customers early enough and not 
engaging every single mentor in a good way, so that when you leave the 
program you’re back on your own. Ideally you walk away and still have that 
base of connectivity. I think most teams did make the most of the opportu-
nities. Some teams may have presumed, “Well, I know what this mentor 
knows. They’re not teaching me anything.” But actually, you never know 
how a mentor can help you, what else – and who else - they know. There’s 
a great amount of serendipity that teams have to be ready to exploit. 
I think a real big lesson learned was the way teams treat mentors is very 
indicative of how they’ll deal with customers, employees, and markets. So if 
you’re slightly arrogant and don’t keep people engaged, then you’ll probably 
do the same in other areas important to your start-up. That’s why the  

European Founders at Work 
 
207  
selection process is so focused on people, attitude, track record—a lot of 
soft stuff. 
Santos: When you say that one of the main mistakes is engaging, how can a 
start-up engage more or better with their mentors and their clients? Is it 
just a matter of listening more? 
Farcet: It is like a cliché now, but it’s just the classic: “I’ll just build another 
feature and I’ll focus on my product.” We had an alumni date where three 
or four of our old teams came by to share what they had learned in the year 
since they left the first Startupbootcamp program . I asked them to share 
what they had been through and every other word was “customer.” Cus-
tomer this, customer that, should have talked to customers more—more 
often, earlier. It’s just a make or break. You can’t have too much customer 
focus and sales focus, really being sales-oriented, thinking more about your 
why customers need your product. 
It’s classic. Everybody knows it and has read about but you have to experi-
ence it yourself. It was striking to hear the alumni, how much they spoke 
about customers.  
Santos: What advice would you give to new entrepreneurs? 
Farcet: First and foremost be extremely aligned with your co-founders on 
values, objectives, ambitions, motivations, and even financial stability. It’s so 
important, when things go wrong, the human stuff will blow up and if you’re 
tight then you’ll come out as one team. And secondly talk to customers 
from day one, and keep talking to them every single day. 

C H A P T E R 
17 
Martin Varsavsky 
Fon 
Martin Varsavsky is an Argentine entrepreneur—the founder of seven North 
American or European companies within the past 30 years. As a college student, 
Varsavsky started Urban Capital Corporation, a real estate company in downtown 
Manhattan. In 1986 he started Medicorp Services, a Canadian biotechnology 
company. In 1990 Varsavsky founded his third business, Viatel Ltd., his first ven-
ture into telecom. In 1998 he started Spain’s second-largest publicly-traded tele-
com operator, Jazztel Telecomunicaciones. In 1999 he founded Ya.com, Spain’s 
third-largest internet provider. In 2000, he started a cloud computing company, 
EINTSTEINet, his only business failure. The company was sold in 2003 for one 
euro—and at a personal loss for Varsavsky. 
Martin Varsavsky’s current venture is Fon, the word’s largest Wi-Fi network. The 
company is headquartered in Madrid, Spain, and its investors include Skype, Goo-
gle, Atomico, British Telecom, Coral Group, Index Ventures, and Sequoia Capital. 
 
Pedro Santos: Can you talk a bit about your history? 
Martin Varsavsky: I was born in Argentina. I grew up there until the mili-
tary coup [in 1976], when my family was forced to emigrate. When I was in 
high school, we were given refugee visas by Senator [Daniel Patrick] Moyni-
han [D-NY] and immigrated to the United States. 
I started college in the States. I went to NYU. I did philosophy and econom-
ics in my undergrad and then I went to Columbia University, where I did 
two master’s degrees, one in international relations and international affairs 
and the other one in business. 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 17 | Martin Varsavsky: Fon 
 
210  
When I was at school I had to pay for my schooling. I started doing menial 
jobs such as being a bike messenger, but I soon realized that I had an oppor-
tunity to build businesses. 
My very first business, while I was at the university, was like a search engine. 
A search engine in the late seventies meant that I would get requests over 
fax from countries outside of the United States about information that was 
at the NYU library in books that would cost $20,000 or more. 
There was a lot of information that was held in books that most people, 
even businesses, couldn’t afford. So I started a company in which I would get 
requests over fax. 
I would just walk over to the library, find the answers in these guides that 
were too costly for most businesses to have, and I would sell the answers. 
So it was like a very primitive form of search engine. 
Then I also started a business, which has grown to become pretty sizable. It 
was called Urban Capital. Urban Capital was basically realizing the activity 
that many of my classmates were doing in the early eighties, which was ille-
gally occupying or being squatters in loft buildings. 
Instead I became partners with the commissioner of leasing for the City of 
New York and I started Urban Capital, which legally transformed the use of 
these industrial buildings into office and residential buildings. 
We did like half a million square feet of—well of loft buildings: both residen-
tial and office by the time I finished school, or two years after I finished 
school in 1987. And I have only done technology businesses ever since. 
But I still own one building in Tribeca that’s 120,000 square feet. So I still 
have that original business or parts of it. 
I built four technology companies that got to be worth over $700 million by 
the time I sold them. These companies are Viatel, Jazztel, Ya.com, and Eolia, 
which is an alternative energy company. Now I’m on my fifth one that is ap-
proaching this value and it’s called Fon. 
I also built another company called EINSTEINet in which I lost €35 million 
of my own. It was one of the first cloud computing companies, ahead of its 
time, and it’s been my big and only really significant business failure. 
Santos: Of all these first four technology businesses that you did, what 
were the main lessons from each one? 
Varsavsky: Well, in general my businesses value comes from turning ideas 
into a business. The ideas are sometimes my own, and sometimes other 

European Founders at Work 
 
211  
people’s ideas. In the case of Viatel, for example, or Fon, it was my own idea 
to invent callback and that was the start of Viatel. And I was also the first 
builder of the pan European fiber optic network. 
Then in the case of Fon, I have the patent, the US patent, for Fon—which is 
that you share a little Wi-Fi at home and you roam the world for free. The 
concept of the global affiliation of Wi-Fi routers who share Wi-Fi. 
And so sometimes it’s my idea, and sometimes it’s other people’s ideas. For 
example, I worked with Nobel Prize winner Cesar Milstein in the eighties to 
start Medicorp Sciences. He’s the inventor of monoclonal antibodies and we 
were one of the first companies to do AIDS tests. 
In this case, I was the business person behind his ideas and the ideas of 
some other scientists. So I either transform other people’s ideas into busi-
nesses or my own. 
Santos: Before you actually go on to start the business, how do you meas-
ure if the idea? How do you see the potential of the idea? How do you de-
cide to do it? Or [is it a matter of] it’s an interesting idea, but I won’t do it?  
Varsavsky: In general, and since 1990, all my businesses have been in tele-
coms, internet, and alternative energy. Since I’ve been in those fields, in gen-
eral it’s something that relates to “if it’s good for me …” I know this may 
not be the most objective rule on the planet—it’s probably the most subjec-
tive rule on the planet. But it’s kind of like, if it’s good for me, it should be 
good for everyone else. 
And so for example, I invented Fon while looking for Wi-Fi myself. I was un-
able to connect to Wi-Fi in Paris while I was visiting and I would find tons of 
Wi-Fi networks. They were all locked. 
And I said how could I convince the people of Paris to open up their Wi-Fi 
for me? And that’s how I thought, “Well, maybe if I open in Madrid for 
them, and maybe if everybody opens their networks to each other in quid 
pro quo, then we will have regulated.” 
Not open Wi-Fi, because open Wi-Fi had not worked, and I knew that. So 
just ask people to open their Wi-Fi and not get anything in return, but I 
thought we could establish a global quid pro quo. 
If I, Martin, would be able to open my Wi-Fi if they give me Wi-Fi when I 
travel, many people may want to do the same. So I generally use myself as 
the reference, and I think if something works for me—and I do that also for 
investing. Like, I only invest in companies whose products I use. 

Chapter 17 | Martin Varsavsky: Fon 
 
212  
Santos: And once you had the idea for Fon, what was the first thing you 
did to implement it? 
Varsavsky: Well, the idea for Fon has not changed since I’ve had it, but the 
strategy of Fon changed two times. The first idea I had was that the Fon was 
not going to be a business. That it was going to be an NGO1 where people 
would download software, change the behavior of their routers, and build a 
global Wi-Fi network. And that didn’t work, because only very few brands of 
routers could be reflexible, meaning that their software could be changed. 
So then I changed to the second idea for Fon, which is to manufacture the 
Fonero and sell or give away for free our own routers, so people would use 
our routers to share a little Wi-Fi at home and roam the world for free. 
But that also didn’t work. People didn’t buy our routers massively, and even 
when we gave them away for free, half of them didn’t connect them, and we 
lost a lot of money. And Fon almost failed. 
But then I had the third idea of Fon, which was to work with the people who 
were supposed to be our enemies to begin with … the telecom companies. 
And then we ended up creating BT Fon, for example, British Telecom, and 
many other associations like that in other countries around the world. Like 
with SoftBank in Japan, or MTS in Russia, or Zon in Portugal, SFR in France, 
or Belgacom in Belgium, and so on. 
And then Fon really worked. But the other thing that made Fon work was 
the advent of the iPhone. The iPhone and Androids, but first the iPhone 
massively created a need for public Wi-Fi, or Wi-Fi everywhere. 
When we started in a world of laptops, there wasn’t enough interest in Wi-
Fi, or not as much as there is now, so it was a trend that helped us and a 
change of strategy. 
Santos: How long did you try the NGO approach? 
Varsavsky: I tried the NGO approach for very little time, between like the 
end of 2005 and February 2006 when we incorporated and got Google and 
Index [Ventures] and Sequoia, and Niklas and Janus from Skype as partners. 
Then we tried with the formula approach between 2006 and 2008. And 
then we tried a corporation with the carriers after 2008, and then it was 
also the birth of the iPhone, and then it would all worked out. 
                                                
1 Non-governmental organization 

European Founders at Work 
 
213  
Santos: And how did you actually convince what would be perceived, as 
you said, your enemies of the company? How did you convince them to join 
forces with Fon?  
Varsavsky: Well, it was interesting, because we’re now the largest Wi-Fi 
network in the world, but when we were trying to do this, we were nobod-
ies, right? And so it was interesting, because Google had me onstage with 
Ian Livingston to debate BT, Fon vs. BT and we were onstage at Google’s 
Zeitgeist, debating each other. 
And then we kind of found we had a lot of things in common because I 
started arguing that Fon was a great addition to BT, actually, and shouldn’t 
be seen as an enemy. 
Because people still pay at home, and the benefit of roaming doesn’t cost 
anything, and that that was the way that Wi-Fi could really become a basic 
necessity, that you paid at home, but you got Wi-Fi everywhere, at home 
and everywhere else. 
That you paid at home, and I argued that that would make the customers at 
BT more loyal next turn. And the iPhone, the average revenue per user will 
be higher at BT if they had this vs. competitors. 
And that also the customer acquisition cost would be lower because there 
was a bigger benefit to signing for DSL Wi-Fi at home, because you would 
get it at home and everywhere else. 
And I kind of convinced Ian Livingston, so instead of debating, we went 
backstage, and then we made a deal. 
Santos: And once you had that deal, it was much easier to bring other 
deals from other countries, I expect. 
Varsavsky: Yeah, BT is one of these companies that are a global reference. 
Santos: And you mentioned that you got investments, as you said, from 
Google, Skype. Was it in the NGO phase or after? 
Varsavsky: After the NGO. Yeah, obviously, when we said we’ll be a 
NGO, we didn’t get any investments. When I decided to turn this into a 
corporation, that’s when I got the investments. 
Santos: And how did you convince Google and Skype? What was the in-
terest from those companies?  
Varsavsky: Well, we were the first European investment that Google ever 
made, the first European company Google ever invested in, and the first 
European company Sequoia ever invested in. I think Google felt and Skype 

Chapter 17 | Martin Varsavsky: Fon 
 
214  
felt that if there’s Wi-Fi everywhere, their products will be more successful. 
That’s their strategic investment and they also wanted to move into an in-
vestment outside of the United States and we had a good proposition. 
In the case of Google. In the case of Skype, they were already a European 
company. 
Santos: But at the time, you were still in the beginning. Can you share a bit 
of how you pitched the idea to them?  
Varsavsky: So I pitched to Google, both to Chris Sacca and Sergey Brin. 
And Chris Sacca was the head of Wi-Fi at that point and was very skeptical 
of Fon, but Sergey Brin was the revolutionary there, and he saw that Fon 
could have a potential. And he decided to go ahead with the investment. 
Santos: And once you raised the Series C round, you personally invested in 
Fon through your holding company. In previous rounds, no. What was the 
reasoning to invest in the C rounds instead of the previous rounds? 
Varsavsky: Well, there was a point where nobody wanted to invest in Fon, 
and we almost went bankrupt. That I was the only investor, and I was the 
only one who could lend to the company. I made it until we became profit-
able. I had come from losing €35 million of my own money in EINSTEINet, 
in the cloud computing company before, and I was very skeptical of being 
the only person who invested in a company. But then what happened was 
that I had no choice, basically. 
Because that was the worst time in the company’s history, and we thought 
we were going bankrupt. I didn’t want to go bankrupt, and I thought Wi-Fi 
had a tremendous future, and I decided to risk my own money to save the 
company. 
Now we’re profitable, in fact now we accumulate cash every month. We 
don’t spend cash. 
Santos: Another interesting thing is that in 2008, you launched a service 
called Twitxr.2 Why launch this service? It seems a very off-core business 
of Fon. 
Varsavsky: No, it’s the same thing. I wanted that. There are a lot of serv-
ices I launch because I want them myself. There’s another one I just 
launched [on the Android platform] a few weeks ago called RadioMe. 
It’s an application that when I’m on my bicycle it reads my tweets, and my 
Facebook, and my Gmail, and plays my music, so when I go on the mountain 
                                                
2 Twitxr is an add-on to Twitter that adds pictures. 

European Founders at Work 
 
215  
bike, which I do three times a week in Madrid, in the mountains near Ma-
drid, I go for like two hours, and I listen to RadioMe. So I did RadioMe for 
myself. And it’s in the Android market. You can test it yourself. But I do a 
lot of these things—I do it because I need them. So, I design them, and I get 
an engineer, and I do them. 
But that doesn’t mean that they’re meant to be businesses. These are all, 
by the way, very small investments. It cost me, like, €10,000, €20,000, to 
do each one of these things. And I do them because I like them. My busi-
ness is fun. 
And my business also is investing with other entrepreneurs, which I do, like 
the founders of other companies. They are all listed in my blog, but most, 
the best-known companies are like Tumblr, and then some others. Tumblr, 
Dopplr, whatever. They’re all in my blog. So I also do business mentoring 
accompanied by some investing. 
But my main activities are Fon, and then I do some investing, and then I do 
some teaching, I’m a professor at Instituto de Empresa, and then I do some 
philanthropy with my foundation. 
Santos: You’re now based in Madrid. Before, you came from the US. You 
started businesses in both continents. In your experience, what are the ad-
vantages and disadvantages of building businesses in America vs. Europe? 
Varsavsky: Well, I think overall it’s easier in America, except there’s more 
competition in America. I think that the market is bigger in Europe, but it’s 
more fragmented. I think that there are three things in America that make 
building businesses hard. 
The best thing is the access to capital, VC capital, that’s phenomenal in 
America. But I find the legal system is very bad for business because of the 
uncertainty of litigation—and this constant uncertainty of litigation—that it’s 
much better in Europe. 
I find the health care system very bad and extremely costly for businesses, 
that if you want to offer health care, it costs like $1,000 a month per  
employee. 
And so the problem of doing business in the United States is litigation, po-
tential litigation, and the cost of health care. Those things are better in 
Europe. 
What’s better in America is that it’s a unified national market, and in Europe 
it’s sort of unified but not really. It’s more fragmented. 
I also think Europe has very difficult labor laws and high taxes on employ-
ment. Europe employment taxes are very high, which is unusual. 

Chapter 17 | Martin Varsavsky: Fon 
 
216  
Not everywhere in Europe, by the way. Like Switzerland has very low taxes 
on employing people. I’m building a new business in Switzerland. The sala-
ries are high, but it’s nice to know that most of the money goes to the em-
ployee. So Europe is more diverse. 
I actually gave a talk about this to people in the press, and there’s a video 
about why you shouldn’t move your business to Silicon Valley. That de-
scribes very much how I feel about this. It’s complicated. It’s not a straight 
answer.  
Santos: But still you moved to Madrid. Was it a personal decision?  
Varsavsky: It was purely a personal decision in the sense that it’s not a ra-
tional one. If you study all the countries in the world, you wouldn’t end up 
in Spain building technology companies. But I happen to be a big fish in a 
small pond and I’m happy there. 
Santos: Of all these experiences that you had, including EINSTEINet, what 
were the main learning points? 
Varsavsky: I think that Fon exists today thanks to EINSTEINet because in 
EINSTEINet, I sold the company for one euro to save the jobs of the em-
ployees thinking that I was the only crazy person to think that cloud com-
puting had a future. And then two years later, cloud computing really took 
off. Now cloud computing is huge. 
So when Wi-Fi looked like it was failing, I remembered EINSTEINet and I 
said, “I’m going to put my money there because my ideas are not crazy. It’s 
just sometimes ahead of their time and if I have enough money to wait, the 
market will help me.” 
Santos: What advice would you give to a new entrepreneur?  
Varsavsky: Well, I would be realistic and I would say, “Look, if you think 
you are the lucky sperm that’s going to get the ovule, go ahead and start the 
business.” 
Santos: Do you think it’s a lucky star or you think it’s personal quality? 
Varsavsky: It’s a very difficult thing to do with a very high probability of 
failure. But it is essential for society and even those who try and fail are also 
helping society. So I encourage people to try, but at the same time warning 
them how difficult it is. 
Santos: But you have several companies started and successfully built with 
only one failure. That’s a very good batting average. 

European Founders at Work 
 
217  
Varsavsky: Yeah, because I am tenacious and I am sometimes lucky and I’m 
good at spotting trends. Whether it was 1985 and realizing that lofts were a 
big trend and buying 120,000 square feet in Tribeca while I was a student. 
Or being in 2005 and realizing that Wi-Fi was going to be huge and global, 
and to be the only global wireless signal while all the other wireless stan-
dards were not global. 
And CDMA and GSM and GPLS and Edge and 2G and LTE and that Wi-Fi 
was Wi-Fi and everybody understood that in China, in Argentina, in the UK, 
in the USA, in Spain. 
It’s just having a sense of what technology people are going to want to use 
and being tenacious and being persuasive and being devoted to what I do. 
But I was also lucky. Most people who try businesses fail. That’s the truth 
and people should be warned about that. 

C H A P T E R 
18 
Brent Hoberman 
lastminute.com 
In 1998, Brent Hoberman, together with Martha Lane Fox, founded 
www.lastminute.com, an online travel and gift business that IPOed at the peak of 
the dot-com bubble and managed to survive the bubble’s burst. 
Hoberman remained CEO of www.lastminute.com Ltd until 2006. Sabre acquired 
www.lastminute.com in 2005 for £577 million. 
Hoberman also founded www.mydeco.com,  a VC-backed online furniture and in-
terior design start-up that provides 3D technology for consumers to design their 
own rooms online. In July 2009, he co-founded PROfounders Capital, a fund that 
invests in early-stage internet start-ups. In 2010 he also co-founded made.com a 
company that crowdsources furniture and sells direct from consumers to factories. 
 
Pedro Santos: What was the original idea behind www.lastminute.com 
and how did it evolve to become what it is today?  
Brent Hoberman: The original idea was very much about me as a cus-
tomer wanting to be able to buy things on the internet. And back in ’95, ac-
tually, when I had the idea, there was nothing that I wanted to buy on the 
internet except for books from Amazon in the US.  
So the idea was to do everything at the last minute—that you would be able 
to do everything from going away, to going out, to staying in—at the last 
minute. Then within that, it was about inspiration and solutions. In other 
words, that we could inspire people with a great idea at a great price and 
we could give them solutions, convenience, and availability for products on a 
broad range of stuff at the last minute.  
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 18 | Brent Hoberman: lastminute.com 
 
220  
Santos: After you had that idea, what was the first thing that you did to ac-
tually implement it?  
Hoberman: Actually, it was to do nothing, because it was ’95. It was too 
early. So I sat down with a friend and we wrote about ten pages on it, and 
then we put it in a drawer because we thought it was too early—as I said—
because we had no experience on the internet and the market was too small.  
So we waited. Part of the game plan was to get real work experience on the 
internet. So I got ten months of experience in ’97, having left my consul-
tancy job, and worked for a start-up QXL, the online auction company. I 
also worked for LineOne, the internet service provider, owned by BT and 
News Corp.  
So that gave me some experience. And then eventually, I left QXL, saw that 
the internet was really taking off in ’97, and immediately started working on 
a business plan for www.lastminute.com. I asked one friend to do it first. 
The guy had helped me years before. He wasn’t available, so I then asked 
Martha Lane Fox. And together we wrote the business plan and we sent it 
off to about twenty people, of which about half agreed to see us and half of 
those agreed to fund us. So five of that twenty.   
We raised £600,000 for forty percent of the company. 
Santos: And what was the original business model?  
Hoberman: The original was transactions. Making money on sales and  
advertising. 
Santos: So it kept the same business model all the way through?  
Hoberman: Yes. We kept the same business model. Because at the time, I 
think it was big enough. The other thing we had was B2B, so we would sell 
the technology to other potential competitors, and also sell products into 
travel agencies.  
Santos: How did you convince the companies to put the inventory in your 
web site?   
Hoberman: That was I think one of the most surprising aspects of it. When 
you look back in hindsight: that as a really tiny company in the very begin-
ning, we were able to get deals that the much bigger players weren’t able to 
get. And I think partly because we were evangelizing the internet and these 
companies wanted to be established on the internet. We were sort of like 
free R&D to some extent, and we also worked within their existing con-
straints. If they wanted to fax inventory prices rather than send them over 

European Founders at Work 
 
221  
even e-mail or anything more automatic, we would resource up the man-
power to do that.  
So we made that investment, that early investment in both technology and 
in people to make sure we could work with the suppliers in the way they 
needed to work with us. And the second thing is we were able to convince 
them that the sales would be incremental and avoid cannibalization of their 
core business by listing them in a channel that would be essentially opaque 
to their core customers and, therefore, not cannibalize their pricing.   
Santos: And how did you reach out to so many different types of compa-
nies? You had so many industries in there.  
Hoberman: It was hard. In the beginning, we had a small team. We had ten 
people and just a lot of relentless selling. So definitely, salesmanship is one 
of the keys behind any entrepreneurial venture, I think.  
Santos: And was the IPO an original objective from the start?  
Hoberman: No. The objective was just to build a great business, selling 
everything at the last minute, and the IPO just happened as an opportunity as 
the market became hot and we realized we could—and we needed to lever-
age the last technology investment of twenty to twenty-five million pounds 
over a significant base.  
Santos: And when you decided to IPO, you IPOed right next to the bubble 
bursting. Did you see it coming?  
Hoberman: We priced the market peak, on March 10th, 2000, which is the 
day the stock market actually peaked. And we went out on March the 14th.  
We increased the price by more than any other European IPO had ever 
done, I think. And we went public probably quicker than any other European 
company had done from launching the business to IPO day. About eighteen 
months from launch day.  
Santos: But was it something that you realized, that the market was going 
to peak? Or was it just a coincidence?  
Hoberman: Well, we knew the market was very positive for companies 
like ours, so we saw that the timing couldn’t get much better. But we didn’t 
know how the market would treat us. We didn’t know the price would go 
down ninety-five percent at one point either.  
Santos: And how did your role change after the company went public?  
Hoberman: Well, you always have a board, but I think the key thing is  
you have to spend a lot more time with public market investors obviously. 

Chapter 18 | Brent Hoberman: lastminute.com 
 
222  
Repeating yourself is never a good thing for an entrepreneur. Repeating the 
strategy and explaining the business to people who are less familiar with it, 
who are obviously not on your board and, therefore, not as exposed every 
day or every month to the data. So it’s more of an education process and 
again more of a selling process, constantly.  
Trying to sell the future cash flow to that professional investor audience. It’s 
a global audience, so you have to do a lot of traveling for that as well.  
Santos: You did fourteen acquisitions. Did you decide to grow only by  
acquisition?   
Hoberman: We grew one hundred percent organically through the growth 
of the core business. So I imagine that we got to something like £1.3 billion, 
by the time I left, in gross bookings. Half that business was organic. It was 
just under the core brand and it was growing at one hundred percent a year 
over the first, five-year period. The other half was through the fourteen ac-
quisitions that we built, obviously enabled by the large amount of money we 
raised. We raised about £200 million pounds—about one hundred and twen-
ty in the IPO, and seventy million in bonds, and then I guess about twenty 
before that. So about two hundred and ten. So obviously, between a mix of 
paper and cash, we were able to be very aggressive and to buy companies 
that we saw to be a strategic fit.   
Santos: How did you mix all those companies together while keeping a 
culture?  
Hoberman: It’s very hard to keep the founding entrepreneurs, particularly 
in this type of business where the technology is something that has to be-
come centralized or you have to replace all the technology. They don’t get 
the same levels of control that they’re used to. But to be honest, it was very 
much about our belief in the www.lastminute.com culture. So we were really 
trying to buy businesses that fit in and then could grow into that culture.  
Santos: And did you succeed?  
Hoberman: Not always. But, of course, with big companies, it’s definitely 
not always. But on the whole, I think the companies we bought were very 
good strategically. There’s probably one or two I wouldn’t have done, with 
hindsight, but that’s quite a good batting ratio. And I think where we could 
have done better is that our core systems, because we were such a fast- 
growing company, the core systems that we had were not necessarily ready 
to be plugged in to every type of business. Let’s say a French business or a 
German business that maybe needed a lot of modifications, lots of work on 
the back-end finances, etc., etc. So some of that slowed us down.  

European Founders at Work 
 
223  
Santos: And in 2005, the company was sold. What led to the sale?  
Hoberman: We weren’t necessarily for sale,  but we had multiple offers. 
We had three companies looking to acquire us. We were the last remaining 
independent strategic asset of our scale in Europe, so it made sense. As a 
public company, you’ve got to consider those offers. And basically, the fact 
that there were multiple offers, and we weren’t desperately keen on selling 
meant that you negotiate the best price for your shareholders. So basically, 
that’s what the thinking was and that there were some synergies to being 
part of a global company.  
Santos: Okay. And looking back, what were the main lessons from your 
experience at lastminute?  
Hoberman: The main lesson I guess I’m left with is to have an innovative 
idea that is slightly ahead of its time, and that the consumers and the media 
will be excited about that innovation. Another valuable lesson is to have a 
simple concept that you can explain very quickly to people. If they say, “I 
want that as a consumer,” and you can see yourself and many of your friends 
buying from it, then you’re probably onto a good thing. Another lesson is 
that to scale breaks some barriers. In our case, negotiating power with sup-
pliers and the ability to invest in cutting-edge technology. And the last lesson 
was that we could have done more investment earlier on in the back-end 
system to be more efficient at the back-end processes.  
Santos: Can you give me an idea of the main challenges that you had?  
Hoberman: I think it’s this constant issue of liquidity of supply. So getting 
enough amazing deals and balancing that with the right level of customer 
demand so you’re not getting stuff you can’t sell or getting stuff that sells 
out too quickly. And the second thing is that in those days, it was managing 
a web site, which I guess was one of the biggest web sites in Europe in scale. 
Being able to scale that effectively without it crashing and all that. And I 
think also rapid development—I believe that the more rapidly you develop 
and launch stuff, the more successful you will be. I believe it’s the right thing 
to just launch quickly and often. It is clearly the way to go. I guess I could 
have had more confidence in our ability to do that. Because it means if you 
make mistakes, you make smaller mistakes.  
Santos: My last question is what advice would you give to new  
entrepreneurs?  
Hoberman: Well, I guess one of them is it’s more exciting if you feel like 
you’re changing the world in a positive and innovative way. So launching in-
novative businesses that, therefore, having the potential to be growable 

Chapter 18 | Brent Hoberman: lastminute.com 
 
224  
rather than copycats, is more rewarding. Maybe not financially, but emo-
tionally and intellectually. So we’d love to see more of those out of Europe. 
And secondly, I guess, its tenacity. You have to know when to be tenacious. 
Or when you’re being tenacious and when you’re being just wrong. So, 
that’s a tough call. But definitely, you’ve got to be superbly tenacious, and 
there will be incredible barriers, and it’s always harder than you think. It 
takes longer than you think and it’s more expensive than you think. But it 
can also be more rewarding than you think. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
19 
Loic Le Meur 
Seesmic and LeWeb 
Loic Le Meur is the founder and CEO of Seesmic, a suite of social media man-
agement and collaboration tools. With his wife, Le Meur also founded LeWeb, the 
number-one tech event in Europe. LeWeb brings 3,000 entrepreneurs together 
every year. 
Prior to Seesmic and LeWeb, Le Meur started four other businesses. The first one, 
founded in1996, was B2L, one of the first web agencies in France. It was sold to 
BBDO in 1999. In 1997, he founded RapidSite, a shared hosting company that he 
sold to France Telecom in 1999. In 2000, he founded Tekora, a packaged web 
site solution. In 2003, he founded Ublog, a weblogs platform that was acquired by 
Six Apart in 2004. 
 
Pedro Santos: You founded several companies in France prior to moving 
to the US—all of them doing different things. You also sold a few. Can you 
talk briefly about each one of them and what lessons that you learned from 
them? 
Loic Le Meur: The first one I created on the campus of the business school 
I graduated from. That company is B2L. [It] was a digital web agency—one of 
the very first ones in France. It was founded in 1996 and we were basically 
creating web sites. We created also one of the first advertising banners in 
France as well. That company I created without any funding. I didn’t know 
what a business angel was. It grew from zero to one hundred people. It was 
breakeven, profitable, one of the top three agencies in France in a few years. 
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 19 | Loic Le Meur: Seesmic and LeWeb 
 
226  
Self-funded, I launched this with the remainder of my student loan. I sold it 
to an ad company, BBDO, in 1999. That was the first one. 
B2L was focusing on large brands—so Chanel Peugeot or Twentieth Cen-
tury Fox, all large companies and were pretty expensive. 
I had a lot of demand from small businesses, so I thought I should address 
those in a separate company. In ’97 I launched a company called RapidSite. 
Then my wife joined in and managed it with from the beginning. That was 
web hosting for small businesses. We were the first to introduce shared 
web hosting in France. RapidSite grew from zero to twenty thousand cus-
tomers in a few months and became very successful, also with no funding. It 
was breakeven when we sold it to France Telecom at the end of ’99. 
Those were my two first experiences. Then I started investing in many 
start-ups. Frankly, I think around fifteen start-ups. Remember the context: it 
was the 2000 bubble. It was before the bubble. 
Santos: Yes. 
Le Meur: So, that wasn’t the best choice, let’s say, but I learned the hard 
way that being a business angel or being an investor is not as easy as it might 
seem because I invested in a lot of companies that disappeared. But from 
let’s say 2000 to 2004, I also invested in LinkedIn. It wasn’t a big deal, be-
cause that’s pretty much what investors do. 
You lose on most of them and sometimes you have a winner. That was very 
key that I invested in LinkedIn. That was a big win for me. 
Then, in 2003, I launched a company, which I acquired from a developer 
who launched a service, called Ublog. That was one of the very first, if not 
the first, European blogging companies. I started to focus on promoting and 
growing the software as a blogging service phenomenon in Europe. 
If you look at how I evolved, B2L was very, very French and actually very 
Parisian. It was designed for Paris, like other agencies with customers in Par-
is. RapidSite was very French and nationwide, so I wanted a little more in 
terms of reach. I really wanted Ublog to be international on day one. That 
was my goal. 
I decided to discuss collaboration with the leader in blogging at the time, Six 
Apart, who is not the leader anymore, but was way before WordPress even 
existed. Then WordPress won, but at the time Six Apart was a leader and 
we merged. We were acquired by Six Apart and I became the head of Six 
Apart Europe. I kept going for a few years as the head of Europe for them, 
and you know the rest of the story. 

European Founders at Work 
 
227  
WordPress grew very fast and then Six Apart was acquired by SAY Media, 
which I think is doing very well now. It’s not such a bad thing. It’s actually a 
pretty good story, but it’s not a worldwide leader in blogging anymore. 
In 2004, in parallel to that, I launched LeWeb, which was called Les Blogs—
“the blogs” in French. 
The idea at the beginning was to promote blogging, but also I started to feel 
like I wanted to help Europe in the entrepreneurship scene. So LeWeb grew 
very fast and after two small editions, we had two hundred, and then four 
hundred people. LeBlog turned into LeWeb. Just because I wanted it to be-
come a place for entrepreneurs. The goal was very simple. It wasn’t meant 
as a business, which was an interesting change for me because it wasn’t that. 
I really wanted to help address the European entrepreneurs’ problems, and I 
knew them. One of them is that we’re all too local. If you’re in Spain, you 
tend to focus on Spain. If you’re French, you tend to focus on France. If 
you’re in Germany, and so on, and so forth. By the time you own your city 
or your country, generally there is an American business who did better, 
bigger, faster, and takes your best. 
The number of examples—YouTube vs. Dailymotion in France. Facebook vs 
Tuenti in Spain, or StudiVZ in Germany. Foursquare vs. tons of competitors, 
clones, and so on. 
I decided I wanted to help Europe, and I thought I’d get started by an event 
entirely in English, all international. Where the entire ecosystem would be. 
Entrepreneurs obviously, business angels, investors, bloggers—still are first-
class citizens of LeWeb.  
LeWeb grew from 2004 to today, from 200 people to more than three thou-
sand people in sixty countries. We didn’t raise money—it wasn’t meant as a 
business. Today, it’s a business lead by my wife and it’s doing amazingly well. 
I created Seesmic. Now we’re in 2007. What I wanted to do with Seesmic 
was to help the French president do his social networking campaign. I led 
the social networking efforts for Sarkozy for four months. I call it an intern-
ship in politics, and I know I’ll likely never, ever get close to politics again. It 
was a good experience. It was a very interesting experience, but I didn’t like 
it much. 
Santos: Before we go into Seesmic and your move to the US, the lessons 
you actually learned along the way apparently broadened your horizons. You 
said that you were looking more and more to the world and less to the local. 
Le Meur: Yes, I learned that it’s very difficult to build. I wanted to build 
something worldwide, which was a leader and was international. What I 
learned is that you tend to focus too local and that is a problem. 

Chapter 19 | Loic Le Meur: Seesmic and LeWeb 
 
228  
Then, the second lesson I learned is that copying US successes is a mistake. 
It’s killing European innovation. That’s the second one. I never did it that 
much, but I learned that. You need to focus innovation on something new and 
not look at importing models from the US that work. It might work. It might 
make you money, but I don’t think it’s the best you can spend your time on. 
Some people are proud of copying and making successes. I actually have 
friends who do that. I always give them a hard time because I don’t think it’s 
the best use of your time, but that’s just my opinion. 
Generally, my answer is, yes, that it’s much simpler to just make money. My 
goal has never been to make money first. That’s for sure. Ever. I make mon-
ey, but it’s never been number one. 
Any entrepreneur that puts financial success as number one generally won’t 
succeed. I know a few who succeed, but it’s very rare. They just focus on 
the one thing, I think. 
Then what else? I think the execution matters much more than the idea it-
self. I think that’s a European vs. US thing. I see two problems. One is their 
fear of failure, which is much more important in Europe than in the US. 
Here, [in the US] it’s okay if you fail. We accept it. It’s obvious. But I guess I 
should say it: people are much more fearful of failure in Europe. 
Then, two is the fact that they try to wait for the idea of their life, like a re-
volutionary idea, and that never comes. I think you should focus. Many 
people do that great in Europe, of course, but one of the lessons I learned is 
that you should really find a need, whatever the need, a little niche. 
Focus the time as much as possible in the beginning, and execute very well 
and just iterate. This is much more important than just trying to find an 
amazing idea. I think it’s much less about a revolutionary idea than execu-
tion. Execution matters much more than the idea. 
Santos: What was the biggest problems that you had to solve and over-
come, or not, in your companies? 
Le Meur: I’m hesitating between a few of them. One is dealing with the in-
vestment from VCs. That’s something challenging because you have to be 
sure. It’s not only about money, again. You have to surround yourself with 
smart people, who are ideally former entrepreneurs, because they understand 
you much better. That’s the challenge. Frankly, it’s the same in the US here. 
You can’t raise money from people who will keep asking you to justify every 
single decision you make and ask you to put them on paper and do another 
business plan to see “if we do this, then how would we look financially?” 

European Founders at Work 
 
229  
My point is one of the issues you can find evidence of pretty easily. I’ve seen 
many entrepreneurs do that. Even as an investor, as an entrepreneur myself, 
it makes the entrepreneur lose time by justifying himself all the time. That is 
a huge challenge. 
When anyone raises money, they should be really, really careful not only 
about the money, which is kind of secondary, but with who they are working 
with and how they will deal with that person or company. I would put as the 
number-one criteria a former entrepreneur as a VC is always better I think.  
Then another challenge, obviously more specific to Europe, is managing hu-
man resources. Definitely what is challenging for me has been adapting to cy-
cles. Technology is all about cycles. It’s cycles of three to five years. It goes 
up and down with the economy. But if you look at the last twenty years, it’s 
pretty obvious that it’s three- to five-year cycles. 
What’s challenging is you have to keep adapting yourself to those cycles. 
When the economy is good, it’s easy to raise funding. Companies get ac-
quired. You can hire easily. And then suddenly, with a down economy, you 
have to let some people go and that’s very tough, especially in Europe. It’s 
very difficult because you don’t have the flexibility which is here in the US. 
Here, people say that they fire fast and they hire slow. In Europe, it’s im-
possible to fire fast. That is probably something pretty controversial I’m 
saying here, which I’ve blogged a lot about and I’ve gotten a lot of Europe-
ans going after me for this because Europe likes social protection, and I un-
derstand why. 
I’m not that crazy guy who thinks everything should be money-driven. On 
the contrary, but just the fact that if you can, as a CEO, adapt the size of 
your team, based on the economy, fast, then you can also hire really fast 
when it comes back. 
In Europe, a big problem is obviously all the social blows that make it ex-
tremely expensive to decrease the size of the team. Therefore, people  
hire less because they are scared. They don’t know how they’re going to 
adapt easily. 
That’s a challenge for sure in Europe, which I don’t think has evolved at all 
since I started working in ’96. Over the last fifteen years, I don’t think much 
has changed. 
Something I find in Silicon Valley is that people can find a job so easily that 
they understand if something bad happens. It’s more like the CEO is actu-
ally weaker than the employee here. You have to understand that. Even in 
the recession, people find jobs more easily. But it’s more like: if you have 

Chapter 19 | Loic Le Meur: Seesmic and LeWeb 
 
230  
an engineer, you worry more about keeping him, than the reverse. It’s very 
different than Europe. 
People in the US think as freelancers. They are very independent. If it doesn’t 
work, it doesn’t work. That’s okay and they find something else. In Europe, I 
don’t know why, there always has to be some kind of crisis.  
You don’t feel that much here. It has to be a tension in Europe. While here, 
I have to say—and again, this is probably something controversial—I had to 
let go of some people. We had a very smart, normal and good conversation 
about it. We both thanked each other for the opportunity and we kept in 
touch. I gave him a recommendation on LinkedIn. Often I help them find a 
job as well, but it doesn’t have to be a tension. 
That’s a huge difference between Europe and here. I find that it’s very often 
tense—something that has to end up in a conflict somehow in Europe. 
Santos: I would like to move on to Seesmic and your move to the US. Was 
it personal or was it related to the company?  
Le Meur: It was personal. Seesmic did not exist when I was in Europe. 
Seesmic has been here since day one. 
Santos: But did you move to Silicon Valley with this idea already? 
Le Meur: No, it was a personal project that I wanted to do, but it’s related 
to my business obviously. I was frustrated to be too … isolated, meaning, if 
you want to do a deal with Twitter, there is nothing with Twitter in Europe. 
Maybe there is one now in the UK, but you see what I mean. If you want to 
talk to Facebook, generally in Europe, it’s more like marketing and sales. So, 
I wanted to be close to the heart of the engine. The heart of the engine is 
here. The core is here. So, that’s something I’d been wanting to do for fif-
teen years. 
I decided to do that. To do that with my whole family, my three boys and my 
wife, because I just wanted to be at the center and see how it is and how dif-
ferent it is from Europe. It was really unrelated to Seesmic. 
Santos: When you founded Seesmic, your vision was to create an online 
community for video bloggers. Correct? 
Le Meur: No, not video bloggers, per se. That’s how people think about it, 
but what I thought about was very simple. You could see the rise of social 
networking already in 2007. Facebook was there and smaller networks were 
there. I had a very simple thought. I thought about the talk shows you see 
on TV. You have talk shows on the radio. People debate society, technol-
ogy, whatever. They debate, and they debate online and text a lot. 

European Founders at Work 
 
231  
All the threads, the comments, the forums, whatever you want, the blogs, 
but it’s all rigid. I thought that video was fantastic in a way that you could see 
the feelings. You get so much more from a person if you see that person, or 
if you hear that person, like we’re doing right now, than text only. 
I wanted to build a place where we could discuss building video, and I think 
it will still happen. But I think I was probably literally ten years too early. 
That’s my conclusion. 
We launched it and we picked one hundred thousand users, which were early 
adopters who like video. Then we hit a wall because it didn’t grow more than 
that. With the wall not being technology—it was nothing to do with technol-
ogy—but because the quality of the video was poor. That changed a lot today, 
already. What you can get on an iPhone is amazing compared to 2007. The 
quality of the video was bad and people didn’t like the way they looked. 
Then there are human factors that people don’t like very much generally in 
video, even in HD. They don’t like to record themselves. It’s very challeng-
ing to talk to a camera alone, obviously, and they are shy. Video is some-
thing that you can do in private. That’s why Sky Video and so on is going so 
fast, but not so much in public. 
If you think about it, most of the people who show up in public in video are 
professionals, journalists and crazy bloggers and things. So, we decided to 
give up because it wasn’t growing anymore. I bet it will still happen, just to 
close that chapter. It will happen. 
If you look at hangouts in Google+, it has something of Seesmic video from 
seven years ago, because you can see the video of the person talking. It’s 
just much better execution because we couldn’t do what they can do today 
in terms of quality. 
Santos: The technology evolved a lot since then, of course. 
Le Meur: Yes, but it failed. Let’s face it. It failed. So, I went to my board and 
we discussed the options. One option was just to stop. But there was fund-
ing in Seesmic and that was definitely an option. The other option was to fo-
cus on this new shiny thing that was growing called Twitter. I suggested to 
my board that we [do] that because I had so much passion in Twitter. I de-
cided to suggest to my board that we should focus on that and build applica-
tions, and I thought there would have been a huge success or huge successes 
around Twitter, like there were around Facebook. 
The future proved me wrong, but that’s how we felt at the time. We de-
cided to change Seesmic’s direction and started to build Twitter applications 
on the desktop, web, and mobile. For the last two years, we created iPhone, 

Chapter 19 | Loic Le Meur: Seesmic and LeWeb 
 
232  
Android, Windows Phone 7.0 even, and desktop and web applications for 
Twitter. We reached a very good number of users, still today using it, but 
Twitter completely changed. 
It was heaven with Twitter. We were presenting our road map and every-
thing that we were building to the whole Twitter company at lunch. I re-
member that moment very well. We had most of the Twitter team in front 
of us, helping us and telling us, “This is awesome. We’re just the type who 
love to offer something on our ecosystem.” All of that. Suddenly, they 
changed strategy. 
Anyway, they changed strategy and decided to—this is me speaking—
compete with Facebook. One of the things they wanted was to control  
the UI and the way their users interact with them, so take control of the 
applications at all times. 
At the time, they had no mobile applications. We and others were making 
mobile applications. They acquired Tweetie on iPhone, so that was the begin-
ning of the end for clients like us—a total change of direction without any no-
tice to the ecosystem. They were threatened by someone called Bill Gross, 
who was about to acquire TweetDeck, which accounted for about ten per-
cent of the tweets being sent daily. Bill Gross tried to acquire it, so they ac-
quired TweetDeck so he could not have it, and it was my main competition.  
I ended up being a competitor to my main partner so I had to change. 
Then, finally, to finish it, they decided to communicate very clearly that you 
didn’t want developers like us creating clients that would compete with 
theirs. So, we had to, again, change direction. That was a pretty wild entre-
preneurship adventure: I think I can say I had a lot of headwind... 
Put on top of this the fact that I launched this thing in 2007. Then there was 
a really bad crisis in 2008, so that wasn’t the best year. 
Anyway, that’s the story of Seesmic. So, we had to give up, which is very dif-
ficult for a company, when you’ve done it once, to do it a second time. We 
did it. We started to focus more on another ecosystem, which was a sales 
force, that kind of an ecosystem. 
We are just opting now to build mobile applications, which are more like 
social CRM. Most of these are customer relationship management to help 
salespeople manage their leads and opportunities.  
We have, however, a few products that are hits. For example, our Android 
app is a big hit. It’s installed in over half a million phones and it’s going real-
ly, really fast. So we are keeping them, but we’re also doing something else. 
I don’t know if it’s going to work or not because we launched two weeks 

European Founders at Work 
 
233  
weeks ago. That’s where I am. I hope it will work, but it’s been a pretty 
wild adventure. 
Santos: What is the main lesson that you took from the first pivot, and al-
so from the dependency of a single vendor in this case, which was Twitter? 
Le Meur: Well, that it’s very risky, obviously, to build on only one plat-
form. That was pretty obvious. I knew the risk, but of course I think I’ll 
probably be much more careful in the future. It’s interesting, by the way, to 
see these things we are doing today that are the completely the opposite 
strategy of Google+. Regardless of whether Google+ succeeds or not, it’s 
very interesting to see how Google does it this time. They don’t open the 
API. The API is barely opened today. You can do pretty much nothing. You 
can just look for files. 
They don’t let developers in, and I talked to Google about it. They said, 
“Yes, we don’t want you to be angry. We are changing the core tools so 
fast these days that if we had developers in here, we could break your apps. 
So, we decided to not open it.” 
It’s very interesting because it seems to me that even Google learned from 
it. Because at first, they had not done that, right? 
I think Google learned from what happened in the Twitter ecosystem by 
doing the exact opposite, so that’s interesting. Their working with platforms 
has definitely been extremely interesting and a good learning curve.  
Santos: What else?  
Le Meur: Well, that you have to be very agile as an entrepreneur, but I 
think I’ve always been. I think whatever the success or not of Seesmic is that 
people recognize that. I think as an entrepreneur you have to try and to 
keep changing, inputting, and just keep moving, right? 
You can never stay on something that does not pick up. That’s something I 
knew already. I’ve always been like that. But, if you look at most successes, 
they’ve not been what they used to be. Groupon isn’t what it used to be. 
Skype was a Wi-Fi sharing software. We can go on and on. It’s just normal. 
It’s just that you need to embrace, as an entrepreneur, the fact that when 
you start something, what matters is where you’re going, not where you 
started. It’s very likely that you will end up in a different place than what you 
had in mind. 
That’s why the business plan at the beginning doesn’t matter that much, be-
cause you keep changing. Take LeWeb, it has not raised funding. It’s a very 
specific type of start-up, I would say. But if you take LeWeb, if you had told 

Chapter 19 | Loic Le Meur: Seesmic and LeWeb 
 
234  
me in 2004 it would have three thousand people and be such a huge thing—
I didn’t have any idea it would become like this. 
What matters, really, is to adapt, keep working hard, be always proactive in 
the relationship to your board if you raise money. It’s very important obvi-
ously to be straightforward and honest, explain the problems as you know 
them. Don’t hide anything. 
Never hide any bad news. Discuss the bad news and be proactive. Meaning, 
don’t expect your investors to come with a solution—always come with an 
alternative yourself. 
That’s how I’ve been doing it, but it’s been tough. Let’s face it. Should I have 
known in 2007 in which direction I was heading, I would have probably have 
done something else. 
Santos: I can imagine. How can you convince the board to pivot twice? Is it 
because you were always open? 
Le Meur: Yes, that’s one. Two, they value entrepreneurs who keep trying. 
The history of entrepreneurship is full of stories like this. Look at Twitter. 
Twitter was born from a deal which was a big failure that the Twitter foun-
ders did. They were coming close to being out of cash. They had no idea of 
re-entry, no idea what to do, and Odeo was failing. That’s when Jack 
Dorsey, who was just a developer at the time, got the idea of Twitter. 
Some investors didn’t follow into Twitter. They took Evan William's money 
who acquired Odeo and did not invest in Twitter, because Odeo was a fail-
ure. Today, it's a big mistake, right? 
Santos: Yes. 
Le Meur: So, this story is full of entrepreneurs who fail at something, then 
make a huge success on something else. You never know what’s going to 
happen. 
Santos: Where do you think that Seesmic would be if you would have 
founded it in France, like any of the previous companies that you did? 
Le Meur: It would have been more difficult, I would have likely made some-
thing more local. If you live in Paris and you’re French, you have lunch with 
French friends, you see French journalists, and you talk to the French blog-
gers. There is nothing wrong with that, but what you end up with is a very 
French company. 
What would have been different is that it would probably have been very 
French. That’s the first thing. Two, I could never have done what I’ve done 

European Founders at Work 
 
235  
with Twitter. Now, it was probably not such a bad thing after the fact. But 
what I have done: being close to a platform [Twitter] and build with them 
was only possible because we were a few blocks away. 
Actually, I’m wrong because there were developers all over the world doing 
things with them. But let’s say it helped a lot. So, that was probably a bad 
thing after the fact, but I enjoyed it. 
I enjoy being a few blocks away from Google, Facebook, Twitter, or half an 
hour drive, again. I enjoy it and that is a key component of Silicon Valley. I 
love kayak surfing, for example, and when I go kayak surfing, I always bump 
into friends from Facebook and Google. 
If you go to a restaurant here, everyone you meet is related to technology, 
and that is very refreshing. Something that gives you good ideas. It also puts 
you at the top of what’s happening here because you get to talk to them all 
the time. 
It’s like a big campus. In Silicon Valley, it’s like you never leave university, 
you never graduate. You are here. All the restaurants, all the parties, all the 
sports, all of the work obviously, everything is between San Francisco and 
San Jose, and I would even say San Francisco and Black Mountain. Anyway, 
that changes everything. It puts you in a really different map and I really en-
joy it. It helps me become more visible here and I’m more international. But, 
is that a good thing at the end? I’m not sure. 
The deal we did with Six Apart, I could not have gotten them in France.  
It’s just because I got to know them here. I think my personal network has 
evolved a lot, from being very European-centric, which is not a bad thing, 
again.  
Santos: You got $16 million funding for Seesmic. Did you raise venture 
capital for any of the previous companies? 
Le Meur: Well, Six Apart raised funding, but it wasn’t me directly. I raised 
funding for companies I was involved with in the past, which I didn’t de-
scribe here because they were more like investments than anything else, but 
yes, I had raised funding before. 
Santos: How different was it to raise capital ten years ago and now? How 
different is it between Europe and the US? 
Le Meur: Well, that won’t be easy to answer because most of the funding 
on Seesmic was raised from European investors. Most of my funding is com-
ing from Europe. I think the way that it’s changed in ten years is that there 
are obviously plenty of business angels, which wasn’t the case. There are 

Chapter 19 | Loic Le Meur: Seesmic and LeWeb 
 
236  
more and more business angels. I would say it’s much easier. Money has be-
come easier to find. 
Basically, there is one side, which is that there are lots of investors. If you 
have a good project and a good team, it’s pretty easy to raise funding. I 
would say both in Europe and the US. That has changed a lot in ten years. I 
think there are a ton of investors. Now, there is not a wealth of good inves-
tors, so you need to be careful, of course. That’s what has probably changed. 
There is a lot of money [in] start-ups. There is a lot of attention on start-
ups. We see it with LeWeb. We received more than five hundred candi-
dates for our start-up competition already. 
Santos: You also build many different types of businesses. What things do 
you consider when you start thinking about a venture? 
Le Meur: I follow my feelings. As you can see, sometimes I’m wrong, as 
everyone is. I was very right with LeWeb and very wrong with Twitter or 
with video conversation. So I don’t know. I follow my feelings. I follow the 
needs I see, the vision I have, and I have made a lot of mistakes. Seesmic 
clearly was way ahead of its time, and still would be today. But I think it will 
work. We’ll talk about it in ten years.  
Santos: [laughs] 
Le Meur: For Twitter, I was just totally attracted to it. I thought it was also 
incredible and I wanted to build something around it. The mistake was 
probably to put all my bets on one partner, as we discussed. 
I think it’s a combination of traction—we got a lot of traction in both cases 
at the beginning—and a vision for what it will be. Clearly, Twitter today is 
not what I had in mind a few years ago. I would have likely built on Face-
book if you had told me what would happen. Then the Twitter app was an 
opportunity in revenue, of course, which is probably one of the weaknesses 
of Silicon Valley that I’ve been influenced by. You tend to be influenced. 
Here people build products, full products. They like products, they build a 
product, a product being a software application or a web site. Obviously it 
doesn’t have to be in hardware. But they build a product first and then they 
see if it works. 
You have a lot of investors who support that. They support it. They put 
money in the product, then they see if it works, and then they worry about 
revenues. It’s very unusual. Technology is a very unusual business if you 
think about it this way, because any business would start by revenue first. 

European Founders at Work 
 
237  
What’s the opportunity in revenue, and then how do you build it, and how 
much money do you need? 
Here it’s the opposite. People have ideas for a product. They go to investors 
who bet on those products and revenue is generally secondary, because they 
all think big, which is very refreshing. Here either your reach begins with us-
ers or it doesn’t matter that much. 
You could criticize that, but it’s one of the beauties and one of the weak-
nesses of Silicon Valley. People bet on products. They don’t worry too 
much about revenue. If it doesn’t reach millions of users, then it doesn’t 
matter. You should move on to something else. Pretty interesting way of 
thinking, right? 
Santos: Yes. 
Le Meur: I think it’s very different from Europe. Europe is probably more 
down-to-earth, and people think much more about the revenue, which is 
great to create businesses which last longer. But it is probably harder in 
Europe in that it innovates less, because you have less-crazy investors financ-
ing crazy entrepreneurs, frankly. When they created Twitter, they had no 
idea about the revenue. Frankly, today, I am not sure if they still know ex-
actly how to do it. I don’t know if they are generating too much revenue. 
But, in the case of Facebook, it was the same. Zuckerberg didn’t want ad-
vertising at the beginning—and look at the billions they are generating now. 
So, if you didn’t finance all of that in the beginning, you wouldn’t have such a 
powerful network today reaching nearly eight hundred million people. 
The same with YouTube. If you didn’t lose money for ten years, you wouldn’t 
have what is today the number-one video content in the world. It is fascinat-
ing and frightening at the same time. 
You don’t see that in Europe. Very rarely. It is much more rare. In fact, I 
don’t know if it’s one of your questions, but if it’s not, I want to talk about it 
now. I think Europe is changing and I can see that. I have three examples. 
We used to, for ten years, always talk about Skype and lastminute.com, and 
basically not that many successes and always the same. Today, I think that 
there is a new breed of entrepreneurs who are a new generation, who 
don’t want to do copycats. They hate copycats and they don’t want to copy 
Silicon Valley and they don’t want to think local either, so they don’t want 
to do Germany, or Spain, or France, and they are very ambitious. 
So, those three criteria combined. One, international. Two, innovation and 
no copycat. And then, three, big ambition from the funders surrounded by 

Chapter 19 | Loic Le Meur: Seesmic and LeWeb 
 
238  
a new generation of venture capitalists. This makes the beginning of first 
successes. 
Straight in my mind, obviously, Angry Birds, Spotify, SoundCloud are our 
new generation. This year, throughout the web, we’re going to make them 
icons of this new Europe. If you talk to them, they all say, “We hate copy-
cats.” That’s great to see. 
They are financed by VCs who understand that and they kick butt worldwide, 
including in the US where Spotify is winning here now.  
That’s very refreshing, very new, which probably means that Europe is 
changing. It is slow, but it’s very refreshing. On LeWeb, we’ve got five hun-
dred–plus start-up candidates to be on stage, which is amazing as well. 
Santos: The ecosystem is evolving very rapidly. 
Le Meur: Exactly. 
Santos: In the last three years, I would say. 
Le Meur: Yeah, because with the internet, also, you can be in Silicon Valley 
without being in Silicon Valley. It used to be difficult to get access to all the 
sources, what people think and the news. Now, you just click and every-
body has the same information. 
Santos: What advice would you give to aspiring founders? To the next 
generation? 
Le Meur: Well, I think I’m going to repeat myself, but focus on execution, 
not really on the idea. So, take something that you think is a need and try to 
build a prototype as cheap and fast as possible. My favorite quote of all time 
is Reid Hoffman, founder of LinkedIn, my friend, who says, “If you’re not 
ashamed of your product when you launch it, you launched it too late.” 
That’s really good. So, I think you should launch fast. Fail fast, if it doesn’t 
work.  
You should focus on execution. I think that we forget too much, including 
me, about it in Silicon Valley. You should absolutely think about revenue at 
the very beginning, even if it is a product you are building. I think you need 
to focus on international and building for international, day one, and not lo-
cally, especially if you’re in Europe, because it’s tempting. I know if I moved 
back to France, I would be tempted again to do French just because it’s nat-
ural. Everybody you talk to, they text and they won’t like to see English. 
They’ll want it in French or in Portuguese, and so on. So that’s an issue. 

European Founders at Work 
 
239  
I would be careful with taking too much money—I know what I’m talking 
about—because it can influence you sometimes. Sometimes scarcity is good. 
If you think about LeWeb, it’s a huge success and we never raised money. It 
doesn’t have a team. My only team on LeWeb is my wife and me doing the 
program, and it’s a huge success. Another interesting one is to get the fund-
ing you need, if you need it. If you don’t need it, you can also do it. 
Santos: Bootstrap it. 
Le Meur: Right, don’t think that raising $10 million is a must-do and it’s ab-
solutely necessary. That’s wrong. And I actually think raising too much money, 
too fast, is probably a problem as well. Don’t spend too much on the initial 
business plans, in planning and forecasting, because you will likely give up once 
or twice more. That’s why it doesn’t matter that much. I didn’t say revenue 
doesn’t matter. I said that trying to model everything is, because it will not 
happen the way that you thought it would. 
Santos: When you hit the real customer it will. 
Le Meur: Exactly, and that’s okay. You have to discuss this with your inves-
tors. If you must have investors, you should only take investors that under-
stand that pivoting will happen.  
Santos: What did you see to be the main differences in setting up a busi-
ness in the US and in France in terms of the legal things like paperwork and 
accounting? 
Le Meur: Frankly, I think that setting up a business is easy both in the US 
and in France. It’s a cliché that it is complicated in France. It is easy. Now, 
what’s very different is that you have much less social rules, and burden and 
things to do. Like in France, when you start your business and you start 
adding employees, there are a lot of things to do and you get a lot of mail.  
If you decide to begin, you should absolutely—even if you don’t have mon-
ey—have a lawyer and someone doing your books to make sure that 
you’re legal. You have to put this $2,000 a month as the beginning invest-
ment in that. 
My advice would be don’t try to do it yourself, even if it’s some money, 
some investment, just because you will not do it well and your time is much 
better on your business. 
I don’t think it’s complicated in either country. What’s hugely different of 
course is that here [Silicon Valley], you can be fired as a boss, and with an 
employee leaving you—and that happens all the time, very fast, with adver-
tising—you can also ask someone to leave. There [France] it won’t be. Too 
many things to deal with. It’s just very easy here. 

Chapter 19 | Loic Le Meur: Seesmic and LeWeb 
 
240  
If you ask someone to leave here, there is no notice period. In France, it’s a 
three-months-minimum salary. Then it increases, as employees have stayed 
a long time. It can be six months. It can be pretty big and expensive. 
“Here it is two weeks, if you’re nice.” It’s crazy. I think it’s extreme, by the 
way. But, as an entrepreneur, obviously it is a good thing, because we are 
very flexible and very agile. 
Santos: You can adapt to the market first. 
Le Meur: That and the employees think as entrepreneurs themselves, be-
cause they know it can happen. They always think about it. They are more 
like in a freelancer’s relationship. It’s people getting together in a team to do 
a task, and if it doesn’t work, it doesn’t work. There is no drama. 
It doesn’t work and we move on. We do something else and we stay good 
friends. That’s what’s basically very different. That’s a huge, huge difference. 
But apart from that, all the rest is, frankly, creating a business, then dealing 
with your books and paying your taxes. It’s not a big deal in both sides. 
 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
20 
Eric Wahlforss 
SoundCloud 
Eric Wahlforss is a co-founder of Berlin-based SoundCloud, where he is responsi-
ble for product development and overall company strategy. His background as an 
electronic music artist plays a key in his work at SoundCloud.  
Before moving to Berlin, he co-authored a book, People, Profiles & Trust: On In-
terpersonal Trust in Web-Mediated Social Spaces (Lulu.com, 2008). Earlier in 
his career, he worked as an interaction designer for gate5, a location-based services 
company.  
SoundCloud started in Stockholm, Sweden, but was established in Berlin, Germany, 
in 2007. The initial vision for SoundCloud was to allow musicians to share record-
ings with each other; but it evolved into a full publishing tool. 
In 2009, SoundCloud received €2.5 million Series A funding from Doughty Hanson 
Technology Ventures and in January 2011 raised an undisclosed Series B funding 
round from Union Square Ventures and Index Ventures.  
In May 2010, SoundCloud had one million subscribers. By June 2011, the company 
had five million users and by November the number had grown to eight million. 
SoundCloud also has investments from actor Ashton Kutcher and Guy Oseary’s A-
Grade Fund. 
 
Pedro Santos: How did the actual idea for SoundCloud appear? 
Eric Wahlforss: Alex [Ljung], the other co-founder, and I have a back-
ground in sound and music, so we were both working in that area. I was 
doing music and Alex was working in the sound studio. We met doing  
 
© Pedro Gairifo Santos 2012
P. G. Santos, European Founders at Work

Chapter 20 | Eric Wahlforss: SoundCloud 
 
242  
engineering studies. We were writing our thesis down in Silicon Valley for 
three months. And we were talking a lot about different ideas there. And 
then when we came back, we got really into the idea of making something 
in the space of music because we were both frustrated with the tools avail-
able for music sharing online. 
So we, we did that. And basically, it began. We were still in school. We were 
still studying, both in our last year. 
And, we ended up spending most of our time working on the actual product. 
At one point, we realized that we need to go somewhere else to do this. 
Maybe we should, we should leave Stockholm. So we went around in Europe 
and researched a little bit. We went to London, we went to Barcelona, went 
to Vienna, actually, and checked it out, and—yeah, decided in the end to 
move to Berlin. So that’s kind of how the idea started up. 
Santos: And what was the reason that made you decide Berlin vs. London 
vs. Barcelona? What was the thing that made Berlin so special for you to de-
cide to move there? 
Wahlforss: I have a background in Berlin. I was there in 2001. I was work-
ing at a company called gate5 that got sold to Nokia. I knew the founder of 
that company pretty well. He is really a great guy. He is now a quite well-
known business angel in Berlin. Christophe Maire. 
He is the one that convinced us to move to Berlin because he was able to 
hook us up with some really good other angels and investors. And he 
showed us a bit of the scene, not only that there is a music scene in Berlin, 
because that we knew. I mean, we were really excited about the music scene 
here, but it was also that there is a music software cluster here as well. 
So that’s interesting. Berlin is really a good city for a software start-up today. 
The rents are quite cheap, there is a creative atmosphere, there is a lot going 
on. Basically, the whole city is like one big start-up. 
Santos: Going back to SoundCloud, did it change from the original idea to 
what it is now? How did you tweak it and what was the learning process? 
Wahlforss: I think it took us quite a while. It took us a few months to get 
to the initial idea that seemed like it could work in a scalable way. So that 
took a couple of months, tweaking and prototyping a little bit and thinking 
about it. Then, as we had agreed more on a more final idea, we started de-
veloping that, but we’ve been very iterative in our development. We’ve been 
listening very closely to our users for a very long time. 
And I think we were adjusting a little bit to our users’ needs as well. But, 
still, I think there’s been a pretty strong vision behind it, and the vision has 

European Founders at Work 
 
243  
expanded gradually to become larger. In the beginning, it was more for CMI 
[Computer Musical Instrument] professionals and other professionals and it 
was geared mostly for music. Now it’s all about “anybody can be a creator” 
and it’s not only music—it’s all kinds of sounds. We’re all about sound crea-
tors. And that potential user base is much, much bigger. So that’s on the 
order of hundreds of millions of people, whereas we used to be maybe on 
the order of tens of millions. Or even in the millions. 
Santos: How do you decide which customers to listen to and which ones 
not? Do you have a process behind it? Or is it intuition? 
Wahlforss: It’s a little bit of both, so it’s both intuition and process. And it’s 
synthesizing needs of many different people and trying to understand the ho-
listic perspective, or the holistic picture. 
To see if there’s something—because usually they are not very concrete 
about exactly what it is they need. They can maybe talk about the problem, 
but they cannot exactly specify the solution. Or they are very specific and 
they say, “I want this. I need this specific solution.” But that’s a sign that they 
want a solution to a problem and they might not necessarily have the right 
solution for it. So usually, it comes back to taking a step back, trying to un-
derstand the larger picture, and synthesize many different requirements into 
something that’s scalable. 
That’s usually the key challenge. But then, we have a lot of our own vision in 
this. We have the philosophy that people aren’t going to tell you exactly 
what it is they want, but when they see it, they will want it. I would say we 
have a strong vision that we are also executing on. 
Santos: In the early days of SoundCloud, when you were developing the 
prototype and launching it, how did you get the first listeners and the first 
music into the platform?  
Wahlforss: That’s a really good question. I think one of the things we’ve 
done best is building our community. Just a few months into the project, we 
had a community manager on board. Both Alex and I were answering support 
e-mails. We were actively reaching out to our network. I used to be an active 
musician. I’m actually still doing music, but I used to be doing it almost on a 
professional basis, so I have a couple hundred people in my network that I 
was reaching out to as well. And we kind of got lucky in the sense that we 
found a very strong niche from the start in electronic music. And a couple of 
key people in that niche, people that I knew from before, friends of those 
people, ended up becoming very strong drivers for the whole community. 

Chapter 20 | Eric Wahlforss: SoundCloud 
 
244  
Santos: In the last four months, you passed from five million users to eight 
million users. How are you dealing with the almost exponential growth of 
users?  
Wahlforss: I mean, it’s like everybody says: it’s a good problem to have. But 
it is very hard. It is very hard in a sense, on many different levels, but ulti-
mately, for me, it comes down to scaling the organization. And that is more 
complicated than scaling the technology, or scaling up our community efforts, 
or whatever it might be. The hardest part is the fact that this leads to us hav-
ing to recruit a lot of people and integrate and build a great team. And the 
team is what it always comes down to. It comes down to great teamwork 
behind all these things. So, that’s the key challenge for me in the meantime. 
Santos: And, how do you tackle that challenge? How do you keep the cul-
ture while growing so fast?  
Wahlforss: Yes, that’s not very easy.  
We try very hard to keep the start-up culture. We’re about eighty people 
now, so we are a slightly larger company, but we’re still trying to keep that 
atmosphere, to keep a very flat organization, and to empower people to do 
stuff independently. That’s the key. That’s the best approach we’ve found so 
far. I think—in terms of hiring—we’re constantly stepping up our hiring bar, 
so it’s a lot of international hiring. It’s trying to find the very best people in 
the world.  
A key challenge is to get and to motivate people to come to Berlin. And then 
it’s a challenge keeping multiple offices synched up and sharing the same cul-
ture. We have offices in London and San Francisco, for example, and that’s 
also challenging. 
Santos: What is the key driver for you to have an office in London and Sili-
con Valley?  
Wahlforss: The London office we’ve had for quite a while. And that’s mainly 
about our content partners and our community creation efforts. Because 
we’re doing so and they have a very clear focus. We have a very good guy 
there who runs the London office and he’s a very early employee in the com-
pany, so he has quite some experience and we know each other really well. 
So that’s working out well. And that’s absolutely key for us, to be present in 
the UK or to be present in London because that’s where a lot of the music 
initiatives are happening as well. 
In San Francisco, it’s more about a business focus. We are going to have op-
erations people there. We are going to have community people there as 
well. But the strong driver there is the business angle because in the Valley 

European Founders at Work 
 
245  
and in San Francisco, many of our important partners are there or they are 
passing through there on a regular basis, so it’s the best place for networking 
and hooking up with the rest of the industry. 
Santos: And you have an open API where other companies can build on top 
of it. Why did you decide to have it open? And what are the main benefits 
that you got from it until now? 
Wahlforss: Well, our API, I mean, that’s like fifty percent of our product. 
It’s really, really important because we’re a piece of infrastructure for sound 
sharing, so we’re very much like YouTube or Flickr in the sense that we are 
a platform. So that was absolutely essential because a lot of the use cases 
that people have with the site is that they want to store sounds in one way 
or another, but to integrate them in some other context. So whether it’s 
sharing sound from a sound-creating application or discovering sound on 
some third-party site—we can power those things. 
So that was very key. We also want to keep SoundCloud very focused as a 
product. We want to keep it simple to use and not bloat the features set, or 
bloat the product. So then having an API is a very good way of doing that be-
cause you can give the power users—the people who really need very spe-
cialized things—the tools they need so that they can build on top of the API. 
Whereas the rest get a very simple product. So I think it’s a win-win situation. 
Santos: And did you have the vision to have the API from the start? 
Wahlforss: Actually, more or less. We were very inspired by Flickr at the 
start. We wanted to do a Flickr for sound. So, that’s kind of what it is. Flickr 
had a very successful API, back in the day, and we modeled it like that. 
Santos: Regarding the business model, did you have the premium users 
from the start or did it change? 
Wahlforss: In terms of the business model, the premium idea was in the 
product from very early on. Actually, at the point when we launched pub-
licly in 2008, the model was already in place, so that’s been in there. We 
made tweaks a few times to our pricing model and so on, and that’s helped 
a lot in terms of increasing the conversion, but, yeah, the model remains 
largely the same. 
Santos: And in terms of the API and the business development, do you make 
agreements with companies or is it completely free and open to be used? 
Wahlforss: We still don’t have any partner that’s actually paying money. I 
believe we have a few agreements in place, but they’re not very strict at all. 
It’s relatively straightforward and we try to keep it very informal. 

Chapter 20 | Eric Wahlforss: SoundCloud 
 
246  
Santos: Until now, have you had any problems with copyright content? 
How do you prevent someone from uploading copyrighted content? 
Wahlforss: So one of the cooler parts of our infrastructure is our content 
ID system. We are constantly developing it and we’re working hard on mak-
ing sure that every piece of content that gets submitted to the site is filtered. 
And if it’s copyrighted content, that content gets taken down. So if you try 
to upload a Madonna track or whatever to SoundCloud now, it won’t work. 
So that system is already in place. There are a lot of technical challenges with 
that, but we’re making great progress, so it’s looking good. 
Santos: In the beginning, how did you cope with that problem?  
Wahlforss: The nice thing was that in the very beginning, and even today, 
we’ve had a very strong SoundCloud community, because they’re all creators 
on the site. So, people have a very strong sense of what’s appropriate on the 
site and what’s not and what the site is about. So the piracy issue or the 
copyright issue hasn’t been a very big one. It’s only lately now that we have 
millions and millions of users that we really need to tackle it. 
Santos: And looking back at the history of SoundCloud until now, what 
were the main challenges that you’ve had to face, both technically and in the 
organization? 
Wahlforss: I think probably the single biggest challenge we had was raising 
funds in early 2009 because the climate was so bad and we essentially had 
very little money. We pretty much had no money at all, so we were fund-
raising in that climate. And that was really tough because we had a site that 
very few people understood would be something big. And most VCs were a 
bit scared to invest at all, in any kind of company, and even less so in a com-
pany that has a lot to do with the music industry. They’ve seen what has 
happened to sites like imeem and Myspace and so on. 
So that was very tricky. I think in terms of technical challenges, we’ve had a 
few big things. We just had recently a DDoS [distributed denial-of-service] 
attack, so we had almost twenty-four hours of outage because of that. And 
so security challenges are kind of increasing. We’ve had issues with scaling in 
various ways, but that’s kind of an ongoing thing. 
Santos: You raised the first funds in 2009, but how did you survive the first 
two years? Was it business angel money? 
Wahlforss: We took one original angel and then we took a second one. 
So in total about €400,000 of angel money. So a very small amount actually, 
in total. 

European Founders at Work 
 
247  
Santos: And the second amount that you got in 2009, was it from a Euro-
pean venture capital firm or from an American?  
Wahlforss: It was from a European. I was Doughty Hanson Technology 
Ventures. Doughty Hanson understood us, so they were one of the few who 
really got it. And they decided to do a round. 
Santos: Okay. And how much time did it actually take you to raise the first 
round?  
Wahlforss: The first round was painful. The first round took almost six 
months.  
Santos: And did you tour around Europe? Did you go to the US? How did 
you try to raise this round? 
Wahlforss: I can’t remember. I don’t think we actually went to the US. We 
went to London several times and we went to a few conferences. We did 
meet a couple of US VCs, but none of them were interested. 
Santos: What were the main lessons personally that you learned by building 
SoundCloud until now? 
Wahlforss: I started out having an engineering mindset. Building stuff di-
rectly. So, working very hands-on, thinking about what is the right product. 
And I still do that today, but I’m not working hands-on anymore with the ac-
tual code. 
So, for me, personally it’s been a huge learning experience in how to build an 
organization, how to run a business, how to scale a platform, work with a 
community. Lots of different things that I wouldn’t have learned otherwise. 
It’s a crazy learning experience. I’m learning every day from the great people 
that we have. I’m always trying to hire people that are smarter than me. 
There are lots of smart people here that teach me stuff every day, so it’s a 
great experience. 
Santos: What would be the one thing that you would change if you could? 
Wahlforss: I think we could have easily done this in one year faster if we 
would have been a little bit more bold and thinking a little bit more in terms 
of scale early on. I think we could have done this faster because we kind of 
came from an underdog perspective. We started out very small, had almost 
no money at all, and a very small team. I think we could have been bolder 
and actually done it even faster. From one perspective, it’s kind of how much 
can you ask for. We’ve been around publicly for three years, so it’s not that 
long a time to get to almost ten million users, but, still, I think with the speed 

Chapter 20 | Eric Wahlforss: SoundCloud 
 
248  
of the internet today and how fast these things can happen, it feels like we 
could probably have done this faster. 
But I think we’re very bold now. We don’t have those problems anymore. 
Santos: By “being bolder,” do you mean raising more capital more aggres-
sively in the beginning? 
Wahlforss: Yes, and running with a bigger vision from the start. Hiring 
more people. Stuff like that. 
Santos: Do you want to add anything that you find relevant to pass on? 
Wahlforss: Yeah, there’s a lot of stuff to talk about. But it’s interesting how 
every company has their own culture. We’re now in the portfolio of Index 
[Ventures] and Union Square Ventures, so we have Fred Wilson on our 
board. And Fred Wilson is a very active VC. 
And he has this blog on VC and he has a very great portfolio of companies as 
well. He has Twitter and Foursquare and Tumblr—all these great companies. 
And it’s fascinating going around to visit all of them and to see that we’ve ac-
tually developed our own, quite unique culture.  
Santos: Can you give an example of that uniqueness? 
Wahlforss: Yeah. It’s just a vibe in general, right? So you come into the of-
fice and you immediately feel that this is something unique. This is a very 
special thing we’re doing here. We’re marrying creators, sound creators, and 
a large global community with the help of technology. So I think that’s a very 
special vibe. There are not that many of these companies in Berlin. Basically, 
zero. All of the other companies are either in New York or San Francisco, 
so just that in itself makes it very, very unique. 
There are model companies that we try to be like, but we’re still very, very 
different. We try to do a lot of the good things that they are doing, but we 
still have a very distinctly different culture. 
Santos: But is it a culture designed by you? Or did it evolve by itself? 
Wahlforss: It evolved. But I think it has a lot to do with the founders in any 
company. So it definitely has to do with me and Alex—how we are and how 
we run things. 
Santos: One final question. What advice would you give to an entrepreneur 
that just read your interview? 
Wahlforss: Right. Well, if it’s before starting a company, I would say, “Do 
it.” It’s the best decision I’ve ever done in my whole life. I’m so happy that I 

European Founders at Work 
 
249  
actually dared to do it. I was studying at the business school in Stockholm, 
right? And I was studying engineering as well, and I had one hundred class-
mates. And I know that almost zero of them actually went on to start a 
company, which is kind of crazy because I know a lot of them have good 
ideas. But none of them quite felt that they were able to pull it off.  
I think if you have doubt in your mind that you’re able to pull it off, put the 
doubt aside and run with it for a while and see if you can do it. I think you’ll 
be surprised by yourself. 

  
I 
Index 
A 
Accelerator Group, The (TAG), 135 
Arvai, Peter. Prezi, 121 
challenges, 131 
Christmas party, 133 
cloud-based presentation 
software, 121 
company finance, 123 
company passion, 125 
company profit, 130–131 
discovery process, 126 
European tech companies, 
131–132 
Hungarian Telecom, 126 
Hungary, 122–123 
Dorsey (Jack), advisor, 129 
key moments, 124–125 
Magyar Telekom investment, 
126, 127 
omvard.se, healthcare 
company, 121 
San Francisco team, 132 
Somlai-Fischer and Halacsy, team, 
121–122 
Sunstone Capital finance, 127 
TED Conferences, 128–129 
US market, 124 
venture capital market, 126 
Web Conference, Amsterdam, 130 
ZuiPrezi, 123 
B, C 
Baring Vostok Capital Partners 
(BVCP), 177 
Barton, Chris. Shazam, 15, 31 
audio signal processing, 19 
capital challenge, 24–25 
Chowdhury (Ajay), IDG 
Ventures, 33 
database management, 26 
demo mobile phone, 25 
e-stalker, 17 
launch party, 30 
music industry, 29 
The Pogues, 29 
radio stations, 17–18 
Roost (Jerry), CEO, 32–33 
telecom operators, 29–30 
VCs, 28, 33 
D, E 
Dodsworth, Iain. TweetDeck, 59 
acquisition negotiations and 
tension, 69 
black application, 60 
clients, 65 
company vision and plans, 64–65 
confident model, 65 
contractor, 61 
Deck.ly service, 66–67 

Index 
 
252 
Dodsworth, Iain (continued) 
fairy-tale story, 62 
growth rate, 65–66 
huge differences, opportunities/ 
hindrances, Twitter, 68 
learning curve, 63 
low and high moments, 63 
misconceptions, Twitter, 67 
negotiations relief, 70 
New York investment, 62 
niche social network, 67 
one-man-band business, 63 
personal “browser,” 59 
product engagement, 61 
revenue-based side, 66 
risk element, 63 
San Francisco, 69 
Silicon Valley, 61 
team hire, 64 
Twitter information 
consumption, 59 
Twitter interface, 60 
Twitter proposal, 65 
F 
Farcet, Alex. Startupbootcamp, 201 
biography, 201–202 
Cohen (David) and Feld (Brad), 205 
Denmark, 202–203 
Dublin, 206 
Europe plan, 206 
investor advantages, 204 
Madrid, 206 
mentors recuritment, 203 
program change, 205 
program mistakes, 206–207 
Rainmaking, 202 
start-ups help, 204 
TechStars and Y Combinator, 203 
G 
Guilizzoni, Giacomo Peldi. Balsamiq, 71 
accountant’s office, 78 
Adobe, 71, 75 
Adobe AIR, 86 
bloggers, 79 
customer service, 83 
fears and problems, 79 
Flex Builder, 73 
French employee, 78 
implementation, 74–75 
Italy vs. US start-up, 81–82 
lawyer fees, 78 
LLC and SRL, 76 
Marco, first employee, 87 
Marco, programmer, 81 
new product plan, 85 
NGOs license, 82–83 
price and feature list, 79 
product management, 74 
public feedback, 86 
screenshot, 72 
Silicon Valley, 88 
tax benefits, 76–77 
team, competitive advantage, 84 
Twitter search, 79 
Ultimate Frisbee community, 87 
user interface sketch, 73 
venture capitalists call, 80 
Web 2.0, 73 
whiteboard sketch, 72 
wikis, 73 
H 
Haas, Felix. amiando, 111 
Hinrichs, Lars. XING, 41 
advice, aspiring founders, 48 
brand name problem, 44 
cash-flow positive, 42 
co-founders, 46 
company failure, 44 
company role, 43 
Europe vs. US market, 45 
European start-up community, 47 
Hack Forward, 46 
idea and implementation, 41 
IPO process, 43 
LinkedIn awareness, 45 

Index 
 
253 
network growth, 42 
online social business 
community, 41 
private-held and public-traded 
company, 43 
referrer selection, 48 
Spain and Turkey companies, 43 
team hire, 42 
XING creation difficulties, 44 
Hoberman, Brent. lastminute.com, 219 
business acquisition, 222 
business model, 220 
challenges, 223 
company idea and implementation, 
219–220 
company success, 222 
IPO, objective, 221 
market price, 221 
role change, 221 
sale, 223 
web site inventory, 220–221 
work experience, 223 
I 
Inghelbrecht, Philip. Shazam, 15 
Aardvark, 39 
apps stores, 37 
BMG meeting, 28 
capital raise, 28 
company evolution, 16 
database management, 26 
FLV investment, 29 
hiring CEO, 32 
IBR system, 34 
music database, 23 
music recognition technology, 18 
reverse SMS charge, 22, 27 
RockMelt, Inc., business 
development, 15 
UK music market, 23–24 
VC market, 35 
Viant, internet consulting 
company, 35–36 
Xerox PARC, MIT Media Lab, 18 
J 
Jones, Richard. Last.fm, 187 
A/B and split testing systems, 194 
architecture and tools, 197 
audioscrobbler, 187, 189, 197 
bootstrapping, 190 
copyright holders, 193 
documentation, 197 
entrepreneurs advice, 198 
Europe-wide license, 192 
fake documents, 193 
Google AdSense, 194, 195 
hardware expense, 195 
international, 191 
launch, 189 
marketing, 197 
music recommendations and 
information, 193 
music streaming, 192 
negotiation period, 196 
play your own music, 188 
programming tests, 198 
rights and permission, 192 
scale handling, 190 
semi-interactive radio, 192 
service, 191 
start-ups, 197 
tools and software, 197 
UK,press attention, 196 
VC, 194, 195 
Winamp plug-in, 187 
K 
Klein, Saul. Video Island, 135 
Arts Alliance, 143 
Bend It Like Beckham movie, 138 
cable companies, 137 
company vision, 144 
DVDsOnTap, 138, 143 
entrepreneurship skills, 149 
Estonia, 147 
European vs. US entrepreneurs, 
147–148 
Israel, 149 

Index 
 
254 
Klein, Saul (continued) 
LOVEFiLM, history, 135 
Netflix awareness, 135, 137 
ScreenSelect, 142 
Seedcamp, European micro seed 
fund, 135 
service launch, 140 
Silicon Valley, 146 
Skype, 145 
TAG, 135 
team size, 139–140 
Tesco, 141–143 
Walmart, 140 
L 
Le Meur, Loic. Seesmic and LeWeb, 
225 
B2L, 225 
business plan, 233 
company idea, 227 
ecosystem, 238 
Europe revenue, 237–238 
Europe vs. US, 235 
France, 234–235 
freelancer relationship, 240 
LinkedIn, 226 
next generation founders, 
238–239 
online community creation, 
230–231 
pivot board, 234 
problems and solution, 228–230 
RapidSite, 226 
Silicon Valley, 230, 238 
social networking campaign, 227 
technology evolution, 231–232 
Twitter, 233, 236 
Ublog, 226 
US lessons, 227–228 
US vs. France business, 239–240 
venture capital fund raise, 235 
Wi-Fi sharing software, 
Skype, 233 
WordPress, 226 
Liautaud, Bernard. Business 
Objects, 49 
Atlas Ventures, 50 
business intelligence and 
analytics, 55 
California, marketing head, 53 
Coface, 50 
cost-cutting mode, 54 
Crystal Reports, 52, 53 
entrepreneur needs, 56 
European investors, 54 
European market, 51 
European vs. US venture, 56 
Goldman Sachs, 51 
Innovacom, France Telecom, 50 
Michel (Jean), Oracle interface, 49 
Schwartz (John), CEO, 55–56 
key lessons, success, 51 
NASDAQ, 50 
near-death experience, 53 
new hire risk, 51 
Partech International, 50 
product marketing, Oracle, 49 
SAP deal, 55 
strong execution model, 57 
US subsidiary and French 
company, internal issues, 52 
M, N, O 
Moross, Richard. Moo.com, 101 
American brand, 107 
Atlas Venture, 105 
business Pleasure Cards, 103 
Flickr, landmark partner, 105–106 
Imagination, design business, 102 
Index Ventures, 103 
in-house printing, 108 
key moments, 108–109 
launch date, 101 
“MiniCards,” 101 
“Moo” meaning, 109 
Pleasure Cards brand and 
marketing plan, 103 
“printfinity” technology, 107 

Index 
 
255 
Storman (Richard), internet 
technology guru, 102 
Klein (Saul), Video Island 
business, 102 
Godin (Seth), blogger and 
marketing guru, 106 
social networks, 104 
specific shape and size, 
MiniCards, 106 
Magdelinsky (Stephan), business 
discussion, 104 
UK and US web site, 108 
vision, 101 
WeeWorld, avatar business, 
104–105 
Mukherjee, Dhiraj. Shazam, 15, 31 
Barton (Chris) and Inghelbrecht 
(Philip), business school 
classmates, 24 
business plan, 21 
friendship and persistence, 38, 39 
Infosys, Social Media strategy, 15 
international director hiring, 36 
launch party, 30 
P, Q, R 
Poitrey, Olivier. Dailymotion, 91 
Atlas and Partech investors, 94 
bandwidth cost, 92 
Bejbaum (Benjamin), CEO role,  
95–96 
business growth, 95 
business model, 93 
Tournay (Cédric), 97 
company damage, 97 
company vision, 99 
copyright, 98, 99 
development and architecture, 94 
fingerprinting technology, 99 
full-time work, 93 
internationalization, 95 
investment, 92 
investors, 96, 97 
key moments, 94 
launch date, 92 
loan money, 92 
shortv.net, 92 
Silicon Valley, 98 
YouTube, 98 
S, T, U 
Segalovich, Ilya. Yandex, 175 
advertisement product, 176 
American market attack, 182 
Arkadia, 175 
Volozh (Arkady), software 
engineer, 175 
assessors, 181 
banner advertisement, 180 
BVCP, 177 
company culture, 185 
company management, 186 
CompTek, 177 
context advertising, 181 
direct Windows system 
calls, 178 
foreign investors, 183 
FreeBSD, 178 
Google, 181 
InfoArt, 178–179 
internet bubble, 180 
keyword-based advertising 
snippet, 180 
lessons and challenges, 177–178 
MatrixNet, 182 
MS-DOS machine, 176 
NASDAQ, 177, 183 
Netherland office, 182–183 
private vs. public-traded company, 
183–184 
Rambler team, 184 
Russian-language development, 
Google, 184 
Soviet Union, 176 
Turkey, 183 
Yandex roots, 175 
Yandex, name origin, 179 
Yandex’s history challenges, 184 

Index 
 
256 
Sohoni, Reshma. Seedcamp, 163, 174 
alumni, 172 
brand applications, 167 
business startups, 168 
challenges/difficulties, 167–168 
core elements, 165 
Europe ecosystem, 168 
funding per business, 170 
idea and implementation, 163–164 
initial phase, quality, 173 
launch, 164 
mentor’s network, 166 
number-one accelerator, 
Europe, 174 
positive attitude, 172 
problem solving, 165 
program setting process, 167 
role models and future 
entrepreneurs, 169 
start ups mistakes, 171 
success cases, 173–174 
team size, 165 
University of Pennsylvania, 163 
US investors, 170 
Y Combinator and TechStars, 
169–170 
V 
van Zanten, Boris Veldhuijzen. The 
Next Web, 151 
advantages and disadvantages, 
Netherland, 159–160 
anti-spam company, 155 
big and large corporation, 160 
bill payment, 153–154 
companies success, 154 
company management, 160, 162 
company sale, 152–153 
conference binding factor, 157 
Europe vs. US, 158 
money making experiment, 152 
one hundred million-dollar 
company creation, 156 
Twitter Counter, 151, 159 
V3 Redirect Services, 151, 152 
Wi-Fi service, 155–156 
Varsavsky, Martin. Fon, 209 
America vs. Europe, 215–216 
biography, 209–210 
BT deal, 213 
business ideas, 211 
company success, 216–217 
DSL Wi-Fi, 213 
EINSTEINet, 209, 216 
Google, 213 
idea implementation, 211–212 
investments, 213 
Madrid, 216 
Medicorp Services, 209 
NGO approach, 212 
pan European fiber optic 
network, 211 
Brin (Sergey), 214 
Series C round, 214 
Skype investment, 213 
Twitxr, 214–215 
Viatel Ltd., 209 
Wi-Fi routers, 211 
Ya.com, 209 
W 
Wahlforss, Eric. SoundCloud, 241, 249 
“being bolder,” capital raise, 248 
Berlin vs. London vs. Barcelona, 242 
business angel money, 246 
challenge and culture growth, 244 
company agreements, 245 
company funds, 246 
company idea, 241 
company uniqueness, 248 
copyright content problem, 246 
European venture capital, 247 
Wilson (Fred), VC, 248 
intuition and process, 243 
learning experience, 247 
learning process, 242–243 
London and Silicon Valley, 244 
open API, 245 

Index 
 
257 
premium users, 245 
prototype and launch 
development, 243 
US VCs, 247 
users growth, 243 
Wang, Avery. Shazam, 15, 38, 39 
Aardvark, 39 
audio recordings, 20 
copyright issues, 22 
friendship and persistence, 37–38 
launch coordination, 31 
leverage credibility, 26 
money raising idea, 20 
music recognition, 21 
White, Jos. Notion Capital, 1 
autonomous management team, 10 
Bank of New York, 6 
bankers appointment, 5 
bootstrapping and cash 
management, 8 
Cisco equipment, 2 
cloud-computing, 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daily Telegraph, 12 
dot-com crash, 7 
e-mail scanning technology, 4 
e-mail virus, 9 
ISP industry, 3 
Love Bug virus, 11 
Madison Dearborn, 7 
MessageLabs, 1 
$15 million investment, 10 
QA training company, 11 
RBR Networks, 1 
revenues and profits, 5 
sales and marketing, 9 
security background, 8 
Star Internet, 1 
US and Europe company, 3 
US management team, 6 
US market, 7 
VC market, Europe, 7 
virus scanner, 12–13 
virus techniques and behavior, 4 
web and IM traffic, 4

