EUTHANASIA
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Abortion in the United States, Dorothy E. McBride
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Capital Punishment, Michael Kronenwetter
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Conflicts over Natural Resources, Jacqueline Vaughn
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Genetic Engineering, Harry LeVine, III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit
www.abc-clio.com.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series
will find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

EUTHANASIA
A Reference Handbook,
Second Edition
Jennifer Fecio McDougall
Martha Gorman
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Copyright © 2008 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for
the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission in
writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
McDougall, Jennifer Fecio.
Euthanasia : a reference handbook / Jennifer Fecio McDougall,
Martha Gorman. — 2nd ed.
p. cm. — (ABC-CLIO's contemporary world issues)
Rev. ed. of: Euthanasia / Carolyn S. Roberts, Martha Gorman. c1996.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-121-3 (hard copy : alk. paper)  1.  Euthanasia.
I. Gorman, Martha, 1952- II. Roberts, Carolyn S., 1960- Euthanasia.
III. Title. IV. Series: Contemporary world issues. 
[DNLM: 1.  Euthanasia.  WB 60 M4775e 2008]
R726.R53 2008
179.7—dc22
2007025758
11  10  09  08  07    1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America
∞
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Contents
Preface, xi
1
Background and History, 1
History of Euthanasia, 1
Attitudes toward Euthanasia throughout History, 2
The History of Euthanasia Becomes Personal, 6
Examining the Issue, 12
Medical-Bioethical, 12
Spiritual-Social-Cultural, 21
Legal-Political, 25
References, 27
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 31
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to
End-of-Life Issues, 31
Differentiating between Key Concepts, 32
Medical-Bioethical Issues, 34
Spiritual-Social-Cultural Issues, 51
Legal-Political Issues, 58
References, 65
3
Worldwide Perspective, 69
Examining Euthanasia throughout the World, 69
Data on a Global Scale, 69
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life Issues throughout
the World, 70
United Kingdom, 70
Netherlands, 74
Australia, 76
vii
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Africa, 78
Canada, 81
France, 83
Germany, 86
Japan, 88
China, 91
Belgium, 92
Colombia, 93
References, 95
4
Chronology, 99
5
Biographical Sketches, 127
Janet Adkins, 127
Dr. Pieter Admiraal, 128
Kevin Andrews, 128
Dr. Margaret Pabst Battin, 129
Pope Benedict XVI, 129
Dr. Daniel Callahan, 130
Diane Coleman, 131
Nancy Cruzan, 131
Dr. Kathleen Foley, 132
Dr. Faye Girsh, 133
Dr. Herbert Hendin, 133
Vincent Humbert, 134
Derek Humphry, 134
Pope John Paul II, 135
Yale Kamisar, 136
Dr. Jack Kevorkian, 136
Dr. Elisabeth Kübler Ross, 137
Luis Kutner, 137
Barbara Coombs Lee, 138
Rita Marker, 138
Dr. Philip Nitschke, 139
Dr. Edmund Pellegrino, 139
Dr. Gertruida Postma, 140
Dr. Timothy Quill, 140
Karen Ann Quinlan, 141
Dr. James Rachels, 142
Dame Cicely Saunders, 142
Terri Schindler Schiavo, 143
viii
Contents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Wesley J. Smith, 143
Joni Eareckson Tada, 144
Thomas Youk, 144
References, 145
6
Data and Documents, 148
Facts and Data, 148
Meaning of the Word, 148
A Common Thread, 148
Elderly Suicide in America, 148
The Hospice Option, 150
Spiritual-Social-Cultural, 150
Health Care Today, 155
Legal-Political, 157
Documents, 160
Medical-Bioethical, 160
Spiritual-Social-Cultural, 164
Documents related to Individuals and Organizations, 174
Legal-Political, 175
Quotations, 182
In Favor of Euthanasia or Physician-Assisted Suicide, 182
Spiritual-Social-Cultural, 185
Legal-Political, 187
Opposed to Euthanasia or Physician-Assisted Suicide, 190
References, 195
7
Directory of Organizations, 199
Organizations in the United States, 199
Organizations Overseas, 219
8
Resources, 225
Resources to Assist in the Study of Euthanasia, 225
Print Resources, 226
Periodicals, 247
Nonprint Resources, 252
Databases, 256
Internet Sites, 257
Glossary, 263
Index, 267
About the Authors, 283
Contents   ix
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Preface
P
eople approach euthanasia and other end-of-life issues in dif-
ferent ways. For a student assigned a paper, these issues are
merely academic topics to be studied, researched, and
addressed for presentation to a teacher or professor. For a casual
observer, a newspaper article or conversation regarding end-of-
life issues may lead to introspection. Such examination of one’s
personal feelings about these issues may lead the individual to the
conclusion that issues related to the end of life should not be left
to chance. If this is the case, the individual may make decisions
and prepare documents to cover some of the medical contingen-
cies that may arise at the end of life. Finally, for a person dealing
with his or her own end-of-life issues or those of a loved one, these
issues frame the final months, weeks, days, and even hours of life.
In cases like this, end-of-life issues are reality; they may even
include a momentous choice between vastly different courses of
action, such as making a final effort to prolong life or making a
request for assistance in committing suicide.
This book aims to assist people at all points along this spec-
trum. Whether the reader is a student conducting research, a leg-
islator considering a bill, or a person facing a terminal illness, the
following chapters contain information that will be invaluable in
sorting through these issues. In addition to discussing the com-
plexities surrounding end-of-life issues, this book contains valu-
able factual information, such as a chronology of events, a directo-
ry of organizations, and resources for additional study.
Chapter 1 focuses on the background and history of
euthanasia in the United States, including an examination of the
nuances of end-of-life issues, relevant terminology, and the histo-
xi
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

ry of the issue up to the present time. This chapter also includes a
synopsis of attitudes toward euthanasia throughout history. The
issue is divided into three subtopics: medical-bioethical, spiritual-
social-cultural, and legal-political. This hierarchy of subtopics is
used throughout the book.
Chapter 2 offers insight into the problems, controversies, and
solutions surrounding euthanasia. All sides of the issue are pre-
sented to provide a fair and balanced examination of the topic and
to provide a solid overview of the complex problems, controver-
sies, and solutions within it. This chapter includes a section high-
lighting relevant concepts to minimize confusion and foster
greater understanding along with information about some of the
more recent controversies involving end-of-life issues in the
United States.
In Chapter 3, the focus turns to an examination of euthana-
sia from a worldwide perspective. Information related to euthana-
sia and other end-of-life issues is presented in the context of vari-
ous countries. The valuable information a country may offer to the
United States, or the relevance of the country’s experience to that
of the United States, is also examined. In addition to reminding
readers and researchers that no country is alone in grappling with
end-of-life issues, this chapter places the experiences of the United
States with these issues into a broader context to provide addition-
al perspective.
A chronology of key events related to euthanasia and other
end-of-life issues is found in Chapter 4. The chronology provides
a valuable tool for examining these issues throughout history and
putting events into the context of the ages. For someone just
embarking on the study of euthanasia and other end-of-life issues,
this historical timeline is a valuable reminder that these issues are
not unique to our time. Rather, societies throughout history have
faced death and all that it entails, and their experiences offer his-
torical lessons and perspectives for modern societies working to
address the issues that arise at or near the end of life.
Chapter 5 highlights the people who frame the issue of
euthanasia in some way. Some continue to contribute through
their actions, words, or writing. Others are no longer active in this
area but have left a legacy that will resonate for years to come.
Chapter 6 examines the facts and data that underpin the
issue of euthanasia. In addition to statistics, relevant documents,
xii
Preface
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

and quotations, this chapter includes information that places each
informational item in its proper context. 
Chapter 7 highlights the various organizations that are active
in the arena of euthanasia or other end-of-life issues. This chapter
is divided into organizations located in the United States and
those that are overseas to make it easier for researchers to narrow
their focus if they so choose. Each entry is annotated with a
description of the organization’s activities, and contact informa-
tion for each organization is also included.
Chapter 8 is valuable for those who wish to further explore
euthanasia or other end-of-life issues. It features a list of written
works, including books, articles, and newsletters, as well as DVDs,
videos, Internet sites, and other valuable resources.
Euthanasia and other end-of-life issues do not exist in a vac-
uum. By their very nature, they cover a variety of topics, includ-
ing medicine, politics, law, philosophy, and religion. As a result,
there is a great deal of terminology to contend with. The glossary
lists many relevant terms and their definitions.
We thank everyone who has helped make this book possible.
To Dayle Dermatis, Mim Vasan, and the entire wonderful staff at
ABC-CLIO: We could not have done this without you! We are also
grateful to the staffs of the Buffalo and Erie County Public Library
(Central Branch), the Canisius College Library, and the Eldredge
Public Library in Chatham, Massachusetts.
To the family members and friends who have provided lov-
ing support: Words cannot express the depth of our gratitude.
Special thanks to Jack and Maureen Fecio for constant encourage-
ment, Iris Skoog for the gift of writing, and Shelbie Callaghan for
her special assistance. To Alex and Maeve McDougall: a lifetime of
loving appreciation for your love, patience, support, and countless
hugs. Thank you!
And a special commemoration of Tim Gorman, whose fierce
battle with muscular dystrophy decades ago inspired the ethical
introspection that imbues this reference book with a warm heart
and a tortured soul.
Preface   xiii
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1
Background and History
History of Euthanasia
T
he Merriam-Webster Dictionary defines euthanasia as easy death
or mercy killing (1998, 179). The dictionary defines suicide as
the act of killing oneself purposely or one who commits or
attempts suicide (517). Assisted suicide, by extension, would be
the act of taking one’s own life purposely, but with the assistance
of another person. Similarly, physician-assisted suicide would be
the act of taking one’s own life purposely, with the aid of a physi-
cian. In other words, assisted suicide occurs when someone assists
a person in ending his or her own life. When the person who
assists is a doctor, the common term is physician-assisted suicide.
In many cases, though, the person assisting is a layperson, such as
a relative or friend who is sympathetic to the other person’s wish
to end his or her own life. It is common in assisted suicide for the
person who has chosen to die to actually perform the final act, or
the act that actually results in death (Yount 2000, 4). Although
these definitions provide insight into the meaning of these words
in a scholarly or intellectual sense, they do not convey the emo-
tion, controversy, and history related to them.
Within the concept of euthanasia, there are various nuances
which are useful in explaining the concept more fully. Passive
euthanasia and active euthanasia, as their names imply, are differ-
entiated by the amount of action one takes to bring about the
1
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

intended result. Passive euthanasia is often described as letting
someone die. In practical terms, this might mean “ceasing or not
starting medical treatment that keeps a person alive, such as
attachment to a respirator or provision of food and water through
a tube.” In active euthanasia, someone “causes the death of a sick
person without that person’s participation.” It is important to note
that active euthanasia always involves someone other than the
patient actually performing the action (Yount 2000, 4).
There are three types of active euthanasia. Voluntary
euthanasia is a form of active euthanasia that is performed at the
request of the patient. Involuntary euthanasia is another term for
what is sometimes known as “mercy killing,” or taking the life of
a patient who has not requested death with the intent of relieving
suffering. Nonvoluntary euthanasia denotes euthanasia that takes
place even though the patient is not competent to give consent
(Yount 2000, 4).
Terminology is important in any discussion of end-of-life
issues. For example, “[the] term self-deliverance is preferred by
some over the term suicide, so as not to correlate the two events,
because they believe they are entirely different, with self-deliver-
ance stemming from a rational choice and traditional suicide
resulting from emotional or psychological trauma” (Scherer and
Simon 1999, 13).
Attitudes toward Euthanasia
throughout History
Today, the mention of euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide is
guaranteed to elicit a reaction from most people. Like abortion,
capital punishment, and other issues related to the beginning or
end of human life, end-of-life issues crop up in a variety of situa-
tions including academic and other discussions, politics, the
media, and everyday life. Although it is often assumed that con-
temporary perspectives are different from those throughout his-
tory, it would seem that the concept of euthanasia has always
been the subject of debate. The difference today is that media cov-
erage enables people and events relevant to the issue to gain
wider exposure.
Even the origin of the term euthanasia is not as straightfor-
ward as it may seem. Although the translation of “good death”
2
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

may imply that the Greeks and Romans who coined the term
agreed on the basic issues, history shows us that this is not the
case. With official permission, residents of Athens could obtain a
dose of poison which would allow them to choose death. Romans
did not punish people who attempted suicide unless they were
considered irrational. The flip side of this more permissive atti-
tude was condemnation of euthanasia by Pythagoreans; they
based their condemnation on the spiritual notion that only God
had the right to take life.
That dichotomy has continued throughout history. In vari-
ous nations and at various times, there were people who advocat-
ed for the right to die and people who argued that euthanasia or
assisted suicide, for a variety of reasons, were harmful and should
not be legal. This knowledge is instructive because it reminds us
that our society is not alone in examining these issues. As individ-
uals and organizations on both sides of end-of-life issues engage
in advocacy work, address legislation, assist people with prob-
lems, and educate the public, they may often feel as if they are
alone in their battles. History shows that this is not so; throughout
the world, civilizations have addressed these issues in various
ways just as modern communities continue to address them today.
New technology, which enables medical personnel to treat
patients in ways that would have been considered miraculous a
generation ago, raises new issues that those who address end-of-
life matters continually work to address. Even that, though, is not
new: New technology throughout the ages has historically raised
unexpected new issues which each respective society has worked
to address.
Christianity in the Roman Empire (First Century–Fifth Century)
As the religion officially associated with the Roman Empire,
Christianity had a profound impact on views on euthanasia. Not
surprisingly, there is little gray area in terms of Christianity’s
teachings on this issue. Even the term for suicide, felo de se, which
means self murder, is a very straightforward indication of this.
This terminology, and the philosophy attached to it, did not
include a distinction between suicide as a result of emotional
issues and suicide as a result of suffering from a terminal illness.
Rather, suicide of any type was strictly forbidden on the grounds
that making determinations regarding life and death was solely
and completely the purview of God. As a result, people who com-
History of Euthanasia   3
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

mitted suicide were denied a Christian burial; in fact, their bodies
were sometimes left, impaled on a stake, at the roadside. Their
family members suffered as a result of the suicide, as well: The
person’s worldly belongings were taken away with the intention
of punishing the family by leaving them impoverished.
The Middle Ages (Fifth Century–Fifteenth Century)
Euthanasia was cast in a new, and further stigmatized, light when
Christianity linked suffering with spiritual growth by citing the
spiritual virtues of martyrdom. The Catholic Church cemented
this religious condemnation of euthanasia when it declared that
suicide or attempted suicide was grounds for excommunication.
Taking a life, in general, was condemned. Although it was consid-
ered acceptable to take a life within a just war or to execute a crim-
inal, it was most definitely not acceptable to commit suicide.
Killing as a means of defending oneself was also deemed as being
beyond the bounds of acceptability.
Judaism at that time did not involve a gray area either: It was
considered murder to cause a death, even if the person was already
dying.
The Renaissance (Fourteenth Century–Seventeenth Century)
The Renaissance, which offered a rebirth of learning in many
areas, was the backdrop for quantum leaps in terms of scientific
discovery. These discoveries resulted in the notion that the human
body was understandable, at least to a certain degree, rather than
a mystery of the divine variety, as many had previously thought.
As part of this increased understanding, the practice of dissecting
cadavers became commonplace because the dead provided physi-
cians with unique opportunities to understand diseases, learn
more about the organs and systems within the human body, and
determine the source of illness. Tools were another aspect of this
increased understanding; it was during this time period that it
became common practice to use tools to perform acts we take for
granted, such as taking a patient’s temperature.
The notion that the body was not some sort of divine mys-
tery gave rise to renewed discussions about euthanasia. Although
the Catholic and Protestant churches remained steadfast in their
condemnation of it, some people of the day began to examine the
notion that euthanasia might not be such a grievous sin after all.
Then, as today, scientific discovery resulted in increased
4
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

dilemmas for people who were ill, as well as for their loved ones,
and society in general. The scientific discoveries of the time had
resulted in medical advances that provided physicians with the
means to prolong life. However, prolonging life sometimes gave
rise to other, often unanticipated, issues such as increased suffer-
ing, which resulted in the new dilemmas of the day.
The Age of Reason (Eighteenth Century)
Further understanding of the human body dawned during the
Age of Reason. The invention of the stethoscope, ophthalmoscope,
and laryngoscope were important components of this increased
body of knowledge. With this greater understanding came an
increased sense of responsibility for many physicians of the day;
many doctors throughout Europe and North America began talk-
ing about previously unexplored subjects such as humane death.
As the notion of humane death began to crop up within the
medical community, people outside the practice of medicine con-
currently began to examine this concept and to consider the idea
of some degree of choice in death. In fact, by 1798, six of the thir-
teen colonies no longer mandated legal penalties for people who
attempted suicide.
Pre–World War II and Nazi Germany (1920s–1945)
In the 1920s and 1930s in Germany, people who were handi-
capped, mentally ill, or in asylums were among those who were
killed in a program secretly approved by the government. This
example of government-sanctioned eugenics evolved into Adolf
Hitler’s “Euthanasia Programme.” Hitler’s program was actually
brutal murder of those least able to defend themselves and the
euthanasia-related terminology had a tremendously negative
impact on the euthanasia movement. As part of his campaign of
horror, Hitler created an environment among Germans of fester-
ing hatred and resentment against those in asylums. His diaboli-
cal campaign included use of the term unnutze esser, or useless
eater, to further demonize asylum residents as unfairly taking
food from Germans already suffering from wartime conditions.
Hitler’s actions forever changed the meaning of the word
euthanasia. In the United States, for example, a poll after the war
indicated that support for euthanasia was lower than it had been
before the war. It seems that Hitler’s twisted use of the term had
resulted in a greater negative attitude toward the entire concept.
History of Euthanasia   5
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Some, in fact, have argued that he succeeded in portraying
euthanasia as an anti-American concept.
Modern Medicine (1940–Present)
Although previous eras have yielded amazing advances in med-
ical technology, such advances have been especially plentiful and
technologically wondrous in the modern age. Although we take
them for granted today, discoveries such as vaccines for polio and
measles, certain new medications, pacemakers, and surgical tech-
niques were actually landmark events that changed the practice
of medicine. Certainly, these technological advances, and others
like them, make it possible to save the lives of patients who
would otherwise have faced certain death. Although such
advances have provided doctors with the means to prolong life,
patients have not always been happy to have their lives pro-
longed. These lifesaving and life-prolonging advances, in fact,
were contemporaneous with increased patient requests for assis-
tance in dying and a renewed interest, among both physicians
and the public, in the concept of euthanasia.
The History of Euthanasia Becomes Personal
When people read a newspaper article about a horrific automobile
accident or watch a news report about someone struck with a ter-
minal illness, they may feel a sense of relief that such tragedy has
not visited them or their loved ones. Although they do not wish it
on the unfortunate victim, they may still think, “I’m glad it’s not
me or someone in my family.”
Unfortunately, when such tragedies occur, they change the
lives of all involved—for the worse, and forever. No discussion of
the history of euthanasia would be complete without highlighting
some of the most well-known, and often controversial, cases in the
United States. For Karen Ann Quinlan, Nancy Cruzan, and Terri
Schiavo, tragedy struck. For their families, the world tilted and
they were left facing a loved one lying in a hospital bed, heart-
rending decisions, and seemingly endless court battles.
Karen Ann Quinlan
The tragic story surrounding the case of Karen Ann Quinlan began
on April 15, 1975. Quinlan, age 21, was admitted to a hospital in
6
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

New Jersey because she was in a coma induced by drugs and alco-
hol. After monitoring her for several months, her doctors conclud-
ed that she was in a persistent vegetative state (PVS) and had suf-
fered irreversible brain damage. Her parents determined that it
would be in their daughter’s best interests to remove the respira-
tor that was breathing for her. The respirator was considered an
extraordinary means of life support and hospital officials initially
agreed with the decision made by Karen Ann Quinlan’s parents.
When hospital officials subsequently changed their minds and
decided that they would not agree to the removal of the respirator,
Mr. and Mrs. Quinlan took their fight to a court of law.
As the court battles were fought, Karen Ann Quinlan
remained in a persistent vegetative state in her hospital bed; how-
ever, her nurse had succeeded in weaning her from the respirator
and Quinlan was breathing on her own without mechanical assis-
tance. Although the court ultimately agreed with the Quinlans, the
matter was made moot by the fact that Karen Ann Quinlan was,
by that time, no longer dependent on the respirator. She remained
in a persistent vegetative state for eight years and died of pneumo-
nia in 1985.
Effects of the Case of Karen Ann Quinlan.—Prior to the protracted bat-
tle surrounding the life of Karen Ann Quinlan, five states had
addressed legislation regarding right-to-die issues. The case, and
the national media attention that surrounded it, brought this issue
to the forefront and sixty-seven bills regarding end-of-life matters
were introduced within a year. Eight of these pieces of legislation
became law. Hospital officials throughout the country responded
to the case by establishing ethics committees which were charged
with examining decisions made by guardians to verify that each
decision was in the best interest of the patient in question.
Hospital officials and state legislators were not the only peo-
ple impacted by the Karen Ann Quinlan case, as evidenced by the
fact that the number of requests for living wills increased dramat-
ically at that time. It seems that the case was a clarion call to peo-
ple throughout the United States to consider issues related to the
end of their own lives. News accounts of such a young adult in
this situation seemed to force many people to acknowledge the
fact that catastrophic medical situations can arise unexpectedly;
this acknowledgement was coupled with the awareness that
addressing end-of-life issues in advance of such a situation is an
effective way to make one’s wishes known.
History of Euthanasia   7
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

In his book Taking Advance Directives Seriously, Robert S.
Olick defines a living will as a document that includes “the indi-
vidual’s wishes and instructions for health care” (2001, xiv). A liv-
ing will must be prepared and signed when the person is in good
health and mentally competent; in other words, it must be appar-
ent that the person made the decisions contained in the living will
freely and with a sound mind. Another type of advance directive,
known as a durable power of attorney or health care proxy, was
also developed during this time period. Olick defines this legal
document as one which “may designate another person to make
health care decisions on the patient’s behalf” (xiv). The durable
power of attorney or health care proxy provides an additional
degree of control for the person signing it: The individual can
choose both the degree of authority he or she bestows upon the
proxy and what form the authority will take. In this way, the indi-
vidual can tailor the durable power of attorney or health care
proxy to be appropriate and as effective as possible for his or her
particular needs and wants. In addition, it is important to note that
this document does not expire; it can be revoked only by the per-
son who signed it. Although many people feel that their wishes
will be covered if they have either a living will or a durable power
of attorney, many legal and medical experts recommend prepar-
ing both.
Nancy Cruzan
Nancy Cruzan, age 25, was traveling along a rural road in
Missouri in 1983 when she lost control of her car and crashed into
a ravine. She suffered extensive injuries, oxygen deprivation, and
permanent brain damage and she was in a deep coma, which was
later determined to be a persistent vegetative state. Although
Cruzan’s family struggled to bring her out of this state by talking
to her, providing stimulation, and making her comfortable, after
four years, they began to acknowledge the fact that she might not
emerge from it. As Nancy Cruzan remained in this persistent veg-
etative state and her family struggled to help her as best they
could, extensive media coverage enabled people interested in the
situation and in end-of-life issues to follow the case and track new
developments. Like the case of Karen Ann Quinlan, the case of
Nancy Cruzan prompted many people to begin examining their
own wishes and preparations regarding end-of-life issues.
Although the cases of Karen Ann Quinlan and Nancy
8
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Cruzan were similar in some ways, there was a significant differ-
ence in that Nancy Cruzan was not dependent on a ventilator. She
received artificial nutrition and hydration through a feeding tube;
this feeding tube garnered a great deal of attention when Mr. and
Mrs. Cruzan stated that their daughter would not want to be kept
alive as she was at that time. The feeding tube was the only option
available as far as putting an end to life-sustaining treatment; thus,
when her parents stated that it was their wish, on their daughter’s
behalf, to allow her life to end, they asked that the tube be
removed. When officials of the rehabilitation facility in which
Nancy Cruzan resided opposed the decision, the Cruzans took the
case to court.
When the Cruzans declared, on their daughter’s behalf, that
the feeding tube should be removed, the media coverage
increased dramatically. Throughout the nation, the case spurred
an outcry from those who deemed the removal of the feeding tube
to be the beginning of an inhumane death. A feeding tube was
considered ordinary treatment; some individuals and organiza-
tions charged that removing it would lead society on a slippery
slope that would endanger people unable to speak for themselves.
Others, however, argued that it was the right of Nancy Cruzan’s
parents to allow her to die rather than live a life she would not
have wanted to live.
In the absence of any type of advance directives, the court
declared that the state’s interest in maintaining life was greater
than the family’s arguments about the quality of Nancy Cruzan’s
life. The Cruzans appealed this verdict and the case went to the
U.S. Supreme Court. The Court handed down a decision on June
25, 1990; in Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health, the
Court sided with the Cruzans. In the decision, the Court declared
that the right to die was a constitutionally protected liberty inter-
est, maintaining that the right to refuse treatment, even artificial
nutrition and hydration, is guaranteed through the liberty clause
in the Constitution of the United States of America.
However, such a guarantee was not absolute, according to
the Court. The decision contained restrictions that mandated that
no action could be taken unless there was proof that the action was
in accordance with what the person’s wishes would have been.
The Court further declared that states had to create guidelines out-
lining what standards of proof would be considered acceptable; in
this way, a state could protect those facing end-of-life decisions
History of Euthanasia   9
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

made by others and simultaneously protect its own interests in
preserving life. As a result of the aforementioned limits placed by
the Court, the Cruzans were required to go back to the state court
in Missouri to determine if there was sufficient proof of what their
daughter’s wishes might have been. Several of her friends testified
regarding conversations they had shared with Nancy Cruzan
about issues related to life, illness, and death. Based on this testi-
mony, the state court, declaring that existing evidence was suffi-
cient to surmise what Nancy Cruzan would have wanted, granted
her the right to die.
Nancy Cruzan’s feeding tube was removed on December 14,
1990. Protestors gathered outside the rehabilitation facility in
which she resided, vocalized their opposition, and begged for the
reinsertion of her feeding tube. Some people even attempted to
reach her room to force reconnection of the feeding tube; their
efforts were unsuccessful and Nancy Cruzan died on December
26, 1990.
Effects of the Case of Nancy Cruzan.—Just as Karen Ann Quinlan’s
case spurred increased attention to end-of-life issues, Nancy
Cruzan’s case caused people throughout the United States and
beyond to begin reexamining many of these issues. Senator John
Danforth of Missouri was no exception. He introduced the Patient
Self Determination Act (PSDA) in Congress in an attempt to bring
a sense of uniformity and order to advance directives in the
United States. As adopted, the legislation introduced greater clar-
ification in this area by clearly delineating responsibilities of the
various parties, including doctors, patients, families, and health
care institutions. Effective December 1, 1991, it immediately sup-
planted existing state laws and made advance directives more
accessible throughout the United States. Although the Patient Self
Determination Act provided needed clarity in this area, there are
still components that vary from state to state. The language used
in advance directives, for example, varies for each state.
Furthermore, advance directives are applicable only in the state in
which the patient lives. Despite the inconsistencies and restric-
tions, the PSDA introduced an element of uniformity and a degree
of clarification.
Terri Schindler Schiavo
Terri Schiavo collapsed in 1990, when she was 26 years old. She
suffered cardiac arrest and lapsed into what some physicians
10
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

termed a persistent vegetative state. Like Karen Ann Quinlan and
Nancy Cruzan, Terri Schiavo did not have advance directives; as a
result, decisions regarding her care were left to her husband,
Michael Schiavo. Although relations between Michael Schiavo
and Terri Schiavo’s parents, Robert and Mary Schindler, seem to
have been amicable for a time, the relationship began to deterio-
rate when there was a disagreement about her care (Levesque
2003; St. Petersburg Times 2004).
Michael Schiavo argued that previous conversations with his
wife, as well as his knowledge of her, gave him insight into what
her wishes would have been in regard to a medical situation like
the one she was in. An article that appeared in the St. Petersburg
Times in 2003, during the ongoing legal battles, noted, “In 1998,
Michael Schiavo petitioned the courts to have her feeding tube
removed, saying she was in an irreversible persistent vegetative
state. Schiavo said his wife told him several times during their
marriage she would not want to be kept alive on life support”
(Levesque 2003).
Robert and Mary Schindler, however, opposed Michael
Schiavo’s efforts. According to the St. Petersburg Times, the
Schindlers “argue that their daughter recognizes and responds to
them, and might be helped with more therapy.” Some physicians
supported their claims, declaring that “she is not in a persistent
vegetative state, so the tube legally cannot be removed.”  In addi-
tion, Robert and Mary Schindler argued that “no matter what her
medical condition, Schiavo would have wanted to be kept alive”
(St. Petersburg Times 2004). The ongoing legal battles came to an
end when Michael Schiavo prevailed in his efforts to have Terri
Schiavo’s artificial nutrition and hydration discontinued. Terri
Schiavo died on March 31, 2005.
Effects of the Case of Terri Schiavo.—Just as the cases of Karen Ann
Quinlan and Nancy Cruzan had ripple effects, the case of Terri
Schindler Schiavo had an impact beyond the patient and her fam-
ily. In addition to an increase in awareness of end-of-life issues in
general, this situation yielded a focus on specific medical and end-
of-life issues related to nutrition and hydration at the end of life.
The Schiavo case also prompted increased interest in advance
directives. Again, although interest in advance directives as a gen-
eral topic grew tremendously, many people now focused on their
end-of-life wishes in terms of nutrition and hydration. Although it
is not possible to cover every single issue that might arise at the
History of Euthanasia   11
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

end of life, the case of Terri Schiavo was a catalyst for many peo-
ple to examine their feelings and wishes about this particular issue
vis-à-vis the end of life.
Examining the Issue
As with any complex issue, the concept of euthanasia does not
exist in a vacuum; it necessarily addresses numerous subtopics. In
order to make this complex study easier, three chapters of this
book contain sections which address these subtopics. For many
people, the issue of euthanasia arises in the context of one’s own
illness or the illness of a loved one. As a result, medical and bioeth-
ical issues are a major part of studying this issue; medical-bioeth-
ical issues are listed first because this area is, in many ways, the
most logical starting point. However, study of this issue obvious-
ly cannot be limited to medical and bioethical issues. Spiritual
issues are important for many people who are concerned with
euthanasia; issues in this realm are included with social and cul-
tural issues. The spiritual-social-cultural section examines and
addresses many of the influences that rule the way individuals
feel about this topic. Finally, although euthanasia is an intensely
personal issue, it enters the legal realm on a regular basis, especial-
ly when the wishes of an individual, or the family members of a
patient, are in conflict with a hospital’s medical or bioethical con-
cerns. In addition, various legislative bodies in the United States
and throughout the world have considered legislation related to
euthanasia. The final section, legal-political, addresses both of
these matters.
Medical-Bioethical
If you want to start a lively discussion in any setting ranging from
a classroom to a dinner party, euthanasia is a surefire conversation
starter. It is a complex issue which is both intensely personal and
politically charged. Although some people have not formed solid
opinions on the issue, many people have very strong feelings.
Some may believe that euthanasia is wrong and should not occur
under any circumstances; conversely, others may be of the opinion
that someone facing the end of life should be able to choose the cir-
12
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

cumstances under which death occurs. The following topics high-
light the quagmires related to end-of-life issues.
Terminology and Issues Related to the End of Life
Quality of Life. Our society’s current definition of the concept of
quality of life is largely predicated on an individual’s ability to
determine when his or her life has become too painful to bear or
has lost all meaning. This definition has been honed over a period
of approximately four decades; various constituencies, including
the courts, advocacy groups, physicians, patients, and the media
have weighed in on it. The result is a loose definition that focuses
on an individualistic approach rather than taking a one-size-fits-
all stance regarding this amorphous concept.
Quality of life can be the subject of controversy, especially
when someone else attempts to gauge a particular patient’s quali-
ty of life. The concept is so subjective that a patient’s assessment of
his or her quality of life can be very different from assessments
made by others, including physicians, other medical profession-
als, family members, or friends.
Brain Death.—The American Medical Association Complete Medical
Encyclopedia defines brain death as the “irreversible cessation of all
functions of the entire brain, including the brain stem.” The defi-
nition, the encyclopedia notes, was developed by Harvard
Medical School in 1968. The encyclopedia goes on to explain that
the diagnosis of brain death is “confirmed by a variety of tests that
determine an absence of reflexes, unresponsiveness to stimuli, a
lack of spontaneous respiration or movement, and the absence of
electrical activity of the brain as indicated by a flat electroen-
cephalogram (EEG)” once it has been determined that “nothing is
suppressing the person’s responses, such as hypothermia . . . or
drugs . . .” (Leikin and Lipsky 2003, 271).
Pain.—For someone facing imminent death, numerous issues
affect how the remaining hours, days, or months of life are spent.
Pain is at the top of this list of issues: Someone who is experienc-
ing a tolerable amount of pain has greater latitude to make choic-
es about the end of life. For some people, a tolerable pain level
might present the chance to spend additional time with loved ones
or an opportunity for a final trip before traveling becomes impos-
sible. For those with pain that has become intolerable, everything
may seem overwhelming; in fact, intolerable pain removes choice
from many facets of the remainder of a patient’s life. In some
Examining the Issue   13
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

cases, doctors can prescribe medication to lessen it; however, for
some patients, such as those suffering from AIDS and certain
types of cancer, relief, unfortunately, is nearly impossible. In addi-
tion, a patient’s efforts at achieving some measure of relief may, in
some cases, be thwarted by medical personnel. Some physicians
worry about patients becoming addicted to pain relief or assume
that the patient is exaggerating the pain. In cases like these, physi-
cians may prescribe a lower dose of pain medication. Regardless
of the circumstances, good communication between the patient,
family, medical personnel, and other caregivers is an essential
component of ensuring that the patient’s pain level is as tolerable
as it can be.
Persistent Vegetative State.—Persistent vegetative state (PVS) is
defined in Slee’s Health Care Terms as “the condition of a patient
who is still breathing with or without the aid of medical assis-
tance, but whose mental functions have ceased, as determined by
examining the electrical activity of the brain” (Slee et al. 2001, 478).
Taber’s Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary offers a definition that
includes specific factors for determining whether a persistent veg-
etative state exists:
A continuing and unremitting clinical condition of
complete unawareness of the environment accompa-
nied by sleep-wake cycles with either complete or par-
tial preservation of hypothalamic and brain-stem auto-
nomic functions. The diagnosis is established if the
condition is present for 1 month after acute or nontrau-
matic brain injury or has lasted for 1 month in patients
with degenerative or metabolic disorders or develop-
mental malformations (Venes 2005, 1641–1642).
What Is Hospice?
Dame Cicely Saunders is considered the founder of the modern
hospice movement. As a result of her efforts, people in the United
States and throughout the world have discovered the option of
palliative care or “the management of pain and discomfort, with-
out medical treatment that is curative in nature” (Scherer and
Simon 1999, 13). Writing in The Case against Assisted Suicide: For the
Right to End-of-Life Care, Dame Saunders, O.M., F.R.C.P., explains,
“Hospice is a complex set of attitudes and skills, not a building.
14
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Much of this care and treatment can be accomplished at home
with the support of teams so well developed in the United
States . . .” (Foley and Hendin 2002, 287).
Referring to hospice or palliative care as comfort care, Dr.
Charles McKhann notes, in his book A Time to Die: The Place for
Physician Assistance, that the purpose of such care is to “relieve
pain and all other symptoms, including anxiety, to the extent that
medication and personal support make it possible.” McKhann
also cites an important tenet of the hospice movement: “Implicit in
comfort care is the understanding that it will be given continuous-
ly to the very end, that the patient will not be abandoned by his
caregivers.” This comfort extends to “supportive measures . . .
limited to those that contribute directly to providing comfort . . .”
(1999, 76). He explains:
Most laboratory studies are eliminated, and drawing of
blood is avoided if at all possible. X-rays are not taken
unless they will influence the care being given.
Nutrition and hydration are usually limited to what
can be taken by mouth. Tube feedings and intravenous
feeding are not started, but may be continued if they
are already in place. Blood transfusions are not given,
and oxygen is only provided when it is needed to pro-
vide comfort. Mechanical ventilation is not used
(McKhann 1999, 77).
Hospice care, however, does not end with the medical team.
Hospice care programs generally use multidisciplinary teams to
provide patients and families with a complete spectrum of care
and services. In addition to medical care, hospice programs have
the resources to provide patients and families with access to
experts in various fields, including social work, counseling, reli-
gious and spiritual support, and so on.
Health Care Issues
Managed Care.—Health care in the United States today is very dif-
ferent than it was for previous generations. One of the major
changes is that managed care has replaced traditional health
insurance plans with Health Maintenance Organizations
(HMOs), Preferred Provider Organizations (PPOs), and similar
organizations. This new structure has resulted in profound
Examining the Issue   15
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

changes in doctor-patient relationships. By the mid-1990s, a visit
to the doctor had changed for many people: Instead of seeing the
family physician, they saw their “designated medical provider.”
In everyday terminology, this meant that they had a visit with the
doctor on call in the clinic setting at that time; the fact that it could
be a different person each time reduced the concept of continuity
of care.
This change has had two salient impacts on end-of-life care:
1. Doctors who had previously owned their medical prac-
tices are now generally employed by managed care
organizations. This situation is significant for patients:
Rather than the physician setting the treatment stan-
dards, practices, and priorities, the corporation fills that
role. Since the corporation has a vested interest in main-
taining a profitable bottom line, there is the chance that
profit can take precedence over patient needs. This sys-
tem has raised questions, including the following, for
people who study health care: What if a patient has an
illness that is very costly to treat and the corporation
denies this treatment on the grounds that it is too expen-
sive? If physician-assisted suicide is legal, does the doc-
tor’s loyalty lie with the patient or the corporation—and
its financial interests? What safeguards exist to protect
the patient’s wishes?
2. Under this scenario, patients rarely have the opportunity
to get to know their doctors and establish a relationship
of trust. It is more difficult, then, for patients and family
members to turn to the doctor for advice and wisdom
regarding complex medical decisions, especially those
related to end-of-life issues. It is more difficult for the
physician, also, because he or she is placed in the unen-
viable position of giving life-changing advice to a patient
who is a fairly recent acquaintance.
Doctor-Patient Relationships.—For many people, the days when the
doctor was a trusted guide on healthcare issues are a mere memo-
ry; in the new environment, relationships between patients and
their physicians may become more complex. It is more difficult for
a patient to trust a doctor that he or she has met only once or twice.
While it can be very challenging for a patient to raise a sensitive
16
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

question with a doctor who is nearly a stranger, it can be excruci-
atingly difficult for a patient to face end-of-life decisions with a
medical practitioner he or she barely knows.
Added to the problems that arise from such lack of familiar-
ity with one’s physician, the typical issues that have always
framed the doctor-patient relationship remain. These typical
issues can include patient anxiety, poor communication between
the doctor and patient, patient embarrassment about sensitive
issues, and many others depending on the individuals involved.
Dr. Nancy Snyderman, writing in Good Housekeeping, explains how
her own experience as a patient made those issues clear in a way
that she has remembered throughout her medical career:
The doctor-patient relationship is a sensitive one,
requiring respect and openness on both sides. I believe
that most physicians try to do their jobs well and that
most patients understand their M.D.’s are only human.
But today—with managed care and a climate of dimin-
ished time, privacy erosion, and information
onslaught—the relationship has become strained. I feel
lucky that when I was a young doctor, I was given an
inside look into the world of a patient: I was misdiag-
nosed with a rare cancer. My physicians weren’t at
fault. An unusual infection from a tick bite masquerad-
ed as a terminal illness. But none of us had figured out
the mystery before I was on the receiving end of
painful needles, cold hands, [skimpy] hospital gowns,
a surgeon’s scalpel, and anxiety-filled hours of waiting
for lab reports. How I was treated, and the inevitable
lapses, changed forever the way I take care of my
patients (Snyderman 2005, 90).
Good communication is essential as physicians and patients
work together to build a level of trust that makes both parties
comfortable with the doctor-patient relationship. This is especial-
ly true in the case of a patient who is facing end-of-life decisions.
Regardless of the type of illness, the physician is responsible for
ensuring that the patient fully understands the diagnosis, its
implications, and available treatment options. When combined
with the issues that have arisen as part of the managed care envi-
ronment, the aforementioned obstacles cited by Dr. Nancy
Examining the Issue   17
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Snyderman can be tremendous. For a patient who is already
bewildered by a frightening diagnosis and concerns about what is
to come, the unfamiliar, sterile environment can be a tremendous
burden. This environment can be intimidating for many people;
even the most articulate adults can find themselves overwhelmed
and at a loss for words. To further complicate matters, when the
environment is intimidating, medical personnel can become
intimidating, as well. If that occurs, a positive doctor-patient rela-
tionship can provide the patient with the necessary building
blocks to face the obstacles and move forward with making deci-
sions and addressing medical issues.
Should Religion Be Part of the Doctor-Patient Relationship?—What, if
any, role should religion play in the doctor-patient relationship?
Farr A. Curlin, M.D., and Peter P. Moschovis, writing in the Journal
of Family Practice, examine patient views on this topic. They cite a
“recent multicenter survey of outpatients,” which found that “in
the setting of dying,” a majority would appreciate physician
inquiries about their religion and would welcome the opportuni-
ty to engage in silent prayer. They also state that half of the
patients in the survey responded affirmatively to a question about
whether the physician should pray with them. Noting that “gener-
ic, one-size-fits-all spirituality is inadequate, especially for those
patients who are devoutly religious,” they ask the best way for a
physician to respond to the religious concerns of a patient.
Declaring that these issues “have not been adequately answered,”
they posit that “the ethical form and content of legitimate spiritu-
al discussions between patient and physician remain ill defined
(Curlin and Moschovis 2004, 633).
Religion is different things for different people. For some
people, it is not a factor at all; for others, it is merely another obli-
gation to be fulfilled. Some people view religion as a source of
comfort in times of stress or strife, whereas others consider it to be
the center of their lives. For the latter group, their love for a
supreme being, and their deity’s love for them, is a constant; they
might view the idea of bringing religion into the healthcare setting
as a logical extension of its presence in other facets of their lives.
For people who are more casual about their religious beliefs, how-
ever, a physician raising the idea of religion could seem intrusive.
As a result, clear channels of communication are necessary
between the patient and the doctor in this area, as well. Patients
who want to make religion part of their medical care may find that
18
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

the most effective way to make that happen may be to raise the
issue with the doctor. Doctors, in turn, must communicate their
feelings, and comfort level, with the patient in a clear and sensitive
manner. For example, if the doctor and patient subscribe to very
different belief systems, but both are comfortable with making
spirituality part of their relationship, the compromise might be
that they talk about spirituality in a more general sense rather than
in the context of a particular religion.
Health Insurance.—Although many people who have health insur-
ance take it for granted, most of those who lack it consider it a pre-
cious commodity. For people who do not have health insurance,
life can seem like a tightrope without a net. Situations that result
in a quick doctor visit or trip to the emergency room for people
with healthcare coverage can become frighteningly ominous situ-
ations for people without health insurance: “The kids are really
sick and I can’t afford to take them to the doctor. What do I do?”
“I fell off my bike and really hurt my back but I can’t afford to go
to the emergency room. I don’t know what to do.” Throughout the
United States, many full-time workers and some part-time work-
ers acquire health insurance through their employers. In many
cases, however, rising insurance costs have increased the amount
that many employees must contribute toward this coverage; such
increases, unfortunately, make insurance unaffordable for an ever-
greater portion of the population.
An article in the Buffalo News in November 2006 reported on
the dramatic increases in insurance costs for residents of New
York State from 2000 through 2006:
Health insurance premiums rose 5.5 times faster than
earnings for New York families during the last six
years, according to a report by a health care advocacy
group. The rising prices put many at risk of having to
forego coverage, the report said. The Families USA
study found that health care premiums rose 71.8 per-
cent in New York from 2000 to 2006, while median
earnings rose 13 percent. According to the report, New
York health care premiums in the last six years rose to
$12,183 from $7,090 for family coverage through the
workplace. But median earnings for workers in the
state in the same period rose to $31,811 from $28,153
(Epstein 2006).
Examining the Issue   19
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

For people who are not even eligible for such insurance cov-
erage through their employers, insurance can remain maddening-
ly elusive. Paying for it privately can be prohibitively expensive,
especially when coverage is required for several people in a fami-
ly. The result, unfortunately, is that many people remain unin-
sured and continue to walk that tightrope without a safety net. An
article in America magazine used data from the U.S. Census
Bureau to illustrate the severity of this problem:
The number of people below the U.S. poverty line
increased by 1.3 million in 2003. More than 60 percent
of the increase was among children under 18 years of
age, according to the U.S. Census Bureau’s annual
report on income, poverty and health insurance cover-
age. The Census Bureau also reported a 1.4 million rise
in the number of people lacking health insurance . . .
(America 2004, 5).
A Newsweek article cited statistics from the Children’s
Defense Fund to illustrate how serious the lack of health insur-
ance has become for many people throughout the United States.
The article highlights the fact that lack of health insurance is
more common among some demographic groups than others.
The article, which cites 2003–2004 averages, notes that 11 per-
cent of White Americans lacked health insurance, while 20 per-
cent of Black Americans lacked this type of coverage. The per-
centage was highest among America’s Hispanic population:
fully 33 percent of Hispanic Americans lacked health insurance
(Ulick 2005, 22).
As costs continue to rise, and employers find it increasingly
difficult to fund health insurance for employees, the numbers of
Americans without health insurance will likely continue to rise
among every demographic group. For some policy makers, this
issue has risen to the top of the agenda; however, consensus must
be reached before the issue can be addressed in a way that will
help people without health insurance in a concrete and meaning-
ful way. Such consensus appears impossible at times, given the
plethora of plans, ideas, political obstacles, and people involved in
the process.
20
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Spiritual-Social-Cultural
Religion
When people face end-of-life decisions, they sometimes rely on
religious beliefs to help them cope with their fear or give them
strength to deal with this uncharted territory. When people are not
religious, they sometimes turn to religion as they search for the
hope and succor they may require to help them face the issues that
arise at the end of life and the dying process. In addition to offer-
ing hope, religions may also offer laws or guidelines for people
who are facing death. This section examines the ways several reli-
gions address issues related to the end of life.
Judaism.—Judaism is an ancient religion; as is the case with many
other established religions, it offers insight into death and dying
from a religious perspective. Essayist Elliot N. Dorff examines this
insight in Must We Suffer Our Way to Death? In his essay, Dorff
notes that “Jewish law and theology demand that we preserve
good health and act as God’s partners in restoring it to the sick”
(Hamel and DuBose 1996, 166). Dorff also examines issues related
to the taking of a life in the context of the Jewish tradition. Noting
that it has always been “technically possible” to kill “oneself or
others,” he declares that it is “not surprising that the Jewish tradi-
tion, like many others, has much to say about these possibilities”
(141). He continues, acknowledging that modern technology fur-
ther complicates the issue:
Among other things, [Judaism] delineates a prohibition
against murder, a positive obligation for self-defense, and
varying penalties for acts of homicide, depending upon
the circumstances. In our time, however, the matter has
been complicated by our new ability to sustain almost
indefinitely people who would otherwise die (141).
Catholicism.—The Roman Catholic Church is known for its rejection
of actions that are considered to interfere with the sanctity of life,
including euthanasia. It is important to note, however, that this
rejection does not preclude actions that would allow death to
occur naturally. The Roman Catholic Church issued The Vatican’s
Declaration on Euthanasia, prepared by the Sacred Congregation for
the Doctrine of the Faith, in 1980. One section of this document
addresses the question of using available technology to prolong
Examining the Issue   21
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

life, noting “it is very important to protect, at the time of death,
both the dignity of the human person and the Christian concept of
life, against a technological attitude that threatens to become an
abuse.” The document goes on to examine the issue of whether it
is “necessary in all circumstances to have recourse to all possible
remedies” and offers the following:
. . . It will be possible to make a correct judgment as to
the means by studying the type of treatment to be
used, its degree of complexity or risk, its cost and the
possibilities of using it, and comparing these elements
with the result that can be expected, taking into
account the state of the sick person and his or her
physical and moral resources (The Vatican’s Declaration
on Euthanasia 1980).
In an article for America magazine titled “Catholicism, Death
and Modern Medicine,” Lisa Sowle Cahill offers additional insight
into the use, or lack thereof, of medical technology from the per-
spective of the Roman Catholic Church:
. . . Not all technologies are equally appropriate and
useful, and not all need be used by persons who are ill
or approaching the end. The terms “ordinary” and
“extraordinary” means of life support are used to dif-
ferentiate between obligatory and optional treatment.
As the Declaration on Euthanasia noted 25 years ago,
the terms “proportionate” and “disproportionate” may
now be preferable. The key point in the distinction is
that various technologies cannot simply be classified
according to type; instead they must be judged accord-
ing to the circumstances of the individual patient
(Cahill 2005, 15).
Pope John Paul II, born Karol Wojtyla, served as the leader of
Roman Catholics throughout the world from 1978 until his death
in 2005. During his papacy, Pope John Paul II issued statements
affirming that euthanasia remained unacceptable from the per-
spective of the Roman Catholic Church. As he neared the end of
his life, the world watched as he suffered from Parkinson’s dis-
ease. A Newsweek article provided a glimpse of that suffering and
22
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

explained why it was important in the context of the Roman
Catholic Church:
Few people can get close enough to Pope John Paul
II to try to read the thoughts behind the mask of sick-
ness . . . but some of those who have approached
him say they’ve glimpsed the pain of a man with a
vital mind, a man who has loved life enormously,
trapped now in a body that brings him nothing but
suffering.
And yet—because he is the leader of a billion
Roman Catholics; because he is the first pontiff of the
satellite and Internet age, reaching out to billions more;
and because he is John Paul II, who has ruled the
church for more than 26 years—in that public experi-
ence of suffering lies enormous power. And he knows
it (Dickey et al. 2005, 18).
Islam.—Described as one of the “fastest-growing major religions in
the world,” Islam is estimated to have 1.4 billion followers
throughout the world. Islam affirms the “significant value of per-
sons” and emphasizes that each person is responsible for his or
her own body and is “therefore entrusted with the capacities and
responsibility to make appropriate decisions when confronting a
treatment choice at the end of [his or her] own life or that of a
loved one.” In addition, euthanasia is considered a violation of the
sacredness that Islamic teachings attach to the “physician’s com-
mitment or covenant to healing” (Campbell 2000, 38).
Buddhism.—As an article in the Futurist noted, Buddhism “is based
on the teachings of Siddartha Gautama, who became known as the
Buddha or ‘the Enlightened one’ and the ultimate objective of the
practice of Buddhism is to reach a state of perfect cosmic under-
standing, loosely translated as enlightenment or Nirvana”
(Futurist 2006, 32).
In an article addressing euthanasia in the context of religion,
author Courtney Campbell delves into the complexities surround-
ing end-of-life issues for those who follow Hinduism and
Buddhism. Noting that suicide is generally anathema for Hindus
and Buddhists, Campbell explains that this does not necessarily
preclude declining treatment if such a choice is made to “avoid
imposing a heavy burden of caregiving on family or friends”
Examining the Issue   23
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

(Campbell 2000, 39). Campbell further examines the role that
“physical suffering” may play in end-of-life decision making
within this religious realm:
When physical suffering impedes self-control and
lucidity, it is permissible to shorten life. Pain or lethar-
gy might cloud the awareness and consciousness at
death that both Hindus and Buddhists believe is neces-
sary to ensure a [favorable] rebirth.
This pattern of reasoning . . . also applies to
euthanasia through physician injection or administra-
tion of a lethal drug. Hindu and Buddhist scholars
have found support for this so-called “active” euthana-
sia in their traditions by reflecting on the meaning of
death as a door to liberation . . . (Campbell 2000, 39).
Unitarian Universalist.—The Unitarian Universalist Association
(UUA) is a “religious organization in the United States” which was
formed when the Universalist Church of America merged with the
American Unitarian Association in May 1961 (Encyclopedia
Brittanica Micropædia 2003, 137). It was at the 1988 meeting of its
General Assembly that the Unitarian Universalist Association
affirmed its commitment to a document titled “The Right to Die
with Dignity,” which contained the following resolutions:
• That the Unitarian Universalist Association calls upon its
congregations and individual Unitarian Universalists to
examine attitudes and practices in our society relative to
the ending of life, as well as those in other countries and
cultures;
• That Unitarian Universalists reaffirm their support for
the Living Will, as declared in a 1978 resolution of the
General Assembly, declare support for the Durable
Power of Attorney for Health Care, and seek assurance
that both instruments will be honored;
• That Unitarian Universalists advocate the right to self-
determination in dying, and the release from civil or
criminal penalties of those who, under proper safe-
guards, act to honor the right of terminally ill patients to
select the time of their own deaths;
• That Unitarian Universalists advocate safeguards against
24
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

abuses by those who would hasten death contrary to an
individual’s desires;
• That Unitarian Universalists, acting through their con-
gregations, memorial societies, and appropriate organi-
zations, inform and petition legislators to support legis-
lation that will create legal protection for the right to die
with dignity, in accordance with one’s own choice
(General Assembly of Unitarian Universalists, 1988
Proceedings, 74).
Legal-Political
Washington v. Glucksberg and Vacco v. Quill.
Carl E. Schneider served as the editor of a book titled Law at the
End of Life: The Supreme Court and Assisted Suicide (2000). In his
introduction to this book, Schneider describes the evolution of
assisted suicide from a political question into a judicial one:
For a number of years, assisted suicide was the proto-
type of a (nonpartisan) political question. Almost sud-
denly, however, this classic political process was trans-
formed into a judicial one by the startling and strongly
stated opinions of the Second and Ninth Circuit Courts
of Appeals.
Now, in a case called Washington v. Glucksberg
(and, of course, its companion case, Vacco v. Quill), the
Supreme Court has reversed the decisions of the
Second and Ninth Circuits (1).
These two cases, namely Washington v. Glucksberg and Vacco
v. Quill, are important in the modern history of end-of-life issues.
They have provided the legal cornerstones for subsequent court
battles since the Supreme Court of the United States decided them
in 1997. Various legal scholars have analyzed the impact of these
decisions on both sides of the right-to-die discussion. One issue in
particular has been the subject of a great deal of analysis. It is the
concept of double effect. Pain medication is typically used to
relieve a patient’s pain and reduce suffering; however, when
administered in sufficient doses, it can end the patient’s life.
Under this scenario, relieving pain is the primary purpose and
Examining the Issue   25
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

ending life is a secondary one; together, the two are often known
as a double effect.
Writing in Law at the End of Life: The Supreme Court and Assisted
Suicide, Rebecca Dresser examined Washington v. Glucksberg and
Vacco v. Quill in an essay entitled “The Supreme Court and End-of-
Life Care: Principled Distinctions or Slippery Slope?” Noting that
the decisions “upheld the constitutionality of state criminal laws
prohibiting assisted suicide,” Dresser opined that the decisions
provided ways for people at the end of life to reduce their suffer-
ing (Schneider 2000, 83). She seems to be of the opinion that the
Court’s permissiveness regarding double effect is intentional:
By conferring their approval on [a constitutionally pro-
tected interest in obtaining adequate palliative care,
including pain medication that could hasten death, and
terminal sedation], the Justices [writing for the majori-
ty] advanced current efforts to lessen the suffering of
dying patients.
The Court’s position on palliative care has impor-
tant implications for patients and clinicians. Although
proponents of legalized physician-assisted suicide
were disappointed by the Court’s decisions, the
Justices did give patients explicit legal authority to con-
trol many dimensions of the dying process. And in
granting patients this authority, the Justices also shield-
ed clinicians acting to fulfill patients’ choices from legal
liability (83).
In addition to serving as the editor of Law at the End of Life:
The Supreme Court and Assisted Suicide, Carl E. Schneider wrote
several essays which appear in the book. In one of these essays,
he expresses a point of view that is distinctly different from
Rebecca Dresser’s regarding double effect; the crux of his state-
ment seems to be that the Court’s permissiveness of double effect
is unintentional:
Not only does the court misperceive the motives doc-
tors and patients might have in terminating medical
treatment or in seeking relief from pain, it seems not to
have considered the consequences of equating those
acts with suicide (173).
26
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act
Just as the aforementioned Supreme Court decisions are very
important in terms of the legal aspects of end-of-life issues and
decisions, Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act is a legislative and
political milestone in this context. Introduced in Oregon’s
Legislative Assembly in 1994 as Measure 16, the bill aimed to pro-
vide physicians with a means of prescribing medication to end life
to terminally ill patients. The bill limited this option to competent
patients who met specific criteria of eligibility. Measure 16 passed
but was subsequently blocked by a restraining order; when it
eventually became effective in October 1997 (Yount 2000, 34), the
Oregon Death with Dignity Act was the first law of its kind in the
United States (Foley and Hendin 2002, 144). However, a subse-
quent bill aimed at repealing it was put before the voters in the
election of November 1997. This bid failed; in fact, some said it
backfired because it passed by a margin even wider than that of
the original measure (Yount 2000, 34).
As the only law of its kind in the United States, the Oregon
Death with Dignity Act provides Oregonians with the option of
choosing to die rather than continuing to suffer from a terminal
illness. Not surprisingly, the Death with Dignity Act has been the
subject of scrutiny since it was proposed. Individuals and organ-
izations on both sides of the issue have examined it, its implica-
tions, and its implementation thoroughly and continuously.
Those who favor the right-to-die movement cheer the Death
with Dignity Act for providing terminally ill people with a
choice about death, but they sometimes cite its safeguards as
restrictions or constraints which limit choice. Those who oppose
assisted suicide argue that it represents the beginning of a slip-
pery slope for America and that its safeguards do not go far
enough to prevent abuse.
References
America. 2004. “Census Bureau Counts More Poor and
Uninsured.” America 191 (6): 5.
“Brain Death.” Leikin, Jerrold B., and Martin  S. Lipsky, eds.
2003. American Medical Association Complete Medical Encyclopedia.
New York: Random House, 271. 
References   27
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Cahill, Lisa Sowle. 2005. “Catholicism, Death and Modern
Medicine.” America 192 (14): 14–17.
Campbell, Courtney S. 2000.“Euthanasia and Religion.”
UNESCO Courier 53 (1): 37–39.
Curlin, Farr A., and Peter P. Moschovis. 2004. “Is Religious
Devotion Relevant to the Doctor-Patient Relationship?” Journal of
Family Practice 53 (8): 632–636.
Dickey, Christopher, Rod Nordland, Anne Underwood, Robert
Blair Kaiser, Edward Pentin, Barbie Nadeau, and Jacopo
Barigazzi. 2005. “‘Precious’ Suffering.” Newsweek, 18–23, Atlantic
edition.
Epstein, Jonathan D. 2006. “N.Y. Families Squeezed by Health
Costs.” Buffalo News, November 5, D1.
Foley, Kathleen, and Herbert Hendin., eds. 2002. The Case against
Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End-of-Life Care. Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
General Assembly of Unitarian Universalists. Proceedings, 74. 
Hamel, Ronald P., and Edwin R. DuBose, eds. 1996. Must We
Suffer Our Way to Death? Dallas, TX: Southern Methodist
University Press.
Levesque, William R. “Schiavo’s Family Ends Legal Fight.” St.
Petersburg Times, October 15, 2003. http://www.sptimes.com/
2003/10/15/news_pf/Tampabay/Schiavo_s_family_ends.
shtml (accessed October 28, 2006).
“Major World Religions.” 2006. Futurist, September–October: 32.
McKhann, Charles F. 1999. A Time to Die: The Place for Physician
Assistance. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Olick, Robert S. 2001. Taking Advance Directives Seriously.
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Scherer, Jennifer M., and Rita J. Simon. 1999. Euthanasia and the
Right to Die. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Schneider, Carl E., ed. 2000. Law at the End of Life: The Supreme
Court and Assisted Suicide. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan
Press.
Slee, Vergil, Debora Slee, and H. Joachim Schmidt. 2001.  Slee’s
Health Care Terms. 4th ed. St. Paul, MN: Tringa Press.
28
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Snyderman, Nancy. September 2005. “Bedside Manners.” Good
Housekeeping: 90–94.
Times Staff Writer. 2004. “Q&A: Schiavo Story Is Long, with
Ending Still Unwritten.” St. Petersburg Times, September 24.
http://www.sptimes.com/
2004/09/24/State/QA__Schiavo_story_is_.shtml.
Venes, Donald, ed. Taber’s Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary. 2005.
Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis Company, 1641–1642.
Merriam-Webster Dictionary. 1998. Springfield, MA: Merriam-
Webster, 179, 517.
Ulick, Josh. 9/19/2005. “Portrait of the Poor.” (Accessed
October 29, 2006). Newsweek: 22–23, Atlantic edition.
The Vatican’s Declaration on Euthanasia. 1980. Rome: Vatican.
“Unitarian Universalist Association.” Encyclopedia Brittanica
Micropædia. Vol. 12. Chicago: Britannica, 2003.
Yount, Lisa. 2000. Physician-Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia. New
York: Facts on File.
References   29
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Related to End-of-Life Issues
D
eath can be a difficult subject to discuss, or even think about.
In addition to forcing people to face their own mortality, dis-
cussions of death can cause them to examine how satisfied
they are with life, worry about family, and face their fears of the
unknown. Discussions of euthanasia and physician-assisted sui-
cide raise these issues, but they add myriad other complex points,
including those related to autonomy, spirituality, and ethics. In
addition to these matters, which cause one’s focus to turn inward,
discussions of euthanasia must necessarily consider external
issues, including the legality of the action, or lack of action, that
would result in death.
This chapter examines various problems, controversies, and
solutions surrounding euthanasia, including the aforementioned
issues of autonomy, spirituality, and ethics. The problems, contro-
versies, and solutions are divided into the categories established
in Chapter 1: medical-bioethical, spiritual-social-cultural, and
legal-political.
31
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Differentiating between Key Concepts
To begin with, it is important to gain a clear understanding of the
terminology relevant to this discussion. There are various nuances
within the language of end-of-life issues. These nuances are impor-
tant because they represent distinctions between actions; they also
represent boundaries of acceptability for individuals and groups.
Euthanasia
Passive euthanasia is often described as letting someone die.
“Letting die” is the operative phrase because it is more about lack
of action than taking an action. It can be described as “ceasing or
not starting medical treatment that keeps a person alive, such as
attachment to a respirator or provision of food and water through
a tube.” Active euthanasia, on the other hand, involves an action
that “causes the death of a sick person without that person’s par-
ticipation” (Yount 2000, 4). Active euthanasia, which always
involves someone other than the patient actually performing the
action, is divided into three types:
• Voluntary euthanasia is a form of active euthanasia that
is performed at the request of the patient.
• Involuntary euthanasia, or “mercy killing” as it is some-
times called, involves taking the life of a patient who
has not requested death, with the intent of relieving
suffering.
• Nonvoluntary euthanasia denotes euthanasia that takes
place even though the patient is not competent to give
consent. (4)
Assisted Suicide
In assisted suicide, the patient is involved. In addition to making
the decision to die, the patient participates in the act. As the term
implies, someone assists the patient in taking the action to end life.
When the person who assists is a doctor, the act is termed physi-
cian-assisted suicide. In some cases, the person assisting is a
layperson who is sympathetic to the person’s wish to end his or
her own life. The person who has chosen to die actually performs
the final act, or the act that ultimately results in death (4). It is
important to note that some people and organizations active in
right-to-die issues consider it anathema to term this suicide
32
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

because it removes the concept of rationality from the action. The
term self-deliverance is considered preferable “so as not to corre-
late the two events, because they believe they are entirely differ-
ent, with self-deliverance stemming from a rational choice and tra-
ditional suicide resulting from emotional or psychological trau-
ma” (Scherer and Simon 1999, 13).
Concept of Rational Suicide
When individuals and organizations opposed to assisted suicide
argue the issue, they sometimes base a portion of their argument
on the concept that it is irrational to end one’s life. Harvey M.
Chochiniv and Leonard Schwartz examine this issue in The Case
against Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End-of-Life Care. Their essay,
titled “Depression and the Will to Live in Terminally Ill Patients,”
addresses the risk factors associated with requests for hastened
death by people who are terminally ill. They write that such risk
factors for people in the advanced stages of disease can include
“physical problems, such as pain, delirium, and fatigue” as well as
“social factors, such as the extent of emotional or family support;
and prior psychopathology and psychiatric history,” and note that
“depression is the one factor that has the most empirical support”
(Foley and Hendin 2002, 269).
Those who argue for the right to assisted death, however,
counter that suicide is sometimes a very rational choice. Charles F.
McKhann, M.D., explains the concept of rational suicide in his
book A Time to Die: The Place for Physician Assistance:
Traditional medical and psychiatric thinking considers
all suicides to be the product of disturbed mentation,
usually depression, and therefore irrational. But the
concept of rational suicide, widely held in ancient
Greece, is reawakening in our culture. Although it will
always apply to only a small minority of all deaths, this
concept is rapidly gaining acceptance among patients
with terminal illnesses and the physicians who care for
them, as well as with medical ethicists and others who
concern 
themselves 
with 
end-of-life 
decisions
(McKhann 1999, 44).
McKhann states that the concept of rational suicide rests on
two foundations:
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
33
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1. The desire to avoid unnecessary suffering
2. The desire to exercise one’s autonomy and self-determi-
nation
He explains that the first is “an essential reason for wishing
to have an earlier and more comfortable death” while the second
“provides the impetus for actually doing it or asking for help.”
McKhann asserts that the criteria for rational suicide are relevant
to all forms of assisted dying because “all such actions are initiat-
ed by the patient and are similar in many ways” (45, 46).
Medical-Bioethical Issues
Concepts and Issues That Arise at the End of Life
When a person is reaching the end of life as a result of a terminal
illness, numerous problematic issues can arise. For the person fac-
ing death, these issues frame the final months, weeks, days, and
even hours of life. If the patient is aware, the issues necessitate
decision making that can range from simple to agonizing.
Decisions on the simpler end of the spectrum can include things
like deciding whether to spend a few minutes outside enjoying the
sunshine or whether to receive visitors on a given day. On the
more agonizing end of the decision-making spectrum, a person
with ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), or Lou Gehrig’s disease,
for example, may face a decision about whether to go on a venti-
lator. Similarly, a person with terminal cancer may face a decision
about whether to try one last dose of chemotherapy. Decisions,
simple and complex, determine how the remainder of the
patient’s limited time will be spent. If the patient is not capable of
making decisions and did not indicate wishes in an advance direc-
tive document, the decision falls to the person’s health care proxy
or family members. For family members watching a loved one
suffer and die, each decision can be an agonizing struggle to deter-
mine what the person would have wanted.
In this context, where life hangs in the balance and death is
imminent, end-of-life issues are not academic or theoretical: They
are reality. In many cases, they are also subjective. For individuals
and organizations on opposing sides of right-to-die issues, these are
the issues on which opinions diverge. Terminology, as previously
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

noted, is important because it is the language of end-of-life issues
and it defines the points at which divergences occur. This is true not
only in the macro sense of the societal debate surrounding end-of-
life issues, but in the micro sense of a particular family’s struggle to
address the approaching end of a loved one’s life. For example, if a
loved one is near death and family members disagree about the
appropriate course of action, family disagreements and discord can
be unnecessarily magnified by lack of understanding regarding
medical procedures, terminology related to the end of life, and the
ramifications of any wishes the patient may have stated.
Quality of Life
Quality of life is a subjective issue that is the topic of intense
debate. Although some people who study end-of-life issues argue
that quality of life can be measured, at least to some degree, using
specific objective standards, others argue that the subjectivity of
the concept makes it too amorphous to allow for empirical meas-
urement. The crux of the issue of quality of life is what the individ-
ual gains from life. Even for two individuals at the same terminal
point of the same debilitating condition, there can be two different
answers. One might find the incapacitation of the illness too debil-
itating to allow for any meaning in life, while the other may view
the period of incapacitation as a final chance to bid farewell to
family and friends.
David W. Kissane addresses the subjectivity of this issue in
The Case against Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End-of-Life Care. An
excerpt from his essay, entitled “Deadly Days in Darwin,” illus-
trates just how personal the concept of quality of life is and
explains how quality of life can be difficult to assess, especially for
family members, as they grapple with the patient’s illness.
Research has repeatedly shown how quality of life is
appraised differently by patient, caregiver, and clinician.
A patient with cancer can adjust to the experience of
gradual frailty over time, so long as adequate reassur-
ance is given about the thoroughness of care along the
way. Family onlookers can have a more difficult task,
especially when the onlookers work or worked in med-
icine and have a variety of memories of decay, bodily
disintegration, and disability, sometimes associated with
revulsion and disgust (Foley and Hendin 2002, 204).
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
35
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Just as the concept of quality of life is personal, the concept
of suffering is equally personal. For some people, there is a point
at which suffering becomes too great to bear. For others, suffering
is valued in a spiritual sense. For people who decide that their suf-
fering has become unbearable, there are various possibilities. One
possibility is that the person simply loses the will to live; for that
person, death may be hastened simply because they have decided
that it is not worth it to cling to life. A second possibility is that the
person could begin refusing any further treatments, including
major treatments such as surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, or
dialysis. On the other hand, the person could decide to refuse
things that many consider more basic, such as nutrition, hydra-
tion, or medications. Finally, the person could begin examining the
possibilities available to them in terms of ending life. In the
absence of an option like Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act, the
person may begin examining ways to end his or her own life,
either alone or with the assistance of another person.
Who Should Ultimately Decide?
Who should decide the circumstances under which medical treat-
ment should be provided—or denied—to a patient? Some have
argued that the policy of always working to save a patient’s life is
not appropriate and should be replaced by an empirical consider-
ation of the situation to determine the best course of action. In an
article in Philanthropy Magazine, Wesley J. Smith writes, “Dr.
Donald J. Murphy, a Colorado physician and ethics consultant . . .
believes that ‘the community’ should define . . . under what cir-
cumstances it is inappropriate for doctors to provide medical
treatment.” Murphy was director of the Colorado Collective for
Medical Decisions, an organization dedicated to eliminating the
uncertainty of this process by establishing protocol to clearly
define when certain types of treatment should be withheld or dis-
continued. The protocol, as proposed by the Colorado Collective
for Medical Decisions, would rule the day, regardless of what the
patient or family members wanted (Smith 2001).
Upon receipt of a grant from a philanthropic organization
known as the Colorado Trust, the Colorado Collective for Medical
Decisions “[convened] community focus groups intended to
determine . . . the public’s attitudes towards end-of-life care.”  To
the surprise of Dr. Murphy and the members of the organization
he headed, the focus group participants rejected the concept
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

behind the guidelines. Following this outcome, the Colorado Trust
decided to discontinue funding the Colorado Collective for
Medical Decisions, which became inactive (Smith 2001).
Although Dr. Murphy and the members of the Colorado
Collective for Medical Decisions believed that they had developed
a solution to determine the type and extent of medical care that
should be administered in a given situation, the members of their
focus groups rejected their proposal. It seems that, as much as end-
of-life issues generate discussion, debate, and controversy, the
idea of another person or entity making these decisions—without
input from the patient, family members, or medical personnel—
was anathema to them. Many organizations on both sides of
euthanasia and assisted suicide issues disagree about whether
patients should have the option of assisted suicide, but few in the
United States seem to be of the opinion that neither the patient (or
patient’s family, if the patient is incapable of making decisions)
nor the doctor should be part of that decision-making process.
Rather, organizations and individuals supportive of providing
patients with the right to die argue that such decisions should be
made by the patient (or patient’s family, as the case may be), with
assistance and support from the physician or someone else, while
those who oppose euthanasia and assisted suicide argue that life
should always be preserved.
Technology
In this day and age, physicians can make use of technological
innovations that were unavailable to previous generations.
Technological innovations include machines, or systems, such as
ventilators and cardiac monitors. Technological innovations also
include medications and techniques that were discovered as a
result of more advanced technology. Examples include certain
antibiotics, surgical techniques, and CPR (cardiopulmonary resus-
citation). Although these examples may seem mundane, some of
them were unavailable even a generation ago. The reality is that
these and other innovations make it possible to save lives of peo-
ple who would have died otherwise. 
Although patients, family members, and medical personnel
might take many technological innovations for granted, some
advances introduce a whole new set of issues that all of these par-
ties must face. For example, in the absence of advance directives,
the goal is always to save the patient’s life. If a person is critically
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
37
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

injured in an automobile accident, the emergency medical servic-
es (EMS) personnel at the scene will treat the immediate and most
critical issues so that the patient can be stabilized and transported
to a hospital. Once the patient arrives at the hospital, doctors,
nurses, and other members of the medical team assess the situa-
tion and try to save the patient’s life using every possible means at
their disposal. This might include performing cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, performing surgery, administering antibiotics to
ward off infection, or placing the patient on a ventilator. If family
members arrive at the scene after any of these initial steps have
been performed and indicate that the patient had an advance
directive indicating that he or she did not wish to have certain pro-
cedures performed under certain circumstances, it is too late. The
doctors, nurses, and other medical personnel, having cared for the
patient to the best of their ability, saved the person’s life. In a sce-
nario like this, technology enabled caregivers to save a life, even if
that is not the outcome that patient might have wanted.
In addition to technological innovations that are geared to
saving life, such as those mentioned above, some technological
innovations are geared more to improving life. Examples include
knee and hip replacements, prosthetic devices, and certain med-
ications, such as antidepressants. Although innovations like these
are generally considered to improve—rather than save—lives,
they represent the crossroads where technology and quality of life
meet. For an older person who has been shut in for years due to
lack of mobility, a hip replacement can mean a new outlook and
the end of the idea of giving up on life. For a burn victim who lost
a limb, a prosthetic device can mean the end of a heartfelt wish to
die. For a person who has faced years of clinical depression and
contemplated suicide, an antidepressant can mean the end of such
suicidal thoughts and a totally new outlook. In some scenarios,
like these, innovations designed to improve life can change the
person’s quality of life so much that they ultimately save life.
Issues Related to People with Disabilities
The issue of euthanasia can be especially polarizing for people
with disabilities and disability advocacy groups. Some people
with disabilities view euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide as a
means of providing choice in dying and they advocate for legal-
ization. A principal argument from individuals and organizations
with this view is that some people with severe handicaps may be
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

physically incapable of committing suicide and that denying them
assistance with performing the act is unfair to the point of discrim-
ination. On the opposite side, people who oppose legalization of
euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide argue that people with
disabilities would be especially vulnerable to abuse in this area by
doctors and other medical personnel. Quality of life, they argue, is
subjective and physicians and others who perceive a patient’s
quality of life as low because of his or her disability might place a
higher value on their own assessment than the patient’s assess-
ment of his or her own quality of life.
Claire Rayner (2000) describes the chasm that separates these
groups in an article for New Scientist. The article focuses on the
people who attended a forum on euthanasia at the Science
Museum in London, England. The forum was held to mark the
donation of a “euthanasia machine . . . to the museum . . . by its
developer, Dr. Philip Nitschke.” Rayner notes that the speakers
represented “various shades of opinion” and were, “to be honest,
far less interesting than the audience.”
Most striking were the disabled people, who—elo-
quently and passionately—argued that a society which
[legalizes] the killing of sick people, even if it is sup-
posed to be limited to those who actively request it,
sends a dangerous message to its members: the lives of
those who are sick, in pain, limited in their ability to
operate in a self-sufficient manner, are worthless.
Their opponents countered that those who are
terminally ill, in a state of constant physical as well as
emotional and mental pain, have a hellish experience.
Modern hospice care does not work for everyone, and
anyway isn’t available everywhere. And what of those
who are not terminally ill but in a state they find
unbearable—[paralyzed], helpless, communicating
only with eye blinks, and liable to live so for many
years? (Rayner 2000, 31).
Special Concerns for Incompetent Patients
There are also unique circumstances in the cases of incompetent
patients. Some people, such as those newly diagnosed with
Alzheimer’s disease, may have enough advance notice to prepare a
living will before they reach a point where they are unable to care for
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
39
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

themselves and make decisions. For many incompetent patients,
however, this is not possible. Newborns with serious birth defects
are an example of this; for them and other incompetent patients lack-
ing advance directives, end-of-life decisions must be made by some-
one else. The medical profession, in the absence of a do not resusci-
tate (DNR) order or other type of advance directive, uses every pos-
sible means to save the patient’s life. This protocol becomes a thorny
issue when family members of an incompetent patient would rather
let the person die. These cases often end up before hospital ethics
committees because the wishes of the family and the protocol of the
medical personnel are so diametrically opposed.
Many proponents of euthanasia argue that parents,
guardians, or other persons charged with the person’s care should
have the ability to decide when it is time to end life. These people,
they argue, have the best knowledge of the patient so the decision-
making ability should lie with them. Many opponents, on the
other hand, counter that ending lives in this way is tantamount to
murder and charge that such a system would be rife with abuse
because the patients are unable to speak for themselves. Critics
also note that the person charged with making the decision could
have ulterior motives to decide a certain way; such motives would
create a conflict that could result in taking the patient’s life even if
that is not what the patient wanted or would have wanted.
Robert S. Olick (2001), author of Taking Advance Directives
Seriously, examines the legal aspects of making this type of deci-
sion on behalf of a patient:
In fact, the substantive standard of choosing as the
patient would has been the most controverted and
troublesome aspect in life-and-death litigation. The pri-
mary reason is that implementing this standard and
determining whether to authorize the surrogate to
direct forgoing of life support can become a thorny evi-
dentiary question. Couched against the law’s time-
honored presumption in favor of life, the burden of
proof that the patient would refuse life support rests
with the surrogate (15).
Doctor-Patient Relationships
Health care has changed in many ways. As a result of managed
care, HMOs (health maintenance organizations), PPOs (preferred
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

provider organizations), and similar entities have supplanted tra-
ditional health insurance plans. This, in turn, has caused a dramat-
ic change in the character of doctor-patient relationships. Instead
of seeing a family physician, patients see a doctor who bears a
title, such as “designated medical provider,” that reflects the less
personal aspects of this system. Patients see an assigned doctor;
however, such arrangements often undermine the concept of con-
tinuity of care because, in reality, the assigned doctor could be a
different person each time.
This system impacts patients in many ways. In terms of rou-
tine matters, the patient might find it intimidating to talk about
difficult subjects, including embarrassing symptoms or problems,
with a doctor he or she just met. In terms of more serious matters,
such as a diagnosis of a serious illness, the lack of a prior relation-
ship can leave the patient feeling as if he or she is adrift without a
trusted medical professional to turn to for advice. In terms of end-
of-life matters, the results can be catastrophic. The lack of a prior
relationship can leave the patient feeling as if he or she is facing
death without the benefit of a trusted medical advisor to provide
counsel about the best way to navigate the medical aspects of the
dying process.
Instances of Euthanasia and Physician-Assisted Suicide
Except for the Oregon Death with Dignity Act, there are no laws
in the United States that allow physicians to assist patients in has-
tening death in any way. However, anecdotal reports and other
evidence indicate that instances of assisted suicide and euthanasia
are clearly not limited to Oregon. In an attempt to quantify this to
some degree, several researchers conducted a national survey and
published their findings in the New England Journal of Medicine.
Their methodology was as follows: “In 1996, we mailed question-
naires to . . . 3102 physicians in the 10 specialties in which doctors
are most likely to receive requests from patients for assistance
with suicide or euthanasia.” Noting that they weighted the results
to “obtain nationally representative data,” the researchers report-
ed the following based on the 1,902 completed questionnaires that
were returned to them:
Eleven percent . . . said that under current legal con-
straints, there were circumstances in which they would
be willing to hasten a patient’s death by prescribing
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
41
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

medication, and 7 percent said that they would provide
a lethal injection; 36 percent and 24 percent, respective-
ly, said that they would do so if it were legal.
Last: 18.3 percent . . . (unweighted number, 320)
reported having received a request from a patient for
assistance with suicide and 11.1 percent (unweighted
number, 196) had received a request for a lethal injec-
tion. Sixteen percent . . . receiving such requests
(unweighted number, 42), or 3.3 percent of the entire
sample, reported that they had written at least one
prescription to be used to hasten death, and 4.7 per-
cent (unweighted number, 59), said that they had
administered at least one lethal injection (Meier et al.
1998, 1193).
What are the ramifications of this? Some cases are never
determined to be the result of assisted suicide. Of the cases that
come to light, some are prosecuted, with varying degrees of suc-
cess. Such was the case with Dr. Jack Kevorkian; although he was
tried and acquitted three times, his fourth trial resulted in a con-
viction and prison sentence.
Dr. Jack Kevorkian.—For people who might be less familiar with
issues surrounding euthanasia and assisted suicide, discussion of
these topics often begins with one name: Dr. Jack Kevorkian. Dr.
Kevorkian’s methods came under fire from critics who “[decried]
his seeming quest for publicity, his idiosyncratic process and crite-
ria for patient selection, his lack of clinical knowledge of the
patients’ earlier diseases, and his relatively short-term association
with his patients” (McKhann 1999, 83). In addition, even people
who agreed with him in principle about right-to-die issues criti-
cized him because “he did not know his patients well and did not
take any steps to confirm their diagnoses. This criticism became
especially sharp when autopsies on several of the people he had
helped to kill themselves showed no sign of physical disease at
all” (Yount 2000, 27).
Dr. Charles McKhann (1999) cites “three acquittals on mur-
der charges” as proof that “jurors in Michigan felt that [Dr.
Kevorkian’s] activities were justified” (83, 84). The acquittals
ended, however, when Dr. Jack Kevorkian was tried on charges of
first-degree murder in the death of Thomas Youk. The charge
came after Kevorkian had “administered a lethal injection to 52-
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

year-old Thomas Youk, who suffered from Lou Gehrig’s disease.”
In a twist, though, “Kevorkian captured most of the experience,
including Youk’s request for death and his own giving of the injec-
tion, on videotape. He then sent the tape to CBS’s news program
60 Minutes, which broadcast it to more than 15 million households
on November 22, 1998”; the charge of first-degree murder came
three days later on November 25, 1998 (Yount 2000, 37).
Prosecutors focused on the fact that the tape showed
“Kevorkian, not Youk, [administering] the fatal drug dose . . . from
a legal standpoint, that fact was the most important difference
between the Youk trial and Kevorkian’s three earlier ones, in
which he had been acquitted.” Kevorkian’s series of acquittals
officially ended on March 26, 1999, when “the jury found
Kevorkian guilty of second-degree murder (rather than the first-
degree murder charge demanded by the prosecutor) and delivery
of a controlled substance” (Yount 2000, 38). Judge Jessica Cooper
subsequently handed down a “10 to 25 year prison sentence for
murder.” During the sentencing, Judge Cooper said, “You had the
audacity to go on national television, show the world what you
did and dare the legal system to stop you. Well sir, consider your-
self stopped” (BBC News 2000).
The Hurricane Katrina Cases: Euthanasia? Murder? Neither?—A 2005
hurricane named Katrina left a path of destruction nearly unprece-
dented in the United States:
When it made landfall near the Louisiana-Mississippi
border on August 29, 2005, wind gusts of more than
125 miles an hour produced storm surges that demol-
ished many coastal communities. Within hours, many
homes, roads, bridges, hospitals, and schools in
Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama were completely
destroyed. More than 1,800 people were killed, and
hundreds of thousands were left homeless.
Since most of New Orleans lies below sea level, it
was especially vulnerable. After a storm surge toppled
levees, river and lake water poured in, flooding about
80 percent of the city (McCabe 2006, 8).
In the midst of this destruction, medical personnel struggled
to care for patients in their care, as reported in the Washington Post:
“In the flooded city, some of the greatest desperation was at hos-
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
43
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

pitals and nursing homes where frail people were left without air
conditioning, medicine and basic care. Doctors pleaded for heli-
copters and boats and feared looters.” At Memorial Medical
Center, conditions presented an environment that challenged doc-
tors and nurses trying to care for patients: “Temperatures inside
Memorial Medical Center rose to 100 degrees, the generators did-
n’t work, toilets backed up, and nurses had to resort to improvis-
ing care.” It was against this backdrop that Dr. Anna Pou and
nurses Lori L. Budo and Cheryl A. Landry were accused of mur-
dering four patients: “An investigation into mercy killings during
the chaos after Hurricane Katrina has led to the arrests of a doctor
and two nurses who allegedly administered lethal doses of mor-
phine and another drug to four New Orleans hospital patients”
(Whoriskey and Skipp 2006).
Although some law enforcement officials and media
termed these acts euthanasia given the circumstances, Charles C.
Foti, Louisiana attorney general, said the actions constituted
murder. Dr. Pou, Budo, and Landry were arrested and charged
with second-degree murder on July 17, 2006. Rick Simmons, Dr.
Pou’s attorney, disputed the charges, saying that Dr. Pou had no
reason to murder the patients (Whoriskey and Skipp 2006). An
article in the New Orleans Times Picayune noted that Simmons
declared that Dr. Pou is neither “on the barricades of the ethical
debate on euthanasia” nor “‘some advocate for assisted sui-
cide.’” In addition, the article included information from
experts indicating that death might not have been the intent of
the injections:
Morphine and Ativan, one of the drug combinations
that a Foti witness says were administered to the
patients, is an extremely unreliable way to induce
death, pharmacologists and forensic pathologists say. It
is used to relax agitated patients and to relieve severe
pain (Varney 2006).
The Washington Post story included a statement regarding
euthanasia from Tenet Healthcare, the company that owns
Memorial Medical Center:
Tenet Healthcare, which owns the medical center, said,
“Euthanasia is repugnant to everything we believe as
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

ethical health-care providers, and it violates every pre-
cept of ethical behavior and the law. It is never permis-
sible under any circumstances” (2006).
In the November 7, 2006, edition of the Greater Baton Rouge
Business Report, columnist Jason Berry assailed State Attorney
General Charles Foti’s actions in this case. After first examining
the concept of euthanasia and whether this crime was related to it,
he focused on Charles Foti’s role in the case, noting that the case
would actually fall under the jurisdiction of New Orleans District
Attorney Eddie Jordan:
Three months after the arrests, there have been no
indictments. The case now sits with New Orleans
District Attorney Eddie Jordan, in whose jurisdiction
the deaths occurred. Jordan needs evidence to present
to a grand jury. A pivotal factor for Jordan is how
Orleans Parish Coroner Dr. Frank Minyard decides to
classify toxicology data from lab specimens of the four
deceased seniors. Samples have gone to out-of-state
labs, with toxicology consultants yet to render opin-
ions. Police can arrest and prosecutors can charge or
seek indictments, but only a coroner can classify a
death as a homicide. Without that classification, there
can be no murder case (Berry 2006).
The aftermath of Hurricane Katrina was a nightmare for res-
idents who lived in communities devastated by the destruction.
Some have argued that Dr. Pou and nurses Budo and Landry
were simply trying to help patients cope with the untenable con-
ditions by providing them with medication to ease their pain and
suffering, as well as their fear of the hurricane conditions. Others,
however, have argued that these caregivers abused their posi-
tions by taking their patients’ lives. Whether these medical pro-
fessionals are punished or exonerated, this case represents a
unique chapter in the ongoing history of end-of-life issues in the
United States.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
45
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Role of Physicians
Although it is always important for a doctor and patient to have
good communication and trust, it is especially important when a
patient is facing end-of-life issues and decisions. The doctor can be
very helpful in terms of providing information regarding treat-
ment, offering guidance about what to expect, and dispensing
advice about ways to deal with problems that may arise. For some
patients, there is a point, cited in the quality of life section of this
chapter, at which suffering is so great that everything else, includ-
ing life, has lost meaning. While quality of life is a subjective con-
cept, a theoretical point at which life loses meaning is perhaps the
most subjective concept imaginable. For some people, such a point
does not even exist; for someone who believes that life is invio-
lable regardless of the circumstances, there is seemingly no point
at which life loses meaning. For a person who believes that such a
point exists, the point may come at a certain predetermined time,
such as when a specific life-sustaining function cannot be per-
formed without mechanical intervention. For someone who
believes that such a point exists but does not have a set point in
mind, each day of suffering may equal another step toward a deci-
sion that life is intolerable and no longer worth living.
For a patient who has reached such a point, the doctor might
seem to be the most logical person to turn to for relief in the form
of assistance to hasten death. McKhann examines the suggestion
that patients should turn to people other than physicians for assis-
tance in dying; he concludes, however, that physicians are the
most logical choice:
Some who suggest transferring the responsibility [for
providing assistance in dying] outside of medicine are
opposed to physician-assisted dying in any form and
hope that the medical profession will continue to refuse
to support or participate in it. But the profession’s
opposition is already softening, and there is no need to
look beyond our physicians for aid in dying. Many
acknowledge having helped people die, and many
more indicate willingness to do so, particularly if it
were legal (McKhann 1999, 86).
How does a physician respond to a patient’s request for aid
in dying? Anthony L. Back, M.D., examines issues related to com-
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

munication about end-of-life issues in an essay titled “Doctor-
Patient Communication about Physician-Assisted Suicide,” which
appears in Physician-Assisted Dying: The Case for Palliative Care and
Patient Choice. In a section on improving communication between
doctors and patients about aid in dying, Back notes:
Existing recommendations stress the importance of
clarifying the request, exploring the reasons underly-
ing it, emphasizing that the patient will not be aban-
doned, and providing excellent palliative care.
First, aid in dying may be a patient concern that is
often blocked by physicians.
When physicians say that their patients never ask
about it, that may be because the physicians them-
selves block the discussion (Quill and Battin 2004, 112).
Back asserts that patients who raise the issue of assisted sui-
cide may actually be less interested in “just a prescription” and
more interested in building a “therapeutic alliance” with someone
who can “guide them through the dying process”:
In dealing with a request for aid in dying, a therapeu-
tic relationship between patient and doctor may be as
important as a prescription for physician-assisted sui-
cide. The combination of openness to discussions about
assisted suicide and expertise in dealing with the dying
process are what makes a continued clinician-patient
relationship possible when a patient pursues a has-
tened death (114).
Double Effect
A concept known as double effect “allows physicians to help sig-
nificantly in the deaths of some patients by giving large doses of
narcotics to relieve pain, with the knowledge that respiration will
be suppressed and death may ensue” (McKhann 1999, 8).
Although it is condemned by some as a way of helping a patient
to die by simply turning a blind eye to the notion that death may
occur as a result of these drugs, others view it as a sort of de facto
middle ground in which death is a secondary result, or double
effect, of drugs to relieve the patient’s pain.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
47
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Leon R. Kass, M.D., Ph.D., argues that it is never right for
doctors to assist patients in committing suicide. In his essay “‘I
Will Give No Deadly Drug’: Why Doctors Must Not Kill,” which
appears in The Case against Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End-of-
Life Care, Kass says it is ironic that people seek assistance from the
“death defying art of medicine”:
Because we want to live and not to die, we resort to
medicine to delay the inevitable. Yet in some cases,
medicine’s success in preserving life has been pur-
chased at a heavy price, pain in the coin of how we die:
often in conditions of great pain and suffering, irre-
versible incompetence, and terminal loss of control. In
these circumstances, many Americans increasingly
seek great control over the end of life, and some even
wish to elect death to avoid the burdens of lingering
on. Ironically, they also seek assistance in doing so from
the death-defying art of medicine. People no longer
talk only about refusing medical treatment. The
demands of the day are for physician-assisted suicide
and euthanasia (Foley and Hendin 2002, 17).
If a patient requests a physician’s assistance in hastening
death, how does the physician respond? If such an action is in con-
flict with the physician’s beliefs, as in the essay by Dr. Kass, the
answer would most likely be no. However, as Dr. Back notes, the
patient may be looking more for someone to guide him or her
through the dying process. Even in refusing to assist a patient in
committing suicide, a physician can phrase the refusal in a way
that indicates understanding of the patient’s suffering and con-
cerns. In this way, the physician can show that he or she under-
stands the patient’s fears and would be helpful to the patient as a
guide through the unknown and sometimes frightening experi-
ences leading to death. Drs. Quill and Battin offer the following
guidance on this topic:
If a physician is aware of all the last-resort options and
is opposed to granting a request for assisted suicide by
a particular patient, the physician might explore those
options that he or she can support to see whether com-
mon ground can be found. Clearly, physicians should
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

attempt to extend themselves to remain responsive to
such suffering patients and their families, but that
should not include violating fundamental personal
moral values for either the physician or the patient
(Quill and Battin 2004, 327).
They conclude with the following caveat that encapsulates
the point of their book, which is that palliative care should be
available to everyone and that physician-assisted death should be
available as a last resort: “It is imperative that we now recognize
that the patient’s fundamental moral values may include physi-
cian-assisted suicide and that this option, for those who are dying,
should be part of recognized law” (327).
If the physician is not opposed to assisting a patient with
dying, the patient and physician enter into a unique partnership of
sorts. In addition to sharing the decision making, they consider
the central operational issues: how and when the assistance will
happen. McKhann summarizes these issues as follows:
Suicide, which is legal, is a private act. Because it
requires no interaction with anyone else, it is also the
only completely autonomous step that one can take to
end life. As soon as a physician is included to assist in
any way, autonomy must be shared. The patient shares
autonomy in finding a physician who is willing to help
and in agreeing on terms, the timing, and the method
to be used (McKhann 1999, 229).
McKhann also notes that legalization would not mean the
end of these and other constraints: “Legalization of assisted dying
will introduce specific requirements, including some form of pub-
lic oversight. The confidential nature of the patient-physician rela-
tionship will necessarily be qualified. This invasion of the privacy
of both patient and physician is the unavoidable cost of legal
approval and protection” (229).
Abuse
As McKhann notes, patients who choose physician-assisted sui-
cide give up some degree of autonomy; they share autonomy, in
his parlance. Some people cite this sharing of autonomy as creat-
ing a potential for abuse. Critics also declare that certain groups,
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
49
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

including disabled people and incompetent people, are more vul-
nerable to abuse than the general public. Many opponents cite this
potential for abuse as chief among their objections.
Felicia Cohn, Ph.D., and Joanne Lynn, M.D., M.A., M.S.,
assert that concerns regarding another person or persons making
decisions about end-of-life issues are not relevant just to those
immediately involved; those decisions, they declare, will impact
all of us at some point. Their assertions are included in
“Vulnerable People: Practical Rejoinders to Claims in Favor of
Assisted Suicide,” an essay that appears in The Case against
Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End-of-Life Care. Dr. Cohn and Dr.
Lynn begin by acknowledging that there are some people for
whom physician-assisted suicide holds some degree of appeal
and “seems to offer an answer” as well as the ability to “prevent
suffering and maintain control over what once seemed uncon-
trollable” (Foley and Hendin 2002, 238). The flip side, they note,
is as follows:
For others, however, physician-assisted suicide con-
jures fear that someone else will determine what is to
be considered excessive suffering or costs, and that oth-
ers might seek to eliminate the suffering or the costs by
eliminating those persons who are perceived to be suf-
fering or costly. The elderly and the poor are particular-
ly vulnerable to the effects of inadequate health care
resources and the attendant constraints on medical
decision making. The issue of physician-assisted sui-
cide, however, is not merely a matter for “other”
groups. “The poor” is a lifelong or end-of-life reality for
many Americans; “the elderly” is a group that most of
us would eventually like to join; and “the dying” is a
category we cannot reasonably avoid (Foley and
Hendin 2002, 238).
Charles F. McKhann, M.D., asserts that, although there are
some risks associated with legalizing assisted suicide, the afore-
mentioned objections and concerns are not universal. In address-
ing some of these concerns in his book A Time to Die: The Place for
Physician Assistance, he acknowledges the existence of “under-
standable concern that legalization of assisted dying will entail
risks” but cautions that although some are “immediate and realis-
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

tic,” others are “at the remote limits of imagination.” He declares
that many of the most common arguments are hypothetical—and,
therefore, “impossible to weigh and evaluate in advance.” He fur-
ther notes the need to evaluate these arguments prior to any sort
of legalization (McKhann 1999, 160, 161).
Spiritual-Social-Cultural Issues
As noted in Chapter 1, euthanasia, physician-assisted suicide, and
other issues related to the end of life do not exist in a vacuum.
Spiritual, social, and cultural issues are part of the context in
which these issues exist and studying them is a useful part of
examining end-of-life issues more fully. This particular area of
study is also helpful because it provides information relevant to
the context in which people view these issues: For many people,
feelings about euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide grow
partly from their spiritual or cultural background.
Spiritual Issues
Part of the first chapter examined the ways that various religions
address euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide, as well as the
ways that people may rely on religious beliefs and traditions
when they are facing the end of life. This section focuses more on
the problems, controversies, and solutions within the realm of
religion and spirituality vis-à-vis euthanasia and physician-assist-
ed suicide.
It is important to introduce this discussion by clarifying that
assisted suicide is not universally condemned by existing religious
faiths. Many people mistakenly believe that all religions are united
in opposition to such acts. Courtney S. Campbell examines this
issue in an article entitled “Euthanasia and Religion” for UNESCO
Courier. Noting that “suicide is sinful according to [the monotheistic
faiths of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam],” Campbell writes that:
. . . Some faith communities in Protestant Christianity
and in Reformed Judaism have argued otherwise.
When faced with terminal illness, one may well be dis-
posed to ending life, and one’s immediate community
(or family) may support this method of death
(Campbell 2000, 38).
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
51
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Roman Catholic.—Within the Roman Catholic tradition, suffering is
considered meaningful. As Pope John Paul II neared the end of his
life, his suffering became obvious to the world at large. An article
in Newsweek examined what his experience meant for him, for the
Catholic Church, and for Roman Catholics throughout the world.
Excerpts from the article indicate that Pope John Paul II used his
own suffering to teach and to lead:
More than 20 years ago, after recovering from the pis-
tol shot that almost took his life in front of St. Peter’s,
John Paul declared that suffering, as such, is one of the
most powerful messages in Christianity. “Human suf-
fering evokes compassion,” he wrote in 1984, “it also
evokes respect, and in its own way it intimidates.”
In 1994, as age and infirmity began to incapacitate
John Paul publicly, he told his followers he had heard
God and was about to change the way he led the
church. “I must lead her with suffering,” he said. “The
pope must suffer so that every family and the world
should see that there is, I would say, a higher gospel:
the gospel of suffering, with which one must prepare
the future” (Dickey et al. 2005, 18).
The Newsweek article also noted that the pope’s remarks, con-
sidered controversial by some, likely met with varying degrees of
acceptance: “This exaltation of suffering may be difficult for many
non-Catholics to understand” (19). For many Catholics, though,
the pope’s remarks, and even his suffering itself, served as an affir-
mation of the Catholic Church’s stance on euthanasia. The fact
that the pope had written and spoken frequently during his papa-
cy on the sanctity of life further cemented that stance and his com-
mitment to it.
Although the Catholic Church teaches that life is sacred and
must be preserved, the church does not require the use of all avail-
able technology to preserve life. A 1982 statement issued by the
Catholic Health Association explained it in this way:
Christians believe that through death life is merely
changed, not taken away and that death need not be
resisted with every possible means. Dying is a natural
part of life that should be made as comfortable as pos-
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

sible for the patient and should not be unnecessarily
prolonged. Not unduly prolonging the dying process
affirms belief in eternal life (Zucker 1999, 104).
The Catholic Church is not alone in teaching that it is not
required to employ every available technology to preserve life. As
Courtney Campbell writes in “Euthanasia and Religion,” “the
major faith traditions of the West have rejected a view known as
‘vitalism,’ which holds that biological life is to be preserved at all
costs and with all available technologies” (Campbell 2000, 38).
Furthermore, the Catholic Church’s teaching that it is not
necessary to use every available means of technology to preserve
life has resonated with some Catholics, because it provides firm
ground for them to stand on if they choose to succumb to the
dying process rather than fighting it with every means of technol-
ogy available. Pope John Paul II’s words about the spiritual value
of suffering were controversial to some people outside the
Catholic Church and daunting for some within it, but the idea of
being able to forego certain types of technology provides patients
with a sense of control in making decisions about the dying
process within the scope of Catholic teachings.
A Lutheran Theologian’s Perspective.
James M. Childs, Jr. authored
the essay “Anna, Ambiguity, and the Promise: A Lutheran
Theologian Reflects on Assisted Death,” which is in Must We Suffer
Our Way to Death? In his essay, Childs tells of a woman named
Anna, whom he encountered during his seminary days. He tells of
his experiences with this psychiatric patient who was “blind,
alone, and suffering assorted physical ailments of advanced age.”
He writes that he “held her hand, and we prayed for death to
come quickly and soon” but he worried that “somehow it was the-
ologically wrong to pray for death” (Hamel and DuBose 1996,
207). His experience illustrates a conundrum that spiritual advi-
sors can face: how to counsel and advise a follower who is suffer-
ing and wants to die when the religious tradition in question is
neutral, or even opposed, to such a desire to die. Based on his
recounting of this experience, it is obvious that Childs was guided
by a desire to be humane and compassionate as he counseled
Anna and offered her comfort. The memory of Anna stayed with
him, causing him to consider how this experience might offer a
lesson about despair and hope:
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
53
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Perhaps the mystery of Anna’s blend of despair and
hope, like that blend in Jesus on the cross, is a signpost
to the mystery of the cross as a symbol of both despair
and hope; a sign of anguish and healing; a sign of the
tragedy of sin, suffering, and death, and a sign of
redemption and new life; a sign of our alienation from
God and a sign of God taking upon God’s self our suf-
fering and death; a sign of estrangement and a sign of
forgiveness and reconciliation (207).
Ministers, priests, rabbis, and other spiritual advisers are
often called upon to provide words of comfort that will ease a
patient’s fears of dying. The notion of being a guide through the
dying process is a weighty one and the complexity of the situation
may be compounded if the patient is suffering or worried about
matters pertaining to life, such as family members who will be left
behind. The aforementioned example of Anna illustrates the fact
that spiritual advisers face a daunting task in their efforts to pro-
vide comfort—and even hope—within the constraints of their reli-
gious beliefs and traditions, even as the patient struggles with ill-
ness and faces death.
Unitarian Universalist Church.
The Unitarian Universalist Church
has issued public support for “The Right to Die with Dignity” as
stated in a resolution passed at the Unitarian Universalist General
Assembly in 1988. The resolution acknowledges the differences of
opinion that exist among people on this topic, including the fact
that some faiths promote prolonging life at all costs, and address-
es the notion that abuses may occur. Highlights of the resolution
include the following:
WHEREAS, differences exist among people over reli-
gious, moral and legal implications of administering
aid-in-dying when an individual of sound mind has
voluntarily asked for such aid; and
WHEREAS, many counselors, clergy and health-
care personnel value prolongation of life regardless of
the quality of life or will to live; and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED: That Unitarian
Universalists advocate the right to self-determination
in dying, and the release from civil or criminal penal-
ties of those who, under proper safeguards, act to
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

honor the right of terminally ill patients to select the
time of their own deaths; and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED: That Unitarian
Universalists advocate safeguards against abuses by
those who would hasten death contrary to an individ-
ual’s desires . . . (General Assembly of Unitarian
Universalists 1998).
Although people may assume that all religions oppose
euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide, the Unitarian
Universalist church’s stance on this issue demonstrates that some
religious organizations allow for more latitude on issues related to
providing aid in dying. In addition to supporting the notion that
people should have the option to choose assisted suicide, the res-
olution acknowledges that there are differences of opinion on this
issue and urges safeguards against abuse.
Cultural Factors and Traditions
The United States is often referred to as a melting pot, meaning
that each citizen’s cultural background was added together and
mixed to create a blending of culture and traditions. Alternatively,
the result is sometimes referred to as a salad bowl: Although
everyone’s culture and traditions get tossed together, each
remains intact but becomes part of the whole. Whether one views
the United States as a melting pot or a salad bowl, the fact is that
an individual’s cultural background can be a major determinant of
the ways that individual views certain issues. One’s viewpoint on
critical issues, such as those related to life and death, are often
influenced by culture and cultural traditions, especially in situa-
tions where cultural and religious traditions are intertwined.
The United States has a diverse population that includes
people of many cultures. In some cases, where cultural traditions
are part of the patient’s life, they may become part of the patient’s
care in some way. Such cultural traditions may be unfamiliar or
problematic for medical personnel, who must determine a way to
respect these customs if they are to effectively treat the patient. If,
for example, a person’s cultural traditions dictate that a dying per-
son is spared the knowledge of impending death, the physician
and medical team must address the situation both legally and sen-
sitively. Similarly, if a person’s cultural traditions call for the dying
person to be surrounded by family at all times, the physician and
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
55
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

medical team must determine how to effectively deliver care
given the patient’s wishes vis-à-vis that cultural constraint.
Culture of Youth.
Although the United States has a diverse popu-
lation that reflects a variety of races, ethnicities, and religions, peo-
ple share many things in common: One common aspect is that we
all age, and another is that we all die. Author and physician
Charles F. McKhann says the United States has a mindset which
makes aging an especially difficult and intimidating process.
Declaring that our culture is “oriented toward youth,” he notes
that the “increasing number of aged in the population is often seen
as a social embarrassment, a political problem, and a financial lia-
bility.” He states one possible reason for this attitude: “The culmi-
nation of old age and illness is death, and our society fears death”
(McKhann 1999, 107).
This culture of youth has marginalized older members of our
society in some ways, but the baby boomer generation seems to be
challenging that position. The baby boomers represent a large seg-
ment of the nation’s population and they are simultaneously chal-
lenging the culture of youth and redefining what it means to be
middle age and older. The baby boomer generation is establishing
itself as a force to be reckoned with and various components of our
society are appealing to this generation in new ways. Much of the
marketing aimed at this generation, for example, features active,
vibrant people who are enjoying life; far from lamenting their age,
they seem to relish each new stage of life. This generation has
changed the way society views retirees; as the baby boomers age,
they will also change the way society views the elderly. In addition,
they will likely eventually change the way society views the dying,
as well. Baby boomers, as a group, have demonstrated that they are
not reticent about identifying problems and working to solve them.
If they continue in that vein as members of the baby boomer gen-
eration face issues related to death and dying, baby boomers will
be vocal about ensuring that their voices are heard and their needs
are met as they approach the end of life. 
Culture of Poverty.
Throughout the United States of America,
there are people who live in poverty. Poverty is closely linked to
poor healthcare because the United States does not have a univer-
sal health care system. Health care, therefore, is inextricably linked
to one’s ability to pay. Scherer and Simon, in Euthanasia and the
Right to Die, address the ways that income affects the availability
and quality of health care for patients in the United States:
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

. . . [The] United States has developed a health care
system that is profit based—a direct-fee system. In this
system, the patient is responsible for payment for all
treatment or services rendered. Forms of payment for
health care include personal financial resources or
insurance coverage funded fully or partially through
an employer or purchased privately at one’s own
expense. Obviously, those with higher incomes can
afford to have better medical care than those who are
less affluent (Scherer and Simon 1999, 30).
As Scherer and Simon note above, health insurance funds
health care costs to some extent, but having health insurance often
depends on one’s ability to pay for it. For the poorest of the
nation’s poor, health insurance may be unattainable. Although
some people are eligible to attain health insurance through their
employers, the employee contribution that is usually required
may prove burdensome enough to keep that coverage out of
reach, as well.
The poor in our society are vulnerable in many ways, includ-
ing in terms of health care. When people cannot afford to pay for
insurance, their health care may be limited to emergency room vis-
its in dire situations. This kind of care, in which the poor seek
medical assistance for only the most serious problems, means that
there is generally no preventive care, such as flu shots and/or an
annual checkup, where problems may be detected early and treat-
ment begun. The result is that a minor health problem may turn
into a catastrophic medical situation before the patient is aware
that any problem even exists. Although serious health problems
are overwhelming, they are even more problematic for a patient
who is poor because the cycle of inadequate care generally contin-
ues for poor patients.
De Facto Euthanasia.
The end result of the worst-case health-care
scenario for the poor is de facto euthanasia, a concept that can best
be explained by an example. Imagine a scenario in which a 76-
year-old man, otherwise healthy, falls ill. He does not have health
insurance so he visits a local clinic; the diagnosis is cancer. Even if
it is not terminal, he cannot afford treatment and he eventually
succumbs to the disease that is ravaging his body. This type of sce-
nario is too common in the United States. The lack of health insur-
ance is attributable to a variety of factors, but the result is the
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
57
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

same: People die because they lack the ability to pay for treatment.
Advocates across the country have begun to speak out about this
issue, which many have begun to refer to as de facto involuntary
euthanasia. It is not active euthanasia or physician-assisted sui-
cide; that is, death did not occur at the hand or with the assistance
of another. It occurred because nothing was done.
Legal-Political Issues
It is obvious that there are a variety of opinions surrounding
euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide. In addition to the med-
ical-bioethical and spiritual-social-cultural components of these
end-of-life issues, there are also legal and political issues to consid-
er. Various parties have gone to court in an attempt to resolve
these issues in a legal manner; some of these cases have set prece-
dents which are important to note when studying these issues. In
addition, end-of-life issues become part of the political realm in
various ways, such as when candidates address them in cam-
paigns or elected officials propose legislation in an effort to pass a
law regarding some aspect of end-of-life issues.
Legal Issues
Issues related to euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide end
up in court because the parties are unable to come to an agree-
ment and they seek a legal decision to resolve the issues.
However, even the matter of going to court becomes a subject of
controversy in some cases because some people believe that right-
to-die issues should be decided individually. Although people
with such feelings might allow for the possibility of input from
the medical community or guidance from a spiritual advisor, the
idea of a legal decision is anathema because the very action of
involving someone else as the decision maker interferes with
one’s autonomy.
Is Assisted Suicide a Constitutional Right?
Many legal cases regard-
ing right-to-die issues cite the United States Constitution to but-
tress their arguments. They cite the rights to liberty and privacy,
guaranteed under the Constitution, as providing the foundation
for one’s right to choose the time and manner in which death
should occur. Many of the organizations and individuals in favor
of assisted suicide argue that the logical next step is to make the
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

right to die a constitutional right. Although legal rulings that favor
assisted suicide in some way set precedents which supporters can
then cite in future scenarios and cases, making assisted suicide a
constitutional right would provide greater protection under the
law than legal precedents do. Opponents of assisted suicide, on
the other hand, argue just as strongly that assisted suicide should
not be made a constitutional right. They cite the potential for
abuse as one of the main reasons for their opposition.
Legal Cases
Although numerous legal cases have touched on various issues
related to euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide, two cases are
particularly noteworthy. They have been cited in subsequent legal
battles and they form much of the contemporary legal basis for the
fact that assisted suicide is not recognized as a legal act in any state
other than Oregon.
Washington v. Glucksberg.
This case, which began in 1994, was orig-
inally known as Compassion in Dying et al. v. State of Washington
because Compassion in Dying “sponsored and helped to pay for
the litigation” when a “group of physicians and . . . terminally ill
patients filed suit against the state, claiming that the . . . law against
assisted suicide was unconstitutional because it violated the rights
guaranteed under . . . the Due Process Clause and the Equal
Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment” (Yount 2000, 31).
The Glucksberg portion of the name came about because “cancer
specialist Harold Glucksberg . . . [was] one of five physicians who
agreed to be plaintiffs in Compassion in Dying’s suit” (30).
Judge Barbara Rothstein, the chief judge of the Federal
District Court for the western part of the state, heard the case. She
ruled that “the Washington law violated both clauses of the
Fourteenth Amendment and was therefore unconstitutional.” But
when the state subsequently appealed the decision, the case went
to a three-judge panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals,
which reversed Judge Rothstein’s ruling. As a result of an appeal
by Compassion in Dying and the other plaintiffs, “the full 11-
judge panel of the appeals court heard the case” and overturned
the decision of the three-judge panel (31).
Vacco v. Quill.
In the meantime, a New York case was wending its
way through that state’s judicial system. The case began as
Timothy E. Quill v. G. Oliver Koppell, or Quill v. N.Y. Attorney
General. It was so named because Timothy E. Quill “was the physi-
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
59
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

cian and right-to-die advocate who had achieved fame after
describing his role in the assisted suicide of ‘Diane.’” The name by
which the case is known was subsequently changed because
Dennis Vacco replaced Koppell as New York’s state attorney gen-
eral. Similar to the case in Washington, the New York case
involved physicians and patients who filed suit citing the uncon-
stitutionality of state law. Judge Thomas Griesa disagreed and
ruled against them. The plaintiffs appealed and the case went
before the Second Circuit Court of Appeals; this panel found in
favor of the plaintiffs (Yount 2000, 31, 32).
Washington v. Glucksberg and Vacco v. Quill.
Both Washington and
New York, dissatisfied with the rulings against them, appealed
their cases to the Supreme Court of the United States, which deter-
mined the cases would be heard together. Although “it was clear
to even the most ardent supporters of assisted suicide that the
Supreme Court was unlikely to agree with their claim that there
was a ‘constitutional right to die,’” both sides were anxious as they
awaited the decision (Yount 2000, 32). As with almost all cases
before the Supreme Court, there was a great deal of passion and
emotion on both sides. Supporters and opponents added to the
overall chaos of the situation, with various organizations staging
demonstrations outside the courthouse to show their stances on
the cases. Given the fact that many people on both sides of the
issue felt that the Court would side with the states of New York
and Washington, the Court’s decision that the state laws were con-
stitutional was not entirely unexpected (33).
However, Chief Justice William Rehnquist, writing for the
Supreme Court, concluded the ruling with the following words
that resonated with the right-to-die community: His words were
considered a silver lining even though the decision conflicted with
the outcome they had sought:
Throughout the Nation, Americans are engaged in
earnest and profound debate about the morality, legal-
ity and practicality of physician-assisted suicide. Our
holding permits this debate to continue, as it should in
a democratic society (McKhann 1999, 216).
Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act.
Oregon voters who went to the
polls in 1994 faced a ballot question known as Measure 16, the
Death with Dignity Act. The language was such that it provided
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

voters with a different way of looking at the issue and kept the
focus narrowed on a very tightly defined topic:
Technically, the proposal did not even legalize assisted
suicide. Rather, it defined activities that fit within its
guidelines as not being assisted suicide and, therefore,
not breaking the state’s existing law against assisting a
suicide (Yount 2000, 30).
The vote, however, was not allowed to stand for long:
The Oregon referendum took an unexpected turn, the
legality of which was not clear, when the state legislature
insisted on having a second referendum on the same
question. This was held in November 1997, with the sur-
prising result that 60 percent of the voters favored physi-
cian-assisted suicide. Some observers have suggested
that the large majority resulted from voter resentment of
outside pressure (McKhann 1999, 210).
Implementation of Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act
As it was implemented, Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act
has several provisions which are intended to serve as safeguards,
including:
• An adult who is capable, is a resident of Oregon, and has
been determined by the attending physician and consult-
ing physician to be suffering from a terminal disease,
and who has voluntarily expressed his or her wish to
die, may make a written request for medication for the
purpose of ending his or her life in a humane and digni-
fied manner in accordance with ORS 127.800 to 127.897.
• No person shall qualify under the provisions of ORS
127.800 to 127.897 solely because of age or disability.
[1995 c.3 §2.01; 1999 c.423 §2]
• In order to receive a prescription for medication to end
his or her life in a humane and dignified manner, a qual-
ified patient shall have made an oral request and a writ-
ten request, and reiterate the oral request to his or her
attending physician no less than fifteen (15) days after
making the initial oral request. At the time the qualified
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
61
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

patient makes his or her second oral request, the attend-
ing physician shall offer the patient an opportunity to
rescind the request. [1995 c.3 §3.06]
• A patient may rescind his or her request at any time and
in any manner without regard to his or her mental state.
No prescription for medication under ORS 127.800 to
127.897 may be written without the attending physician
offering the qualified patient an opportunity to rescind
the request. [1995 c.3 §3.07]
• No less than fifteen (15) days shall elapse between the
patient’s initial oral request and the writing of a pre-
scription under ORS 127.800 to 127.897. No less than 48
hours shall elapse between the patient’s written request
and the writing of a prescription under ORS 127.800 to
127.897. [1995 c.3 §3.08]
• Only requests made by Oregon residents under ORS
127.800 to 127.897 shall be granted. Factors demonstrat-
ing Oregon residency include but are not limited to:
(1) Possession of an Oregon driver license;
(2) Registration to vote in Oregon;
(3) Evidence that the person owns or leases property
in Oregon; or
(4) Filing of an Oregon tax return for the most recent
tax year. [1995 c.3 §3.10; 1999 c.423 §8]
* [Reporting requirements]:
(a) The Department of Human Services shall
annually review a sample of records main-
tained pursuant to ORS 127.800 to 127.897.
(b) The department shall require any health care
provider upon dispensing medication pur-
suant to ORS 127.800 to 127.897 to file a copy
of the dispensing record with the department.
• The department shall make rules to facilitate the collec-
tion of information regarding compliance with ORS
127.800 to 127.897. Except as otherwise required by law,
the information collected shall not be a public record and
may not be made available for inspection by the public.
• The department shall generate and make available to the
public an annual statistical report of information collect-
ed under subsection (2) of this section. [1995 c.3 §3.11;
1999 c.423 §9; 2001 c.104 §40]
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

• Nothing in ORS 127.800 to 127.897 shall be construed to
authorize a physician or any other person to end a
patient’s life by lethal injection, mercy killing or active
euthanasia. Actions taken in accordance with ORS
127.800 to 127.897 shall not, for any purpose, constitute
suicide, assisted suicide, mercy killing or homicide,
under the law [1995 c.3 §3.14]. (State of Oregon,
Department of Human Services, Legislative Statutes)
Critics argue, however, that the safeguards are not enough.
Kathleen Foley, M.D., and Herbert Hendin, M.D., (2002) editors of
The Case against Physician-Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End of Life
Care, authored the essay “The Oregon Experiment,” which
appears in their book. They argue that the Oregon Health Division
(OHD), “charged with monitoring the law,” has “interpreted its
mandate” in a “restrictive manner” and offer several objections,
including the following:
OHD limits its yearly reports to general epidemiologi-
cal data and collects limited information from physi-
cians who have prescribed lethal medication.
Physicians who declined to prescribe the lethal medica-
tion, as well as nurses and social workers who cared for
the patients, are not interviewed.
Not all the information collected is made public,
and OHD defends its limited data collection and cen-
sorship of released information as necessary to protect
doctors’ and patients’ confidentiality. There is no provi-
sion for an independent evaluator or researcher to
study whatever data are available. This OHD process
has prevented a full and open discussion (144–145).
Foley and Hendin address the requirement that a second
physician evaluate the person who wishes to die by noting that
“no provision is made for the independent selection of this con-
sulting physician” and stating, “Unless the selection is truly inde-
pendent, the consultant, even if not a colleague of the attending
physician, is likely to be a known proponent and practitioner of
assisted suicide” (150).
A question about an “informed decision” is also raised. Foley
and Hendin declare:
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions Related to End-of-Life Issues
63
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Without a proper psychiatric evaluation, it is not possi-
ble even to ascertain if a patient has impaired judgment
that would make him or her not “capable” of an
“informed decision” as required by Oregon law (153).
Making One’s Wishes Known
Advance directives provide people with a means to let physicians,
loved ones, and any other relevant parties know what their wish-
es are for care at the end of life. Absent such a document, family
members must try to determine what the person might have
wanted in a given situation. In addition to being nearly impossi-
ble given the countless permutations of medical situations one
might encounter and types of care available at the end of life, it is
very difficult to make such a determination when a loved one is
dying. Robert S. Olick (2001), author of Taking Advance Directives
Seriously, notes that such difficult situations have led to the current
state of acceptance of advance directives: “The quest for respons-
es to this dilemma and the value we attach to dying on our own
terms has led to widespread acceptance of advance directives in
the medical, legal, and academic communities and throughout
society.”  Olick goes on to say that as a result of this widespread
acceptance of advance directives, “ . . . all 50 states and the District
of Columbia have enacted legislation recognizing the right to plan
ahead for important decisions near the end of life at a time of
future decisional incapacity by executing an advance directive”
(xiv). Olick admits, however, that enforcement remains a problem:
. . . [The] law has yet to develop the teeth of enforce-
ability. It has not lived up to the maxim that for every
right there is a remedy, and it has given clinicians rea-
son to believe that there is little or no price to pay for
disregarding a patient’s directive. The same is true of
the law’s response to family members who resist fol-
lowing a patient’s directive (28).
Living wills provide another way for people to make their
end-of-life wishes known. The St. Petersburg Times reported a dra-
matic increase in interest in living wills in response to the Terri
Schiavo case. The newspaper article cautioned, however, that liv-
ing wills that do not address specific issues might still leave prob-
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

lematic questions for family members to face: “ . . . [Lawyers]
familiar with living wills say just having a living will may not be
enough. Not all such documents answer crucial questions—
specifically whether or not a feeding tube should be removed
under certain circumstances” (Sandler 2005).
Given the range of illnesses, accidents, and conditions that
can affect human beings, it is basically impossible to cover every
possible situation that could arise. However, a living will provides
a valuable starting point. The Schiavo case, far from answering all
of the possible questions that could face the family of a suffering
patient, raised countless new questions. The mere fact that the case
prompted so many people throughout the nation and the world to
make their wishes known is important because for people who
did not previously have a living will, just creating the document
provides answers to questions that family members might face at
some point in the future. The aforementioned article in the St.
Petersburg Times describes the extent of new interest from “thou-
sands of people once unfamiliar” with living wills:
“We are overwhelmed,” said Dr. Joseph Barmakian,
founder of the U.S. Living Will Registry. The reg-
istry . . . electronically stores advance directives, organ
donor information and emergency contact information,
and makes [the information] available to health care
providers across the country 24 hours a day . . .
Barmakian . . . said the Web site traditionally has
500 hits a day. This week, it has had more than 30,000
on some days (Sandler 2005).
References
BBC News. “‘Dr. Death’: Pushing the Law.” Health Briefings.
November 28, 2000, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/low/health/
background_briefings/euthanasia/331269.stm (accessed
November 18, 2006).
Berry, Jason. “Foti’s Crusade.” Greater Baton Rouge Business
Report. November 7, 2006, http://www.businessreport.com/news
Detail.cfm?aid=10036&cid=25 (accessed November 18, 2006).
References
65
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Campbell, Courtney S. 2000. “Euthanasia and Religion.”
UNESCO Courier 53 (1): 38.
Dickey, Christopher, Rod Nordland, Anne Underwood, Robert
Blair Kaiser, Edward Pentin, Barbie Nadeau, and Jacopo Barigazzi.
“‘Precious’ Suffering.” Newsweek, February 28, 2005, 18–23.
Foley, Kathleen, and Herbert Hendin. 2002. The Case against
Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End-of-Life Care. Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
General Assembly of Unitarian Universalists. 1988 Proceedings, 74.
Hamel, Ronald P., and Edwin R. DuBose. 1996. Must We Suffer Our
Way to Death? Dallas, TX: Southern Methodist University Press.
McCabe, Suzanne. 2006. “Hurricane Katrina: One Year Later.”
Junior Scholastic, September 4, 7–9.
McKhann, Charles F. 1999. A Time to Die: The Place for Physician
Assistance. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Meier, Diane E., Carol-Ann Emmons, Sylvan Wallenstein,
Timothy Quill, R. Sean Morrison, and Christine K. Cassel. 1998.
“A National Survey of Physician-Assisted Suicide and
Euthanasia in the United States.” New England Journal of Medicine
338 (17): 1193–1201.
Olick, Robert S. 2001. Taking Advance Directives Seriously.
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Quill, Timothy E., and Margaret P. Battin., eds. 2004. Physician-
Assisted Dying: The Case for Palliative Care and Patient Choice.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Rayner, Claire. 2000. “You Say Murder, I Say Euthanasia.” New
Scientist, June 19, 31.
Sandler, Michael. “Case Has Created Sudden Interest in Living
Wills.” St. Petersburg Times, March 26, 2005, http://www.
sptimes.com/2005/03/26/news_pf/Tampabay/Case_has_
created_sudd.shtml (accessed November 16, 2006).
Scherer, Jennifer M., and Rita J. Simon. 1999. Euthanasia and the
Right to Die. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Smith, Wesley J. “Philanthropy’s Brave New World: Will Those
Who Give Decide Who Should Live?” Philanthropy Magazine,
January 1, 2001, http://www.philanthropyroundtable.org/
article.asp?article=1013&paper=0&cat=147 (accessed November
17, 2006).
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

State of Oregon, Department of Human Services. Legislative
Statutes, http://oregon.gov/DHS/ph/pas/docs/statute.pdf
(accessed October 22, 2006).
Varney, James. “Doctor’s Drug Mix Not Ideal Killer.” New
Orleans Times Picayune, August 6, 2006, http://www.nola.com/
news/t-p/frontpage/index.ssf?/base/news–6/1154844156102520.
xml&coll=1&thispage=1 (accessed November 18, 2006). 
Whoriskey, Peter, and Catharine Skipp. “3 Arrested in New
Orleans Hospital Deaths.” Washington Post, July 19, 2006,
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/
article/2006/07/18/AR2006071800448_pf.html (accessed
November 18, 2006).
Yount, Lisa. 2000. Physician-Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia. New
York: Facts On File.
Zucker, Marjorie B. 1999. The Right to Die Debate: A Documentary
History. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
References
67
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

3
Worldwide Perspective
Examining Euthanasia
throughout the World
C
learly, the United States is not alone in grappling with euthana-
sia, physician-assisted suicide, and other end-of-life issues.
Countries throughout the world have addressed these issues in
some fashion; their experiences help fill in the emerging picture of
this issue on a worldwide scale.
Data on a Global Scale
When studying issues related to death and the end of life through-
out the world, it is important to note that the quality and reliabil-
ity of data varies. The Bulletin of the World Health Organization fea-
tured an article on global death data. Through their research, the
article’s authors “sought to assess the current status of global data
on death registration and to examine several indicators of data
completeness and quality.” The authors’ basic conclusion was that
“few countries have good-quality data on mortality that can be
used to adequately support policy development and implementa-
tion.” They cited “an urgent need for countries to implement
death registration systems . . . or enhance their existing sys-
69
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

tems . . . to . . . improve knowledge about the most basic of health
statistics: who dies from what?” (Mathers et al. 2005, 171).
As noted in the article, “good-quality data on mortality . . .
can be used to adequately support policy development and imple-
mentation” (171). End-of-life issues, as a policy area, would clearly
benefit from this type of data quality. In addition to allowing
researchers to more accurately gauge how certain diseases and
conditions impact the population, such data would make it easier
to determine compliance with existing laws.
The article provides a clear breakdown of the quality and
completeness of the data available for each country. The findings
are summarized as follows:
. . . Death registration is considered to be essentially
100% complete in only 64 of the 115 countries reporting
data, and predominantly these are developed countries
in Europe, the Americas and the Pacific regions (173).
The authors make it clear that quality data is an important
building block in efforts to examine health care, disease, death,
and issues related to the end of life throughout the world.
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life
Issues throughout the World
The issue of euthanasia does not exist in a vacuum in other coun-
tries any more than it does in the United States. In this section, the
stances of several countries on euthanasia and other end-of-life
issues are covered in separate listings. In order to help place these
issues in the proper context, information about health care,
euthanasia history, and relevance to the United States is included
with each country’s listing.
United Kingdom
Officially known as the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the UK consists of England, Scotland, Wales,
and Northern Ireland. London being its capital city, England has a
70
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

diverse population. Christianity is a prominent religion and a sig-
nificant portion of the population follows Islam.
Health Care
Health care services in the United Kingdom, as in many European
countries, are quite different from the system currently in place in
the United States. The United Kingdom offers a “comprehensive
social-security system” which “provides cash benefits for sick-
ness . . .”; in addition, the National Health Service, which was
established in 1948, “offers free medical treatment to all citizens
through a network of about 2,400 hospitals” (Encyclopedia
Britannica Micropædia 2003, v. 12, 144).
Infant mortality rates for the United Kingdom are described
as “relatively high for a developed country.” Overall “life
expectancy is 72 years for males and 78 years for females (142).
Euthanasia History
Britain’s history in this area includes the formation of the British
Voluntary Euthanasia Society in 1935. Founded by Lord
Moynihan and Dr. Killick Millard, the organization offered a
publication called A Guide to Self-Deliverance, which included
guidelines on committing suicide. The publication resulted part-
ly from members’ frustration with what they perceived as lack of
assistance from the medical community for their efforts.
Although the organization agreed to limit distribution to mem-
bers at least twenty-five years of age, A Guide to Self-Deliverance
was to become especially controversial because “the Suicide Act
of 1961 called for imprisonment for a period of up to fourteen
years for anyone who assisted suicide, and it still was question-
able as to whether disseminating information about how to suc-
cessfully complete the act was technically assisting suicide.”
Another publication followed in 1980 when the Voluntary
Euthanasia Society of Scotland broke away from the British
Voluntary Euthanasia Society. The new society’s How to Die with
Dignity was the first publication of its kind in the world (Scherer
and Simon 1999, 61).
In more recent developments, Dignitas, an organization
based in Switzerland, urged the United Kingdom to relax existing
suicide laws so that people facing chronic depression could choose
assisted suicide as a means of ending their lives. Ludwig Minelli,
head of the organization, said in an interview in All Headline News,
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life Issues throughout the World
71
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

“The question for politicians in Britain today is why do you force
your citizens, people in the most terrible circumstances who are
determined to end their suffering in a way of their own choosing,
to leave their country and travel to Switzerland to exercise their
free will” (Roque 2006). Minelli’s words drew attention from indi-
viduals and organizations who shared his views, as well as from
those who disagreed with him. James Le Fanu, writing in the
Telegraph, declares “ . . . the protracted campaign in [favour] of vol-
untary euthanasia seems to be over,” so traveling to Switzerland
for assistance in ending one’s life continues. He points out that UK
laws prohibit assisting someone with committing suicide and that
anyone who chooses to do so risks fourteen years in prison. Citing
an article “by Dr. David Garwood in the medical journal Update,”
however, he reveals that while assisted suicide remains illegal in
Britain, that does not mean it is impossible to obtain, “so long as
those seeking it have the necessary funds (around £3000), and a
partner willing to take them abroad” (Le Fanu 2006).
Making the trip to Switzerland may not be a necessary step
for everyone in Britain, however. It seems that some patients
have succeeded in finding physicians willing to assist them in
ending their lives, despite the fact that it is illegal, according to a
2006 article in the Guardian. The article reported on a study  con-
ducted by Professor Clive Seale, of west London’s Brunel
University, which showed that “doctors help about two-thirds of
terminally ill patients to die by withholding treatment or giving
them painkillers they know will shorten life—but do it only
when they believe death is a few days away and after consulting
patients, relatives or other doctors.” The article noted Professor
Seale’s assertion that his research showed that “in Britain doctors
take a more cautious approach than elsewhere” and “the degree
to which life is shortened in the UK is very low [while] consulta-
tion with patients and relatives and colleagues is fairly high”
(Boseley 2006).
Relevance to the United States
Like the United States, the United Kingdom continues to grapple
with end-of-life issues in various ways on several fronts. There are
some similarities. For example, both nations are home to organiza-
tions representing both sides of the assisted suicide and euthana-
sia debates. In addition, research and anecdotal reports in both the
United States and the United Kingdom document the fact that
72
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

assisted suicide, including physician-assisted suicide, occurs to
some degree even where it is not legalized.
The health care system in the United Kingdom is very differ-
ent from that in the United States. Examining these differences is
an important part of fully understanding the differences between
the countries in terms of issues related to the end of life. The
United Kingdom’s National Health Service addresses many of the
issues that face Americans who do not have health insurance. For
example, an American without health insurance may delay a visit
to the doctor, even when it is very clear that there is something
wrong, because of an inability to pay for the visit. A resident of the
United Kingdom, though, can make use of the National Health
Service to visit the doctor and determine the root of the problem
in a more timely fashion. Despite the obvious advantage for a res-
ident of the United Kingdom who may be able to obtain necessary
care more quickly regardless of ability to pay, the country’s system
does not seem to be a cure-all, either. An article by Donald Light,
Ph.D., in the American Journal of Public Health, notes that some peo-
ple in the ongoing debate over the health care system in America
cite problems with the National Health Service, including “low
salaries, rundown facilities, poor quality, and endless waits to see
a doctor” (Light 2003, 25). The article, however, cautions that these
problems are no reason to reject the National Health Service out of
hand, provided that funding levels are adequate: “Most of the . . .
dreary features . . . stem from chronic underfunding and under-
supply of personnel and equipment” (Light 2003, 25).
What lessons does the National Health Service offer for
those who are trying to reform health care in the United States?
Clearly, although it is paramount to have a well-designed sys-
tem, it is also crucial to have an adequately funded system. As
people throughout the United States struggle with the problems
that arise from a lack of health insurance, it is disingenuous to
think that a universal healthcare system would automatically
solve all of the healthcare problems and issues that arise for
Americans. Britain’s National Health Service is an example of
the fact that problems, including those related to funding, never
completely disappear. Whatever solution is devised to serve
Americans, the British National Health Service teaches us that
good design and adequate funding are merely two of the ele-
ments necessary to create a system that works and meets the
healthcare needs of residents.
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life Issues throughout the World
73
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Netherlands
The Netherlands, also called Holland, is officially known as the
Kingdom of the Netherlands. Amsterdam is the capital and the
“seat of government is The Hague.” Although the people are most-
ly Dutch, other groups, including Turks, Moroccans, and Germans,
also make up sizable portions of the population. Many people, per-
haps as much as one-third of the nation’s population, are not affil-
iated with any religion and the remainder of the people are approx-
imately equally split between Roman Catholics and Protestants.
Life expectancy is considered high, at 74 years for males and 80 for
females (Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia 2003, v. 8, 615).
Health Care
Health conditions in the Netherlands are considered to be compa-
rable with health conditions in other developed countries. The
country’s social welfare programs “include . . . reimbursement of
exceptional medical expenditures for all residents,” while
employed workers receive “health benefits and services” (616).
Euthanasia History
Since 1973, physicians in the Netherlands have assisted patients
with committing suicide sans fear of prosecution—as long as cer-
tain conditions exist. After 28 years of allowing such actions de
facto, the Dutch parliament moved to allow them de jure, with the
passage of a statute that “formally legalized euthanasia and physi-
cian-assisted suicide” (Foley and Hendin 2002, 97). Today, the
legal status of euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide in the
Netherlands is celebrated by those in favor of the right to die and
assailed by those who oppose it.
Organizations on both sides of the issue frequently cite the
Netherlands as an example: Those who favor the right to die hold
the country up as a haven where people who are suffering have an
option to choose death on their own terms. Those who oppose it
claim the Netherlands is an environment in which patients are vul-
nerable and abuse is rampant. Even the genesis of the practice, and
the subsequent law, is somewhat controversial. Jennifer Scherer and
Rita J. Simon, in Euthanasia and the Right to Die, cite the trust in doc-
tor-patient relationships as one of the building blocks of the law:
The unique situation that exists with euthanasia and
physician-assisted suicide practices in the Netherlands
74
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

is due to an unusual combination of historical factors in
the development of the trusting physician-patient rela-
tionship and the extraordinary level of health care avail-
able to all citizens. Economics does not influence medical
decisions at the end of life, as the medical institutional
system does not stand to profit from these choices and
the family of the patient is not burdened with health
care expenses . . . (Scherer and Simon 1999, 54).
Herbert Hendin, M.D., in an essay in The Case against Assisted
Suicide: For the Right to End-of-Life Care, describes the situation in
the Netherlands much less benevolently. He posits that the Dutch
are on a slippery slope.
The “slippery slope” is the gradual extension of assist-
ed suicide to widening groups of patients after it is
legally permitted for patients designated as terminally
ill. In the past three decades, the Netherlands has
moved from considering assisted suicide (preferred
over euthanasia by the Dutch Voluntary Euthanasia
Society) to giving legal sanction to both physician-
assisted suicide and euthanasia, from euthanasia for
terminally ill patients to euthanasia for those who are
chronically ill, from euthanasia for physical illness to
euthanasia for psychological distress, and from volun-
tary euthanasia to nonvoluntary and involuntary
euthanasia (Foley and Hendin 2002, 101).
Relevance to the United States
With the exception of Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act, the United
States does not have any laws in place to allow for any type of
assistance with ending life. The Netherlands, therefore, is thought
to offer a unique body of knowledge, research, and experience
from which the United States should learn. Exactly what the
United States should learn, however, depends on whom one asks.
For people who advocate end-of-life options and choices, includ-
ing euthanasia and/or physician-assisted suicide, the Netherlands
offers an example of how legalization enables doctors and patients
to work together in allowing patients to make choices about when
and how suffering should end. For those opposed to euthanasia
and physician-assisted suicide, the Netherlands offers an example
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life Issues throughout the World
75
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

of abuses and an illustration of a country sliding down a slippery
slope towards an environment in which assistance in ending life is
available to anyone who simply no longer wishes to live.
Australia
The Commonwealth of Australia, whose capital is Canberra, has a
very homogeneous population as a result of immigration policies
that remained in effect until the latter part of the twentieth century.
When the policies were relaxed in the 1960s and 1970s, immigrants
began entering the country in much greater numbers. Christianity
is the principal religion, and Roman Catholics and Anglicans make
up the greatest portion of the population. Australia has enjoyed
substantial population growth since the end of World War II; this
population growth has been attributed to immigration:
The country’s low birth and death rates, comparable to
those of other developed countries, have contributed
only a modest natural increase to the population. Life
expectancy, at 73 years for males and 79 years for
females, is among the highest in the world
(Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia 2003, v. 1, 712).
Health Care
Australia’s health conditions are considered very favorable. The
country’s “high levels of nutrition, sanitation, disease control, and
medical technology prevent the development and spread of infec-
tious diseases.” In addition, Australia has “a high proportion of
doctors and hospital beds to population and a low infant mortali-
ty rate.” The federal government administers a universal health
insurance program (713).
Euthanasia History
Euthanasia was legal in Australia’s Northern Territory for nine
months. During this period, which lasted from July 1996 until
March 1997, four people availed themselves of this law. Three oth-
ers died before they could finalize their own attempts to make use
of it (Foley and Hendin 2002, 9; Scherer and Simon 1999, 75). The
law, known as the Rights of the Terminally Ill Act (ROTI), was
76
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

passed by the Northern Territory government. In Euthanasia and
the Right to Die, authors Jennifer Scherer and Rita J. Simon note
that the passage of such a law was not exactly shocking given the
character of the Northern Territory:
It is not at all surprising that the law had its origins in
this crocodile-infested, sparsely populated, rugged
area that is twice the size of the state of Texas. The
Northern Territory has been self-governing since 1978
and has enjoyed a reputation as a trailblazer, often
asserting itself through maverick, rebellious tendencies
and legislation. A prime target of this free-spirited and
free-thinking region is the Australian federal govern-
ment. Although the federal government is among the
largest employers in the region, Territorians remain
highly antagonistic toward being told what to do by
outsiders (Scherer and Simon 1999, 75).
Marshall Perron and Dr. Philip Nitschke emerged as central
figures in the passage of ROTI. Perron, who led the Northern
Territory government at that time, began the process when he
introduced the legislation. Interestingly, he “resigned his govern-
ment position the morning the euthanasia debate began,” declar-
ing that “he did not want the vote to be influenced by that posi-
tion.” His explanation, however, was not universally accepted:
“Some observers . . . claim that he resigned in order to sway
undecided votes to his side” (Scherer and Simon 1999, 75–76).
Nitschke’s involvement began when he stated that he would
not be opposed to assisting patients with euthanasia. His state-
ment was in direct conflict with the position of the Northern
Territory chapter of the Australian Medical Association.
From that day, he became a constant media personality
campaigning for the introduction of the regulations
and availability of the act. Patients began to seek him
out for assistance in accessing the ROTI Act, and he
developed what he called his “deliverance machine,” a
computer that asked patients to confirm their intention
to die and wish to proceed by further pressing the com-
puter’s spacebar (Foley and Hendin 2002, 195). 
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life Issues throughout the World
77
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The Rights of the Terminally Ill Act was repealed when
the Euthanasia Laws Bill of 1996, introduced by Kevin
Andrews, was passed. In a vote in which “parliamen-
tarians were permitted a conscience vote rather than
having to vote with their parties . . . the Commonwealth
Parliament strongly upheld the bill that rescinded the
ROTI Act” (205, 206).
Relevance to the United States
Australia’s limited experience with euthanasia demonstrates how
representatives elected by voting citizens can have very different
views on what the public wants. Marshall Perron introduced the
Rights of the Terminally Ill legislation and it passed; Kevin
Andrews subsequently introduced legislation to overturn it,
which also passed. Although the fact that both pieces of legislation
passed might seem contradictory, two factors merit consideration.
First, implementation of Perron’s legislation had given other elect-
ed representatives the opportunity to observe exactly what would
occur with such legalization in place. It is possible that some real-
ized that they (or their constituents) did not agree with the reali-
ties of legalization and chose to vote in favor of Andrews’ legisla-
tion. Second, this implementation gave advocacy groups on both
sides of the issues the opportunity to rally their supporters, shore
up their arguments, and make their opinions known. Strong lob-
bying undoubtedly was a factor in the passage of Andrews’ bill.
Australia’s experience illustrates that the United States is not
alone in addressing end-of-life issues. Like some of their American
counterparts, some elected officials in Australia have addressed
these issues by introducing legislation aimed at changing laws
related to euthanasia and assisted suicide. Both Australia and the
United States have raised awareness of end-of-life issues simply
because of the legislation and discussion surrounding them; how-
ever, citizens in both Australia and the United States continue to
grapple with euthanasia and other issues related to the end of life. 
Africa
Although Africa is the world’s second-largest continent, the pop-
ulation density is low because many desert areas are unfit for
human habitation. Africa is estimated to have an annual rate of
population growth of around three percent, with birth and death
78
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

rates that “vary widely from region to region.” Many African
nations are still struggling to improve social services and health
conditions. In the meantime, existing conditions have major rami-
fications for residents, especially in terms of health and medical
care. In fact, “most African countries have yet to develop compre-
hensive systems of social-welfare benefits,” although “South
Africa and the North African countries of Egypt, Tunisia, and
Algeria” are further along in development of their social-welfare
systems (Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia 2003, v. 1, 132).
Health Care
The dearth of well-developed social-welfare systems is even more
problematic given that “Health and sanitary conditions in Africa
are generally poor, particularly outside the major metropolitan
[centers] having doctors and hospitals.” The result is that
“Africans in many parts of the continent suffer from starvation or
malnutrition” and “the most prevalent diseases [of] malaria,
dysentery, tuberculosis, whooping cough, typhoid fever, gonor-
rhea, and AIDS.” Adequate medical care is scarce. In fact, “South
Africa, Réunion, Mauritius, Libya, and Algeria are perhaps the
only countries in Africa that do not have a serious shortage of doc-
tors.” Given the aforementioned conditions, it is not surprising
that infant mortality rates are high and life expectancies are low.
Infant mortality “in some countries (e.g., Ethiopia and Mali),
reaches rates of more than 150 per 1,000 live births.” Life expectan-
cy rates are equally dismaying: “as low as 40 years in the least-
developed countries or as high as 65 years in salubrious climates
like those of Réunion and Mauritius” (132).
Euthanasia History
People in parts of Africa, like those in the United States and else-
where throughout the world, are grappling with euthanasia and
other issues related to the end of life. The Dispatch, a newspaper
based in South Africa, featured an article on March 21, 2001, that
illustrated the fact that people are divided on the topic of euthana-
sia: “Fifty percent of South Africans polled in a survey believed
voluntary euthanasia was acceptable, one of South Africa’s lead-
ing information companies, Research Surveys, has found. The
sample of men and women was representative of the country’s
various population groups” (Dispatch March 21, 2001).
A subsequent Dispatch article, on May 17, 2001, reported on
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life Issues throughout the World
79
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

a speech given by Willem Landman, a member of the South
African Law Commission, at a symposium on euthanasia at the
World Congress of Family Doctors in Durban, South Africa.
According to the article, Landman contended in his speech that “a
large number of doctors in South Africa would be willing to per-
form euthanasia at the request of their patients once the controver-
sial practice was [legalized] in the country.” The article also noted
reservations expressed by a Cape Town doctor named Zandy
Rosochacki: “He believed [legalizing] euthanasia in South Africa
would be premature and difficult to put into practice—given cir-
cumstances where there was one doctor for every 40,000 people in
certain rural areas. Unlike countries like the Netherlands and
Australia, South Africa had not yet reached a stage where
euthanasia could be legalized” (Dispatch May 17, 2001).
If a Washington Post article regarding possible candidates to
succeed Pope John Paul II as leader of the world’s Roman Catholic
population is any indication, this openness toward euthanasia does
not span the African continent. The article addressed the possibili-
ty of Cardinal Francis Arinze becoming “the first pope from Africa
in 1,500 years” (Timberg 2005, A01). Cardinal Arinze’s status, the
article noted, was partly a result of his efforts following a 1970s
governmental decree that European and American priests had to
leave the country. An archbishop at the time, Arinze is said to have
risen to the challenge, recruiting Nigerians to serve the Catholic
Church as new priests. The results of Arinze’s efforts are visible
today, according to the article:
Since the purge of foreign-born priests, church mem-
bership in the territory once overseen by Arinze has
quintupled through a combination of conversion and
the burgeoning size of Catholic families. Two out of
every three residents of the area reportedly are Catholic
(Timberg 2005, A01).
The article also notes that despite the fact that “Arinze has
become a controversial figure to many American Catholics
because of his rigid views on matters of doctrine,” his conserva-
tive stances, and the conservative stances of the Catholic Church,
“are not controversial . . . among Catholics in most African coun-
tries . . .” and concludes, “the Vatican’s teachings against . . .
euthanasia . . . draw little dissent here” (Timberg 2005, A01).
80
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Relevance to the United States
The people of Africa, like the people of the United States, have
been polled about their opinions on euthanasia and other end-of-
life issues. The people of Africa, also like the people of the United
States, have widely divergent opinions on these issues. Although
the aforesaid polling results and anecdotal reports indicate results
that lean in one direction, the information about the degree of alle-
giance to Cardinal Francis Arinze, and his doctrines, seems to con-
tradict that leaning to some extent. How can separate polls show
such dissimilar results? The polling methodology is one factor that
can make a difference. Many components of the overall polling
strategy, including the sample size, the language used to ask the
question, and the randomness of the respondents, can also make a
difference in the results. In addition, organizations responsible for
commissioning polls can put a positive or negative “spin” on the
results. A news organization or other type of entity that is commit-
ted to studying the matter objectively can ask straightforward
questions and present the results in an unbiased way. On the other
hand, an organization that is trying to swing public opinion one
way or the other can ask loaded questions and present the results
selectively in a manner designed to further its agenda in the most
effective manner possible.
Canada
Canada is the second-largest country in the world in terms of area.
Its capital is Ottawa. While “people of British and French descent
comprise more than half the population,” the country is also home
to “significant minorities of German, Italian, Ukrainian, Chinese,
Dutch, American Indian, and Inuit origin.” Roman Catholics make
up nearly half of the country’s population; “more than one-third
[of Canadians] are Protestants” (Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia
2003, v. 2, 785–786).
Health Care
Canada divides “responsibility for social welfare and health
care . . . between the federal and the [ten] provincial govern-
ments.” Health conditions are considered to be favorable. Most
Canadians are covered by “the federal medical care insurance pro-
gram, which provides coverage for medically required services
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life Issues throughout the World
81
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

rendered by a physician or surgeon. Provincial hospital insurance
programs, funded in part by the federal government, cover
almost all of the population.” Canada has a “high number of
physicians and hospital beds per capita.” The country has “high
life expectancy rates of 75 years for men and 81 years for
women.” The life expectancy rates are buttressed by an infant
mortality rate that “is about average for a Western industrialized
country” (785–786).
Euthanasia History
A Canadian woman named Sue Rodriguez is known for her fight
to legalize assisted suicide in Canada. After she was diagnosed
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or Lou Gehrig’s disease,
Rodriguez issued a public plea for the government to legalize
physician-assisted suicide. She took her battle all the way to the
Supreme Court, but she was unsuccessful in her efforts. Her plea
resulted in the creation of a government committee which was
charged with studying the issues of euthanasia and assisted sui-
cide. The committee ultimately decided that Canada’s existing
laws on these matters should stand (Yount 2000, 45). Sue
Rodriguez lost her battle, but she still managed to choose the
manner of her death: She “defied the Court ruling and eventual-
ly committed suicide with the assistance of an unnamed physi-
cian” (48–49).
Irene McNeilly’s name is not as well known but she, too, has
waged a war regarding euthanasia. As an article in Report/
Newsmagazine noted, “She is angry because of treatment her hus-
band received in St. Therese Hospital in St. Paul, prior to his death
[March 19, 2001]. It was not only ‘callous and degrading,’ she
alleges, but possibly ended in euthanasia” (McLean 2001, 22).
McNeilly’s husband, Dr. Keith McNeilly, suffered a stroke at the
age of 79. During her husband’s subsequent hospital stay, Mrs.
McNeilly was concerned when he was given morphine despite
improving health and she alleged that a dose of morphine, given
without her permission, resulted in his death.
[She] lodged a complaint with the College of
Physicians and Surgeons. Allan Sinclair, manager of
health services with Lakeland Regional Health
Authority which is also investigating, says he has no
knowledge of any euthanasia ever practised in the
82
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

region. The Elder Advocate of Alberta, Ruth Adria of
Edmonton, says that if the case does prove to be
euthanasia, it will not be the first she has seen docu-
mented; in fact, she has charges in process (22).
Relevance to the United States
Throughout the United States, elected officials, doctors, and citi-
zens have lamented the state of America’s healthcare system and
called for change. One oft-mentioned option is a universal health-
care system. As our neighbor to the north, Canada provides us
with a unique view of a universal healthcare system; however, in
studying the system, we must be sure to study its drawbacks, as
well. Although Canada’s system guarantees health care, the wait-
ing times can be extremely long, especially for visits to specialists
and for certain specialized procedures. For some Canadians, the
wait proves too long and they choose to visit medical practitioners
in the United States; such a decision is not made lightly because
the expenses must be paid out of pocket.
Canada’s system offers valuable insight to everyone con-
cerned with reforming health care in the United States. In a coun-
try where so many people are uninsured, universal health care
holds a great deal of appeal for many Americans. Whatever sys-
tem the United States eventually chooses, we should be mindful of
all aspects of the collective Canadian experience and the lessons
that have resulted from it.
France
Officially known as the French Republic, France is characterized
by a population that, despite its diversity in terms of both ethnici-
ty and religion, is united: “The French consider themselves a sin-
gle race and a single nation, but they are actually amalgams of eth-
nic strains that overlapped during centuries of invasions and
migrations.” In terms of religion, “About three-fourths of the
French people belong to the Roman Catholic Church. Other reli-
gious groups of sizable numbers include Protestants of various
denominations, Jews, and Muslims. A significant portion of the
population is also atheist” (Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia
2003, v. 4, 919–920).
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life Issues throughout the World
83
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Health Care
France’s birth rates and death rates are comparable with other
European countries. The country’s social-welfare system “covers
most employed persons” and “insured residents are . . . reimbursed
for part or all of their medical costs.” Health conditions in France
also “compare favorably with those of other western European
countries,” and the country has a “relatively low incidence of infec-
tious disease and an adequate supply of both medical personnel and
hospital beds.” Finally, with an infant mortality rate that is “compar-
atively low for Europe,” the country has a life expectancy that is
“high [at] 72 years for males and 80 years for females (919–920).
Euthanasia History
Along with its national system of health care, France has “a well-
developed hospice care program.” These factors are cited as one
possible reason for a lack of greater urgency regarding end-of-life
issues: “The high quality of health care coupled with an excellent
hospice system for managing extreme pain may contribute to lack
of official concern for the legalization of euthanasia and physician-
assisted suicide” (Scherer and Simon 1999, 72–73).
That lack of official concern changed when Vincent Humbert’s
name became well known in France following a catastrophic auto-
mobile accident in 2000. The accident left him unable to “walk, see,
speak, smell, or taste.” He was able to move his right thumb and he
used that ability to write a book by indicating letters of the alpha-
bet. The book, I Ask the Right to Die (Je Vous Demande le Droit de
Mourir), spelled out his wish to die legally. When his request failed
to yield official approval, his mother, Marie Humbert, agreed to
help him commit suicide. She “injected an overdose of barbiturates
into his intravenous drip, sending him into a coma”; he died two
days later and his mother was arrested for her role in complying
with his request (Horsburgh, Lerner, and Corbett 2003, 83–84).
Although Vincent Humbert’s quest for suicide ultimately
resulted in his mother assisting him, his case resonated after his
death. An article in the Christian Science Monitor, regarding the
global impact of the Terri Schiavo case, noted that Humbert’s case
led to new legislation aimed at “clarifying doctors’ responsibilities
in such circumstances”:
Due to come into effect later this year, the law limits
“unreasonable persistence” in treating the terminally
84
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

ill, and specifies that “when medical acts appear use-
less, disproportionate, or serve no other purpose than
the artificial support of life, they can be suspended or
not undertaken.” The law has been welcomed, with
some reservations, by activists on both sides of the
euthanasia debate, though it is ambiguous about doc-
tors’ right to give potentially fatal doses of painkillers.
High doses are permitted to ease discomfort even if
the doctor suspects they might kill the patient as a sec-
ondary effect, but not if they are intentionally deadly
(Ford 2005).
The charges against Marie Humbert were eventually
dropped; however, she was not pleased with that outcome. As a
newspaper account noted, “Marie Humbert said she felt cheated
because she wanted to stand trial to defend her son Vincent’s oft-
stated wish to die after his debilitating injuries in a road accident
in 2000. She wanted to campaign for a law allowing assisted sui-
cide” (Reuters February 27, 2006).
Relevance for the United States
The case of Vincent Humbert was dissimilar to Terri Schiavo’s
case in terms of illness, circumstances, or manner of death.
However, the cases were similar in some very important ways.
First, both cases touched on end-of-life issues that many people
prefer not to address, perhaps because they do not wish to think
about the end of their own lives. Second, both cases involved
family members with very strong feelings. These family mem-
bers—and their actions—were central to the media attention that
surrounded both cases. Third, both cases resulted in the death of
the central figures in environments of controversy and legal
wrangling: Terri Schiavo because her husband, Michael, emerged
as the victor in his courtroom battle; Marie Humbert because she
was unsuccessful in her attempt to gain official approval for her
son’s assisted suicide and fulfilled her son’s wishes herself.
Finally, both cases had resounding impacts; people on both sides
of the ocean became more aware of end-of-life matters. Both cases
spawned legislation, increased interest in legal documents to
make provisions for end-of-life circumstances, and made their
central figures household names in terms of issues related to the
end of life.
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life Issues throughout the World
85
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Germany
Germany is officially known as the Federal Republic of Germany
and its capital is Berlin. Although Roman Catholics comprise a
majority of the population in many European countries, that is not
the case in Germany. In fact, “Protestants substantially outnumber
Roman Catholics in the population. Predominantly Roman
Catholic districts are found in the Rhineland and Bavaria.
Northern Germany is largely Protestant. The country also has a
small number of Muslims and Eastern Orthodox Christians”
(Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia 2003, v. 5, 217–218).
Health Care
With a social services system that includes benefits when a person
falls ill, Germany has distinguished itself in terms of health condi-
tions. “Sickness benefits pay for most medical attention [and]
Germany’s health and sanitary conditions are among the best in
the world.” Perhaps because “the rate of doctors per person is
higher than that found in either France or the United Kingdom,”
the “infant mortality rate is low, and life expectancy stands at 77
years” (217–218).
Euthanasia History
Although all of the countries mentioned here have some sort of
history with the concept of euthanasia, Germany’s history with it
is singular. As head of the Nazi Party, Adolf Hitler wanted to
remove everyone he considered defective from Germany; his goal
was to create a master race. “The program started with mentally
disabled children, then expanded to include mentally and physi-
cally disabled adults. The rationale behind the program was part-
ly economic—a desire to spare the state the expense of caring for
‘useless’ people—and partly biological, stemming from a belief in
eugenics, which claimed that only the healthy should reproduce”
(Yount 2000, 10).
An article in the International Herald Tribune on October 6,
2006, reported the discovery of a mass grave in Menden, Germany.
The grave was found after a witness offered a tip. Authorities were
treating the discovery as a murder investigation, despite the diffi-
culties associated with collecting evidence after the passage of such
a long interval. The article noted that authorities suspected that the
“remains . . . are from child victims of Adolf Hitler’s euthanasia
program, which killed people the Nazis considered worthless”:
86
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

About 200,000 people, many of them children, who
were deemed unfit were killed by doctors under the
Nazis as part of a vast Europe-wide euthanasia pro-
gram, according to the U.S. Holocaust Museum.
According to Harald Jenner, a prominent German
historian, as many as 8,000 minors died in facilities for the
disabled between 1939 and 1945 under mostly unclear cir-
cumstances. Another estimated 70,000 disabled or men-
tally ill adults were deliberately killed under a secret Nazi
program code-named T4 in specially established death
camps in 1940–1941 (Associated Press 2006).
Although some individuals and organizations cite these and
other policies and practices from Nazi Germany as the ultimate
threat in slippery slope arguments, author and physician Charles
McKhann argues that this is an invalid application of these argu-
ments. Arguing that “there was no slope at all,” McKhann cites the
Nazi law, passed in 1933, regarding “Prevention of Hereditarily Ill
Offspring,” which “provided compulsory sterilization for patients
who were mentally retarded or who had serious genetic defects.”
He notes that this policy was followed by others, including the
“Children’s Action,” an effort by Hitler “to identify ‘all severe
cases of idiocy, mongoloidism, microcephalic disorders, hydro-
cephaly, deformed extremities, and paralysis,’” so that the chil-
dren who suffered these conditions could be “euthanized without
parental knowledge or consent” (McKhann 1999, 185).
McKhann continues his argument by explaining how the
concept of euthanasia was corrupted by the Nazi party and their
practices:
The Nazi corruption of euthanasia bore no resemblance
to the original meaning of the word, nor to its use
today in the concept of assisted dying. They sought to
whitewash and legitimize the process of eliminating
“defective” members of society by deliberately misus-
ing the word (186).
Like many countries throughout the world, Germany is cur-
rently wrestling with issues related to the end of life. One recent
development, according to Deutsch Welle, a German newspaper,
focuses on living wills and the suspension of treatment:
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life Issues throughout the World
87
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

A federal court decided in 2003 that living wills are
binding for doctors and caregivers, but life-sustaining
measures can only be suspended if the illness is fatal.
The main issue is whether patients whose condition
isn’t necessarily fatal—largely those plagued by severe
dementia or suspended in a persistent vegetative
state—will be permitted to have treatment suspended
(Hartl 2005).
Relevance to the United States
As the excerpt from Deutsch Welle notes, Germany is struggling to
address issues related to the end of life. Throughout the United
States, end-of-life issues are being addressed by various organiza-
tions and in academic settings, as well as by legislative bodies,
newspaper editorial boards, and people throughout the country.
Although it is obvious that the United States is not alone in
addressing these issues, news from other countries provides a
valuable perspective, especially in terms of cultural nuances.
Japan
Japan is a country in East Asia; Tokyo is the nation’s capital.
Although the Japanese are a “single ethnic group,” citizens of
Japan people follow a variety of religions:
Shinto (an indigenous folk religion), various sects of
Buddhism, and Christianity coexist. There are also a
variety of “new religions,” of which the Soka-Gakkai,
based on a sect of Buddhism, has one of the largest fol-
lowings. No one religion is dominant, and each is
affected by the others. Buddhism is classified into 12
major sects and almost 60 branches. A small proportion
of the population is Christian (Encyclopedia Britannica
Micropædia 2003, v. 6, 497).
Health Care
With a “social-welfare system [that consists] of both public and
private health and welfare programs, [Japan] covers virtually the
entire population . . . with benefits for . . . sickness . . . and old
age.” The country’s health conditions are indicative of its status as
88
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

a developed country. At “78 years for men and 85 years for
women,” life expectancy rates in Japan are “among the highest in
the world” (498–499).
Euthanasia History
“Until recently, death and dying were considered taboo or inap-
propriate subjects for discussion in Japan” (Scherer and Simon
1999, 85). However, it seems that mindset is beginning to change:
“Now, spurred by recent cases of apparent euthanasia, Japan has
begun grappling seriously with the difficult issue of ‘death with
dignity,’ including legislation to make it possible” (Reuters April
27, 2006).
One of the cases to which the aforementioned article
alludes was that of a doctor who “confessed to helping a number
of terminally ill patients die.” Radio host Eleanor Hall highlight-
ed the case during a radio show focusing on world affairs; a
reporter in Tokyo filled in some of the facts of the case, including
the fact that “between 2000 and 2005 [the doctor] helped at least
seven terminally ill cancer patients to end their lives by switch-
ing off or removing their respirators.” Although “a 1995 court
ruling outlined the circumstances in which Japanese doctors can
help their patients to die,” it seems those specific provisions may
not have been met in these cases and that is the crux of the prob-
lem (Hall 2006).
Medical personnel and family members facing difficult deci-
sions like these in Japan will soon have additional help and
resources, according to a newspaper article. The additional help
will come in the form of “bioethics SWAT teams”:
While the name may sound odd, the bioethics SWAT
teams, says Atsushi Asai, a professor of bioethics at
Kumamoto University’s Graduate School of Medicine,
will fill a much-needed gap. Members will be on hand
to respond specifically to doctors and family members
unsure of how to deal with terminally ill patients
(Konishi 2006).
The bioethics SWAT teams will assist medical personnel and
family members with addressing difficult issues by examining all
relevant facets of each individual case. The article notes that team
members will “analyze the situation from an ethical, legal and
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life Issues throughout the World
89
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

social viewpoint before dispensing advice.” Although the pro-
gram is limited while it is in the early stages, organizers hope that
it will result in additional resources: “While the research team is
for now relying on subsidies from the Ministry of Health, Labor
and Welfare, plans call for creating a nonprofit organization” to
allow this effort to continue (Konishi).
Relevance to the United States
For many people, end-of-life issues are purely academic; they are
the subject of debate, discussion, and study. For others, they are
at the heart of a difficult personal decision about the end of one’s
own life or the life of a loved one. For hospitals, they often repre-
sent a quagmire of legal, ethical, and medical issues. Japan’s
bioethics SWAT teams offer an innovative approach to addressing
these issues. Their goal of assisting medical personnel and family
members means that they will have to be mindful of the perspec-
tives of these very separate constituencies. Their input may be
most valuable—and most needed—in situations in which the
medical personnel and family members have opposite views on a
particular situation. Their commitment to analyzing each situa-
tion from various perspectives prior to offering input is important
because end-of-life issues and decisions involve a variety of com-
ponents, including medical concerns, cultural factors, religious
beliefs, legal matters, and ethical issues.
As various legislative bodies, individuals, organizations,
and others throughout the United States work to address end-of-
life issues from a variety of standpoints, family members contin-
ue to watch loved ones suffer and medical personnel continue to
treat patients to the best of their ability. Is there any place in the
American system for something like these bioethics SWAT teams?
At this point, hospital ethics boards generally end up filling this
role, but these boards are generally brought into the discussion
when the matter has reached the crisis point. While some hospi-
tals do offer some type of assistance prior to that point, many sim-
ply do not have the resources to do so. Although there would be
constraints, such as healthcare privacy laws to address in the
United States, such assistance might well be welcomed in many
situations throughout the country.
90
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

China
Officially called the People’s Republic of China, China is “a multi-
national country, with a large number of ethnic and linguistic
groups” and the capital is Beijing. The country’s large population
has resulted in a controversial plan to limit future growth because
the “huge population must subsist on a relatively limited area of
agricultural land, raising the ever-present possibility of an inade-
quate food supply.” The plan is well known: China “rewards cou-
ples who have only one child and penalizes those who have more
than two. Each one-child family is given preference in housing,
medical care, and other social-welfare services” (Encyclopedia
Britannica Micropædia 2003, v. 3, 229–230).
Health Care
Medical care in China includes teams of medical personnel who
travel to see patients in rural areas. Although such “house calls” are
a thing of the past in many countries, this type of proactive care is
making a tremendous difference in eliminating many diseases:
Medical personnel in cities are encouraged to go into
the country to serve people there; medical teams circu-
late regularly in rural areas. Among these are the so-
called barefoot doctors, who are given intensive train-
ing for relatively short periods so that they may work
in rural areas. Owing to this emphasis on medical care
and sanitation, such diseases as cholera, plague,
typhoid, and scarlet fever have been virtually eradicat-
ed. China’s new health problems are cardiovascular
diseases and cancer. China’s life expectancy in the
1970s was about 60 years; by the 1990s, it had risen to
69 years for men and 72 years for women (229–230).
Euthanasia History
Nine people from Xi’an City in China made news when they
“jointly wrote to local media asking for euthanasia, or mercy
killings,” according to an article in People’s Daily. The patients,
who had uremia, cited “unbearable suffering and [an unwilling-
ness] to burden their families any more” as reasons for their
requests. The article explained what could be done for the
patients: “China has so far no legalized euthanasia, that is, no
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life Issues throughout the World
91
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

institutions and persons are permitted by law to conduct euthana-
sia, otherwise legal punishment would follow. So what doctors
can do is for the time being only to try their best to ease patients’
pains” (People’s Daily 2001).
Relevance to the United States
As the People’s Daily article illustrates, doctors in China, like doctors
in the United States, may receive requests from suffering patients
who want to end their lives as a means of ending their suffering.
Whether euthanasia or assisted suicide is legalized or not, this type
of request is a weighty one for a patient to make and it has the poten-
tial to have a major impact on the doctor-patient relationship.
Regardless of how the doctor actually responds, if the doctor is
thoughtful, reasoned, compassionate, and respectful of the patient’s
feelings and concerns, the doctor-patient relationship may survive—
even if the response is not the one the patient was seeking. If, on the
other hand, the doctor minimizes the patient’s condition or does not
seem to give the request adequate consideration, the patient may
decide to begin receiving care from a different physician—even if the
response was the one he or she sought. For patients seeking a respite
from their pain, fear, illness, and worry, the doctor’s compassion,
understanding, and acknowledgement are necessary parts of end-
of-life care, regardless of whether the care is comfort care or care
designed to provide the patient with choice regarding the end of life.
Belgium
Belgium is officially known as the Kingdom of Belgium and
Brussels is the capital. Belgium’s population, which consists of
French, German, and Dutch speakers, is largely Roman Catholic.
Health Care
As in many European countries, “social-welfare programs provide
health insurance [covering almost the entire population]” of
Belgium. Life expectancy rates are comparable to other European
nations: “73 years for males and 80 for females” (Encyclopedia
Britannica Micropædia 2003, v. 2, 61–62).
When Belgium “partially [legalized] euthanasia in 2002,”
safeguards were instituted; requests are “controlled by a commis-
sion that reviews patients’ and doctors’ declarations.” The safe-
92
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

guards also include “a clause necessitating a long-term relation-
ship between the doctor practicing euthanasia and the patient put-
ting an end to his or her suffering. Consequently potential candi-
dates need to reside in Belgium to be granted this right” (Expatica
Magazine 2006). An article in The Economist offered additional clar-
ification of Belgian law in this matter:
Belgium permits only voluntary euthanasia. The
patient must be adult and in a “futile medical condition
of constant and unbearable physical or mental suffer-
ing that cannot be alleviated.” His request must be
“voluntary, well considered, and repeated,” and all this
confirmed by two doctors. [In 2004,] 347 acts of
euthanasia were reported (The Economist 2005).
Relevance to the United States
Like Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act, Belgian law regarding
euthanasia includes safeguards. The people who craft such laws,
whether in the United States or elsewhere, include such measures
in the language of the legislation to reduce the potential for abuse
as much as possible. Just as laws regarding euthanasia or assisted
suicide engender debate, safeguards are also subject to debate.
People who are opposed to euthanasia and assisted suicide often
declare that the safeguards fall far short in terms of preventing
abuse; those who favor end-of-life options sometimes declare the
same safeguards as unnecessary obstacles or constraints to people
who want to end their lives.
Colombia
The Republic of Colombia, as Colombia is officially known, has
Bogotá as its capital. Although Roman Catholicism, as the official
religion, “is practiced by most Colombians,” Colombia has a small
but growing Protestant community, and “some Indians continue
to follow traditional religious beliefs” (Encyclopedia Britannica
Micropædia, 2007, v. 3, 461).
Health Care
Colombia’s “annual birth rate and its rate of natural increase are
among the highest in Latin America,” but the country’s infant
Studying Euthanasia and End-of-Life Issues throughout the World
93
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

mortality rate is “also relatively high” (461). In addition, Colombia
has other health-related problems, with “significant numbers of
people [suffering] from malaria, dysentery, and other infectious
diseases, and malnutrition”; these problems are compounded by a
“shortage of trained medical personnel.” The country’s life
expectancy rates are “66 years for men and 74 for women” (462).
Euthanasia History
Given the country’s Roman Catholic history, it came as a surprise
to some when “Colombia’s constitutional court accepted the prac-
tice of euthanasia in May 1997 for terminally ill patients who
expressly ask for it” (Television New Zealand 2001). However, as
an article in the San Diego Union Tribune on July 31, 2005, noted,
legislators have expressed reluctance to develop a law following
the constitutional court’s decision:
The court urged Congress to codify the practice to pre-
vent abuses. Lawmakers, apparently reluctant to take
on such an emotionally charged debate in this predom-
inantly Roman Catholic country, still haven’t done so
(Housego 2005).
Those who favor such a law, including Carlos
Gaviria, argue that it would prevent abuse. Gaviria was
the judge who wrote for the majority at the time of the
constitutional court’s ruling. He subsequently ran for
senate; in this role, he can propose legislation, rather
than just make a recommendation about it. Regardless of
the state of the law, anecdotal reports indicate that some
patients have been able to find physicians willing to
assist them in their efforts to end their lives. However,
given the lack of records about the practice at this time,
it is difficult to ascertain exactly how many patients have
received this type of assistance (Housego 2005).
Relevance to the United States
The situation in Colombia is an interesting one: Although the con-
stitutional court accepts the practice of euthanasia, there is no law
on the books about it. This dichotomy means that there are no pro-
cedures in place and no records are kept. Colombia’s situation is in
stark contrast to Oregon’s, where the Death with Dignity Act con-
94
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

tains a number of safeguards and reporting procedures. However,
despite the lack of a law on the matter, anecdotal accounts of
Colombia’s experience indicate that some people who wish to end
their lives rather than endure additional suffering have found
physicians willing to assist them in this endeavor—even in the face
of such strong religious opposition. Anecdotal reports from the
United States, too, indicate that although assisted suicide is illegal
in every state but Oregon, some patients in other states are also able
to find physicians who are willing to assist them.
References
Associated Press. “Grave May Be Evidence of Euthanasia.”
International Herald Tribune, October 6, 2006, http://www.iht.com/
articles/2006/10/06/news/germany.php (accessed October 21,
2006).
Boseley, Sarah. “Most Doctors Help End Lives of Terminally Ill
Patients, Says Study.” Guardian, October 14, 2006,
http://www.guardian.co.uk/medicine/story/0,1922385,00.html
(accessed October 21, 2006).
Dispatch. “Half of SA for Mercy Killing.” March 21, 2001,
http://www.dispatch.co.za/2001/03/21/southafrica/BKILLING
.HTM (accessed October 22, 2006).
Dispatch. “Many Doctors in SA Favour Mercy Killing.” May 17,
2001, http://www.dispatch.co.za/2001/05/17/southafrica/
CADOCTOR.HTM (accessed October 22, 2006).
The Economist 2005. “The Art of Dying.” October 13, 59–59. 
“Africa.” Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia. Vol. 1. Chicago:
Britannica, 2003.
“Australia.” Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia. Vol. 1. Chicago:
Britannica, 2003.
“Belgium.” Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia Vol. 2. Chicago:
Britannica, 2003.
“Canada.” Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia Vol. 2. Chicago:
Britannica, 2003.
“China.” Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia Vol. 3. Chicago:
Britannica, 2003.
References
95
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

“Colombia.” Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia Vol. 3. Chicago:
Britannica, 2003.
“France.” Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia Vol. 4. Chicago:
Britannica, 2003.
“Germany.” Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia Vol. 5. Chicago:
Britannica, 2003.
“Japan.” Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia Vol. 6. Chicago:
Britannica, 2003.
“The Netherlands.” Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia Vol. 8.
Chicago: Britannica, 2003.
“United Kingdom.” Encyclopedia Britannica Micropædia Vol. 12.
Chicago: Britannica, 2007.
Expatica Magazine. “Belgium Keeps Tight Reins on Euthanasia
Legislation.” November 9, 2006, http://www.expatica.com/
actual/article.asp?subchannel_id=48&story_id=34248 (accessed
November 13, 2006).
Foley, Kathleen, and Herbert Hendin. 2002. The Case against
Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End-of-Life Care. Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Ford, Peter. “World Divided on Ethics of Terri Schiavo Case.”
Christian Science Monitor, March 25, 2005, http://www.csmoni-
tor.com/2005/0325/p01s04-wogi.htm (accessed October 5, 2006).
Hall, Eleanor. “Japanese Doctor Sparks Euthanasia Debate.” The
World Today, March 31, 2006, http://www.abc.net.au/worldto-
day/content/2006/s1605759 (accessed November 12, 2006).
Hartl, Judith. “Germany Debates Physician-Assisted Death.”
Deutsch Welle, March 24, 2005, http://www.dw-world.de/
dw/article/0,2144,1529079,00.html (accessed November 12, 2006).
Horsburgh, Susan, Dietlind Lerner, and Bryce Corbett. “Her
Son’s Last Wish.” People, November 13, 2003, 83–84.
Housego, Kim. “Euthanasia Regularly Practiced in Colombia.”
San Diego Union Tribune, July 31, 2005, http://www.signon-
sandiego.com/news/world/20050731–1013-colombia-euthana-
sia.html (accessed January 17, 2007).
96
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Konishi, Hiroshi. “Proposed ‘SWAT’ Teams to Provide Guidance
on Bioethics.” Asahi Shimbun, October 9, 2006, http://www.asahi.
com/english/Herald-asahi/TKY200610090098.html (accessed
October 22, 2006).
Le Fanu, James. “Second Opinion: A Legal Release.” Telegraph,
September 10, 2006, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/health/
main.jhtml?xml=/health/ 2006/10/09/hlefanu09.xml (acccessed
October 22, 2006).
Light, Donald, Ph.D. 2003. Universal Healthcare: Lessons from the
British Experience. American Journal of Public Health, January: vol. 93,
issue 1, 25–30.
Mathers, Colin D., Doris Ma Fat, Mie Inoue, Chalapati Rao, and
Alan D. Lopez. 2005. “Counting the Dead and What They Died
From: An Assessment of the Global Status of Cause of Death Data.”
Bulletin of the World Health Organization. March (83): 171–177.
McKhann, Charles F. 1999. A Time to Die: The Place for Physician
Assistance. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
McLean, Candis. “None Dare Call It Euthanasia.”
Report/Newsmagazine (National Edition), May 28, 2001.
People’s Daily. “9 Xi’an Patients Jointly Request for Euthanasia.”
April 10, 2001, http://www.china.org.cn/english/2001/
Apr/10872.htm (accessed November 12, 2006).
Reuters. “No Charges for Frenchwoman Who Helped Son Die.”
SwissInfo, February 27, 2006, http://www.swissinfo.org/eng/
search/detail/No_charges_for_Frenchwoman_who_helped_son_
die.html?siteSect=881&sid=6509884&cKey=1141072535000
(accessed November 11, 2006).
Reuters. “Ageing Japan Takes Up ‘Death with Dignity’ Debate.”
Khaleej Times, April 27, 2006, http://www.khaleejtimes.com/
DisplayArticle.asp?xfile=data/todaysfeatures/2006/April/
todaysfeatures_April55.xml&section=todaysfeatures (accessed
November 12, 2006).
Roque, Josephine. “Org. Calling for Euthanasia Option for the
Clinically Depressed.” All Headline News, September 21, 2006,
http://www.allheadlinenews.com/articles/7004941207 (accessed
October 23, 2006).
References
97
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Scherer, Jennifer M., and Rita J. Simon. 1999. Euthanasia and the
Right to Die. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Television New Zealand. “Mercy Killing around the World.”
April 11, 2001, http://tvnz.co.nz/view/page/425822/36104
(accessed January 18, 2007).
Timberg, Craig. “Nigeria’s Spiritual Rainmaker Is Eyed at Vatican.”
Washington Post, April 17, 2005, http://www.washingtonpost.com/
wp-dyn/articles/A59514–2005Apr16.html (accessed November 11,
2006).
Yount, Lisa. 2000. Physician-Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia. New
York: Facts on File.
98
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

4
Chronology
O
n many levels, euthanasia is a personal issue. When one is fac-
ing a terminal illness or considering the end-of-life issues of a
loved one, thought is focused inward. The concept of euthana-
sia, however, does not exist in a vacuum. Due to the complexity of
the issue, it is influenced by the religious, legal, and medical com-
munities. It has ramifications for these constituencies, as well.
The following chronology highlights issues related to
euthanasia throughout history. Religious, legal, and medical mile-
stones provide the framework.
1727 BCE The Babylonian Code of Hammurabi is developed to
protect patients from physician error.
850 BCE
Greek physicians are organized as members of a lay
craft.
600–300
The term euthanatos, meaning good death, is coined in
Ancient Greece. 
Due to the development of scientific medicine,
healing is no longer believed to occur as a result of
magic.
The Hippocratic Oath is likely written at some
point during this period.
500 BCE
A religious sect called the Pythagorean Brotherhood
is created. Its members consider the best parts of the
soul to be divine and eternal.
99
BCE
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

497 BCE
Pythagoras dies. A Greek philosopher, he placed the
highest value on the soul and believed in immortality.
429–347
Plato lives during this period. In addition to making
the claim, which was radical for the time, that indi-
viduals are responsible for their own health, he
declares that thought is centered in the brain.
421 BCE
Many scholars believe the Hippocratic Oath is written
this year.
400 BCE
Roman emperors create laws against infanticide. A
common practice until this point, it was utilized for
healthy and unhealthy male and female infants.
383–322
Aristotle, the son of a physician, lives during this
time. He declares that the body and soul cannot be
separated.
341–270
Greek philosopher Epicurus states that death is a
state of oblivion.
CE 129
This year marks the birth of Galen, the man known as
the Father of Medicine.
Telemachus, a monk who is committed to bring-
ing gladiator battles to an end, stands between two
gladiators and demands they stop in the name of
Christ. The gladiators kill him and the shock is so
great that the emperor makes the battles illegal.
533
The Council of Orleans, France, refuses funeral rites
for anyone who kills him/herself upon being accused
of a crime.
693
The Council of Toledo, Spain, determines that the
penalty for attempting to take one’s own life will be
excommunication.
875–925
Rhases, a Persian, employs his knowledge of chemi-
cals to create medicines.
1100–1140 Sicily holds state examinations for people who want
to practice medicine.
1199
Practitioners of medicine begin to form associations.
1240
The study and practice of medicine are governed by
Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II.
1310
The era of modern surgery begins with a human dis-
section by Italian anatomist Mondino De Luzzi.
1516
Sir Thomas More’s Utopia provides a literary example
of a society that sanctions voluntary euthanasia.
100
Chronology
BCE
BCE
BCE
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1651
Suicide, a term from the Latin for “to kill,” becomes
part of the English lexicon.
1770
Geneva, Switzerland, abolishes the practice of defil-
ing the corpses of people who took their own lives.
1794
Oratio de Euthanasia, a document which advocates “an
easy death for the patient” is written by a physician
named Paradys.
1798
English physician Edward Jenner introduces vaccina-
tions.
1799
Sir Humphrey Davy, a British chemist, uses nitrous
oxide (also known as laughing gas) as a form of anes-
thesia.
1803
Morphine, a narcotic painkiller made from opium, is
developed by German chemist Frederich Serturner.
1824
The English Parliament decrees that people who com-
mit suicide may be buried in a churchyard. The buri-
als, however, must take place between 9 P.M. and
midnight.
1846
William Morton uses ether during a surgical proce-
dure at Massachusetts General Hospital.
The American Medical Association (AMA) is
founded.
1861
Louis Pasteur, a French scientist, introduces the germ
theory of disease.
1865
Antiseptic surgery is introduced in England by
Joseph Lister.
1869
The Oxford English Dictionary includes an entry for
euthanasia.
1870
The government of France makes it illegal to discrim-
inate against anyone, including suicide cases, in mat-
ters pertaining to burial.
1885
The X-ray process is inadvertently discovered by
Wilhelm Röntgen of Germany.
1905
Mohr v. Williams, a Minnesota case, sets legal prece-
dent regarding informed consent.
1906
The Ohio state legislature considers the first piece of
legislation related to euthanasia in the history of the
United States. The bill fails when only approximately
one-quarter of the state legislators vote in favor of it.
1917
Russia suspends use of the Hippocratic Oath at the
beginning of the Russian Revolution. The theory is
Chronology
101
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

that the absence of the oath allows doctors to remain
loyal to Russia, rather than to the patient.
1920
Michigan resident Frank Roberts is convicted of mur-
der. He placed arsenic within reach of his wife, who
was ill. Roberts dies during his incarceration.
In Germany, a piece by Karl Binding and Alfred
Hoche is published. The topic is Lebensunwerten Leben
(life that is not worthy of life).
1925
The case against Dr. Harold Blazer, who took the life
of his daughter, an invalid for 30 years, is dismissed
following the jury’s inability to reach a verdict.
1929
Life insurance undergoes a change following the
stock market crash. Although suicide claims had pre-
viously resulted in full payment, the spate of suicides
following the crash prompts many insurance compa-
nies to include noncontestability clauses in their poli-
cies. These clauses mandate a two-year waiting peri-
od for payments on suicide policies.
1930–1931 Dr. C. Killick Millard, an English physician, issues a
“Plea for Legalization of Euthanasia” in a speech to
the Society of the Officers of Health.
1935
The British Euthanasia Society is founded by Harold
Laski, Bertrand Russell, George Bernard Shaw, and H.
G. Wells.
1937
Senator John Comstock of Nebraska introduces the
Voluntary Euthanasia Act. The legislation, which
aims to legalize active euthanasia, never goes to a
vote.
Chicago’s Cook County Hospital opens the
nation’s first blood bank. Blood banks are a key factor
in making complex procedures, even surgeries, more
routine.
1938
Unitarian minister Charles Potter establishes the
Euthanasia Society in New York. This organization,
which promotes passive euthanasia, is the first of its
kind in the nation and the second in the world.
1939
The concept of mercy killing is developed.
1941
The Nazis murder approximately 100,000 (non-
Jewish) handicapped Germans. The Nazis refer to this
as euthanasia.
1945
Streptomycin (an antibiotic) is developed.
102
Chronology
1917 (cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1950–1951 Euthanasia is denounced by the General Council of
the Presbyterian Church.
1952
The Protestant Episcopal Church declares its official
opposition to euthanasia.
During a surgical procedure, an artificial
heart/lung machine is used for the first time.
1954
Morals and Medicine, a book by Joseph Fletcher, intro-
duces the concepts of patient autonomy and a “good
death” to a broader spectrum of the public.
1955
Open-heart surgery is performed for the first time.
Sir Alexander Fleming, a bacteriologist from
Scotland, discovers penicillin in London, England.
1957
During a speech to the Seventh International
Congress of Doctors at The Hague, Pope Pius XII
declares, “Medical law can never permit the doctor or
the patient to practice direct euthanasia.” He allows,
however, that extraordinary care could be withdrawn
in some cases.
1959
Herman Feifel’s book, The Meaning of Death, is pub-
lished. The book brings issues related to death and
dying to the forefront, especially in academia.
The development of the sonogram, which makes
it possible to view a fetus in utero, is announced.
Dr. Hermann N. Sanders, who took the life of
terminal cancer patient Abbie Borroto and included
his actions in her medical chart, is prosecuted for
first-degree murder.
1960–1969 During this period, neonatology becomes a medical
subspecialty. Neonatal intensive care units are devel-
oped to provide highly specialized treatment for
infants who would die without such care.
1960
The pacemaker is invented.
1961
The birth control pill is approved as a new form of
contraception.
In England, suicide and attempted suicide are no
longer deemed criminal. Assisted suicide, however,
remains illegal.
1965
Griswold v. Connecticut, a Supreme Court case regard-
ing contraceptive use, sets a legal precedent in terms
of right to privacy.
1967
The Euthanasia Education Fund, a tax-exempt partner
Chronology
103
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

of the Euthanasia Society of New York, is formed to
educate the public about death and dying. In cooper-
ation with Luis Kutner, an attorney from Chicago, the
organization creates the first living will.
Dr. Christiaan Barnard performs the first heart
transplant.
The Foundation of Thanatology is established.
The organization is dedicated to improving care for
the critically ill.
1968
Dr. Walter Sackett, a retired physician and member of
the Florida House of Representatives, begins intro-
ducing legislation about living wills and other end-of-
life issues. His efforts to pass these bills are unsuc-
cessful.
In London, England, Dame Cicely Saunders
establishes the first modern hospice.
1969
Dr. Elizabeth Kübler Ross’s book, On Death and
Dying, is published.
The Hastings Center is established. This organi-
zation delves into issues of biomedical ethics.
The Euthanasia Education Council is founded.
Donald McKinney is its first president.
The British House of Lords considers a bill on
voluntary euthanasia. The bill passes without debate
on its first reading but it is rejected on the second
reading.
1970
More than 60,000 living wills are distributed by the
Euthanasia Society.
Georgetown University Medical School’s
Kennedy Institute of Ethics is established.
1971
Bioethics enters the lexicon.
1972
More than 100,000 people in the United States request
living will forms so they can document their wishes
about end-of-life care.
The U.S. Senate’s Special Committee on Aging
meets to discuss “Death with Dignity: An Inquiry
into Related Public Issues.”
Long Island physician Vincent Montemaro is
prosecuted after he euthanized Eugene Bauer, a 59-
year-old who suffered from terminal cancer.
104
Chronology
1967 (cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1973
The National Conference of Catholic Bishops forms
the National Right to Life Committee.
In Roe v. Wade, the Supreme Court legalizes
abortion.
The American Hospital Association, which
counts more than 90 percent of the nation’s hospitals
among its membership, implements “A Patient’s Bill
of Rights.”
In the Netherlands, Dr. Gertruida Potsma, con-
victed of killing her terminally ill mother at the moth-
er’s request, is sentenced to one month in jail and one
year of probation. The sentence of incarceration for
one month is suspended. The trial mobilizes Jaap and
Klazien Sybrandy to establish the Netherlands
Society for Voluntary Euthanasia. As a result of their
efforts, a legal precedent is established to permit
euthanasia in certain cases.
1974
New Haven, Connecticut, is the site of the first hos-
pice in America.
The American Medical Association’s National
Conference Steering Committee issues new standards
for CPR and emergency cardiac care.
1975
After ingesting a combination of alcohol and seda-
tives, a young woman named Karen Ann Quinlan
goes into a coma.
Derek Humphry helps his wife Jean die in
Britain following her fight with cancer.
1976
California Governor Jerry Brown signs the state’s
Natural Death Act into law. The Natural Death Act
allows patients to set forth their wishes for care at the
end of their lives. The document is tantamount to a
living will.
Switzerland’s Academy of Medical Sciences
releases guidelines on caring for dying patients. The
guidelines mandate personal support, care, and med-
ical treatment.
1977
A physician in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, is tried
for giving a patient a lethal dose of a drug. The physi-
cian is acquitted.
1978
Assisted suicide is considered a criminal act in New
York State.
Chronology
105
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

An act of Congress (Public Law 95–622) estab-
lishes the President’s Commission for the Study of
Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and
Behavioral Research. The Commission is charged
with examining the ethical and legal questions of cur-
rent medical and research-oriented issues.
1979
The Veterans Administration declares that it is not
permissible for physicians to issue do not resuscitate
(DNR) orders for patients who are terminally ill.
Jerry Falwell, a Baptist minister and evangelist,
establishes the Moral Majority, an organization that
focuses its attention on various issues, including
abortion and euthanasia.
1980
The Hemlock Society is founded in California by
Derek Humphry, Ann Wickett, and Gerald Larue.
Dr. George B. Mair’s How to Die with Dignity is
published by the Scottish chapter of EXIT, a right-to-
die organization.
The World Federation of Right-to-Die Societies is
founded.
1981
The Los Angeles County Medical Association and the
Los Angeles County Bar Association form a commit-
tee which delivers physician guidelines for removing
life support, in the absence of prior court approval,
from patients who are terminally ill.
The first AIDS case is diagnosed.
Derek Humphry’s guide to self deliverance, Let
Me Die before I Wake, is published.
A layperson (i.e., not a doctor) is convicted of
assisting a suicide in Rotterdam, the Netherlands. The
case sets legal precedents for determining which
cases will be subject to prosecution.
The British chapter of EXIT publishes A Guide to
Self-Deliverance.
1982
The Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act is
passed in Congress. One provision divides medical
conditions into “diagnostic-related groups.” The
result is a change in Medicare policy limiting pay-
ments to predetermined amounts depending on the
services rendered. Many cite the Tax Equity and
Fiscal Responsibility Act, and the Medicare policy
106
Chronology
1978 (cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

change, as a factor in premature hospital discharges
of elderly patients.
New York State’s Medical Society develops
physician guidelines for withholding resuscitation if a
terminally ill patient stops breathing or his/her heart
fails.
In the Netherlands, Queen Beatrix establishes
the State Commission on Euthanasia.
A physician charged with fulfilling a patient’s
request for death is tried in the Alkmaar District
Court of the Netherlands. The court finds that the
patient was exercising her right to self-determination
and declares that the doctor followed all protocols.
The prosecutor appeals the court’s ruling.
Two journalists in Paris release a manual which
portrays suicide as a revolutionary act appropriate for
general use. Sales of the manual, titled Suicide, Mode
d’Emploi, reach nearly 50,000 within five months.
Attempts to ban the manual prove unsuccessful.
1983
Nancy Cruzan, age 25, sustains critical injuries in an
automobile accident. She falls into a coma and nutri-
ents and hydration are administered by artificial
means. Absent a living will, Nancy Cruzan’s parents
engage in a protracted legal struggle to discontinue
the artificial nutrition and hydration and allow their
daughter to die.
The Veterans Administration declares that
patients have a right to die. The declaration allows
doctors, with permission of the patient, to write
orders that reject lifesaving steps when the patient is
critically ill. In cases where the patient is unable to
decide, the patient’s family may give such permis-
sion.
The President’s Commission for the Study of
Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and
Behavioral Research determines that patients should
have the option of refusing lifesaving measures when
death is imminent.
On March 7, the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services issues “Baby Doe” regulations sched-
uled to become effective March 22. The regulations
Chronology
107
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

mandate that every hospital which receives federal
funding must post the following notice in all nurseries
and maternity wards: “Discriminatory failure to feed
and care for handicapped infants in this facility is pro-
hibited by federal law.” 
On March 18, several national organizations,
including the American Academy of Pediatrics,
protest the Baby Doe regulations by filing a lawsuit
against the Department of Health and Human
Services and Secretary Margaret Heckler.
On April 14, Judge Gerhard Gesell, declaring
that the Baby Doe regulations violate federal law,
rules that they must be amended.
On October 8, Baby Jane Doe is born in New
York. She has spina bifida and is hydrocephalic and
microencephalic. The infant’s parents decline surgery
that would provide her with approximately 20 years
of life in a severely compromised state. Attorney
Lawrence Washburn, acting on behalf of the infant,
petitions the court to perform the surgery, alleging
that the hospital is discriminating against a handi-
capped infant. The court rules in his favor and the
surgery is performed.
The Netherlands case (see 1982) from the Alkmaar
District Court goes to the Amsterdam Court of
Appeals. The Appeals Court, in a reversal of the lower
court’s decision, convicts the physician but does not
recommend punishment. The doctor files an appeal.
Dr. Pieter Admiraal’s Justifiable Euthanasia: A
Manual for the Medical Profession is released. The book-
let provides doctors and pharmacists with drug
dosages required to effectively hasten death.
1984
The U.S. Congress passes “Baby Doe” legislation,
which requires that states that receive federal funds
for child abuse prevention adopt rules aimed at pre-
venting medical neglect of handicapped infants.
The Royal Dutch Society for the Promotion of
Medicine calls upon the Minister of Justice in the
Netherlands to legalize euthanasia.
The Netherlands Society for Voluntary
Euthanasia assists the physician in the Alkmaar
108
Chronology
1983 (cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

District Court case with appealing the most recent
ruling. The Dutch Supreme Court subsequently over-
turns the decision handed down by the Amsterdam
Court of Appeals; the case is referred to the Court of
Appeals in The Hague.
1985
Karen Ann Quinlan dies.
1986
Attorneys Michael White and Robert Risely write the
Humane and Dignified Death Act and attempt to put
the issue before the voters in California. The act never
makes it to the ballot because it is lacking the
required number of signatures.
In The Hague, the Netherlands, the court dis-
misses charges against the physician from the
Alkmaar District Court. The justices reason that there
are no norms of medical ethics that prohibit his
actions.
1987
Dr. Peter Rosier is tried for murdering his wife, Patti,
who was battling cancer. The jury is unanimous in its
acquittal.
Nancy Cruzan is diagnosed as being in a persist-
ent vegetative state.
France bans all books that provide information
about how to commit suicide.
1988
An organization known as Americans against Human
Suffering attempts to place an initiative legalizing
euthanasia and physician-assisted death on the
California ballot. The effort fails due to an insufficient
number of signatures.
A Tennessee police officer named Gary Dockery
is shot in the head in the line of duty and lapses into
a coma. His physicians view his chances of recovery
as very slim.
1989
Dr. Jack Kevorkian builds the “mercitron,” a suicide
machine.
Senator John Danforth of Missouri introduces
the Patient Self-Determination Act (PSDA) in the U.S.
Senate.
The Supreme Court of the United States accepts
the Nancy Cruzan case. The case, Cruzan v. Director,
Missouri Department of Health, is the Court’s first right-
to-die case.
Chronology
109
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1990
In Law, Medicine, and Health Care, Dr. Steven Miles
publishes research showing that courts are more like-
ly to fulfill the wishes of men than women regarding
life support.
Congress passes the Patient Self-Determination
Act, requiring all facilities that receive federal funds
to make patients aware that they have the right to
refuse medical treatment. The act also authorizes
these facilities to offer living wills and powers of
attorney prior to illness or injury. Effective in 1991,
the act surpasses state laws regarding living wills.
On June 4, Dr. Jack Kevorkian helps Janet
Adkins commit suicide. Adkins, 54, suffered from
Alzheimer’s disease.
On June 25, the U.S. Supreme Court rules in
Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health. The
ruling is 5–4 in favor of Nancy Cruzan’s parents.
Chief Justice William Rehnquist cites the Fourteenth
Amendment in noting that people have the right to
avoid unwanted medical treatment. Specific guide-
lines are left to the states.
On December 3, Dr. Kevorkian is charged with
the murder of Janet Adkins. Judge Gerald McNally
listens to a tape Adkins made prior to her death and
drops the charges.
On December 14, Nancy Cruzan’s feeding tube
is removed and she is transferred to hospice care.
On December 18, nineteen right-to-life activists
are arrested as they attempt to force reconnection of
Nancy Cruzan’s feeding tube.
On December 26, Nancy Cruzan dies.
The Royal Dutch Medical Association and the
Netherlands Ministry of Justice agree to require that
all doctors disclose cases involving assisted dying.
1991
An article by Dr. Timothy Quill appears in the New
England Journal of Medicine. In his article, Dr. Quill
chronicles how he helped Patricia Diane Trumbull, a
terminally ill patient, end her life. Although prosecutors
charge him, the jury does not deliver an indictment.
Prescription Medicine: The Goodness of Planned
Death, by Dr. Jack Kevorkian, is published.
110
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Choice in Dying, a national right-to-die organi-
zation, is formed by the merger of Concern for Dying
and the Society for the Right to Die.
Nancy Cruzan’s parents establish the Cruzan
Foundation. The organization’s mission is to help
families in situations like the one they faced with
their daughter.
Derek Humphry’s book, Final Exit, is published.
In addition to appearing on the New York Times best
seller list for eighteen weeks, the book is a nonfiction
best seller for 1991.
The ballot in Washington State features a Death
with Dignity initiative. With 1.3 million votes cast, the
measure fails.
Pennsylvania’s State House of Representatives
votes in favor of allowing terminally ill people to
forego treatment provided that they had signed a liv-
ing will while still sound in mind and body.
On October 23, Dr. Kevorkian helps Sherry
Miller and Marjorie Wantz commit suicide. Miller, 43,
suffered from multiple sclerosis, and Wantz, 58, suf-
fered from abdominal and pelvic pain.
On November 20, in a unanimous decision, the
Michigan Board of Medicine suspends the medical
license of Dr. Jack Kevorkian.
On December 1, the Patient Self-Determination
Act, passed by Congress in 1990, goes into effect.
1992
Florida Governor Lawton Chiles signs the state’s
Health Care Advance Directives Act into law.
Having received the required number of signa-
tures, California’s Death with Dignity Act is placed
on the ballot. It fails with a vote of 54 percent to 46
percent.
Washington State’s Feeding Tube Bill (HB
#1481) is approved. Under the bill, a patient in an
irreversible coma may be removed from life support
if the patient had a living will.
On February 5, Dr. Kevorkian is indicted for
murder in the deaths of Sherry Miller and Marjorie
Wantz. The case is known as Michigan v. Kevorkian.
On May 15, Dr. Kevorkian helps 52-year-old
Chronology
111
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Susan Williams commit suicide. Williams suffered
from multiple sclerosis.
On June 5, the office of the Medical Examiner in
Oakland County, Michigan, finds that Dr. Kevorkian’s
actions in the death of Susan Williams constitute
homicide.
On July 21, Dr. Kevorkian is cleared of murder
charges in the deaths of Marjorie Wantz and Sherry
Miller. The prosecutor files an appeal.
After being cleared of murder charges in the
deaths of Marjorie Wantz and Sherry Miller, Dr. Kevor-
kian assists four other people with committing suicide
in 1992. Their names and conditions are listed below.
Lois Hawes
lung cancer
Catherine Andreyev
breast cancer
Marguerite Tate
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
Marcella Lawrence
heart disease, liver
problems, emphysema,
arthritis
On November 24, the Michigan House of
Representatives passes a measure declaring that
assisted suicide is a felony carrying a four-year prison
term. It will become law on March 30, 1993.
Final Exit is banned in New Zealand, Australia,
and France. The ban is lifted within the same year in
Australia and New Zealand.
1993
Dr. Jack Kevorkian helps 12 people commit suicide
during this year.
Dr. Ali Khalili
bone cancer
Merian Frederick
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
Jack Miller
bone cancer
Mary Biernat
breast cancer
Stanley Ball
pancreatic cancer
Elaine Goldblum
multiple sclerosis
Hugo Gale
emphysema and heart
problems
Jonathan Grenz
mouth and throat cancer
Martha Ruwart
duodenal and ovarian
cancer
112
Chronology
1992 (cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Ronald Mansur
bone and lung cancer
Thomas Hyde
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
Donald O’Keefe
bone cancer
On February 25, Michigan’s State Senate passes
special legislation to make the ban on assisted suicide
effective immediately.
On March 1, the American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU) goes to court to challenge Michigan’s ban on
assisted suicide.
The Dutch Parliament passes a law guarantee-
ing that doctors will not be prosecuted for euthanasia
if they follow the established guidelines. This is con-
sidered the first modern euthanasia law in the world.
1994
Three patients suffering from terminal illnesses, along
with their doctors, go to court in Quill et al. v. New
York to test the state’s ban on assisted suicide. The
U.S. District Court in New York City rules against
them, declaring that assisted suicide is illegal. Their
appeal takes the case to the Second Circuit Court of
Appeals.
With Michigan’s temporary ban on assisted sui-
cide nearing expiration, the state legislature votes to
implement a permanent ban. The State Supreme
Court declares the ban constitutional given the lack of
a constitutional right to assisted suicide.
Voters in Oregon approve Measure 16, the
state’s Death with Dignity Act. It is the first law in the
United States to explicitly allow assisted suicide. A
temporary restraining order prevents it from taking
effect. A judge later postpones it indefinitely pending
a thorough analysis of constitutional issues.
A Dutch-produced documentary, Death upon
Request, is aired in the Netherlands. The subject is
Cees van Wendel de Joode’s quest to end his life. At
63, he is fighting amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
On January 24, Compassion in Dying, an organi-
zation committed to making end-of-life choices avail-
able to terminally ill patients, brings a lawsuit to the
U.S. District Court for Western Washington on behalf of
three terminally ill patients and their physicians. The
Chronology
113
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

case, Compassion et al. v. Washington State, is based on
their claim that existing law in Washington State inter-
feres with people’s constitutional rights of liberty and
equal protection under the Fourteenth Amendment.
On May 3, in Compassion et al. v. Washington
State, a federal judge rules that it is unconstitutional
to deny a terminally ill, competent adult in
Washington a physician’s aid in dying.
1995
The Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA)
reports findings on surveys about advance directives.
Among the findings: In three out of four cases of eld-
erly patients admitted to a New York Hospital, doc-
tors were unaware of the existence of advance direc-
tives. In California, a survey of the files of Medicare
patients with advance directives revealed that the
directives were present in only 25 percent of the files.
On March 9, the U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of
Appeals overturns the ruling in Compassion et al. v.
Washington State, declaring that it is not within a per-
son’s constitutional rights to have a physician-assist-
ed death.
Dr. Jack Kevorkian assists five people with com-
mitting suicide.
Reverend John Evans
pulmonary fibrosis
Nicholas Loving
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
Erika Garcellano
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
Esther Cohan
multiple sclerosis and
ulcers
Patricia Cashman
cancer
On October 30, Dr. Kevorkian, five other physi-
cians, and a psychologist form an organization called
Physicians for Mercy. They draft guidelines for physi-
cians who help terminally ill patients commit suicide.
1996
Gary Dockery, the police officer who slipped into a
coma after being shot in the head in the line of duty
(see 1988), emerges from the coma. He is able to com-
municate clearly.
Dr. Jack Kevorkian is found not guilty in the
1993 deaths of Dr. Ali Khalili and Merian Frederick.
114
Chronology
1994 (cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

He is tried again in the deaths of Marjorie Wantz and
Sherry Miller (see 1991 and 1992).
Dr. Kevorkian assists 19 people with committing
suicide.
Linda Henslee
multiple sclerosis
Austin Bastable
multiple sclerosis
Ruth Neuman
multiple strokes
Lona Jones
malignant brain tumor
Bette Lou Hamilton
syringomyelia
Shirley Cline
cancer
Rebecca Badger
multiple sclerosis
Elizabeth Mertz
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
Judith Curren
chronic fatigue, immune
system dysfunction,
fibromyalgia
Louise Siebens
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
Patricia Smith
multiple sclerosis
Pat DiGangi
multiple sclerosis
Loretta Peabody
multiple sclerosis
Jack Leatherman
pancreatic cancer
Isabel Correa
a spinal cord disorder
Richard Faw
colon cancer
Wallace Spolar
multiple sclerosis
Nancy de Soto
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
Barbara Collins
ovarian cancer
On February 1, the New England Journal of
Medicine publishes results of physician surveys
regarding physician-assisted suicide in Oregon and
Michigan. The results indicate that many doctors, in
some cases and under specific conditions, support
physician-assisted suicide.
On March 6, following an en banc hearing, the
U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals rules in
Compassion et al. v. Washington State. The court, in a
vote of 8 to 3, overturns the lower court’s ban on
physician-assisted suicide. The decision is stayed
pending appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.
On April 2, in Quill et al. v. Vacco (see 1994), the
Chronology
115
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Second Circuit Court of Appeals reverses the earlier
court’s ruling. The case is slated to go to the U.S.
Supreme Court. (Note that the case is also known as
Quill et al. v. New York or Quill et al. v. Koppell.)
On May 14, Oakland County’s Circuit Court
finds Kevorkian not guilty of breaking the Michigan
Supreme Court’s 1994 ruling banning assisted sui-
cide.
On May 17, in Manhattan, New York, 72-year-
old George Delury is sentenced to six months in jail
for helping his wife, Myrna Lebov, commit suicide in
1995. Lebov, suffering from multiple sclerosis, was 52
at the time of her death. Delury aided her in her quest
to die by mixing a drug concoction for her to take.
On June 20, Dr. Maurice Generaux, a physician
in Canada, is charged with assisting in the suicide of
Aaron McGinn on April 10. McGinn, age 31, had been
diagnosed as HIV positive. Generaux is the first doc-
tor in Canada charged with “aiding a suicide.”
The Rights of the Terminally Ill Act goes into
effect in Australia’s Northern Territory.
1997
In response to a Congressional inquiry, the U.S. Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) declares that
“delivering, dispensing, or prescribing a controlled
substance with the intent of assisting a suicide” is not
a “legitimate medical purpose.”
Congress passes a law prohibiting the use of fed-
eral funds in physician-assisted suicides. The legisla-
tion, known as the Assisted Suicide Funding Restriction
Act of 1997, is signed by President Bill Clinton.
The State Supreme Court in Florida rules that
the state’s ban on assisted suicide is not a violation of
the right to privacy under the state constitution.
Dr. Kevorkian assists 30 people with committing
suicide during this year.
Elaine Louise Day
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
Lisa Lansing
Crohn’s disease
Helen Livengood
severe arthritis and
problems related to the
esophagus
116
Chronology
1996 (cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Albert (Buddy) Miley
quadriplegic
Janette Knowles
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
Heidi Aseltyne
AIDS
Delouise Bacher
multiple sclerosis
Janis Murphy
chronic fatigue syn-
drome and fibromyalgia
Dorinda Scheipsmeier
multiple sclerosis
Lynne Dawn Lenox
multiple sclerosis
Karen Shoffstall
multiple sclerosis
Janet Good
pancreatic cancer
Thomas Summerslee
multiple sclerosis
Carol Fox
ovarian cancer
Deborah Sickels
multiple sclerosis
Natverlal Thakore
Parkinson’s disease
Kari Miller
multiple sclerosis
John Zdanowicz
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
Lois Caswell
chronic pain syndrome
Annette Blackman
multiple sclerosis
John O’Hara
stroke, gout, kidney
problems
Nadia Foldes
cancer
Naomi Sachs
osteoporosis
Bernice Gross
multiple sclerosis
Martha Wichorek
various ailments
Rosalind Haas
breast cancer
Margaret Weilhart
stroke, paralysis, blind-
ness
Cheri Trimble
breast cancer
Franz-Johann Long
tentative diagnosis of
bladder cancer
Mary Langford
breast and lung cancer
On March 25, the Rights of the Terminally Ill Act
in Australia’s Northern Territory is overturned by the
passage of the Voluntary Euthanasia Laws Bill.
On May 13, in a vote of 32 to 26, Oregon’s
House of Representatives votes to place Measure 16
(the Death with Dignity Act) back on the ballot.
On May 26, the Supreme Court of the United
States overturns the decisions of the lower courts in
Chronology
117
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Quill v. Vacco and Washington v. Glucksberg (as the
Washington State case is now known). In this unani-
mous ruling, the Supreme Court upholds the constitu-
tionality of state statutes which ban assisted suicide.
The Court, however, allows that hastening death by
increasing palliative care measures is not a prohibited
action when the intent is to relieve pain and suffering.
On June 10, echoing the sentiment of the state’s
House of Representatives, Oregon’s Senate votes 20
to 10 to return Measure 16 to the voters.
On October 27, Oregon’s Death with Dignity
Act, passed in 1994, becomes effective. However, a
measure to repeal it is slated to appear on the ballot
in the upcoming election.
On November 4, Oregon voters reject Measure
51, the ballot measure which would have repealed the
state’s Death with Dignity Act (Measure 16).
Colombia allows euthanasia under specific cir-
cumstances.
By a vote of 234 to 89, the British Parliament
votes against legalizing assisted suicide.
1998
The Health Services Commission in Oregon declares
that it is permissible to utilize state funds for costs
associated with physician-assisted suicide.
Sixteen people take advantage of Oregon’s
Death with Dignity Act and die by physician-assisted
suicide this year.
Michigan voters defeat Measure B, which would
legalize physician-assisted suicide.
Janet Reno, U.S. Attorney General, overturns the
Drug Enforcement Administration’s 1997 declaration
that “delivering, dispensing, or prescribing a con-
trolled substance with the intent of assisting a sui-
cide” is not a “legitimate medical purpose.”
Dr. Kevorkian helps 18 people commit suicide
this year.
Nancy Rush
lung cancer, emphyse-
ma, ulcers
Carrie Hunter
AIDS
Jeremy Allen
kidney cancer
118
Chronology
1997 (cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Muriel Clement
advanced Parkinson’s
disease
Roosevelt Dawson
quadriplegia
William Connaughton
fibromyalgia
Patricia Greyham
rheumatoid arthritis
Waldo Herman
lung cancer
Mary Judith Kanner
Huntington’s disease
Shala Semonic
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
Dixie Colleen Wilson
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
Priscilla Hiles
chronic arthritis, degen-
erative disk disease,
sciatica, asthma
Jack Schenbern
prostate cancer
Lucille Alderman
heart disease and
osteoarthritis
Matthew Johnson
quadriplegia
Emma Kass
lung cancer
Joseph Tushkowski
quadriplegia
Thomas Youk
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis
On November 22, the CBS primetime program
60 Minutes shows footage of Dr. Jack Kevorkian help-
ing Thomas Youk commit suicide.
On November 24, Dr. Jack Kevorkian is charged
in Michigan with murder in the death of Thomas
Youk. Additional charges include violating the assist-
ed suicide law and delivering a controlled substance
without a license.
1999
Twenty-six people utilize Oregon’s Death with
Dignity Act and die by physician-assisted suicide
during this year.
A bill to allow assisted suicide passes two com-
mittees of the California state legislature but lacks
sufficient support to be put to a vote of the full
Assembly.
The Pain Relief Promotion Act of 1999, geared
toward promoting aggressive pain management and
prohibiting the use of controlled substances for assist-
Chronology
119
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

ed suicide and euthanasia, is introduced in Congress.
It is approved in the U.S. House of Representatives.
On April 13, Dr. Jack Kevorkian receives a prison
sentence of 10 to 25 years for second-degree murder
in the death of Thomas Youk. Kevorkian will be eligi-
ble for parole in six years. He plans to appeal.
2000
Maine voters defeat, by a vote of 51 percent to 49 per-
cent, a ballot initiative that would legalize physician-
assisted suicide.
The State Senate in New Hampshire votes
against legalizing physician-assisted suicide.
A Hawaiian public access television station
airs Final Exit, a video which demonstrates how to
commit suicide using a plastic bag. The video
was prepared by Derek Humphry of the Hemlock
Society.
A judge in Michigan denies Dr. Jack Kevorkian’s
plea for early release. Kevorkian had cited poor
health in making this request.
Oregon Senator Ron Wyden threatens to fili-
buster the Pain Relief Promotion Act of 1999, which
passed the U.S. House of Representatives in 1999. As
a result, the act is never put to a Senate vote.
The Voluntary Euthanasia Society of Scotland
(VESS) changes its name to EXIT.
2001
U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft restores the
DEA’s 1997 declaration that it is not permissible for
doctors to prescribe federally controlled drugs for
euthanasia or assisted suicide. Ashcroft’s statement
thwarts Oregon’s assisted suicide law and state offi-
cials secure a temporary restraining order to suspend
the order pending judicial review.
The New England Journal of Medicine features a
report regarding sixty-nine of the cases in which Dr.
Jack Kevorkian assisted people in committing suicide.
The Journal analysis shows that seventeen were termi-
nally ill. The other fifty-two were not terminally ill
but their conditions had recently become worse. In
five of those fifty-two cases, autopsies did not yield
evidence of any disease.
The Supreme Court in Alaska is unanimous in
120
Chronology
1999 (cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

its rejection of a claim that Alaska’s law against assist-
ed suicide violates constitutional rights.
California’s state legislature approves legislation
aimed at enhancing pain management for people at
the end of their lives.
On April 10, voluntary euthanasia is legalized in
the Netherlands. The country is the first in the world
to declare that euthanasia is legal.
2002
Hawaii’s House of Representatives approves a bill
legalizing physician-assisted suicide. Known as
Hawaii’s Death with Dignity Act, the bill fails in the
State Senate by a vote of 14 to 11.
On April 17, a federal judge rules that Attorney
General John Ashcroft does not have the authority to
foil the Oregon law which allows physician-assisted
suicide. The federal government files an appeal with
the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
On February 1, the new law in the Netherlands
regarding voluntary euthanasia and physician-assist-
ed suicide goes into effect. Although not illegal prior
to this, such acts were permitted only under certain
guidelines.
Belgium approves a law similar to that of the
Dutch. It allows voluntary euthanasia and physician-
assisted suicide.
On November 27, Toronto’s National Post prints
results of a poll of Canadians regarding various
issues, including physician-assisted suicide. The poll,
conducted by Canadian polling firm COMPAS,
shows that 55 percent of Canadian adults support
physician-assisted suicide, while 36 percent oppose it.
2003
Representative Linda Lopez of Arizona’s House of
Representatives sponsors a bill to legalize “aid in
dying.” The bill fails within committee and never
makes it to a full House vote.
The Vermont Death with Dignity Act is intro-
duced in Vermont’s state legislature. The bill never
makes it to a vote.
Oral arguments are held in the U.S. Ninth
Circuit Court of Appeals regarding Attorney General
John Ashcroft’s prohibition of the use of federally
Chronology
121
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

controlled drugs for assisted suicide. The case is
known as Oregon v. Ashcroft.
Hawaii’s Death with Dignity Act dies in committee.
Oregon officials report that 129 people have
been granted approval for physician-assisted suicide
since 1998.
Following a survey of its members, the Hemlock
Society embraces a new course: The organization will
become more proactive in the legislative arena. The
goal is to provide people who are terminally ill and
mentally competent with the opportunity to legally
choose a peaceful death. The Hemlock Society’s new
name is End-of-Life Choices.
2004
The Final Exit Network is formed following the
change in the Hemlock Society’s name and mission.
The Final Exit Network establishes a group of volun-
teers to help and support the dying.
Hawaii’s Death with Dignity Act passes the
state’s House Judiciary Committee, but the bill never
makes it to a vote before the full House.
Arizona Representative Lopez introduces a sec-
ond bill regarding assisted suicide. Known as the
Patient Comfort and Control Act, the bill fails.
The Vermont Medical Association voices its
opposition to legalizing physician-assisted suicide in
Vermont. Disability rights groups join them in oppos-
ing such legislation.
In Vermont, the chairs of the House and Senate
Health and Welfare Committees announce that there
will be no action on bills to legalize physician-assisted
suicide.
Legislation to legalize physician-assisted suicide
is introduced in Wyoming.
On May 26, the U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of
Appeals upholds the lower court’s ruling in Oregon v.
Ashcroft.
On November 9, Attorney General John Ashcroft
submits his resignation to President George W. Bush.
Prior to leaving office, Ashcroft appeals the decision
of the U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in Ashcroft
v. Oregon.
122
Chronology
2003 (cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

2005
The U.S. Supreme Court agrees to hear Gonzales v.
Oregon (formerly known as Oregon v. Ashcroft).
On March 2, Charles Cullen, a nurse who pled
guilty in the deaths of twenty-nine patients, is sen-
tenced to eleven consecutive life terms. Cullen had
worked in nine hospitals and a nursing home
throughout New Jersey and Pennsylvania. He told
authorities that he may have killed more people than
the twenty-nine for which he was convicted.
On March 31, Terry Schiavo dies at the age of 41
after spending years in what many doctors termed a
persistent vegetative state (PVS). Her death follows a
protracted legal battle between her husband, Michael,
and her parents, Robert and Mary Schindler, regard-
ing Michael Schindler’s decision to remove life sup-
port, including a feeding tube and hydration.
On April 30, Donald Herbert, a firefighter from
Buffalo, New York, awakens and speaks after spend-
ing close to ten years in a coma. Herbert had fallen
into the coma after a burning roof fell on him in the
line of duty and he was deprived of oxygen.
On October 14, Charles Foti, Attorney General of
Louisiana, investigates allegations that staff at
Memorial Medical Center euthanized patients follow-
ing Hurricane Katrina. The allegations center on
patients who were elderly and seriously ill.
In Vermont’s House of Representatives,
Representatives William Aswad, Malcolm Severance,
and David Zuckerman introduce House Bill 168,
Vermont’s Death with Dignity Act. The bill is sent to
the Human Services Committee.
Assembly members Lloyd Levine and Patty Berg
of the California State Assembly introduce Bill 651,
the California Compassionate Choices Act.
Compassion and Choices, an organization dedi-
cated to providing patients with end-of-life choices,
is created as the result of a merger between
Compassion in Dying and End-of-Life Choices. The
organization is headquartered in Denver, Colorado,
and Portland, Oregon.
A new version of Hawaii’s Death with Dignity
Chronology
123
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Act is introduced in the state legislature but the bill
dies in committee and never makes it to a full vote.
Arizona’s state legislature considers two bills
legalizing assisted suicide. HB 2313 is similar to
Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act, while HB 2311 is
similar to the 2004 Patient Comfort and Control Act.
Both bills fail.
The state legislature of Wisconsin considers a
Death with Dignity bill introduced by
Representatives Frank Boyle and Fred Risser.
A Swiss hospital declares that representatives of
EXIT, a right-to-die organization with a local chapter,
will be allowed into hospital wards. EXIT is legally
permitted to help terminally ill people in Switzerland
commit suicide. However, there are certain condi-
tions: It is the patient’s stated wish to die, the patient
is suffering from an incurable disease or faces immi-
nent death, and the patient administers the fatal over-
dose of barbiturates. If the assisting person has “self-
ish motives” in assisting the suicide, he or she can be
prosecuted for providing assistance.
A pharmaceutical company announces that
“euthanasia kits” will be made available in pharma-
cies in Belgium.
2006
The U.S. Supreme Court, by a vote of 6 to 3, rules that
Oregon’s physician-assisted suicide law stands.
Rejecting the position of former Attorney General
John Ashcroft, the Court rules that the attorney gener-
al does not have the authority to override the Oregon
law allowing physician-assisted suicide.
In Rhode Island’s General Assembly, Represent-
ative Edith Ajello introduces the Rhode Island Death
with Dignity Act (HB 7428). After failing in commit-
tee, the bill never makes it to the floor for a full vote.
State Senator Pat Thibaudeau introduces
Washington’s Death with Dignity Act (Senate Bill
6843). The bill remains in the Senate Committee on
Health and Long-Term Care.
On February 21, Donald Herbert, the Buffalo
firefighter who emerged from a ten-year coma in
April 2005, dies after contracting pneumonia.
124
Chronology
2005 (cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

On May 2, the U.S. Court of Appeals in
Washington rules that terminally ill patients have the
right to receive experimental drugs prior to official
approval of the drugs by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration.
On May 22, Michigan’s Department of
Corrections receives a request from Dr. Jack Kevorkian
for commutation of his prison sentence of 15 to 20
years for second-degree murder in the death of
Thomas Youk. He bases his request on failing health.
On July 18, a doctor and two nurses are arrested
for allegedly euthanizing patients in a hospital in
New Orleans, Louisiana, following the devastation
wrought by Hurricane Katrina.
Australia’s Suicide Materials Offenses Act is
effective. Under this act, it is criminal to discuss
euthanasia or assisted suicide or provide advice on
these matters on the Internet or via telephone, e-mail,
or fax. Books, postal mail, and meetings are not
included.
On May 12, the British House of Lords votes 148
to 100 against legalizing physician-assisted suicide.
2007
Dr. Jack Kevorkian is released from prison in June.
California representatives Patty Berg and Lloyd
Levine place a bill before their colleagues in
California’s state legislature to legalize assisted suicide.
Additional people may have received Dr. Jack Kevorkian’s
assistance in committing suicide. Dr. Kevorkian reportedly
kept some of the cases private.
Chronology
125
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

5
Biographical Sketches
T
he following people have participated—or are participating—
in the issues of euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide in
some way. Some continue to make an impact on this issue at
the present time; others are deceased but their legacies are impor-
tant to the study of this topic.
Some of these names will be recognizable because of their
influence on end-of-life issues in the areas of public policy, reli-
gion, research, or ethics. Others will be familiar because their
names are associated with some sort of milestone in the realm of
end-of-life issues.
Janet Adkins (1936–1990)
Janet Adkins was a teacher who lived a full and active life in
Portland, Oregon, with her husband and their three sons. When
she was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease, she was informed
that she would soon be unable to care for herself. She sought
counseling and determined that she would rather die than live
the life that lay before her. Her early efforts to obtain aid in dying
from three Oregon physicians were unsuccessful, but when she
learned of Dr. Jack Kevorkian through media reports, she contact-
ed him. He examined her medical records and decided to assist
her in her quest to die.
In June 1990, Janet Adkins’ husband accompanied her to
Michigan. Dr. Kevorkian chose a campsite outside of Royal Oak,
127
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Michigan, as the location to assist her in her effort to die. Dr.
Kevorkian’s method required Adkins to flip a switch to trigger the
release of thiopental to induce sleep. Subsequently, with the use of
a timer, potassium chloride was administered to stop Adkins’
heart. Despite Kevorkian’s efforts to streamline the process, there
were unforeseen glitches: He was missing some necessary compo-
nents for the machine when he arrived. During his attempts to
remediate the problem, some of the necessary medication was
spilled. As a result, Adkins waited while Dr. Kevorkian addressed
the situation.
Although her death was delayed briefly by these problems,
Janet Adkins will forever be known as the first person to die by
using Dr. Jack Kevorkian’s “suicide machine,” which he called the
“mercitron.” Her death, on June 4, 1990, was reported internation-
ally and it spurred a spate of legislation regarding end-of-life
issues. Dr. Kevorkian was subsequently charged with murder in
Adkins’ death, but the case ended in an acquittal.
Dr. Pieter Admiraal (1929–)
Dr. Pieter Admiraal is known for his efforts since the early 1970s
to promote euthanasia as an option in the Netherlands. In addition
to his advocacy efforts, Dr. Admiraal has practiced physician-
assisted suicide; in fact, he is considered to be one of the most
experienced physicians in the world in practicing physician-assist-
ed suicide.
An anesthesiologist, Dr. Admiraal served at the Reinier de Graf
Hospital in Delft for thirty years before retiring in 1995. His efforts to
promote euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide include the pub-
lication of a 1977 guide that outlines the dosages required for drugs
to be lethal. He followed this guide up in 1987 with a compilation of
lethal dosage information for the Royal Dutch Society for the
Advancement of Pharmacy. He has also written numerous pieces
addressing the issue of physician effectiveness in various physi-
cian-assisted suicide scenarios. In addition, Dr. Admiraal has spo-
ken about physician-assisted suicide in various locations through-
out the world. Dr. Admiraal is known for expressing the view that
euthanasia should be included as one of the options available to
patients at the end of their lives as a way of helping them maintain
their autonomy as they face end-of-life issues.
128
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Kevin Andrews (1955–)
In Australia’s Northern Territory, euthanasia was legalized for a
period of nine months: July 1996 through March 1997. The law
which made euthanasia legal for this period was known as the
Rights of the Terminally Ill Act (ROTI).  Marshall Perron had spon-
sored the legislation.
In 1996, Kevin Andrews introduced the Euthanasia Laws Bill
of 1996 aimed at repealing the Rights of the Terminally Ill Act.
Andrews’ bill was passed and the ROTI was repealed.
A barrister, Andrews was elected to Australia’s House of
Representatives in 1991,and served as the Minister of Aging for
nearly two years. Andrews has collaborated on articles and books
on several subjects, including issues related to biomedical ethics.
Dr. Margaret Pabst Battin
Margaret Pabst Battin, Ph.D., has authored and edited books, jour-
nal articles, and papers on various subjects, including those related
to end-of-life issues. The books include Ethical Issues in Suicide,
Suicide: The Philosophical Issues, The Case for Physician-Assisted Dying:
The Right to Excellent End-of-Life Care and Patient Choice, and Ending
Life: Ethics and the Way We Die.
Dr. Battin is a professor of Philosophy and adjunct professor
of Internal Medicine, Division of Medical Ethics, at the University
of Utah. In addition to a Ph.D. in Philosophy from the University
of California at Irvine (1976), Dr. Battin holds a Master’s of Fine
Arts degree, also from the University of California at Irvine (1973),
and a bachelor’s degree from Bryn Mawr College (1963).
Pope Benedict XVI (1927–)
As the leader of the world’s Roman Catholic population, Pope
Benedict XVI, by his words and actions, influences Catholic opin-
ion on various matters, including euthanasia, physician-assisted
suicide, and other issues related to the end of life. In his role as
leader of the church, he also sets policy for Roman Catholic insti-
tutions such as hospitals and nursing homes that play a role in
end-of-life care. Pope Benedict XVI has both influenced Roman
Biographical Sketches
129
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Catholics and established policy by stressing the sanctity of life
from birth until death.
Pope Benedict XVI, formerly known as Cardinal Joseph
Ratzinger, was born in Germany in 1927. He was ordained as a
priest in the Roman Catholic Church in 1951, obtaining his doctor-
ate in theology two years later. He subsequently began teaching at
the university level and participated in Vatican II as a theological
advisor to the Archbishop of Cologne, Cardinal Joseph Frings.
Father Ratzinger was later named an archbishop and then a
cardinal. He served as Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine
of the Faith and later as a leader of the College of Cardinals. He
was elected by his fellow cardinals to serve as pope, following the
death of Pope John Paul II in April 2005.
Dr. Daniel Callahan (1930–)
Daniel Callahan has studied numerous issues related to bioethics,
including population, aging, abortion, euthanasia, and physician-
assisted suicide. His seminal works in these and other areas of
bioethics have earned him a reputation as an expert on issues
related to medical ethics. In addition to a Ph.D. from Harvard
University (1965), Dr. Callahan’s educational background includes
a master’s degree from Georgetown University (1957) and a bach-
elor’s degree from Yale University (1952).
Dr. Callahan cofounded the Hastings Center in 1969 and
was its president for more than 20 years. He also was director of
its international program. His work in academia has included
serving as a Fellow in Yale University’s Institution for Social and
Policy Studies, Senior Research Fellow in Yale’s Department of
Philosophy, Senior Lecturer at Harvard Medical School, and
Visiting Fellow at Harvard’s Center for Population and
Development Studies.
In addition, Dr. Callahan has served as a board member, con-
sultant, or advisor for various organizations, including the
Medical Ethics Committee of the American College of Physicians,
the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the
Center for Philosophy and Public Policy. He was a special consult-
ant to the Presidential Commission on Population Growth and the
American Future in the early 1970s.
Dr. Callahan is the author, coauthor, or editor of numerous
130
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

books, including Medicine and the Market: Equity v. Choice (with
Angela Wasunna), A World Growing Old (with Ruud ter Meulen
and Eva Topinková), The Troubled Dream of Life: In Search of a
Peaceful Death, What Kind of Life: The Limits of Medical Progress, and
Setting Limits: Medical Goals in an Aging Society.
Diane Coleman
Diane Coleman is the founder of Not Dead Yet. Founded in 1996,
this organization is dedicated to opposing assisted suicide and
euthanasia. In her capacity as founder, she has appeared on
numerous television and radio programs at the national, regional,
and local levels.
Coleman is a person with disabilities and she adds that per-
spective to her work, as well as to her service as a board member
for disability-related organizations. She has written articles on
topics related to disabilities, and she speaks on such topics, as well
as on topics related to health care. Coleman is an adjunct member
of the faculty of University of Illinois at Chicago, where she has co-
taught courses at the graduate level addressing issues of disabili-
ty and medical ethics.
Coleman earned her law degree and Master’s in Business
Administration at the University of California, Los Angeles (1981).
After practicing law for several years, she became codirector of the
Technology Access Center of Middle Tennessee and Policy
Analyst for the Tennessee Technology Access Project. She is cur-
rently serving as the executive director of the Progress Center for
Independent Living in Illinois, an organization which advocates
for people with disabilities.
Nancy Cruzan (1957–1990)
At the age of 25, Nancy Cruzan was in an automobile accident that
resulted in extensive injuries, oxygen deprivation, and permanent
brain damage. Her deep coma would eventually be determined to
be a persistent vegetative state. Her family talked to her, provided
stimulation, and made her as comfortable as possible as they
worked to help her come out of the coma. However, after four
years, they began to believe that she might never come out of the
Biographical Sketches
131
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

coma. At that point, her family declared that she would not have
wanted to live that life. Due to the fact that she was not on a ven-
tilator or other form of life support, it was determined that remov-
ing the feeding tube was the only way to bring about the end of
her life. Her parents stated that they, on their daughter’s behalf,
wanted the tube to be removed. Administrators at the rehabilita-
tion facility where she lived resisted this decision and Nancy
Cruzan’s parents took their case to court.
Nancy Cruzan did not have any written directives regarding
her end-of-life wishes. In the absence of such directives, the court
ruled that the state’s interest in maintaining sanctity of life out-
weighed the family’s concerns about Nancy Cruzan’s quality of
life. The Cruzans disagreed and appealed the verdict; the case
went to the U.S. Supreme Court. The Court, in Cruzan v. Director,
Missouri Department of Health, ruled in favor of the Cruzans, citing
the right to die as a constitutionally protected liberty interest.
There was a caveat, however, that such a right to die was not
absolute. The court declared that there were limitations unless
proof existed regarding the person’s wishes and that it was incum-
bent on the states to provide guidelines to determine what was
acceptable as proof. The Cruzans went back to the state court in
Missouri to offer proof of what their daughter’s wishes might
have been; testimony from friends was found by the state court to
constitute sufficient proof.
Nancy Cruzan’s feeding tube was subsequently removed on
December 14, 1990 and she died on December 26, 1990.
Dr. Kathleen Foley
After earning her degree in medicine at Cornell University
Medical College, Dr. Kathleen Foley completed her residency, as
well as a fellowship, at the New York Hospital/Cornell Medical
Center. She is board certified in Neurology with clinical expertise
in Cancer Pain and Supportive Care. Her work has included
extensive study about pain, palliative care, and issues related to
the end of life.
An attending neurologist in the Pain and Palliative Care
Service at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York
City, Dr. Foley has served as the chair of the Society of Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Pain Research. She has also
132
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

served as a professor of Neurology, Neuroscience, and Clinical
Pharmacology at Weill Medical College of Cornell University.
Dr. Foley has chaired two advisory panels for the World
Health Organization’s Cancer Unit; the panels developed guide-
lines for managing cancer pain and establishing initiatives in pal-
liative care. Dr. Foley’s other experience has included testifying
before the Senate Judiciary Committee, managing the Project on
Death in America (PDIA), and writing extensively. She has written
or cowritten several books, including The Case against Assisted
Suicide: For the Right to End-of-Life Care; Palliative Care for Infants,
Children, and Adolescents: a Practical Handbook; and Describing Death
in America: What We Need to Know.
Dr. Faye Girsh
Dr. Faye Girsh earned her doctorate at Harvard University. She
has worked as a clinical and forensic psychologist and taught at
Morehouse College and the University of Chicago. She has an
extensive background with the right-to-die movement, including
serving as president of the Hemlock Society, vice president and
president of End-of-Life Choices, senior advisor for the Final Exit
Network, and member of the board of directors of various organ-
izations, including Americans for Death with Dignity, ERGO, and
the World Federation of Right to Die Societies. In recognition of
her dedication to right-to-die issues, Dr. Girsh received the
Hemlock Society’s Lifetime Achievement Award.
Dr. Girsh has made television appearances, written exten-
sively, and spoken internationally about right-to-die issues. She
remains active in the right-to-die movement.
Dr. Herbert Hendin (1926–)
Dr. Herbert Hendin is a professor of psychiatry and behavioral
sciences at New York Medical College. He previously served as
medical director of the American Foundation for Suicide
Prevention.
As a result of his extensive study of suicide and assisted sui-
cide in the United States and the Netherlands, Dr. Hendin is con-
sidered an expert on these subjects. He has testified before the
Biographical Sketches
133
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Subcommittee on the Constitution of the Judiciary Committee of
the U.S. House of Representatives.
In addition, Dr. Hendin has written extensively on the afore-
mentioned subjects. Among the books he has written or collabo-
rated on are The Case against Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End-
of-Life Care; Seduced by Death: Doctors, Patients and Assisted Suicide;
and Suicide in America.
Vincent Humbert (1981–2003)
An active, vibrant 22-year-old Frenchman, Vincent Humbert was
injured in an automobile accident in 2000. In addition to depriving
him of his ability to walk, the accident deprived him of his sight,
speech, and senses of smell and taste. He used his ability to move
his right thumb to painstakingly indicate letters so that he could
spell out his wish to die legally in a book entitled Je Vous Demande
le Droit de Mourir (I Ask the Right to Die).
He was frustrated by the fact that his request was not grant-
ed. His mother, Marie Humbert, agreed to help him commit sui-
cide. Subsequent to her actions assisting him in this quest, she was
arrested. Although the charges against Marie Humbert were even-
tually dropped, she was frustrated that she did not have the
opportunity to stand trial, defend her son’s wishes, and advocate
for other people to gain the right to die.
Derek Humphry (1930–)
Born in England, Derek Humphry began his newspaper career as
a messenger for the Yorkshire Post and quickly worked his way into
a position as a reporter for the Bristol Evening World. He was draft-
ed into the British Army and served for two years. Afterward, he
worked as a reporter for the Manchester Evening News, and then at
the London Daily Mail. He later accepted a position as an editor.
When Humphry’s wife, Jean, was diagnosed with inopera-
ble bone cancer, he helped her commit suicide. He later married
Ann Wickett and they moved to the United States, where
Humphry worked again as a reporter, this time at the Los Angeles
Times. In 1978, Humphry published Jean’s Way, a book in which he
recounted his role in helping his first wife commit suicide. The
134
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

book received mixed reactions: praise from those who supported
his actions in assisting Jean with committing suicide and criticism
from those who questioned the legality and correctness of his
actions. Among the critics were prosecutors in London; however,
after a lengthy investigation, the prosecutors decided against
charging him with a crime.
As a result of the publicity surrounding this case, Humphry
began to receive requests from others who wanted his assistance
in committing suicide. These requests prompted him and his wife,
Ann Wickett, along with Gerald Larue and Richard Scott to form
the Hemlock Society. This organization was dedicated to helping
people explore suicide as an option when facing terminal illness,
advocating for legislation to legalize assisted suicide, and provid-
ing support to people who had decided to end their lives.
Humphry’s later books include Let Me Die Before I Wake, The
Right to Die, Final Exit: The Practicalities of Self-Deliverance and
Assisted Suicide, Dying with Dignity: Understanding Euthanasia,
Lawful Exit: The Limits of Freedom for Help in Dying, and The Good
Euthanasia Guide 2004: Where, What, and Who in Choices in Dying.
Pope John Paul II (1920–2005)
During his papacy, Pope John Paul II served as the leader of
Roman Catholics throughout the world. In this capacity, he had
unparalleled influence on the opinions of Roman Catholics. His
policies governed Roman Catholic institutions, including hospi-
tals and nursing homes, throughout the world.
Born Karol Wojtyla in Krakow, Poland, Pope John Paul II
was ordained to the priesthood in the Roman Catholic Church in
1946. During his papacy, which began in 1978, Pope John Paul II
traveled more than any of his predecessors as he spread the mes-
sage of Catholicism throughout the world. As the pope, he placed
special emphasis on the sanctity of life; in this way, he addressed
various issues including abortion and euthanasia. One of his
encyclicals, issued in 1980, addressed euthanasia. In this docu-
ment, he denounced euthanasia and declared that there is spiritu-
al value in suffering.
Pope John Paul II’s encyclical became more meaningful for
many Roman Catholics when he lived the message that he had
preached in it. When he was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease,
Biographical Sketches
135
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

he continued to spread the message of Catholicism; as his health
declined, he remained dedicated to that message. His death, in
April 2005, was mourned by Roman Catholics and others
throughout the world who cited his suffering as a testament to his
beliefs in the sanctity of life.
Yale Kamisar (1929–)
Although Yale Kamisar is most known for his expertise in crimi-
nal procedure and related areas, he is also considered an expert on
issues related to physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia.
Kamisar has written extensively on a variety of issues; his writings
on end-of-life issues include papers, articles, and chapters for
books. He has also collaborated on books regarding constitutional
law and constitutional rights
After graduating from New York University, Yale Kamisar
earned his law degree at Columbia Law School. As a law school
professor, he has instructed students at the University of Michigan
Law School, the University of San Diego School of Law, and the
University of Minnesota Law School.
Dr. Jack Kevorkian (1928–)
Dr. Jack Kevorkian’s name is what comes to mind for many peo-
ple in the United States if the topic of euthanasia or physician-
assisted suicide is raised. His renown in this area is a result of the
assistance he gave to people who wished to commit suicide. By Dr.
Kevorkian’s own count, he assisted approximately 130 people in
that endeavor.
Dr. Kevorkian devised a machine to facilitate the process of
assisting people in committing suicide. The “mercitron” incorpo-
rated a mechanism that enabled the patient to flip a switch that
would prompt the machine to begin administering a drug cocktail
that would end life.
Although he was arrested and faced criminal charges in
three of the cases in which he assisted people in committing sui-
cide, he was acquitted each time. That changed, however, when he
was arrested and charged with first-degree murder in the death of
Thomas Youk (see biographical information for Thomas Youk).
136
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Dr. Kevorkian’s motives were controversial and unclear. In
addition to questions of legality, there were issues raised about the
fact that some of the people he assisted in committing suicide were
later determined to not actually suffer from a terminal illness. He
also was criticized for not having a long-term doctor-patient rela-
tionship with any of them; rather, he got to know them briefly
when they reached out to him to request his assistance in commit-
ting suicide. Some people in the medical and legal communities
argued that some of these people might not have chosen suicide if
they had received adequate medical and/or other treatment.
Dr. Elisabeth Kübler Ross (1926–2004)
Dr. Elisabeth Kübler Ross was known for her work, including writ-
ing numerous books, about death, dying, grief, and grieving. Dr.
Kübler Ross was born in Zurich, Switzerland, in 1926. She attend-
ed medical school at the University of Zurich. After graduating in
1957, she moved to the United States and began her career. From
the beginning, Dr. Kübler Ross was struck by the way terminally ill
people were treated and she sought to improve that treatment by
offering insight into their experience. Her first book, On Death and
Dying, provided insight into the five stages of the dying process
and insight into how death impacts everyone affected by it.
Although some now denounce these stages as unscientific and
declare that the stages are not universally experienced by everyone
who is terminally ill, the book and the research by Dr. Kübler Ross
remain required reading for many people studying for careers as
doctors, nurses, psychiatrists, psychologists, or other professions in
which they may come in contact with the terminally ill.
In addition to On Death and Dying, Dr. Kübler Ross wrote
several other books, including The Tunnel and the Light, AIDS: The
Ultimate Challenge, Living with Death and Dying, and On Grief and
Grieving.
Luis Kutner (1908–1993)
Luis Kutner, an attorney who practiced law in Chicago, Illinois, is
credited with proposing that living will documents be used as a
means of allowing people to express their wishes regarding end-
Biographical Sketches
137
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

of-life care. He published “Due Process of Euthanasia: The Living
Will, a Proposal” in the Indiana Law Review in 1969. The paper was
widely considered to be a milestone regarding the legal side of
issues related to euthanasia and other matters dealing with the
end of life.
Kutner was motivated by his belief that people who wished
to have assistance in committing suicide were denied legal rights
and protections necessary to safeguard their wish to die. Those
who agreed to assist them, he believed, should also be protected.
He posited that his proposed living will document would enable
adults who were mentally competent and healthy to put their
wishes in writing so that there would be no question about what
kind of care the person wanted at the end of life. Living wills are
now common and the term has become part of our lexicon.
Kutner is also known for his role in cofounding Amnesty
International.
Barbara Coombs Lee
Barbara Coombs Lee is a physician assistant and family nurse
practitioner, as well as an attorney. She is committed to providing
end-of-life choices. She works to do that in her role as president of
Compassion and Choices, an organization which was created as a
result of a merger between Compassion in Dying and End-of-Life
Choices. Prior to the merger of the organizations, she had served
as president and chief executive officer of Compassion in Dying.
In addition to practicing as a private attorney, Lee has served
as a counsel to the State Senate of Oregon and as an executive in
the field of managed care. She was a chief petitioner regarding the
Oregon Death with Dignity Act.
Rita Marker (1940–)
A practicing attorney, Rita Marker has served as director of the
International Task Force on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide
since the organization was founded in 1987. Marker previously
served as an adjunct professor of Political Science and Ethics at
the University of Steubenville, Ohio. She has written numerous
articles and spoken on issues related to bioethics and human
138
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

rights throughout the world. Marker’s other advocacy efforts
include offering testimony to the Subcommittee on the
Constitution, Civil Rights, and Property Rights of the U.S. Senate
Judiciary Committee.
Marker wrote Deadly Compassion. In this book, she examined
the topic of euthanasia in terms of the suicide of Ann Humphry
and argued against the legalization of euthanasia. She also con-
tributed to Contemporary Perspectives on Rational Suicide.
Dr. Philip Nitschke (1947–)
When the Rights of the Terminally Ill Act was introduced for
Australia’s Northern Territory, Dr. Philip Nitschke made head-
lines by stating that he would be willing to assist patients in com-
mitting suicide. Soon after, he developed a device he called a
“deliverance machine.” This piece of equipment included a com-
puter which required patients to repeatedly confirm their wish to
die before the drugs to end life were administered. Dr. Nitschke
assisted four people in ending their lives under the Rights of the
Terminally Ill Act. The act, which was in effect for nine months,
was repealed under the Euthanasia Laws Bill of 1996, proposed
by Kevin Andrews.
Dr. Nitschke subsequently founded EXIT International.
Members of EXIT International advocate for new legislation to
legalize euthanasia and help people obtain information regarding
options available to them at the end of their lives. As part of his
work with EXIT International, Dr. Nitschke conducts workshops
throughout Australia and New Zealand to provide people with
information on relevant legal issues and how they can control
their own deaths.
Dr. Edmund Pellegrino (1920–)
Dr. Edmund Pellegrino is known for his opposition to euthanasia
and physician-assisted suicide. He was especially vocal on the sub-
ject when the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA)
printed an intern’s anonymous letter purportedly relating his expe-
rience in assisting in the death of a terminally ill patient. The letter,
“It’s Over, Debbie,” was published in JAMA on January 8, 1988.
Biographical Sketches
139
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

A professor emeritus of Medicine and Medical Ethics at the
Center for Clinical Medical Ethics at Georgetown University
Medical Center, Dr. Pellegrino also previously served as the direc-
tor of the Kennedy Institute of Ethics at Georgetown.
Dr. Pellegrino’s educational background includes a bache-
lor’s degree from St. John’s University. He earned his medical
degree at New York University. His résumé includes extensive
writing in philosophy and ethics, as well as medical science. In
addition, he has authored or coauthored numerous books, includ-
ing Transcultural Dimensions in Medical Ethics; Jewish and Catholic
Bioethics: An Ecumenical Dialogue; and Health, Disease, and Illness:
Concepts in Medicine.
Dr. Pellegrino currently serves as a senior fellow of the Center
for Bioethics and Human Dignity, an organization dedicated to
exploring and expanding the Christian role in issues of bioethics.
Dr. Gertruida Postma
In the early 1970s, Dr. Gertruida Postma of the Netherlands
administered a lethal injection to her mother, who was dying. She
was tried and found guilty; her sentence consisted of a one-month
suspended sentence and a year of probation.
Jaap Sybrandy, a social worker, and his wife, Klazien, subse-
quently formed the Netherlands Society for Voluntary Euthanasia
because they were inspired by the story surrounding Dr. Potsma
and her mother. As a result of their efforts, a legal precedent was
established to allow euthanasia in the Netherlands under certain
conditions.
Dr. Timothy Quill (1949–)
Dr. Timothy Quill is director of the Palliative Care Program at the
University of Rochester Medical Center in Rochester, New York. He
is also a professor of medicine at the University of Rochester School
of Medicine and Dentistry. In addition to numerous articles about
end-of-life care, Dr. Quill has written or edited several books, includ-
ing Death and Dignity: Making Choices and Taking Charge, A Midwife
through the Dying Process: Stories of Healing and Hard Choices at the End
of Life, Caring for Patients at the End of Life: Facing an Uncertain Future
140
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Together, Physician Guide to End-of-Life Care, and The Case for Physician-
Assisted Dying: The Case for Palliative Care and Patient Choice.
Dr. Quill is the physician referenced in Quill v. Vacco, a case
that originated in New York State and went to the U.S. Supreme
Court. Dr. Quill had prescribed medication for a leukemia patient
to help her sleep, even though he knew there was a possibility that
she would take them to end her life. She did just that. He wrote
about this experience in the New England Journal of Medicine and
ultimately appeared as a plaintiff before the Supreme Court in
Quill v. Vacco (McKhann 1999, 84).
Dr. Quill co-edited Physician-Assisted Dying: The Case for
Palliative Care and Patient Choice with Margaret Pabst Battin, Ph.D.
In the introduction to this book, Drs. Quill and Battin write that
the central question in this issue is not whether people would pre-
fer “access to palliative care and hospice or access to physician-
assisted death” (2004, 1). They pose the central question as “What
would you prefer, access to excellent palliative care and hospice by
themselves or access to excellent hospice and palliative care plus
legal access to a physician-assisted death as a last resort if your
suffering becomes intolerable and you wish an earlier, easier
death?” (Quill and Battin 2004, 1).
Karen Ann Quinlan (1954–1985)
Karen Ann Quinlan fell into a coma on April 15, 1975, at the age of
21, after consuming drugs and alcohol. She was admitted to a
New Jersey hospital where she was monitored for several months.
When doctors declared that she had sustained irreversible brain
damage and was in a persistent vegetative state, her parents stat-
ed that it was their wish, on her behalf, to have their daughter
taken off the respirator.
Although hospital officials initially agreed with the decision
made by Quinlan’s parents, they later decided that they could not
allow her to be removed from the respirator. Mr. and Mrs. Quinlan
responded by taking their battle to court. During the intervening
period, Quinlan’s nurse weaned her from the respirator and the
court battle became moot. Quinlan remained in a persistent vege-
tative state for eight years; she died in 1985 of pneumonia.
Karen Ann Quinlan’s case resonated for years after her death.
Numerous pieces of legislation addressing end-of-life issues were
Biographical Sketches
141
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

proposed throughout the country, hospitals created ethics commit-
tees to address thorny end-of-life issues, and requests for living
wills increased dramatically.
Dr. James Rachels (1941–2003)
During his professional career, Dr. James Rachels wrote extensive-
ly on morality, moral philosophy, and ethics; some of his writings
focused on euthanasia and other end-of-life issues. His books
include The End of Life: Euthanasia and Morality. His article “Active
and Passive Euthanasia” was published extensively, including in
one of his own books of essays.
Born in 1941, Dr. Rachels earned his bachelor’s degree at
Mercer University (1962) and his Ph.D. at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill (1967). During his teaching career, he
taught students at the University of Richmond, New York
University, the University of Miami, Duke University, and the
University of Alabama at Birmingham.
Dame Cicely Saunders (1919–2005)
Dame Cicely Saunders worked as a nurse and later returned for
additional education to enable her to work as a physician. She com-
bined her training with compassion and a bold philosophy about
the dying process when she opened the first modern hospice, St.
Christopher’s, outside London, England, in 1967. Later she toured
the United States to share her insight, experience, and ideas about
providing comfort care for people who are terminally ill.
At St. Christopher’s, Dame Saunders implemented a philos-
ophy that united medical care for the patient with spiritual care for
the patient and the patient’s family. Her goal was to incorporate
compassion into every action and respect for the patient’s dignity
while providing comfort, care, and adequate pain relief to the ter-
minally ill. Through her implementation of this type of care, Dame
Saunders provided a new alternative for people who faced termi-
nal illnesses. In recognition of her efforts and dedication to the
hospice movement, the title of Dame was bestowed on her in 1980.
Today, Dame Saunders is known as the founder of the
modern hospice movement and she is remembered for her dedi-
142
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

cation to humanizing and personalizing the dying process as
much as possible.
Terri Schindler Schiavo (1963–2005)
When Terri Schindler Schiavo collapsed in 1990, she suffered car-
diac arrest and slipped into a state that some physicians deter-
mined was a persistent vegetative state. She was 26 years old and
she did not have advance directives. In the absence of such a doc-
ument, her husband, Michael, was responsible for decisions
regarding her care. At some point later, Michael Schiavo began to
have disagreements with his wife’s parents, Robert and Mary
Schindler, regarding her care.
Michael Schiavo argued that his wife would not have want-
ed to be kept alive in the manner in which she was living. Citing
conversations with his wife, he stated his intention to have her
feeding tube removed. His in-laws disagreed and a legal battle
ensued. Michael Schiavo’s decision ultimately prevailed and Terri
Schiavo’s feeding tube was removed. She died on March 31, 2005.
The case spawned a great deal of media attention and debate, as
well as increased interest in the concept of advance directives.
Wesley J. Smith (1949–)
Wesley J. Smith is an author, a senior fellow at the Discovery
Institute, an attorney for the International Task Force on
Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide, and a special consultant for the
Center for Bioethics and Culture.
Smith wrote Forced Exit: The Slippery Slope from Assisted
Suicide to Legalized Murder; it was rereleased in 2006 under the title
Forced Exit: Euthanasia, Assisted Suicide, and the New Duty to Die. He
also wrote Culture of Death: The Assault on Medical Ethics in America.
In addition to books, Smith has written opinion pieces for
newspapers throughout the world on end-of-life issues and other
topics. He has offered commentary on television and radio in the
United States and in other countries throughout the world. Smith
has testified before government committees at both the federal
and state levels on end-of-life issues. In the introduction to his
book, Forced Exit: The Slippery Slope from Assisted Suicide to Legalized
Biographical Sketches
143
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Murder, Smith writes about a dear friend who chose to end her life.
He explains that the experience motivated him to crusade against
euthanasia, including writing this book.
Joni Eareckson Tada (1950–)
Joni Eareckson Tada suffered an accident while diving in the
Chesapeake Bay in 1967. The accident left her a quadriplegic; she
has used a wheelchair since then. Although she initially hoped for
death, she began to believe more deeply in her religion. Her belief
gave her the comfort to begin to live her life, rather than trying to
withdraw from it.
In addition to a career as an accomplished painter, Tada has
been an author and collaborator of numerous books. Her books
include Joni, which recounts her story, as well as A Step Further:
Growing Closer to God through Hurt and Hardship, Heaven, and
Ordinary People, Extraordinary Faith. Joni was made into a movie.
In 1979 Tada founded Joni and Friends (JAF), an organiza-
tion dedicated to promoting Christianity within the disability
community. She travels extensively to share her story and her min-
istry. Tada speaks extensively about the obstacles she has faced to
share the notion that it is possible for people to live with disabili-
ties. She uses anecdotes from her own life to illustrate her point
that people might suffer from depression as a result of their health
issues but that the depression can be treated rather than leading
people to turn to assisted suicide as a means of escaping those
health issues.
Thomas Youk (1946–1998)
Thomas Youk was suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS), also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease, and the disease was
worsening when he contacted Dr. Jack Kevorkian and asked for
the doctor’s assistance in ending his life.
Dr. Kevorkian agreed to assist the 52-year-old man and
decided to record the process, from Youk’s request through his
actual death, on videotape. In a departure from his normal proce-
dure, Dr. Kevorkian actually administered the injection. Dr.
Kevorkian then sent the videotape, including the part showing his
144
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

actions in administering the injection, to 60 Minutes, a news-
magazine on the CBS network. CBS aired the videotape and Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was arrested and charged with first-degree mur-
der in the death of Thomas Youk.
Prosecutors, citing the fact that Dr. Kevorkian actually
administered the injection, tried him on the charge of first-degree
murder. The jury found him guilty of murder in the second degree
and Dr. Kevorkian was sentenced to 10 to 25 years in prison.
References
McKhann, Charles F. 1999. A Time to Die: The Place for Physician
Assistance. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Quill, Timothy E., and Margaret P. Battin. 2004. Physician-Assisted
Dying: The Case for Palliative Care and Patient Choice. Baltimore,
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Biographical Sketches
145
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

6
Data and Documents
R
elevant statistics and other data, as well as germane facts and
documents, can be useful in gaining a thorough understanding
of any complex issue. End-of-life issues are no different. The
data and other materials in this chapter will provide researchers
with greater insight into the questions and debate that surround
end-of-life issues.
The information in this chapter is presented in three sections:
Facts and Data
Documents
Quotations
Each section is then further divided into medical-bioethical,
spiritual-social-cultural, and legal-political subsections.
Facts and Data
Although there are many subjective components to arguments
surrounding end-of-life issues, there are also facts and statistics
that help frame the issue and provide context. Books, articles, Web
sites, and other sources provide a combination of objective data
and subjective components, including religious beliefs, ethical
concerns, and issues about protection of rights. This publication
presents the objective data to facilitate research and greater under-
standing of these issues.
147
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Meaning of the Word
Euthanasia, according to The Merriam-Webster Dictionary, means
mercy killing. It is from the Greek words eu, meaning good, and
thanatos, meaning death.
A Common Thread
The American Cancer Society estimates that 570,280 people in the
United States died of cancer in 2005 (2005).
The Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis division of the Muscular
Dystrophy Association reports that approximately 35,000 people in
the United States currently suffer from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s disease), a disease which causes paralysis
and usually results in death within five years of diagnosis (1999).
The Alzheimer’s Association estimates that 5.1 million
Americans suffer from Alzheimer’s disease in 2007 (2007).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) esti-
mates that between 1,039,000 and 1,185,000 people in the United
States had HIV/AIDS as of the end of 2003 (2005).
What is the common thread? It is that people suffering from
these diseases are most likely to commit suicide or request assis-
tance in dying.
What are the particular factors, though, that motivate some
terminally ill people to end their lives or request assistance in doing
so? In his book Angels of Death: Exploring the Euthanasia Underground,
Roger S. Magnusson (2002) examines the motivations of some AIDS
patients who sought the option of assisted suicide. Of the thirty-five
patients interviewed, twenty-one cited “intolerable/unresolved/
chronic pain or physical discomfort”; seventeen said they were
“tired of fighting/‘over it’/[exhausted and hopeless]”; thirteen
cited “fear of the process of dying/not wanting to suffer as others
have suffered/fear of suffering when dying”; eight reported “severe
deterioration in quality of life/lack of quality of life/unable to enjoy
life”; eight said they did “not want to be a burden” (75–76).
Elderly Suicide in America
According to the American Association of Suicidology (AAS),
while elderly people accounted for 12.4 percent of the population
148
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

in 2003, they represented 16.7 percent of suicides. In addition, AAS
says people age 80 years and older are most likely to successfully
complete their suicide attempts. The American Association of
Suicidology stresses that poor health is merely one of the factors in
elderly suicide attempts. The AAS cites other issues that might
contribute toward a suicide attempt in an elderly person, includ-
ing a loved one’s death, isolation and loneliness, and life change
such as retirement or widowhood (American Association of
Suicidology 2006).
Author Eric Marcus (1996) addresses this higher success rate,
as well as the rationale behind some elderly suicides, in his book
Why Suicide? He notes:
Elderly people are more likely to complete a suicide
than those under 65 because when they decide to take
their lives, they’re very serious about it. Generally,
these are not people making a cry for help or attempt-
ing to get back at a boyfriend or girlfriend. They want
to die. They choose more lethal methods. And they get
it right the first time. Many of them live alone, so even
if their suicide attempt is a cry for help, they’re far less
likely to be found in time to be saved (78).
The cry for help component of many of these attempts is crit-
ical, according to the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention
(AFSP). The organization cites a link between suicide and mental
illness, declaring that depression is often a factor in cases of peo-
ple who contemplate suicide while suffering from an illness that is
serious or terminal. Such depression, the organization stresses, is
treatable (2004).
It must be noted that the phenomenon of suicide among
people who are ill is definitely not limited to the elderly.
Statistical information, however, often does not provide a differ-
entiation between those who commit suicide while suffering from
a terminal illness and those who are not suffering from such an
illness at the time of suicide. Statistical information about suicide
among the elderly provides us with valuable insight into the
issue and provides a foundation for further research into suicide
among younger people who are suffering from serious or termi-
nal illness.
Facts and Data
149
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The Hospice Option
As people with terminal illnesses approach the end of their lives,
their options are not limited to euthanasia or dying in the sterility
of a hospital or without medical support at home. Dame Cicely
Saunders founded the modern hospice movement in London,
England, in 1968. One of the many benefits of hospice care is that
all caregivers are trained to provide the patient, as well as family
members, with necessary support, including spiritual and psycho-
logical support. The patient’s pain is a focus in the sense that all
caregivers are specially trained to provide relief from pain.
Many hospice facilities throughout the United States provide
patients with the choice between home care and care within the
hospice facility. This choice makes the patient feel more in control
of his or her care and provides some level of comfort in the midst
of the stress and anxiety surrounding a terminal illness. In The Case
against Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End-of-Life Care, edited by
Kathleen Foley, M.D., and Herbert Hendin, M.D. (2002), Saunders
explains why hospice care can be offered at home. “Hospice is a
complex set of attitudes and skills, not a building. Much of this care
and treatment can be accomplished at home with the support of
teams so well developed in the United States . . . ” (287).
For Saunders, it is important to provide people who are fac-
ing the end of their lives with choices like this. In her piece in The
Case against Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End-of-Life Care, she also
says it is important that everyone provide support to the dying:
Physicians, others on the multiprofessional team, fam-
ily members, and other intimate caregivers are not the
only ones who should feel the responsibility to give
comprehensive palliative care that seeks to understand
and address the many needs dying patients have; soci-
ety as a whole should feel that responsibility. The
strength of the whole hospice and palliative care move-
ment has been its roots in the societies from which it
has originated (286).
Spiritual-Social-Cultural
End-of-life issues do not exist in a vacuum. External issues and
forces influence these matters and provide a context for them.
150
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Some of these issues and forces must be acknowledged in
researching or discussing matters related to end-of-life deci-
sions.
The Context of Religion
For many people, whether they are facing an end-of-life decision
or merely conducting research, religion provides a context. For
some people, this context is borne of deeply held beliefs which
provide a framework to consider the intricacies of the issue. For
others, this context may simply be a starting point from which to
begin exploring the issue.
In Euthanasia and the Right to Die, authors Jennifer M. Scherer
and Rita J. Simon (1999) explain one of the primary reasons for the
opposition many religions share toward euthanasia:
In almost every religion, suicide is considered a crime
against God, because the supreme power that grants
life also determines when it should be terminated. The
timing and manner of one’s death is determined solely
by God, so suicide is not a morally or ethically sanc-
tioned option in any situation. The belief is that human
life is a gift from God and should be highly regarded,
irrespective of the circumstances of that life. Existence
in any capacity is thought to be superior to not living at
all, as the human body is a conduit for spiritual reflec-
tion and moral contemplation (22).
It is important to remember that this opposition is not uni-
versal, especially when the subject is what is termed rational sui-
cide. The term is generally taken to mean that there are circum-
stances in which “death is clearly preferable to continued suffer-
ing.” In other words, there are circumstances in which death is
considered a rational choice (McKhann 1999, 7). “With its tradition
as a sanctuary for the religiously persecuted, the United States
now harbors a wide range of structured religions; some accept
rational suicide, others openly oppose it, and still others are neu-
tral on the subject” (60).
The Roman Catholic Church is well known for its opposition
to suicide and any other activity that interferes with the sanctity of
life, including euthanasia. However, suicide was not always as
stigmatized as it has been in modern times. In his book A Time to
Facts and Data
151
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Die: The Place for Physician Assistance, Charles F. McKhann, M.D.,
writes:
In the early days of Christianity, the penalty for suicide
was relatively mild, a delay for the damaged soul to
reach the afterlife. But as the concept of the sanctity of
life strengthened, suicide became more of an abomina-
tion, and the penalties decreed by the church became
more severe. It became a cardinal sin: the suicide was
refused Christian burial, the body was desecrated, and
the family publicly humiliated. If the suicide left a for-
tune, the church seized it and rendered the family des-
titute (59–60).
Moreover, the church’s position on other end-of-life issues
was the subject of debate for a time, as well. The controversy
began in 1957 with a statement from Pope Pius XII to an interna-
tional conference of physicians regarding patient choice when it
comes to medical treatment. It continued in 1970 with Cardinal
Jean Villot’s statement, also at an international conference, that
physicians were not always obligated to “prolong life at all costs.”
A Declaration on Euthanasia, issued by the Vatican in 1980, quelled
much of the controversy by stating in no uncertain terms that the
Roman Catholic Church disapproved of euthanasia and assisted
suicide. During his papacy, Pope John Paul II reinforced the
Declaration on Euthanasia (Scherer and Simon 1999, 24).
Judaism also regards the power to take life as resting solely
with God. Every moment of a person’s life, indeed, every breath,
is considered sacred. As a result, euthanasia and assisted suicide
are considered anathema even though they are not specifically
addressed in the Talmud. Passive euthanasia, however, is allowed
given certain conditions:
The Talmud implies that the physician does not have to
do everything possible to keep the terminally ill patient
alive. Removing artificial means that are not keeping a
patient from dying, such as a feeding tube, is not con-
sidered a positive or direct action, in that no element,
such as a lethal dose of morphine, is introduced to
cause death.
Thus, while there is an obligation to prolong nat-
152
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

ural life, there is no legal obligation to prolong life arti-
ficially (24-25).
In addition to the Roman Catholic and Jewish faiths,
“Christian Science, Jehovah’s Witnesses, the Eastern Orthodox
churches, the United Pentecostal Church, the Mormon Church, the
Church of the Nazarene, and the Episcopal, Lutheran, and Southern
Baptist churches all have doctrinal proscriptions against suicide.
Islam also opposes suicide for any reason” (McKhann 1999, 61).
However, the influence of any religion in this area is not
absolute and one author asserts that it may be weakening. Nicholas
A. Christakis wrote “Managing Death: The Growing Acceptance of
Euthanasia in Contemporary American Society,” an essay which
appears in Must We Suffer Our Way to Death? In this essay,
Christakis contends that, because our society is governed by secu-
lar influences, euthanasia is becoming more accepted in some
ways. Citing “elimination of school prayer, falling church atten-
dance, and the waning of religious influence over everyday life” as
evidence of this secularization, Christakis asserts, “With respect to
euthanasia, this trend has found expression in the desacralization
of death and healing. In a secular and humanistic society, euthana-
sia becomes more permissible” (Hamel and DuBose 1996, 36).
Although many churches have expressed opposition, others
have not taken a position. In addition to the United Church of
Christ and the Presbyterian Church, these neutral churches
include the Adventists, many Baptist churches, the Christian
Reformed Church of North America, the Church of Christ, and the
Pentecostal Church of God (McKhann 1999, 61). Amidst this oppo-
sition from some churches and neutrality from others, the
Unitarian Universalist Association stands in “support for a right
to self-determination in the dying process and freedom from pros-
ecution for physicians who perform the procedure” (Scherer and
Simon 1999, 25).
Media and Technology
Media coverage is one example of how the contemporary age pro-
vides people with access to a broader spectrum of information
regarding end-of-life issues. News is easily transmitted to nation-
al and international outlets for dissemination to readers and view-
ers throughout the United States and the world. The result is that
people in their living rooms can learn about the latest breast
Facts and Data
153
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

cancer drug, a new piece of legislation about euthanasia, or a
physician who has been accused of illegally assisting in the suicide
of a patient. Our modern age offers myriad other ways to explore
end-of-life issues, as well. From searching the Internet for relevant
sites to watching a DVD of a movie that addresses euthanasia,
people interested in this topic have more learning and research
options available to them than people in previous generations did.
The cases in which Dr. Jack Kevorkian assisted people in
committing suicide are a prime example of how modern media
coverage provides the general public with greater access to infor-
mation regarding end-of-life issues. News coverage of these cases
enabled people throughout the United States and the world to
monitor Dr. Kevorkian’s activities and his efforts to legalize assist-
ed suicide. This coverage peaked on November 22, 1998, when 60
Minutes, a news magazine on the CBS television network, aired a
videotape showing Dr. Kevorkian “administering a lethal injec-
tion” to Thomas Youk, a Michigan resident who had requested Dr.
Kevorkian’s assistance in ending his life because he suffered from
Lou Gehrig’s disease (Magnusson 2002, 31).
When jurors found Dr. Jack Kevorkian guilty of second-
degree murder on March 26, 1999, Judge Jessica Cooper addressed
Dr. Kevorkian in the courtroom. Additional news coverage
focused on her words:
This trial was not about the political or moral correct-
ness of euthanasia. It was about you, sir. It was about
lawlessness. You had the audacity to go on national tel-
evision, show the world what you did and dare the
legal system to stop you. Well, sir, consider yourself
stopped (31). 
Media coverage also provided people around the world with
the opportunity to follow the situation surrounding Terri Schiavo.
In a compromised neurological state since 1990, Schiavo was the
subject of legal conflicts between her husband, Michael, and par-
ents, Robert and Mary Schindler. In 2000, Michael Schiavo won his
legal battle to withdraw life support; the Schindler family
appealed, however, and several years of legal wrangling ensued.
The result was that Terri Schiavo’s feeding tube was removed on
March 18, 2005, and she died on March 31, 2005.
This case led to worldwide debate about end-of-life issues.
154
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Technology played a key role in that debate. The increasing popu-
larity of weblogs, or blogs, meant that anyone with a computer and
an opinion could post their thoughts on the Internet to share an
opinion and invite debate. For the family of Terri Schiavo, technol-
ogy provided an opportunity to tell their side of the story. The fam-
ily established a foundation and a Web site, www.terrisfight.org, to
share their experiences and advocate for people facing similar situ-
ations. Technology provided a similar opportunity for Michael
Schiavo. He founded TerriPAC and established a Web site for the
organization at www.terripac.com, with the goal of working to
restore personal freedoms and individual rights.
In addition to learning about the stances of advocacy organ-
izations, researchers and others who wish to learn more about
end-of-life issues, or simply keep up with news coverage of them,
can do so easily by visiting sites on the Internet.
Health Care Today
From Congressional committees to city councils and from nation-
al health care advocacy organizations to local hospitals, health
care in the United States is the topic of frequent examination and
analysis. It is relevant here simply because end-of-life issues, by
their very nature, touch upon many of the topics that have been so
thoroughly studied.
Economic factors are among the most closely studied facets
of healthcare issues. Skyrocketing health care costs have had an
enormous impact on health care in the United States, including
how health care is delivered, how the health insurance industry is
run, and the way tax dollars are allocated. The relevance to end-
of-life issues is emerging in ways that cause concern for those
examining these issues. For example, questionable practices by
some managed care companies, insurers, and insurance brokers
are giving rise to concerns about economics being a major factor in
end-of-life decisions. In addition, for the large segment of the pop-
ulation which is uninsured or underinsured, access to health care
is limited. For people with insurance obstacles, end-of-life deci-
sions are extremely limited; in some cases, the result amounts to
involuntary euthanasia, or death by neglect.
Just as health insurance costs can be a drain on the budget of
an individual or family, Medicaid costs can be a burdensome com-
Facts and Data
155
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

ponent of a state’s budget. This type of budgetary quagmire is
described in Physician-Assisted Death:
In all state budgets, Medicaid is the second largest
budget item after education. Persons over 85, in fact,
use four times as much money to cover a hospitaliza-
tion [as] those under 85. There will be fewer individu-
als “in the middle” to bear the burden of caring for the
young and the elderly. Already the phenomenon of the
elderly (75 to 85 years of age) caring for the “old old”
(those over 85) has begun (Humber, Almeder, and
Kasting 1994, 116).
What then is the answer? Although some tout Canada’s
healthcare system as a model, authors Jennifer M. Scherer and Rita
J. Simon (1999) point out the existence of problems there, as well:
While Canada is able to provide health care for all its
citizens at a lower cost than is feasible in the United
States, its medical system is frequently backlogged;
individuals wait months or years for surgical proce-
dures, and state-of-the-art technology is not as widely
used and applied (48).
How Do Physicians Feel?
It is difficult to get a precise idea of where physicians stand on the
issue of physician-assisted suicide. There are several reasons for
this and they generally mirror the problems that plague pollsters
on other issues.
1. Many polls or surveys are done on a state-by-state basis,
often in response to the introduction of new legislation
or some other precipitating factor. For example, when
Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act was proposed, physi-
cians in that state were surveyed about their feelings on
the issue as it related to the proposed act.
2. Different surveys approach the issue differently. Some
examine attitudes while others ask about past experi-
ences. Some limit questions to this particular topic while
others include questions about end-of-life issues in a sur-
156
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

vey that touches on a host of issues. These disparities
make it more difficult to compare one survey to another.
3. Many physicians are somewhat hesitant to speak frankly
on the subject.
One survey of 1,902 physicians throughout the United
States, conducted in 1998, found that 3.3 percent of responding
physicians had “written at least one ‘lethal prescription’” and 4.7
percent had “provided [a] lethal injection” in one or more cases.
While 11 percent indicated that they would “prescribe medication
to assist a patient to suicide” even if such action was illegal, the
affirmative responses jumped to 36 percent if such action was
legal. Similarly, while 7 percent declared that they would be will-
ing to administer a lethal injection if such action was illegal, the
affirmative responses increased to 24 percent if such an action
were legal (Magnusson 2002, 40).
In another survey, conducted in 1996, 2,761 Oregon physi-
cians shared their views about prescribing “a lethal dose of med-
ication to assist a suicide if it were legal.” Forty-six percent of the
respondents indicated that they would be willing to do so and 52
percent indicated that they would not (41).
A 1996 survey of Michigan physicians generated 1,119
responses. Of these physicians, 35 percent indicated that they
would assist a patient in committing suicide if it were legal—22 per-
cent said they would take part in “either physician-assisted suicide
or active euthanasia” while 13 percent said they would not assist in
active euthanasia but would assist in physician-assisted suicide—
and 52 percent said that would not be a party to either (41).
A 1995 survey of Oregon physicians examined their attitudes
toward assisted suicide. Of the respondents, 60 percent said
“assisted suicide should be legal in some cases” and 66 percent
said it “would be ethical in some cases”; conversely, 33 percent
said “assisted suicide was immoral,” 34 percent said it “violated
professional ethics,” and 30 percent said it “violated personal
beliefs” (Scherer and Simon 1999, 10).
Legal-Political
There have been many legal and political developments in the
areas of euthanasia and assisted suicide within the past decade.
Many of these developments are listed below. To facilitate research
Facts and Data
157
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

and understanding, the list is divided into sections: developments
within the United States and developments elsewhere. These sec-
tions include subsections separating legal developments from
political developments. (Please note that this section is simply
meant to provide an overview of these issues; for additional
specifics regarding timing of the highlights, please turn to the
chronology in Chapter 4.)
United States
Legal Developments.
In May 1997, the Supreme Court ruled unan-
imously in Quill v. Vacco and Washington v. Glucksberg that state
statutes banning assisted suicide were constitutional. However,
the Court allowed that hastening death by increasing palliative
care measures is not prohibited when the intent is the relief of pain
and suffering.
Dr. Jack Kevorkian’s string of assisting patients with com-
mitting suicide came to a halt when a Michigan jury found him
guilty of murder in the death of Thomas Youk. His prison sentence
was ten to twenty-five years, with the possibility of parole in six
years. He subsequently requested commutation of his prison sen-
tence based on failing health; his request was denied.
In March 2005, Terri Schiavo died at the age of 41. Her death
followed several years in a persistent vegetative state and an
extensive legal battle between her husband, Michael, and her par-
ents, Robert and Mary Schindler, regarding Michael Schindler’s
decision to remove life support, including a feeding tube and
hydration. 
Political Developments.
In 1997, Congress passed a law prohibiting
the use of federal funds in physician-assisted suicides. The legisla-
tion, known as the Assisted Suicide Funding Restriction Act of
1997, was signed by President Bill Clinton.
In 1997, shortly before Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act was
slated to become effective, Oregon’s House of Representatives and
Senate voted to return it to the voters by placing it back on the bal-
lot as Measure 51, which would have repealed the state’s Death
with Dignity Act. Voters stuck with their original position, though,
and defeated Measure 51. The state’s Health Services Commission
subsequently declared that state funds could be utilized for costs
associated with physician-assisted suicide.
The Pain Relief Promotion Act of 1999, geared toward pro-
moting aggressive pain management and prohibiting the use of
158
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

controlled substances for assisted suicide and euthanasia, was
passed by the U.S. House of Representatives, but as a result of
Oregon Senator Ron Wyden’s threat to filibuster it, the act was
never put to a Senate vote.
Outside the United States
Political Developments.
In 1997, the British Parliament voted
against legalizing assisted suicide.
Although the Rights of the Terminally Ill (ROTI) Act in
Australia’s Northern Territory had made euthanasia possible for a
time, the act was ultimately overturned by the passage of the
Voluntary Euthanasia Laws Bill in 1997.
The legalization of euthanasia in 2001 was a milestone for
the right-to-die movement in the Netherlands. The law took effect
in 2002.
Focus on Oregon—Politically and Personally.  In the midst of these
national and international developments, much of the attention
surrounding right-to-die issues in the United States has been
focused on the State of Oregon. Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act,
on the ballot in November 1994, passed by a narrow margin and
made history. Former Oregon Governor Barbara Roberts, writing
in the foreword of Compassion in Dying: Stories of Dignity and
Choice, explains the history of the state’s law and her very person-
al interest in it. She notes that her late husband, State Senator
Frank Roberts, had been involved in examining end-of-life issues
since the 1980s. His interest in the issue led to sponsorship of bills
and championing of “the rights of individuals to have options on
end-of-life matters.” Roberts goes on to say:
So why did Frank introduce all this legislation? He did
so because he passionately and compassionately
believed adults had the knowledge, ability, wisdom—
and the right—to decide their own fate. And perhaps,
looking back, he may have had some premonition of
what was to come for him at the end of his own life.
Frank died a prolonged and difficult cancer death. In
the last weeks of his life he spoke often and wistfully of
his proposed aid-in-dying legislation. But he did not
live to see the Oregon measure reach the ballot or to
celebrate the passage of Oregon’s Death with Dignity
Act in 1994 (Lee 2003, viii).
Facts and Data
159
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Regardless of where people stand on right-to-die issues, it
seems that the late Frank Roberts, state senator and later cancer
patient, helped bring these issues into a realm where people were
more comfortable discussing, debating, researching, and ultimate-
ly deciding them. As his wife remarks, “In the final months of
Frank’s life, when I was Governor of Oregon and he was still serv-
ing as a State Senator, we spoke openly and publicly about his
impending death. I believe our openness encouraged greater pub-
lic discussion among all Oregonians about death and dying” (viii).
Documents
The debate surrounding end-of-life issues, including the changing
relationships between doctors, patients, and institutions, has
included a number of landmark documents. The following docu-
ments and excerpts are a mere fraction of the documents that have
helped shape this debate.
Medical-Bioethical
Hippocratic Oath
For centuries, doctors have been asked or required to declare an
oath to uphold a standard of care and ethics developed primarily
for the benefit of the patient. Many scholars believe the original
Hippocratic Oath was written circa 421 BCE. Various organiza-
tions have developed alternative oaths over the years to keep pace
with changing medical practices and mores. The Hippocratic
Oath, however, remains the most well-known.
The Hippocratic Oath
I swear by Apollo the physician, by Aesculapius,
Hygeia and Panacea, and I take to witness all the gods,
all the goddesses, to keep according to my ability and
my judgment the following oath:
To consider dear to me as my parents him who
taught me this art; to live in common with him and if
necessary to share my goods with him; to look upon
his children as my own brothers, to teach them this art
if they so desire without fee or written promise; to
160
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

impart to my sons and the sons of the master who
taught me and the disciples who have enrolled them-
selves and have agreed to the rules of the profession,
but to these alone, the precepts and the instruction. I
will prescribe regiment for the good of my patients
according to my ability and my judgment and never to
harm anyone. To please no one will I prescribe a dead-
ly drug, nor give advice which may cause his death.
Nor will I give a woman a pessary to procure abortion.
But I will preserve the purity of my life and my art. I
will not cut for stone, even for patients in whom the
disease is manifest; I will leave this operation to be
performed by practitioners (specialists in this art). In
every house where I come I will enter only for the
good of my patients, keeping myself far from all inten-
tional ill-doing and all seduction, and especially from
the pleasures of love or with women or men, be they
free or slaves. All that may come to my knowledge in
the exercise of my profession or outside of my profes-
sion or in daily commerce with men, which ought not
to be spread abroad, I will keep secret and will never
reveal. If I keep this oath faithfully, may I enjoy my life
and practice of my art, respected by all men and in all
times; but if I swerve from it or violate it, may the
reverse be my lot.
Source: William R. Hensyl, ed., Stedman’s Concise
Medical Dictionary (New York: Prentice Hall, 1987), 343.
International Codes of Medical Ethics
This international code was adopted by the World Medical
Association in 1949; it was amended in 1968, 1983, and 1994.
Duties of Physicians in General
ALL PHYSICIANS SHALL always maintain the
highest standards of professional conduct.
ALL PHYSICIANS SHALL not permit motives of
profit to influence the free and independent exercise of
professional judgment on behalf of patients.
ALL PHYSICIANS SHALL, in all types of med-
ical practice, be dedicated to providing competent
Documents
161
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

medical service in full technical and moral independ-
ence, with compassion and respect for human dignity.
ALL PHYSICIANS SHALL deal honestly with
patients and colleagues, and strive to expose those
physicians deficient in character or competence, or
who engage in fraud or deception.
The following practices are deemed to be unethi-
cal conduct:
a. Self-advertising by physicians, unless permit-
ted by the laws of the country and the Code of Ethics of
the national medical association.
b. Paying or receiving any fee or any other con-
sideration solely to procure the referral of a patient or
for prescribing or referring a patient to any source.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL respect the rights of
patients, colleagues, and of other health professionals,
and shall safeguard patient confidences.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL act only in the patient’s
interest when providing medical care which might
have the effect of weakening the physical and medical
condition of the patient.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL use great caution in
divulging discoveries or new techniques or treatment
through non-professional channels.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL certify only that which he
has personally verified.
Duties of the Physician to the Sick
A PHYSICIAN SHALL always bear in mind the
obligation of preserving human life.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL owe his patients complete
loyalty and all the resources of his science. Whenever
an examination or treatment is beyond the physician’s
capacity, he should summon another physician who
has the necessary ability.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL preserve absolute confi-
dentiality on all he knows about his patient, even after
the patient has died.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL give emergency care as a
humanitarian duty unless he is assured that others are
willing and able to give such care.
162
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Duties of the Physician to Each Other
A PHYSICIAN SHALL behave toward his col-
leagues as he would have them behave toward him.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL NOT entice patients from
his colleagues.
A PHYSICIAN SHALL observe the principles of
the Declaration of Geneva approved by the World
Medical Association.
Source: “International Code of Medical Ethics”
(World Medical Association: Stockholm, Sweden, 1994).
Declaration of Geneva
AT THE TIME OF BEING ADMITTED AS A
MEMBER OF THE MEDICAL PROFESSION:
I SOLEMNLY PLEDGE to consecrate my life to
the service of humanity;
I WILL GIVE to my teachers the respect and grat-
itude that is their due;
I WILL PRACTISE my profession with conscience
and dignity;
THE HEALTH OF MY PATIENT will be my first
consideration;
I WILL RESPECT the secrets that are confided in
me, even after the patient has died;
I WILL MAINTAIN by all the means in my
power, the honour and the noble traditions of the med-
ical profession;
MY COLLEAGUES will be my sisters and brothers;
I WILL NOT PERMIT considerations of age, dis-
ease or disability, creed, ethnic origin, gender, national-
ity, political affiliation, race, sexual orientation, social
standing or any other factor to intervene between my
duty and my patient;
I WILL MAINTAIN the utmost respect for human
life;
I WILL NOT USE my medical knowledge to vio-
late human rights and civil liberties, even under threat;
I MAKE THESE PROMISES solemnly, freely and
upon my honour.
Source: 173rd Council Session, Divonne-les-
Documents
163
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Bains, France, “Declaration of Geneva,” World Medical
Journal 52 (2006): 29.
Spiritual-Social-Cultural
Documents Related to Religion
These documents provide a chronological overview of the issues
raised and defined by several religious groups regarding euthana-
sia and end-of-life issues.
Missouri Synod of the Lutheran Church
To Affirm the Sacredness of Human Life
A resolution of the Missouri Synod of the
Lutheran Church adopted in 1977.
WHEREAS, Life is a gift from God and comes
into being by an act that shares in the creative powers
of God himself; and
WHEREAS, Scripture teaches that suffering has a
purposes [sic] of God; and
WHEREAS, Life and death belong in the realm of
God’s providence; and
WHEREAS, Scripture teaches that suffering has a
positive purpose and value in God’s economy and is
not to be avoided at all costs (2 Cor. 1:5–7; 2 Cor.
4:7–11; Heb. 12:5–11; Rom. 8:16–18, 28, 35–39; Phil.
3:10; Col. 1:24); and
WHEREAS, We sing of the positive purpose of
suffering in our worship (TLH, 523, 528, 533, et al); and
WHEREAS, The Commission on Theology and
Church Relations (CTCR) and its Social Concerns
Committee (SCC) currently have a study in progress
regarding the question of euthanasia; and
WHEREAS, The willful taking of the life of one
human being by another is contrary to the Word and
the will of God (Ex. 20:13); therefore be it
RESOLVED, That the Synod affirm that human
life is sacred and finds meaning and purpose in seek-
ing and following God’s will, not in self-centered
pleasure, a concern for convenience, or a desire for
comfort; and be it further
164
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

RESOLVED, That the Synod affirm the positive
benefits of suffering, so that God’s children may be
comforted in Christ Jesus and have their sights focused
more firmly on eternal values; and be it further
RESOLVED, That the Synod unequivocally
declare that the practice known as euthanasia, namely,
inducing death, is contrary to God’s will and cannot be
condoned or justified; and be it finally
RESOLVED, The CTCR and the SCC be urged to
complete their study as soon as possible.
The report, issued in October 1979, affirmed this
stance.
Source: Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod,
“Resolution 3-30: ‘To Affirm the Sacredness of Human
Life,’” 1977 Convention Proceedings, 138. 
Roman Catholic Church
The following is an excerpt form the Roman Catholic Church’s
landmark Declaration on Euthanasia. It was prepared by the Sacred
Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith and issued in 1980.
Declaration on Euthanasia
Introduction
The rights and values pertaining to the human
person occupy an important place among the questions
discussed today. In this regard, the Second Vatican
Ecumenical Council solemnly reaffirmed the lofty dig-
nity of the human person, and in a special way his or
her right to life. The Council therefore condemned
crimes against life “such as any type of murder, geno-
cide, abortion, euthanasia, or willful suicide” (Pastoral
Constitution GAUDIUM ET SPES, no. 27).
More recently, the Sacred Congregation for the
Doctrine of the Faith has reminded all the faithful of
Catholic teaching on procured abortion. The
Congregation now considers it opportune to set forth
the Church’s teaching on euthanasia.
It is indeed true that, in this sphere of teaching,
the recent popes have explained the principles, and
these retain their full force; but the progress of medical
Documents
165
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

science in recent years has brought to the fore new
aspects of the question of euthanasia, and these aspects
call for further elucidation on the ethical level.
In modern society, in which even the fundamen-
tal values of human life are often called into question,
cultural change exercises an influence upon the way of
looking at suffering and death; moreover, medicine has
increased its capacity to cure and to prolong life in par-
ticular circumstances, which sometime give rise to
moral problems. Thus people living in this situation
experience no little anxiety about the meaning of
advanced old age and death. They also begin to won-
der whether they have the right to obtain for them-
selves or their fellow men an “easy death,” which
would shorten suffering and which seems to them
more in harmony with human dignity.
I. The Value of Human Life
Human life is the basis of all goods, and is the
necessary source and condition of every human activi-
ty and of all society. Most people regard life as some-
thing sacred and hold that no one may dispose of it at
will, but believers see in life something greater, name-
ly, a gift of God’s love, which they are called upon to
preserve and make fruitful. And it is this latter consid-
eration that gives rise to the following consequences:
No one can make an attempt on the life of an
innocent person without opposing God’s love for
that person, without violating a fundamental
right, and therefore without committing a crime
of the utmost gravity.
Everyone has the duty to lead his or her life in
accordance with God’s plan. That life is entrusted
to the individual as a good that must bear fruit
already here on earth, but that finds its full per-
fection only in eternal life.
Intentionally causing one’s own death, or suicide,
is therefore equally as wrong as murder; such an
action on the part of a person is to be considered
as a rejection of God’s sovereignty and loving
plan. Furthermore, suicide is also often a refusal
166
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

of love for self, the denial of a natural instinct to
live, a flight from the various duties of justice and
charity owed to one’s neighbor, to various com-
munities or to the whole of society—although, as
is generally recognized, at times there are psycho-
logical factors present that can diminish responsi-
bility or even completely remove it.
However, one must clearly distinguish suicide
from that sacrifice of one’s life whereby for a higher
cause, such as God’s glory, the salvation of souls or the
service of one’s brethren, a person offers his or her own
life or puts it in danger (cf. Jn. 15:14).
II. Euthanasia
In order that the question of euthanasia can be
properly dealt with, it is first necessary to define the
words used.
Etymologically speaking, in ancient times
euthanasia meant an easy death without severe suffer-
ing. Today one no longer thinks of this original mean-
ing of the word, but rather of some intervention of
medicine whereby the suffering of sickness or of the
final agony are reduced, sometimes also with the dan-
ger of suppressing life prematurely. Ultimately, the
word euthanasia is used in a more particular sense to
mean “mercy killing,” for the purpose of putting an
end to extreme suffering, or saving abnormal babies,
the mentally ill or the incurably sick from the prolonga-
tion, perhaps for many years, of a miserable life, which
could impose too heavy a burden on their families or
on society.
It is, therefore, necessary to state clearly in what
sense the word is used in the present document.
By euthanasia is understood an action or an omis-
sion which of itself or by intention causes death, in order
that all suffering may in this way be eliminated.
Euthanasia’s terms of reference, therefore, are to be found
in the intention of the will and in the methods used.
It is necessary to state firmly once more that noth-
ing and no one can in any way permit the killing of an
innocent human being, whether a fetus or an embryo,
an infant or an adult, an old person or one suffering
Documents
167
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

from an incurable disease, or a person who is dying.
Furthermore, no one is permitted to ask for this act of
killing, either for himself or herself or for another per-
son entrusted to his or her care, nor can he or she con-
sent to it, either explicitly or implicitly, nor can any
authority legitimately recommend or permit such an
action. For it is a question of the violation of the divine
law, an offense against the dignity of the human per-
son, a crime against life, and an attack on humanity.
It may happen that, by reason of prolonged and
barely tolerable pain, for deeply personal or other rea-
sons, people may be led to believe that they can legiti-
mately ask for death or obtain it for others. Although in
these cases the guilt of the individual may be reduced
or completely absent, nevertheless the error of judg-
ment into which the conscience falls, perhaps in good
faith, does not change the nature of this act of killing,
which will always be in itself something to be rejected.
The pleas of gravely ill people who sometimes ask for
death are not to be understood as implying a true
desire for euthanasia; in fact, it is almost always a case
of an anguished plea for help and love. What a sick per-
son needs, besides medical care, is love, the human and
supernatural warmth with which the sick person can
and ought to be surrounded by all those close to him or
her, parents and children, doctors and nurses.
III. The Meaning of Suffering for Christians and
the Use of Painkillers
Death does not always come in dramatic circum-
stances after barely tolerable sufferings. Nor do we have
to think only of extreme cases. Numerous testimonies
which confirm one another lead one to the conclusion
that nature itself has made provision to render more
bearable at the moment of death separations that would
be terribly painful to a person in full health. Hence it is
that a prolonged illness, advanced old age, or a state of
loneliness or neglect can bring about psychological con-
ditions that facilitate the acceptance of death.
Nevertheless the fact remains that death, often pre-
ceded or accompanied by severe and prolonged suffer-
ing, is something which naturally causes people anguish.
168
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Physical suffering is certainly an unavoidable ele-
ment of the human condition; on the biological level, it
constitutes a warning of which no one denies the use-
fulness; but, since it affects the human psychological
makeup, it often exceeds its own biological usefulness
and so can become so severe as to cause the desire to
remove it at any cost.
According to Christian teaching, however, suffer-
ing, especially suffering during the last moments of
life, has a special place in God’s saving plan; it is in fact
a sharing in Christ’s passion and a union with the
redeeming sacrifice which He offered in obedience to
the Father’s will. Therefore, one must not be surprised
if some Christians prefer to moderate their use of
painkillers, in order to accept voluntarily at least a part
of their sufferings and thus associate themselves with
the sufferings of Christ crucified (cf. Mt. 27:34).
Nevertheless it would be imprudent to impose a hero-
ic way of acting as a general rule. On the contrary,
human and Christian prudence suggest for the majori-
ty of sick people the use of medicines capable of allevi-
ating or suppressing pain, even though these may
cause, as a secondary effect, semi-consciousness and
reduced lucidity. As for those who are not in a state to
express themselves, one can reasonably presume that
they wish to take these painkillers, and have them
administered according to the doctor’s advice.
But the intensive use of painkillers is not without
difficulties, because the phenomenon of habituation
generally makes it necessary to increase their dosage in
order to maintain their efficacy. At this point it is fitting
to recall a declaration by Pius XII, which retains its full
force; in answer to a group of doctors who had put the
question: “Is the suppression of pain and conscious-
ness by the use of narcotics . . . permitted by religion
and morality to the doctor and the patient (even at the
approach of death and if one foresees that the use of
narcotics will shorten life)?” the Pope said: “If no other
means exist, and if, in the given circumstances, this
does not prevent the carrying out of other religious and
moral duties: Yes.” In this case, of course, death is in no
Documents
169
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

way intended or sought, even if the risk of it is reason-
ably taken; the intention is simply to relieve pain effec-
tively, using for this purpose painkillers available to
medicine.
However, painkillers that cause unconsciousness
need special consideration. For a person not only has to
be able to satisfy his or her moral duties and family obli-
gations; he or she also has to prepare himself or herself
with full consciousness for meeting Christ. Thus Pius
XII warns: “It is not right to deprive the dying person of
consciousness without a serious reason.”
IV. Due Proportion in the Use of Remedies
Today it is very important to protect, at the time of
death, both the dignity of the human person and the
Christian concept of life, against a technological attitude
that threatens to become an abuse. Thus some people
speak of a “right to die,” which is an expression that
does not mean the right to procure death either by one’s
own hand or by means of someone else, as one pleases,
but rather the right to die peacefully with human and
Christian dignity. From this point of view, the use of
therapeutic means can sometimes pose problems.
In numerous cases, the complexity of the situa-
tion can be such as to cause doubts about the way eth-
ical principles should be applied. In the final analysis,
it pertains to the conscience either of the sick person, or
of those qualified to speak in the sick person’s name, or
of the doctors, to decide, in the light of moral obliga-
tions and of the various aspects of the case.
Everyone has the duty to care for his or her own
health or to seek such care from others. Those whose
task it is to care for the sick must do so conscientious-
ly and administer the remedies that seem necessary or
useful.
However, is it necessary in all circumstances to
have recourse to all possible remedies? In the past,
moralists replied that one is never obliged to use
“extraordinary” means. This reply, which as a princi-
ple, still holds good, is perhaps less clear today, by rea-
son of the imprecision of the term and the rapid
progress made in the treatment of sickness. Thus some
170
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

people prefer to speak of “proportionate” and “dispro-
portionate” means. In any case, it will be possible to
make a correct judgment as to the means by studying
the type of treatment to be used, its degree of complex-
ity or risk, its cost and the possibilities of using it, and
comparing these elements with the result that can be
expected, taking into account the state of the sick per-
son and his or her physical and moral resources.
In order to facilitate the application of these gener-
al principles, the following clarifications can be added:
• If there are no other sufficient remedies, it is
permitted, with the patient’s consent, to have
recourse to the means provided by the most
advanced medical techniques, even if these
remedies are still at the experimental stage and
are not without a certain risk. By accepting
them, the patient can even show generosity in
the service of humanity.
• It is also permitted, with the patient’s consent,
to interrupt these means, where the results fall
short of expectation. But for such a decision to
be made, account will have to be taken of the
reasonable wishes of the patient and the
patient’s family, as also of the advice of the doc-
tors who are specially competent in the matter.
The latter may in particular judge that the
investment in instruments and personnel is
disproportionate to the results foreseen; they
may also judge that the techniques applied
impose on the patient strain or suffering out of
proportion with the benefits which he or she
may gain from such techniques.
• It is also permissible to make do with the nor-
mal means that medicine can offer. Therefore
one cannot impose on anyone the obligation to
have recourse to a technique which is already in
use but which carries a risk or is burdensome.
Such a refusal is not the equivalent of suicide;
on the contrary, it should be considered as an
acceptance of the human condition, or a wish to
Documents
171
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

avoid the application of a medical procedure dis-
proportionate to the results that can be expected,
or a desire not to impose excessive expense on the
family or the community.
• When inevitable death is imminent in spite of
the means used, it is permitted in conscience to
take the decision to refuse forms of treatment
that would only secure a precarious and bur-
densome prolongation of life, so long as the
normal care due to the sick person in similar
cases is not interrupted. In such circumstances
the doctor has no reason to reproach himself
with failing to help the person in danger.
Conclusion
The norms contained in the present Declaration
are inspired by a profound desire to service people in
accordance with the plan of the Creator. Life is a gift of
God, and on the other hand death is unavoidable; it is
necessary, therefore, that we, without in any way hasten-
ing the hour of death, should be able to accept it with full
responsibility and dignity. It is true that death marks the
end of our earthly existence, but at the same time it
opens the door to immortal life. Therefore, all must pre-
pare themselves for this event in the light of human val-
ues, and Christians even more so in the light of faith.
As for those who work in the medical profession,
they ought to neglect no means of making all their skill
available to the sick and dying; but they should also
remember how much more necessary it is to provide
them with the comfort of boundless kindness and heart-
felt charity. Such service to people is also service to
Christ the Lord, who said: “As you did it to one of the
least of these my brethren, you did it to me” (Mt. 25:40).
Source: “The Vatican’s Declaration on Euthanasia”
(Rome, 1980). 
Unitarian Universalist
This 1988 resolution is a reaffirmation of the support of Unitarian
Universalists for living wills and commitment to “self-determina-
tion in dying.”
172
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The Right to Die with Dignity
Unitarian Universalist General Assembly, 1988
Guided by our belief as Unitarian Universalists
that human life has inherent dignity, which may be
compromised when life is extended beyond the will or
ability of a person to sustain that dignity; and believing
that it is every person’s inviolable right to determine in
advance the course of action to be taken in the event
that there is no reasonable expectation of recovery from
extreme physical or mental disability, and . . .
WHEREAS, prolongation may cause unnecessary
suffering and/or loss of dignity while providing little
or nothing of benefit to the individual; and
WHEREAS, differences exist among people over
religious, moral and legal implications of administer-
ing aid-in-dying when an individual of sound mind
has voluntarily asked for such aid; and
WHEREAS, obstacles exist within our society
against providing support for an individual’s declared
wish to die; and
WHEREAS, many counselors, clergy and health-
care personnel value prolongation of life regardless of
the quality of life or will to live; and
THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED: That the
Unitarian Universalist Association calls upon its con-
gregations and individual Unitarian Universalists to
examine attitudes and practices in our society relative
to the ending of life, as well as those in other countries
and cultures; and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED: That Unitarian
Universalists reaffirm their support for the Living Will,
as declared in a 1978 resolution of the General
Assembly, declare support for the Durable Power of
Attorney for Health Care, and seek assurance that both
instruments will be honored.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED: That Unitarian
Universalists advocate the right to self-determination
in dying, and the release from civil or criminal penal-
ties of those who, under proper safeguards, act to
honor the right of terminally ill patients to select the
time of their own deaths; and
Documents
173
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED: That Unitarian
Universalists advocate safeguards against abuses by
those who would hasten death contrary to an individ-
ual’s desires; and
BE IT FINALLY RESOLVED: That Unitarian
Universalists, acting through their congregations,
memorial societies, and appropriate organizations,
inform and petition legislators to support legislation that
will create legal protection for the right to die with dig-
nity, in accordance with one’s own choice.
Source: General Assembly of Unitarian Universa -
lists, 1988 Proceedings, 74. 
Documents Related to
Individuals and Organizations
Arthur and Cynthia Koestler died on March 1, 1983. He was 77
and she was 55. Arthur Koestler was perhaps best known for his
writing, including a novel, Darkness at Noon. However, he was also
the president of the Voluntary Euthanasia Society in London. He
suffered from Parkinson’s disease and what he termed “the slow-
killing variety of leukemia (CCL).” When he wrote his “Suicide
Note” (excerpts below) ten months before taking his own life, he
clearly thought Cynthia would survive him. However, as the foot-
note indicates, his wife Cynthia took her own life that day as well.
A Suicide Note
Arthur Koestler, June 1982
To Whom It May Concern.
The purpose of this note is to make it unmistak-
ably clear that I intend to commit suicide by taking an
overdose of drugs without the knowledge or aid of any
other person.
Should this attempt fail and I survive it in a phys-
ically or mentally impaired state, in which I can no
longer control what is done to me, or communicate my
wishes, I hereby request that I be allowed to die in my
own home and not be resuscitated or be kept alive by
artificial means. I further request that my wife, or
physician, or any friend present, should invoke habeus
174
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

corpus against any attempt to remove me forcibly from
my house to hospital.
What makes it nevertheless hard to take this final
step is the reflection of the pain it is bound to inflict on
my few surviving friends, above all my wife Cynthia. It
is to her that I owe the relative peace and happiness
that I enjoyed in the last period of my life—and never
before.
Source: George Mikes, Arthur Koestler: The Story of
a Friendship (London: André Deutsch, 1983), 78, 79.
Footnote
Cynthia Koestler
I should have liked to finish my account of work-
ing for Arthur—a story which began when our paths
happened to cross in 1949. However, I cannot live with-
out Arthur, despite certain inner resources.
Source: Harold Harris, Stranger on the Square, by
Arthur and Cynthia Koestler (New York: Random House,
1984), preface.
American Association of Retired Persons (AARP)
The AARP’s National Legislative Council issued the following
statement in 1997.
After careful consideration, our National Legislative
Council recommends to the Board of Directors of the
AARP that it not take a position on physician-assisted
suicide. The Council concluded that this intensely per-
sonal issue is one about which each individual should
make his or her own decision.
Source: Marjorie B. Zucker, The Right to Die Debate
(Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1999), 264. 
Legal-Political
Many people in the right-to-die movement hope that the U.S.
Constitution will ultimately determine whether or not individuals
in the United States have a right to die. The reason for this is that
constitutional rights provide greater legal protection than rights
resulting from case law. Consequently, those in favor of euthana-
Documents
175
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

sia work toward this protection while those who oppose euthana-
sia work to ensure that euthanasia is not deemed a constitutional
right. The following excerpts from the U.S. Constitution are pro-
vided to help clarify the legal arguments that arise in these cases.
The Constitution of the United States
Preamble
We the people of the United States, in order to
form a more perfect Union, establish Justice, insure
domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defense,
promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings
of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and
establish this CONSTITUTION for the United States of
America.
A Bill of Rights of the United States of America
Effective December 15, 1791
Article IV
Security from Unwarranted Search and Seizure
The right of the people to be secure in their per-
sons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable
searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no
Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, sup-
ported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly
describing the place to be searched, and the persons or
things to be seized.
Article V
Life, Liberty and Property
No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or
otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or
indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in
the land or naval forces, or in the Militia, when in actu-
al service in time of War or public danger; nor shall any
person be subject for the same offense to be twice put
in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in
any criminal case to be a witness against himself, nor
be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due
process of law; nor shall private property be taken for
public use, without just compensation.
Article XIV
Citizenship, Congressional Apportionment, Insur-
rection, Public Debt
176
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Section 1. All persons born or naturalized in the
United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof,
are citizens of the United States and of the State where-
in they reside. No state shall make or enforce any law
which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of cit-
izens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive
any person of life, liberty or property, without due
process of law; nor deny any person within its jurisdic-
tion the equal protection of the laws.
Source: United States Constitution, 1791.
Oregon Death with Dignity Act
Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act was approved by the voters in
1994. It went into effect in 1997. The entire text of the act is avail-
able on the state Web site at http://oregon.gov/DHS/ph/pas/
ors.shtml. The following excerpts provide highlights of the act.
The Oregon Death with Dignity Act
Oregon Revised Statutes
(General Provisions)
(Section 1)
Note: The division headings, subdivision head-
ings and leadlines for 127.800 to 127.890, 127.895 and
127.897 were enacted as part of Ballot Measure 16
(1994) and were not provided by Legislative Counsel.
127.800 §1.01. Definitions. The following words
and phrases, whenever used in ORS 127.800 to 127.897,
have the following meanings:
(1) “Adult” means an individual who is 18 years
of age or older.
(2) “Attending physician” means the physician
who has primary responsibility for the care of the
patient and treatment of the patient’s terminal disease.
(3) “Capable” means that in the opinion of a court
or in the opinion of the patient’s attending physician or
consulting physician, psychiatrist or psychologist, a
patient has the ability to make and communicate health
care decisions to health care providers, including com-
munication through persons familiar with the patient’s
manner of communicating if those persons are available.
Documents
177
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

(4) “Consulting physician” means a physician
who is qualified by specialty or experience to make a
professional diagnosis and prognosis regarding the
patient’s disease.
(5) “Counseling” means one or more consulta-
tions as necessary between a state licensed psychiatrist
or psychologist and a patient for the purpose of deter-
mining that the patient is capable and not suffering
from a psychiatric or psychological disorder or depres-
sion causing impaired judgment.
(6) “Health care provider” means a person licensed,
certified or otherwise authorized or permitted by the law
of this state to administer health care or dispense medica-
tion in the ordinary course of business or practice of a
profession, and includes a health care facility.
(7) “Informed decision” means a decision by a
qualified patient, to request and obtain a prescription
to end his or her life in a humane and dignified man-
ner, that is based on an appreciation of the relevant
facts and after being fully informed by the attending
physician of:
(a) His or her medical diagnosis;
(b) His or her prognosis;
(c) The potential risks associated with taking the
medication to be prescribed;
(d) The probable result of taking the medication
to be prescribed; and
(e) The feasible alternatives, including, but not
limited to, comfort care, hospice care and pain control.
(8) “Medically confirmed” means the medical
opinion of the attending physician has been confirmed
by a consulting physician who has examined the
patient and the patient’s relevant medical records.
(9) “Patient” means a person who is under the
care of a physician.
(10) “Physician” means a doctor of medicine or
osteopathy licensed to practice medicine by the Board
of Medical Examiners for the State of Oregon.
(11) “Qualified patient” means a capable adult
who is a resident of Oregon and has satisfied the
requirements of ORS 127.800 to 127.897 in order to
178
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

obtain a prescription for medication to end his or her
life in a humane and dignified manner.
(12) “Terminal disease” means an incurable and
irreversible disease that has been medically confirmed
and will, within reasonable medical judgment, produce
death within six months. [1995 c.3 §1.01; 1999 c.423 §1]
(Written Request for Medication to End One’s
Life in a Humane and Dignified Manner)
(Section 2)
127.805 §2.01. Who may initiate a written
request for medication. (1) An adult who is capable, is
a resident of Oregon, and has been determined by the
attending physician and consulting physician to be suf-
fering from a terminal disease, and who has voluntari-
ly expressed his or her wish to die, may make a written
request for medication for the purpose of ending his or
her life in a humane and dignified manner in accor-
dance with ORS 127.800 to 127.897.
(2) No person shall qualify under the provisions
of ORS 127.800 to 127.897 solely because of age or dis-
ability. [1995 c.3 §2.01; 1999 c.423 §2]
127.840 §3.06. Written and oral requests. In order
to receive a prescription for medication to end his or
her life in a humane and dignified manner, a qualified
patient shall have made an oral request and a written
request, and reiterate the oral request to his or her
attending physician no less than fifteen (15) days after
making the initial oral request. At the time the qualified
patient makes his or her second oral request, the
attending physician shall offer the patient an opportu-
nity to rescind the request. [1995c.3 §3.06]
127.845 §3.07. Right to rescind request. A patient
may rescind his or her request at any time and in any
manner without regard to his or her mental state. No
prescription for medication under ORS 127.800 to
127.897 may be written without the attending physi-
cian offering the qualified patient an opportunity to
rescind the request. [1995 c.3 §3.07]
127.850 §3.08. Waiting periods. No less than fif-
teen (15) days shall elapse between the patient’s initial
oral request and the writing of a prescription under
Documents
179
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

ORS 127.800 to 127.897. No less than 48 hours shall
elapse between the patient’s written request and the
writing of a prescription under ORS 127.800 to 127.897.
[1995 c.3§3.08]
127.860 §3.10. Residency requirement. Only
requests made by Oregon residents under ORS 127.800
to 127.897 shall be granted. Factors demonstrating
Oregon residency include but are not limited to:
(1) Possession of an Oregon driver license;
(2) Registration to vote in Oregon;
(3) Evidence that the person owns or leases prop-
erty in Oregon; or
(4) Filing of an Oregon tax return for the most
recent tax year. [1995 c.3 §3.10; 1999 c.423 §8]
127.865 §3.11. Reporting requirements. (1)(a) The
Department of Human Services shall annually review a
sample of records maintained pursuant to ORS 127.800
to 127.897.
(b) The department shall require any health care
provider upon dispensing medication pursuant to ORS
127.800 to 127.897 to file a copy of the dispensing
record with the department.
(2) The department shall make rules to facilitate
the collection of information regarding compliance
with ORS 127.800 to 127.897. Except as otherwise
required by law, the information collected shall not be
a public record and may not be made available for
inspection by the public.
(3) The department shall generate and make
available to the public an annual statistical report of
information collected under subsection (2) of this sec-
tion. [1995 c.3 §3.11; 1999 c.423 §9; 2001 c.104 §40]
127.880 §3.14. Construction of Act. Nothing in
ORS 127.800 to 127.897 shall be construed to authorize
a physician or any other person to end a patient’s life
by lethal injection, mercy killing or active euthanasia.
Actions taken in accordance with ORS 127.800 to
127.897 shall not, for any purpose, constitute suicide,
assisted suicide, mercy killing or homicide, under the
law. [1995 c.3 §3.14]
Source: State of Oregon, Department of Human
180
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Services, “Legislative Statutes,” http://oregon.gov/
DHS/ph/pas/docs/statute.pdf.
Supreme Court Opinions
Quill v. Vacco and Washington v. Glucksberg are landmark cases
regarding end-of-life issues. The U.S. Supreme Court decided
these cases on June 26, 1997.
Chief Justice William Rehnquist, writing for the majority, in
Vacco v. Quill:
The Court of Appeals . . . concluded that some termi-
nally ill people—those who are on life-support sys-
tems—are treated differently than those who are not, in
that the former may “hasten death” by ending treat-
ment, but the latter may not “hasten death” through
physician-assisted suicide. . .
Unlike the Court of
Appeals, we think the distinction between assisting
suicide and withdrawing life-sustaining treatment . . .
is both important and logical; it is certainly rational . . .
For all these reasons, we disagree with respon-
dents’ claim that the distinction between refusing life-
saving medical treatment and assisted suicide is “arbi-
trary” and “irrational.”
Source: Marjorie B. Zucker, The Right to Die Debate
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1999), 288. 
Chief Justice William Rehnquist, writing for the majority, in
Washington v. Glucksberg:
To hold for respondents, we would have to reverse cen-
turies of legal doctrine and practice, and strike down
the considered policy choice of almost every State . . .
. . . That many of the rights and liberties protect-
ed by the Due Process Clause are sound in personal
autonomy does not warrant the sweeping conclusion
that any and all important, intimate, and personal deci-
sions are so protected . . .
Source: Marjorie B. Zucker, The Right to Die
Debate. (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1999), 289. 
Documents
181
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Quotations
Throughout the ongoing debate over euthanasia and physician-
assisted suicide, many people on both sides of the issue have
made statements that frame the issue in useful or significant ways.
This section features quotations from both sides of the issue.
Quotations that further the right-to-die argument are listed first;
quotations that refute the right-to-die argument are listed next. All
of the quotations are grouped according to whether they are med-
ical-bioethical, spiritual-social-cultural, or legal-political.
In Favor of Euthanasia or
Physician-Assisted Suicide
Medical-Bioethical.
Author David Rothman offers a stark view of
the way end-of-life issues were addressed as recently as the 1960s:
Issues of life and death remained relatively obscure in
the 1960s, largely because doctors, inside the closed
world of the intensive care units, turned off the
machines when they believed the patient’s death was
imminent and irreversible . . . The intensive care units
were a private domain, whatever the formal definition
of death, and doctors exercised their discretion.
Source: David J. Rothman, Strangers at the Bedside
(New York: Basic Books, 1991), 160.
Charles F. McKhann, M.D., notes that he became interested
in physician-assisted dying following the death of his own father:
A physician himself, he died in 1988 at the age of
eighty-nine, with widespread intra-abdominal cancer.
In the process, he was kept alive for more than a month
when his outlook was clearly hopeless. At one point, he
asked whether I thought he was on his deathbed.
When I said that he probably was, he replied, “That’s
what I think, too, and I wish they would just let me go.”
Even his two physician sons, one of whom is on the
staff of the same hospital, were unable, or too timid and
182
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

conflicted, to influence the decision making so that he
might be allowed to die sooner.
Source: Charles F. McKhann, A Time to Die: The
Place for Physician Assistance (New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1999), 1, 2.
Nancy Dickey, former chair of the American Medical
Association’s Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs, argues that
decisions on end-of-life issues are unique to each person:
We would all draw a different line at which we would-
n’t want to live any longer. We have a strong recogni-
tion in this country that you are the master of your
body. If we begin to deny the freedom of an individual
to participate or not in medical care, we could become
a medical police state.
Source: Quoted in Donald Cox, Hemlock’s Cup
(Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1993), 79.
Dr. Timothy Quill describes a situation in which he felt that
medical care did more harm than good for an elderly, ailing patient:
The bones in his chest were so frail that they fractured
easily. His heart compressions were accompanied by a
sickening crunch of broken ribs . . . I left the room pro-
foundly disturbed. I felt that not only had we violated
this dying man, but I too had been violated by being
forced to act in a way I found both personally and pro-
fessionally intolerable. How could we repeatedly bru-
talize this poor man in the name of extending life?
Could this possibly be what the Hippocratic Oath
intended? 
Source: Timothy Quill, Death and Dignity: Making
Choices and Taking Charge (New York: W. W. Norton,
1993), 35–36.
Dr. Willem Kolff, founder of the artificial heart program,
speaks about the unique end-of-life issues and decisions facing
Barney Clark, the first person to receive an artificial heart. Dr. Kolff
and his colleagues gave Clark a key which empowered him with
the option of turning off the machine that sustained his life:
Quotations
183
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

If the man suffers and feels it isn’t worth it any more,
he has a key that he can apply . . . I think it is entirely
legitimate that this man whose life has been extended
should have the right to cut it off if he doesn’t want it,
if life ceases to be enjoyable . . . The operation won’t be
a success unless he is happy. This has always been our
criteria—to restore happiness.
Source: “Commercial Appeal,” as cited in James
Rachels, The End of Life (Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press, 1986), 79.
Although many end-of-life issues, including assisted suicide,
are commonly associated with physicians, patient care is the
domain of nurses during the hours that fall between visits from a
physician. The result is that nurses, de facto, face many of these
end-of-life issues during the course of caring for the patient. One
nurse, speaking as part of a study which surveyed critical care
nurses on euthanasia and assisted suicide, gave voice to the frus-
tration that can arise:
I have experienced tremendous frustration and anger
with physicians who either stress the possibility of a
good prognosis, giving false hope—or place their belief
system above that of their patients. The physician
spends 5 to 10 minutes each day with the patient and
then leaves me to carry out his orders and deal with the
patient and his/her family for 8 to 12 hours. I’m left
with the dilemma of carrying out orders that I
believe—and sometimes know—are not in the patient’s
best interest or what the patient or family has
expressed as their desires.
Source: David A. Asch, “The Role of Critical Care
Nurses in Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide,” New
England Journal of Medicine 334 (1996): 1374.
A euthanasia law was passed in the Netherlands in 1993. Dr.
Herbert Cohen offers a reason for the existence of the Dutch law:
We need a counterweight for the enormous technology
of present medicine. We are talking mostly about older
people who, in other times, would have died from their
184
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

condition. If we can keep people alive but give them a
life that is no life, we must be consistent and give them
the choice to end it.
Source: Quoted in Marlise Simons, “Dutch Move
to Enact Law Making Euthanasia Easier,” New York
Times (February 9, 1993): 1, 9.
Spiritual-Social-Cultural
In the case of an individual who is unable to make end-of-life deci-
sions, those decisions fall to family members or other loved ones.
Such was the case with Nancy Cruzan following an automobile
accident when doctors declared she would remain in a persistent
vegetative state for the remainder of her days. Her family felt that
they knew exactly what Cruzan would have chosen and that their
decision was merely to implement her choice:
How do you make the best decision? The answer was,
we didn’t make the decision—our loved one made the
decision . . . Chances are—if you haven’t already—you
will probably make some sort of treatment decision for
yourself or a loved one someday.
Source: Christy Cruzan White, in “Taking the
‘Right to Die’ Issue to the Supreme Court,” a presenta-
tion to the Hospice of Boulder (CO) County, March 10,
1996.
The medical community, like the rest of society, is divided
over end-of-life issues. This quote offers one possible reason for
physician opposition:
Our modern doctor is the sworn enemy of death, a spe-
cialist waging a battle in the medical arena. To lose a
patient is to fail. All effort is organized and centered
around the science of saving lives. In this all-out war,
the human needs of the individual patient or family
may often be forgotten or ignored.
Source: Judith Ahronheim and Doron Weber,
Final Passages: Positive Choices for the Dying and their
Loved Ones (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992), 18.
Quotations
185
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

In addition to the patient’s illness, there are always other issues,
such as family concerns, that enter into the doctor-patient relation-
ship and become factors in the end-of-life decision-making process.
This quote cites cultural background as another issue of this type:
Every step of the medical decision-making process is
affected by both the patient’s and the physician’s cul-
tural background. In the emotionality of life-and-death
decisions, cultural beliefs are likely to be perceived as
absolute beliefs about what is right and wrong . . .
Source: Lillian Burke, as quoted in Donald Irish,
et al., eds., Ethnic Variations in Dying, Death and Grief
(Washington, DC: Taylor and Francis 1993), 170.
Sogyal Rinpoche, a Tibetan meditation master, argues that a
modern intensive care unit is not conducive to a peaceful death:
. . . Being in an intensive care unit will make a peaceful
death very difficult, and hardly allows for spiritual
practice at the moment of death. As the person is dying,
there is no privacy: they are hooked up to monitors, and
attempts to resuscitate them will be made when they
stop breathing or their heart fails . . . our state of mind
at death is all-important. If we die in a positive frame of
mind, we can improve our next birth . . . And if we are
upset and distressed, it may have a detrimental effect,
even though we may have used our lives well . . . To use
life-support mechanisms when a person has no chance
of recovery is pointless. It is far better to let them die
naturally in a peaceful atmosphere and perform posi-
tive actions on their behalf. When the life-support
machinery is in place, but there is no hope, it is not a
crime to stop it, since there is no way in which the per-
son can survive, and you are only holding on to their
life artificially.
Source: Sogyal Rinpoche, The Tibetan Book of Living
and Dying (San Francisco: Harper, 1992), 185, 224, 372.
Communication can be a major obstacle for people who face
end-of-life issues themselves or on behalf of family members or
friends:
186
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

[The hospital was like a] foreign land where we often
did not speak the language.
Source: Christy Cruzan White, in “Taking the
‘Right to Die’ Issue to the Supreme Court,” a presentation
at the Hospice of Boulder (CO) County, March 10, 1996.
Dr. Timothy Quill, a physician and former hospice medical
director, addresses patient concerns about death:
Those who have witnessed difficult deaths of patients
in hospice programs are not reassured by the glib asser-
tion that we always know how to make death tolerable,
and they fear that physicians will abandon them if their
course becomes difficult or overwhelming in the face of
comfort care. In fact, there is no empirical evidence that
all physical suffering associated with incurable illness
can be effectively relieved. 
Source: Timothy Quill, Death and Dignity: Making
Choices and Taking Charge (New York: W. W. Norton,
1993), 106, 166.
Author Gavin Fairbairn offers a distinction between
euthanasia and suicide:
In an act of euthanasia, steps are taken to allow a per-
son who is dying to die a death that he wishes to die, in
preference to a death he wishes to avoid.
In an act of suicide, a person arranges his death to
avoid a life that he does not wish to live, or in order to
die a death that he wishes to die.
Source: Gavin J. Fairbairn, Contemplating Suicide
(New York: Routledge, 1995), 123.
Legal-Political
In a case before the Supreme Court of the State of Kansas in 1960,
Justice Alfred Schroeder ruled on the issue of informed consent:
Anglo-American law starts with the premise of thor-
ough-going self-determination. It follows that each
Quotations
187
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

man is considered to be master of his own body, and
he may, if he be of sound mind, expressly prohibit the
performance of life-saving surgery, or other medical
treatment.
Source: Natanson v. Kline, 186 Kan. 393, 350 P.2d
1093 (1960).
In Compassion and Dying et al. v. Washington State, Judge
Barbara Rothstein ruled that a state law known as “Promoting a
Suicide Attempt” (RCW 9A.36.060) was unconstitutional:
The liberty interest protected by the Fourteenth
Amendment is the freedom to make choices according
to one’s individual conscience about those matters
which are essential to personal autonomy and basic
human dignity. There is no more profoundly personal
decision, nor one which is closer to the heart of person-
al liberty, than the choice which a terminally ill person
makes to end his or her suffering and hasten an
inevitable death. From a constitutional perspective, the
court does not believe that a distinction can be drawn
between refusing life-sustaining medical treatment and
physician-assisted suicide by an uncoerced, mentally
competent, terminally ill adult.
Source: Barbara Rothstein, Compassion in Dying et
al. v. Washington State (850 F. Supp. 3 May 1994).
Marshall Perron, speaking before the Northern Australia
Legislative Assembly, introduced the “Rights of the Terminally Ill”
bill with an impassioned statement about suffering at the end of life:
This is not a political issue; it is a human rights issue . . .
Through the laws in place today, society has made an
assessment for all of us that our quality of life, no mat-
ter how wretched, miserable or painful, is never so bad
that any of us will be allowed to put an end to it. I am
not prepared to allow society to make that decision for
me or for those I love . . . If we as legislators wring our
hands and turn our backs, we are compelling suffering
citizens to beg their loved ones to take the law into their
own hands by whatever means they have available
188
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

because current laws forbid the medical profession to
do what is humane.
Source: Marshall Perron, excerpted from the First
Reading Speech he presented at the Northern Territory
Legislative Assembly meeting, February 22, 1995.
The U.S. Supreme Court addressed numerous end-of-life
issues in its decision in the case of Nancy Cruzan; several quotes
from the decision are included below:
The 14th Amendment provides that no state shall
“deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without
due process of law.” . . . But determining that a person
has a liberty interest under the Due Process clause does
not end the inquiry; whether respondent’s constitutional
rights have been violated must be determined by balanc-
ing his liberty interests against the relevant state interests.
Source: William Rehnquist, excerpted from U.S.
Supreme Court Majority Opinions in Cruzan v. Director,
Missouri Department of Health (June 25, 1990).
As the court notes, the liberty interest in refusing med-
ical treatment flows from decisions involving the
state’s invasions into the body. Because our notions of
liberty are inextricably entwined with our idea of phys-
ical freedom and self-determination, the Court has
often deemed state incursions into the body repugnant
to the interests protected by the Due Process clause [of
the Fifth Amendment].
Source: Sandra Day O’Connor, excerpted from
U.S. Supreme Court Majority Opinions in Cruzan v.
Director, Missouri Department of Health (June 25, 1990).
The various opinions in this case portray quite clearly
the difficult, indeed agonizing, questions that are pre-
sented by the constantly increasing power of science to
keep the human body alive for longer than any reason-
able person would want to inhabit it.
Source: Antonin Scalia, excerpted from U.S.
Supreme Court Majority Opinions in Cruzan v. Director,
Missouri Department of Health (June 25, 1990).
Quotations
189
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Justice William Brennan dissented, citing procedural obsta-
cles in the affirming decisions. His opinion, however, was essen-
tially a pro decision:
Because I believe that Nancy Cruzan has a fundamen-
tal right to be free of unwanted artificial nutrition and
hydration, which right is not outweighed by any inter-
ests of the state, and because I find that the improperly
biased procedural obstacles imposed by the Missouri
Supreme Court impermissibly burden that right, I
respectfully dissent. Nancy Cruzan is entitled to choose
to die with dignity.
Source: William Brennan Jr., excerpted from U.S.
Supreme Court Majority Opinions in Cruzan v. Director,
Missouri Department of Health (June 25, 1990).
Opposed to Euthanasia or
Physician-Assisted Suicide
Medical-Bioethical
Dr. David Karnofsky, a cancer specialist, addresses the idea of
whether the physician’s role should be determined by the
patient’s wishes:
The physician who treasures his patient’s life, without
trying to judge its value to the patient, his family, or to
his community, in the end will make fewer mistakes,
will learn more about the disease he is treating, and
will have the satisfaction of giving his best efforts
against difficult odds.
Source: Derek Humphry and Ann Wickett, The
Right to Die (Eugene, OR: The Hemlock Society, 1990), 76.
Although medical technology allows physicians, in many
cases, to predict when death is imminent, many argue that intangi-
bles such as family support and personality cannot be discounted:
At best, confidence in predicting death is possible only
in the last few hours. Patients with the same stage of
190
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

disease but with different family settings, personalities,
and “things to live for” actually do live for strikingly
varied periods of time.
Source: President’s Commission for the Study of
Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and
Behavioral Research, Deciding to Forego Life-Sustaining
Treatment: A Report on the Ethical, Medical and Legal
Issues in Treatment Decisions (Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1983), 25–26.
Semantics play a role in end-of-life decision-making process-
es. This quote addresses the notion of futility and the fact that it
may have different meanings for different people or constituencies:
In many cases, disagreements over [medical] futility
are actually debates over the prudent allocation of lim-
ited health care resources. Terming an intervention
“futile” may allow people to deny that value judg-
ments and trade-offs are being made or that the cost of
trying to save some lives is too high.
Source: Ann Alpers and Bernard Lo, “When Is
CPR Futile?” Journal of the American Medical Association
273 (1995): 158.
Right-to-die issues stir passion in many people; many physi-
cians are among the most passionate:
The very soul of medicine is on trial. For this is not one
of those peripheral issues about which pluralism and
relativism can be tolerated. . . . This issue touches med-
icine at its very moral center; if this moral center col-
lapses, if physicians become killers or are even merely
licensed to kill, the profession—and, therewith, each
physician—will never again be worthy of trust and
respect as healer and comforter of life in all its frailty.
Source: Willard Gaylin, Leon Kass, Edmund
Pellegrino, and Mark Siegler, “Doctors Must Not Kill,”
Journal of the American Medical Association 259 (1998),
2139, 2140.
Quotations
191
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Former U.S. Surgeon General Dr. C. Everett Koop is among
those who have spoken out with passion on the issue:
We are pulling the plug on a great medical history. If
you ask your doctor to be both the killer and the heal-
er, then when you get sick you won’t know which doc-
tor is approaching your bed.
Source: Donald Cox, Hemlock’s Cup (Buffalo, NY:
Prometheus Books, 1993), 209.
Medicine has changed in many ways over the past several
decades. Author David Rothman asserts that many, if not most, of
these changes have created a greater chasm between physicians
and their patients:
Practically every development in medicine in the post-
World War II period distanced the physician and the
hospital from the patient and the community, disrupt-
ing personal connections and severing bonds of trust.
Whatever the index—whether ties of friendship, reli-
gion, ethnicity, or intellectual activity—the results
highlight a sharp division between the lay world and
the medical world. By the 1960s the two had moved so
far apart that one could have asked a lay audience
about the last time they spoke to a physician and had
their clothes on, and they would have been unable to
remember an occasion.
Source: David J. Rothman, Strangers at the Bedside
(New York: Basic Books, 1991), 127.
Although end-of-life decisions are often associated with
physicians, nurses are often the de facto decision makers:
In general, nurses are expected to obey a written “No
Code” order which follows hospital policy. However,
neither the physician’s orders nor the agency’s policies
protect the nurse from legal and ethical accountability
for her actions . . . Often the nurse’s implementation of
professional legal and ethical duties may be hampered
by the legal privilege and conventional ethical rights of
the physician who is considered to have ultimate
192
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

accountability for patient care or by institutional limits
on the nurse’s authority to act.
Source: “Nurses Speak Out: Does a Terminal Patient
Have the Right to Die?” Good Housekeeping (May 1984).
Spiritual-Social-Cultural
Fr. Gerald Kelly, a Jesuit priest, declares that human life is inviolable:
. . . Innocent human life is absolutely inviolable. By
reason of this principle, we exclude all direct killing of
the innocent, e.g., by . . . “mercy killing.”
Source: Gerald Kelly, “The Duty of Using
Artificial Means of Preserving Life,” Theological Studies
II, 1950, as cited in James Rachels, The End of Life:
Euthanasia and Morality (Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press, 1986), 69.
Depression can afflict the elderly just as it can people in other
age groups. Some argue that elderly people who seek a way to end
their lives do so more as a result of depression than a desire to
escape from an illness:
. . . A very large proportion of the elderly men and
women who kill themselves do it because they suffer
from quite remediable depression . . . I have more than
once seen a suicidal old person emerge from depres-
sion . . . When such men or women return to a less
despondent version of reality, their loneliness seems . . .
less stark and their pain more bearable because life has
become interesting again and they realize that there are
people who need them.
Source: Sherwin Nuland, How We Die: Reflections
on Life’s Final Chapter (New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
1993), 152.
Dame Cicely Saunders, the founder of the modern hospice
movement, summarizes the theory behind hospice:
You matter because of who you are. You matter to the
last moment of your life, and we will do all we can not
Quotations
193
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

only to help you die peacefully, but also to live until
you die.
Source: Cicely Saunders, as quoted in Larry
Beresford, The Hospice Handbook (Boston: Little, Brown,
1993), vi.
Legal-Political
This excerpt from a ruling in Cruzan v. Director, Missouri
Department of Health is unequivocal in stating that life, not its qual-
ity, is the overriding interest of the state:
The State’s interest is not in quality of life . . .were
quality of life at issue, all manner of handicaps might
find the State to terminate their lives. Instead the State’s
interest is in life; that interest is unqualified.
Source: Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of
Health, 109 S. Ct. 3240 (1989).
U.S. Supreme Court Justice John Paul Stevens, dissenting in
Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health, addresses the
patient’s best interests and the constitutional right to be free of
unwanted treatment:
The portion of this Court’s opinion that considers the
merits of this case is similarly unsatisfactory. It, too, fails
to respect the best interests of the patient. It, too, relies
on what is tantamount to a waiver rationale: the dying
patient’s best interests are put to one side and the entire
inquiry is focused on her prior expressions of intent.
An innocent person’s constitutional right to be
free from unwanted medical treatment is thereby cate-
gorically limited to those patients who had the fore-
sight to make an unambiguous statement of their wish-
es while competent.
Source: John Paul Stevens, in United States
Supreme Court Minority Opinions on Cruzan v.
Director, Missouri Department of Health (June 25, 1990).
The court has traditionally upheld the highest standard of
life in cases of infants or young children deemed incompetent due
194
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

to youth or lack of maturity. This standard holds even when the
parents choose to end life. Such was the case with Robert and
Pamela Mueller, who had decided to withhold nutrition from their
children because the children were conjoined (Siamese) twins who
could not be separated surgically. The parents’ decision was over-
turned when an anonymous complaint was filed and the State of
Illinois assumed custody of the children:
Perhaps the most important practical lesson of [the case]
is the reminder that non-treatment of handicapped
infants is subject to criminal prosecution. Causing the
death of an infant by intentional withholding of food or
necessary medical treatments by a parent, or by a physi-
cian who has undertaken to treat the infant, may consti-
tute a series of crimes ranging from murder and
manslaughter to conspiracy and child abuse.
Source: John A. Robertson, “Involuntary Euthan -
asia of Defective Newborns: A Legal Analysis,” Stanford
Law Review 27 (1975): 213.
References
(Please note the sources cited for each document, excerpt, and
quotation provided above are not repeated here.)
ABC News. “Dying ‘Dr. Death’ Has Second Thoughts about
Assisting Suicides.” May 26, 2006, http://abcnews.go.com/US/
LegalCenter/story?id=2008364&page=1&CMP=OTC-RSS
Feeds0312 (accessed June 7, 2007).
Alzheimer’s Association. “Statistics about Alzheimer’s Disease.”
2007, http://www.alz.org/AboutAD/statistics.asp, (accessed
June 7, 2007).
American Association of Suicidology. “Elderly Suicide Fact
Sheet.” 2006, http://www.suicidology.org/associations/
1045/files/Elderly.pdf, (accessed June 7, 2007).
American Association of Suicidology. “Suicide in the U.S.A.”
2004, http://www.suicidology.org/associations/1045/files/
suicideintheus.pdf (accessed June 7, 2007).
References
195
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

American Cancer Society. “Cancer Facts and Figures 2005:
Estimated Cancer Deaths for Selected Cancer Sites by State,
2005.” 2005, http://www.cancer.org/downloads/stt/
Estimated_Cancer_Deaths_for_Selected_Cancer_Sites_by_State,_
US,_2005.pdf (accessed June 7, 2007).
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention. “Facts and
Figures.” 2004, http://www.afsp.org/index.cfm?
fuseaction=home.viewpage&page_id=050FEA9F-B064-4092-
B1135C3A70DE1FDA (accessed June 7, 2007).
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services. “What Have We Learned from
HIV/AIDS Surveillance?” http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/
surveillance/basic.htm (accessed June 7, 2007).
Compassion and Choices. “Learn about Us: Timeline.”
http://www.compassionandchoices.org/aboutus/timeline.php
(accessed June 7, 2007).
Death with Dignity National Center. “Chronology of Assisted
Dying.” http://www.deathwithdignity.org/historyfacts/
chronology.asp (accessed June 7, 2007).
Fans of Fieger. “Chronology of Dr. Jack Kevorkian’s Life and
Assisted Suicide Campaign.” http://www.fansoffieger.com/
chronology.htm (accessed June 7, 2007).
Foley, Kathleen, and Herbert Hendin. 2002. The Case against
Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End-of-Life Care. Baltimore; MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hamel, Ronald P., and Edwin R. DuBose. 1996. Must We Suffer Our
Way to Death? Dallas, TX: Southern Methodist University Press.
Humber, James M., Robert Almeder, and Gregg Kasting, eds.
1994. Physician-Assisted Death. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.
Lee, Barbara Coombs. 2003. Compassion in Dying: Stories of
Dignity and Choice. Troutdale, OR: NewSage Press.
Longwood University, Greenwood Library. “Doctor-Assisted
Suicide: A Chronology.” http://www.longwood.edu/library/
suichron.htm (accessed June 7, 2007).
Mackle, Bob. “MDA Researchers Find Dietary Supplement
Promising in Lou Gehrig’s Disease.” Muscular Dystrophy
Association Public Information, Muscular Dystrophy Association
Public Information, March 3, 1999, http://www.mda.org/news/
990303alscreat.html (accessed June 7, 2007).
196
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Magnusson, Roger S. 2002. Angels of Death: Exploring the
Euthanasia Underground. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Marcus, Eric. 1996. Why Suicide? New York: HarperSanFrancisco.
McKhann, Charles F. 1999. A Time to Die: The Place for Physician
Assistance. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
The Merriam-Webster Dictionary. 1998. Springfield, MA: Merriam-
Webster.
Nightingale Alliance. “U.S. Historical Perspective and Current
Trends.” http://www.nightingalealliance.org/cgi-bin/home.
pl?article=204 (accessed June 7, 2007).
Roig-Franzia, Manuel, and Ceci Connolly. “La. Investigates
Allegations of Euthanasia at Hospital.” Washington Post, October
15, 2005, A03.
Scherer, Jennifer M., and Rita J. Simon. 1999. Euthanasia and the
Right to Die. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
South Australian Voluntary Euthanasia Society (SAVES). “The
Death of Compassion: How They Killed the Rights of the
Terminally Ill.” http://www.saves.asn.au/resources/
collection/col14.htm (accessed June 7, 2007).
Terri Schindler Schiavo Foundation. “Terri’s Story: Timeline.”
http://www.terrisfight.org/mainlinks.php?tablesingle=main_
terri_story&id=1 (accessed June 7, 2007).
References
197
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

7
Directory of Organizations
Organizations in the United States
M
any organizations in the United States and throughout the
world are involved in euthanasia and end-of-life issues in
some way. Some of them exist to address the issue, while oth-
ers focus on numerous issues including euthanasia. This directory,
which includes organizations based in the United States and
throughout the world, provides contact information, a synopsis of
the organization, highlights of the organization’s Web site, and rel-
evant publications.
Aging with Dignity
P.O. Box 1661
Tallahassee, Florida 32302
Phone: (888) 594-7437
Web site: http://www.agingwithdignity.org
E-mail: fivewishes@agingwithdignity.org
A national nonprofit organization founded in 1996, Aging with
Dignity is known for its distribution of a document called “Five
Wishes.” The organization describes Five Wishes as an easy-to-
understand living will that helps seriously ill people and their
families deal with the medical, personal, spiritual, and emotional
issues of their illnesses.
199
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The Web site offers updates on recent projects, ways to get
involved in the organization’s efforts, resources for individuals or
families facing end-of-life issues, and links to other organizations.
Aging with Dignity offers Five Wishes, as well as a Five
Wishes video and a guide called “Next Steps.” The organization
also offers a resource guide for family caregivers.
Aid in Dying Communication Project
P.O. Box 570
Mill Valley, California 94942
Phone: (415) 596-4257
Web site: http://www.aidindying.org/
E-mail: info@aidindying.org
The Aid in Dying Communication Project is geared toward helping
clinical personnel with understanding the concerns of patients who
are seriously ill, helping them communicate more effectively with
patients who may request a “hastened death” and/or assistance in
dying, and helping them respond to such a request with compassion.
The Web site outlines the philosophy, objectives, and servic-
es of the Aid in Dying Communication Project. The organization
offers educational and consulting services to various constituen-
cies, including health professionals and ethics committees.
American Association of Suicidology (AAS)
5221 Wisconsin Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20015
Phone: (202) 237-2280
Fax: (202) 237-2282
Web site: http://www.suicidology.org
E-mail: info@suicidology.org
The American Association of Suicidology (AAS), a nonprofit
organization, was founded in 1968 by Edwin S. Schneidman,
Ph.D. The organization’s Web site notes that the goal of AAS is to
understand and prevent suicide. To that end, the American
Association of Suicidology offers a variety of resources for both
volunteers and professionals.
The Web site provides general information and statistics
about suicide, as well as an overview of the organization’s aims
and services. In addition to an online bookstore, the site features
information specifically geared toward various constituencies,
including survivors, friends and loved ones, and researchers.
200
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

AAS publishes a journal called Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior and two newsletters. Surviving Suicide, which is pub-
lished quarterly, is for people who have lost a loved one to suicide.
Newslink is the American Association of Suicidology’s official
newsletter and keeps members up-to-date on the organization’s
activities.
American Chronic Pain Association (ACPA)
P.O. Box 850
Rocklin, California 95677
Phone: (800) 533-3231
Fax: (916) 632-3208
Web site: http://www.theacpa.org/
E-mail: ACPA@pacbell.net
The American Chronic Pain Association (ACPA), founded in
1980, is a nonprofit organization. ACPA works to increase aware-
ness, especially in the healthcare field and among policy makers,
about the issues associated with chronic pain. The organization
provides individuals suffering from chronic pain with the sup-
port and educational resources necessary to lead a fulfilling life,
despite the pain.
ACPA’s Web site includes resources for people living with
chronic pain, as well as for their families and caregivers. In addi-
tion, the site highlights resources and updates available for profes-
sionals and caregivers and offers a forum, in the form of a message
board, for people living with pain.
ACPA offers numerous publications, including a newsletter
called the ACPA Chronicle, a workbook titled From Patient to
Person—First Steps, and the ACPA Family Manual. In addition, a
Facilitator Guide is available to help a person with pain start a self-
help group.
American Counseling Association
5999 Stevenson Avenue
Alexandria, Virginia 22304
Phone: (800) 347-6647
Fax: (800) 473-2329
Web site: http://www.counseling.org
The American Counseling Association, a not-for-profit organiza-
tion, was founded in 1952 to grow and enhance the counseling
profession. The organization’s updated Code of Ethics, revised
Organizations in the United States
201
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

over a three-year period, was released at the end of 2005. The 2005
version of the Code of Ethics includes information regarding end-
of-life issues. American Counseling Association members are
required to abide by the Code of Ethics and thus shape the man-
ner in which they address end-of-life issues with clients.
The Web site features a section for ACA members, including
professional publications, practice guidelines, and benefits and
services of membership. In addition, the Web site offers features
for the public, including a search tool for finding a counselor, deal-
ing with trauma, and coping with various issues.
American Counseling Association publications include jour-
nals and newsletters for people in counseling professions. The
quarterly Journal of Counseling and Development and the monthly
Legal and Regulatory Compliance newsletter are two examples. Both
publications are geared toward counselors and other mental
health professionals.
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (AFSP)
120 Wall Street, 22nd Floor
New York, New York 10005
Phone: (888) 333-AFSP or (212) 363-3500
Fax: (212) 363-6237
Web site: http://www.afsp.org
E-mail: inquiry@afsp.org
The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (AFSP) was
founded in 1987 by a group of people committed to finding a
means to fund research to make meaningful progress in prevent-
ing suicide. The original group consisted of experts on suicide,
business professionals, community leaders, and survivors. Today,
the AFSP is a not-for-profit organization dedicated to research and
education with the goal of understanding and preventing suicide.
The Web site provides an overview of the organization,
information about suicide prevention, opportunities for involve-
ment and advocacy, and educational resources. In addition, the
site offers an overview of the American Foundation for Suicide
Prevention’s grants and includes the necessary information for
applicants.
The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention publishes
a quarterly newsletter, Lifesavers.
202
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

American Life League (ALL)
P.O. Box 1350
Stafford, Virginia 22555
Phone: (540) 659-4171
Fax: (540) 659-2586
Web site: http://www.all.org
E-mail: info@all.org
Founded in 1979, American Life League addresses a range of
issues including abortion, euthanasia, birth control, and bioethics.
ALL is a nonprofit organization whose activities include grass-
roots involvement, public policy, youth outreach, and education.
The Web site includes extensive information on each issue
ALL addresses, guidelines for getting involved, and links to news
in the form of press releases, a blog, and newsletters.
Newsletters include the Communique, a weekly publication
providing an overview of ALL activities and issues, and the Rock
for Life Report highlighting ALL’s youth outreach activities.
American Medical Association (AMA)
515 North State Street
Chicago, Illinois 60610
Phone: (800) 621-8335
Web site: http://www.ama-assn.org/
Dr. Nathan Smith Davis founded the American Medical
Association in 1847. Today, the AMA brings physicians together to
address issues within their profession, as well as issues pertaining
to public health.
The Web site includes clear language outlining the American
Medical Association’s opposition to euthanasia. The site also pro-
vides a search tool for patients to find a physician and access news
and professional resources in the areas of medical ethics, public
health, and legal issues.
AMA Voice is a bimonthly publication aimed at keeping
physicians informed about the association’s activities. American
Medical News, a newspaper for physicians, is published weekly (48
weeks per year). The Archives journals cover medical specialty
areas; some of the journals are published on a bimonthly basis
while others are published monthly. The Journal of the American
Medical Association (JAMA) is the most renowned of AMA’s publi-
cations. JAMA is published weekly (48 weeks per year).
Organizations in the United States
203
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

American Psychological Association (APA)
Public Interest Directorate
750 First Street, NE
Washington, DC 20002-4242
Phone: (202) 336-6050
Web site: http://www.apa.org/pi/eol/homepage.html
E-mail: publicinterest@apa.org
The Public Interest Directorate of the American Psychological
Association (APA) is concerned with human welfare and social
justice, including end-of-life issues and care. The APA is the largest
association of psychologists in the world.
The Directorate’s Web page on end-of-life issues and care
outlines activities and offers fact sheets on relevant issues. The site
also offers resources, including a synopsis of tasks and decisions
and information about the role of psychology in this realm.
Publications specific to end-of-life issues and care include
fact sheets and similar useful documents. 
American Society of Law, Medicine & Ethics (ASLME)
765 Commonwealth Avenue, Suite 1634
Boston, Massachusetts 02215
Phone: (617) 262-4990
Fax: (617) 437-7596
Web site: http://www.aslme.org/
E-mail: info@aslme.org
Founded in 1911, the American Society of Law, Medicine & Ethics
is a nonprofit educational organization. ASLME sponsors confer-
ences on relevant topics and maintains a library.
In addition to links for membership and conference informa-
tion, the organization’s Web site highlights research topics and
offers a special section for members, including a member forum.
ASLME publishes two journals for members. The Journal of
Law, Medicine & Ethics is a peer-reviewed journal for health care
professionals. The American Journal of Law & Medicine examines
various issues, including health law and legal and ethical matters,
related to the practice of medicine.
204
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Americans for Better Care of the Dying (ABCD)
1700 Diagonal Road, Suite 635
Alexandria, Virginia 22314
Phone: (703) 647-8505
Fax: (703) 837-1233
Web site: http://www.abcd-caring.org
E-mail: info@abcd-caring.org
Americans for Better Care of the Dying (ABCD), founded in 1997, is
dedicated to ensuring that people in the United States have good care
available to them at the end of their lives. The organization focuses on
fundamental reform efforts to meet its goals of establishing momen-
tum for reform, finding the best systems and means of providing
care, and implementing public policy based on existing evidence.
The ABCD Web site features links to pages on news and
events, information on existing laws and legislative activity, and
online publications and references.
The print ABCD Exchange newsletter is published several
times per year. 
Americans United for Life (AUL)
310 South Peoria, Suite 300
Chicago, Illinois 60607
Phone: (312) 492-7234
Fax: (312) 492-7235
Web site: http://www.unitedforlife.org/
E-mail: info@AUL.org
Founded in 1971, Americans United for Life is a nonprofit, public
interest bioethics law firm. The organization employs a multi-
pronged approach of legislative, judicial, and educational efforts
in its quest to preserve human life. This organization addresses
various issues, including abortion, human cloning, and stem cell
research, as well as euthanasia and assisted suicide.
The Web site includes an extensive listing of AUL’s activities
as well as summaries of the organization’s stance on issues, with
links to various supporting documents. In addition, the site pro-
vides model legislation and policy guides.
AUL has published several books and studies, including
Defending Life 2006: A State-by-State Legal Guide to Abortion,
Bioethics, and the End of Life. The organization’s AUL Momentum
highlights current events in the areas of abortion and euthanasia.
Organizations in the United States
205
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Association for Death Education and Counseling (ADEC)
60 Revere Drive, Suite 500
Northbrook, Illinois 60062
Phone: (847) 509-0403
Fax: (847) 480-9282
Web site: http://www.adec.org
The Association for Death Education and Counseling (ADEC) is
dedicated to ensuring the highest standards in death education,
grief counseling, care for the dying, and research in issues related
to death and dying.
The Web site provides an overview of the organization, pro-
fessional resources, information about the annual conference and
other educational events, resources for people who are coping
with loss, and information about certifications in Thanatology (the
study of death and dying).
In addition to a quarterly newsletter, The Forum, a cookbook,
Morsels and Memories, and CDs which address grief in children
and adolescents, ADEC publishes Omega: The Journal of Death and
Dying, The Journal of Trauma and Loss, Mortality Journal, Living with
Loss, and The Thanatology Newsletter.
Center for Christian Bioethics
Coleman Pavilion, 11121 S
Loma Linda University
Loma Linda, California 92350
Phone: (909) 558-4956
Fax: (909) 558-0336
Web site: http://www.llu.edu/llu/bioethics/
E-mail: mcarr@llu.edu
The Center for Christian Bioethics is headquartered at Loma Linda
University, which is operated by the Seventh-day Adventist
Church. In addition to conducting bioethics Grand Rounds on a
monthly basis at Loma Linda University Medical Center, the cen-
ter hosts seminars and conferences dealing with bioethical issues
in the areas of medicine, law, and ministry.
The Web site provides a link for ordering videos of bioethics
Grand Rounds and a listing of bioethics resources. In addition,
there is a link to the online Ethics Library, which includes back
issues of the center’s ethics newsletter, transcripts of selected lec-
tureships, and various reports and conference materials.
206
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The Center for Christian Bioethics publishes a quarterly
newsletter, Update.
Children’s Hospice International (CHI)
901 North Pitt Street, Suite 230
Alexandria, Virginia 22314
Phone: (800) 2-4-CHILD
Fax: (703) 684-0226
Web site: http://www.chionline.org/
E-mail: info@chionline.org
Children’s Hospice International (CHI) works to make hospice an
integral component of the range of pediatric services available to
terminally ill children and their families. The organization also
increases awareness of the fact that children have special needs in
terms of hospice care.
The Web site includes an in-depth explanation about the
Children’s Hospice International Program for All-Inclusive Care
for Children and their Families (CHI PACC). The site also includes
an extensive list of available resources and news updates.
CHI publications include books relevant to children facing
end-of-life issues, Palliative Pain & Symptom Management for
Children & Adolescents and Approaching Grief.
Citizens United Resisting Euthanasia (CURE)
303 Truman Street
Berkeley Springs, West Virginia 25411
Phone: (304) 258-5433
Web site: http://mysite.verizon.net/cureltd/index.html
E-mail: cureltd@verizon.net
Citizens United Resisting Euthanasia, founded in 1981, provides a
means for patient advocates to work together in opposition to
euthanasia. Describing itself as the oldest network devoted solely
to combating euthanasia, CURE vigorously defends patients’
rights to lifesaving treatments.
The Web site outlines the organization’s mission and goals
and includes news, educational resources, and links to other
organizations.
CURE publications include brochures about various issues
relevant to euthanasia, numerous reports, and other documents.
Organizations in the United States
207
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Compassion and Choices
P.O. Box 101810
Denver, Colorado 80250-1810
Phone: (800) 247-7421
Fax: (303) 639-1224
Web site: http://www.compassionandchoices.org/
E-mail: info@compassionandchoices.org
Compassion and Choices was created when two organizations,
Compassion in Dying and End-of-Life Choices, joined forces. This
nonprofit entity champions choice and care at the end of life by
focusing on relevant issues in Congress, as well as in the courts
and state legislatures.
The Web site outlines the organization’s numerous services,
highlights the ways Compassion and Choices works to address
end-of-life issues at various levels of government, and offers
opportunities for involvement.
The organization publishes Compassion and Choices Magazine
and has compiled a list of recommended publications, including
Compassion in Dying: Stories of Dignity and Choice, a book by co-
CEO and president Barbara Coombs Lee.
Death with Dignity National Center (DDNC)
520 SW 6th Avenue, Suite 1030
Portland, Oregon 97204
Phone: (503) 228-4415
Fax: (503) 228-7454
Web site: http://www.deathwithdignity.org
A nonprofit organization, the Death with Dignity National Center
leads the legal defense of the State of Oregon’s Death with Dignity
Law. In addition, DDNC educates the public about the law. The
Oregon Death with Dignity Political Action Fund, which is a sep-
arate entity, defends the law on the political front and works for
the promulgation or defense of similar legislation in other states.
The Web site includes extensive background information on
Oregon’s Death with Dignity law, including a chronology and
other historical information. A section devoted to news allows vis-
itors to the site to search by topic. Another section highlights sep-
arate resources for students, physicians, legal professionals, law-
makers, and the general public.
DDNC publishes The Dignity Report newsletter.
208
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Euthanasia Research Guidance Organization (ERGO)
24829 Norris Lane
Junction City, Oregon 97448-9559
Phone: (541) 998-1873
Fax: (541) 998-1873
Web site: http://www.finalexit.org/
E-mail: ergo@efn.org
The Euthanasia Research Guidance Organization (ERGO) is a non-
profit educational corporation which was established in 1993 by
Derek Humphry, founder of the now-defunct Hemlock Society. In
addition to research on end-of-life issues, ERGO offers ethical,
psychological, and legal guides for patients and physicians
addressing issues and decisions related to the end of life.
The ERGO Web site highlights international laws on assisted
suicide and includes information about key figures and events in
the right-to-die movement. Visitors to the site can subscribe to
receive e-mails from the International Right-to-Die News Service.
The Web site also has a store that sells relevant books, e-books,
videos, and documents.
Final Exit Network
P.O. Box 965005
Marietta, Georgia 30066
Phone: (800) 524-3948
Web site: http://www.finalexitnetwork.org
E-mail: info@finalexitnetwork.org
Final Exit Network, a nonprofit organization, is dedicated to help-
ing people address their suffering by providing support, including
counseling, and, upon request, information about self-deliverance.
In addition, the Final Exit Network encourages people to use
advance directives and works to assist those whose advance direc-
tives are being ignored.
The Web site outlines the organization’s Exit Guide program,
which pairs a person facing end-of-life decisions with a guide who
presents information about the various care options available,
including information about self-deliverance options. In addition,
the site includes information about membership, volunteer oppor-
tunities, and events.
The organization’s online bookstore sells print and nonprint
works by Derek Humphry (founder of Euthanasia Research
Guidance Organization [ERGO]).
Organizations in the United States
209
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The Hastings Center
21 Malcolm Gordon Road
Garrison, New York 10524-4125
Phone: (845) 424-4040
Fax: (845) 424-4545
Web site: http://www.thehastingscenter.org
E-mail: mail@thehastingscenter.org
Founded in 1969, the Hastings Center is an independent, nonpar-
tisan, and nonprofit organization. In addition to biotechnological
and environmental issues, the center addresses healthcare matters,
including end-of-life care.
The Web site highlights current research, lists available pub-
lications, provides information about the organization’s extensive
library, and details the center’s Visiting Scholars Program.
The Hastings Center Report is a bimonthly journal that exam-
ines ethical issues related to medicine and the environment. Due
to the high volume of research conducted at the Hastings Center,
the organization publishes numerous books, monographs, special
reports, and other documents.
Hospice Association of America (HAA)
228 Seventh Street, SE
Washington, DC 20003
Phone: (202) 546-4759
Fax: (202) 547-9559
Web site: http://www.nahc.org/haa/
The Hospice Association of America (HAA), a national organiza-
tion, represents the interests of more than 2,800 hospices, as well as
caregivers who provide care to terminally ill patients. HAA’s main
goals include heightening public awareness of hospice services,
promoting hospice as an integral part of health care, and establish-
ing high standards of patient care within the hospice environment.
The Web site provides an overview and updates of legal, reg-
ulatory, and legislative issues related to hospice, as well as infor-
mation regarding meetings at the local and regional levels. The
Consumer Information section provides a comprehensive look at
questions and issues related to hospice. Key features include a
consumer’s guide to hospice, a history of hospice, a fact sheet, sta-
tistics, and the Hospice Patient’s Bill of Rights.
The Hospice Association of America publications include
Caring magazine, several videos, manuals for operating hospice
210
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

programs, and guides for managing issues related to Medicare
and Medicaid.
Hospice Education Institute
3 Unity Square
P.O. Box 98
Machiasport, Maine 04655-0098
Phone: (207) 255-8800
Fax: (207) 255-8008
Web site: http://www.hospiceworld.org
E-mail: info@hospiceworld.org
The Hospice Education Institute is a nonprofit organization dedi-
cated to improving hospice care and making it widely available
throughout the United States and the world. The institute works
for and with the terminally ill and their caregivers.
The Web site offers an overview of the organization and its
services, provides historical highlights of the hospice movement,
and gives information regarding upcoming seminars on hospice-
related issues.
Hospice Education Institute publications include pamphlets
on topics related to hospice and The Hospice Education Institute’s
Notes on Symptom Control in Hospice and Palliative Care.
Human Life International (HLI)
4 Family Life Lane
Front Royal, Virginia 22630
Phone: (800) 549-LIFE
Fax: (540) 622-6247
Web site: http://www.hli.org
E-mail: hli@hli.org
Founded in 1981, Human Life International has grown to its self-
described state as the largest international pro-life, pro-family,
pro-woman organization in the world. The organization advo-
cates the sanctity of life from conception until death occurs nat-
urally.
The Web site describes Human Life International’s activities
throughout the world, provides links to satellite office Web sites,
and highlights ways supporters can become advocates.
HLI publishes Special Report, a monthly publication, cover-
ing international pro-life efforts and news from HLI missionaries;
Front Lines, a quarterly publication providing updates on HLI
activities and issues; and other advocacy publications.
Organizations in the United States
211
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

International Task Force on
Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide
P.O. Box 760
Steubenville, Ohio 43952
Phone: (740) 282-3810
Web site: http://www.iaetf.org or
www.internationaltaskforce.org
The International Task Force on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide,
through networking, research, education, and other activities,
addresses issues related to euthanasia, assisted suicide, advance
directives, disability rights, pain control, and euthanasia practices.
The Web site provides information about the organization,
its activities, and current news on topics of interest. The online
book store sells publications, documents, videos, and other items. 
The International Task Force publishes a newsletter, Update.
The Kennedy Institute of Ethics at Georgetown University
Healy, 4th Floor
Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057
Phone: (202) 687-8099
Fax: (202) 687-8089
Web site: http://kennedyinstitute.georgetown.edu/
index.htm
E-mail: bioethics@georgetown.edu
The Joseph P. and Rose F. Kennedy Institute of Ethics was estab-
lished in 1971 through a grant from the Joseph P. Kennedy, Jr.
Foundation. Described as the oldest and most comprehensive aca-
demic bioethics center in the world, the institute offers degree and
nondegree programs.
The Web site highlights the activities of institute scholars in
numerous areas of bioethics including end-of-life issues, health
care, intellectual disability, and eugenics. In addition, a link is pro-
vided to the institute’s library, which is accessible to the public.
This library, which is nonpartisan in nature, affords researchers
the opportunity to critically examine various viewpoints relevant
to issues of bioethics.
Many of the Kennedy Institute’s publications are issue-spe-
cific; however, the Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal provides a
scholarly look at various viewpoints on issues in bioethics.
Publications in the Scope Note series cover a specific issue and
212
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

include various viewpoints, as well as empirical information and
legal precedents.
MacLean Center for Clinical Medical Ethics
5841 South Maryland Avenue, MC 6098
Chicago, Illinois 60637
Phone: (773) 702-1453
Fax: (773) 702-0090
Web site: http://medicine.uchicago.edu/centers/
ccme/index.htm
E-mail: msiegler@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu
Founded in 1984 with funding from the family of Dorothy J.
MacLean, the MacLean Center for Clinical Medical Ethics was the
first program in the nation devoted to clinical medical ethics. The
MacLean Center is dedicated to addressing ethics issues from the
perspective of various disciplines, including medicine, surgery,
and psychiatry, as well as law, business, public policy, social sci-
ences, and the humanities.
The Web site highlights clinical medical ethics issues and
outlines the organization’s services, including an ethics consulta-
tion service for physicians at University of Chicago hospitals and
a fellowship program for training in medical ethics. The site’s
Faculty section provides curriculum vitae of many faculty mem-
bers, including their publications.
National Center for Death Education (NCDE)
at Mount Ida College
Mount Ida College
777 Dedham Street
Newton, Massachusetts 02459-3323
Phone: (617) 928-4649
Fax: (617) 928-4713
Web site: http://www.mountida.edu/sp.cfm?pageid=307
E-mail: ncde@mountida.edu
The National Center for Death Education (NCDE) at Mount Ida
College promotes knowledge and understanding in the area of
thanatology (the study of death and dying). An educational cen-
ter, NCDE provides professional learning opportunities and
resources to assist caregivers and others who support the dying as
well those who are grieving.
The Web site includes information on thanatology-related
courses and programs, as well as a link to NCDE’s library.
Organizations in the United States
213
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

National Citizens’ Coalition for Nursing Home Reform
(NCCNHR)
1828 L Street, NW, Suite 801
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 332-2276
Fax: (202) 332-2949
Web site: http://www.nursinghomeaction.org
The National Citizens’ Coalition for Nursing Home Reform
(NCCNHR) was founded in 1975 after advocates spoke at a con-
ference in Washington, DC, about the need to dramatically
improve nursing home conditions. Today, NCCNHR works at the
federal and state levels to address issues related to resident care in
nursing homes. Issues include inadequate staffing, poor working
conditions, use of restraints, resident rights, and more.
The Web site highlights ways for family members to serve as
advocates for nursing home residents, provides links to relevant
government policies, offers an online library, and includes links to
state ombudsmen.
NCCNHR’s publications for consumers include annual
meeting materials, family involvement information, and guide-
lines to resident rights. Professional versions of the annual meet-
ing materials and guidelines to resident rights are also available.
Other professional publications include sources and references on
nursing home reform law, research and reports, and training mate-
rials. Miscellaneous publications, including History and Role of the
Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program, are also available for sale. A
newsletter, Quality Care Advocate, is free to members.
National Hospice Foundation (NHF)
1700 Diagonal Road, Suite 625
Alexandria, Virginia 22314
Phone: (703) 516-4928
Fax: (703) 837-1233
Web site: http://www.nationalhospicefoundation.org
E-mail: info@nationalhospicefoundation.org
The National Hospice Foundation (NHF) is a nonprofit organiza-
tion dedicated to increasing awareness about the issue of end-of-
life care, including hospice and palliative care options. As the prin-
cipal fundraising partner of the National Hospice and Palliative
Care Organization (NHPCO), NHF works to raise awareness and
214
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

funds to ensure that hospice and palliative care continue to be
options for people at the end of their lives.
The Web site includes a history of the National Hospice
Foundation, information about hospice and palliative care, and a
search tool to locate a hospice and/or palliative care organization.
National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization
(NHPCO)
1700 Diagonal Road, Suite 625
Alexandria, Virginia 22314
Phone: (703) 837-1500
Fax: (703) 837-1233
Web site: http://www.nhpco.org
E-mail: nhpco_info@nhpco.org
The National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization (NHPCO)
represents hospice and palliative care organizations, as well as
caregivers, from areas throughout the United States. Founded in
1978 as the National Hospice Organization, the group changed its
name to the National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization in
2000. In addition to developing programs to increase awareness
about hospice and palliative care, NHPCO provides information
and educational resources to its members, monitors legislation,
and conducts research.
The Web site provides general information about hospice and
palliative care, as well as links to access advance directives by state.
In addition, the site highlights information about conferences and
other resources and offers information relevant to hospice and pal-
liative care for people facing end-of-life issues and decisions.
NHPCO’s publications are geared toward specific groups
within the organization’s membership. NewsBriefs is a weekly
memo for organizations that provide hospice and/or palliative
care. NewsLine, which is published monthly, is also for these
providers, as well as other organizations that belong to NHPCO.
Insights is a quarterly magazine for professionals and volunteers
who work in a hospice and/or palliative care setting. The Journal
of Pain and Symptom Management, a peer-reviewed journal, is pub-
lished monthly.
Organizations in the United States
215
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

National Right to Life Committee (NRLC)
512 10th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20004
Phone: (202) 626-8800
Web site: http://www.nrlc.org/
E-mail: nrlc@nrlc.org
The National Right to Life Committee was founded in 1973 fol-
lowing the U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Roe v. Wade. Although the
organization’s main focus is on fighting abortion, its overall con-
cern with issues of medical ethics includes issues related to
euthanasia and infanticide.
The Web site provides a means for interested parties to learn
more about current efforts, legislation, and available resources.
The site also provides information regarding its advocacy issues,
including statistical information, links to other Web sites, and def-
initions of key words.
The National Right to Life Committee offers various online
documents, 
including 
e-mail 
newsletters, 
downloadable
brochures, periodicals, and fact sheets.
Not Dead Yet
7521 Madison Street
Forest Park, Illinois 60130
Phone: (708) 209-1500
Fax: (708) 209-1735
Web site: http://www.notdeadyet.org
E-mail: ndycoleman@aol.com
Not Dead Yet, founded in 1996, opposes legalized assisted suicide.
The organization was established following Dr. Jack Kevorkian’s
acquittal in the suicides of two women who had disabilities but
were not terminally ill. Not Dead Yet works with other national
disability rights organizations to spread their message about the
dangers legalized assisted suicide would present for people with
severe disabilities.
The organization’s Web site offers articles, fact sheets, links to
other organizations, information about the Not Dead Yet Speakers’
Bureau, a list of partner organizations, and highlights of court
cases, including amicus briefs submitted by the organization.
216
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Park Ridge Center
205 West Touhy Avenue, Suite 203
Park Ridge, Illinois 60068-4202
Phone: (847) 384-3507
Fax: (847) 384-3557
Web site: http://www.parkridgecenter.org/
E-mail: al.hurd@advocatehealth.com
The Park Ridge Center is an independent, nonprofit, and nonsec-
tarian organization. Affiliated with Advocate Health Care, the cen-
ter engages in research, education, and consultation aimed at delv-
ing into the interaction between health, faith, and ethics.
The Web site includes a brief message from the organiza-
tion’s president outlining news and current projects. In addition,
the site features links to Park Ridge Center publications, affiliated
programs, and consultation services.
A peer-reviewed journal, Second Opinion, is published quar-
terly. The E-Ethics Newsletter is offered on a monthly basis. Past
issues of the Bulletin, a publication which focused on a specific
topic in each edition, are also available.
Supportive Care Coalition: Pursuing Excellence in
Palliative Care
c/o Providence Health System
4805 NE Glisen 2E07
Portland, Oregon 97213
Phone: (503) 215-7009
Fax: (503) 215-5054
Web site: http://www.SupportiveCareCoalition.org
E-mail: karin.dufault@providence.org
Supportive Care Coalition: Pursuing Excellence in Palliative Care
is a coalition of Catholic health ministries working to advance
excellence in palliative care through knowledge transfer, advoca-
cy, and partnerships. The coalition’s member organizations
include some of the nation’s largest Catholic health systems and
operate health facilities in 48 states. Informed by its Catholic faith
and values, the coalition envisions a society in which all persons
living with or affected by a chronic or life-threatening condition
receive compassionate, holistic, coordinated care.
In addition to an overview of the organization, the Web site
provides a plethora of resources related to palliative care, including
Organizations in the United States
217
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

assessment tools, successful practices, and articles and essays. The
site also offers a section with resources on ethics issues.
The Supportive Care Coalition publishes a quarterly
newsletter, Supportive Voice, and a bimonthly E-news listserv and
offers reference manuals.
Terri Schindler Schiavo Foundation (TSSF)
5562 Central Avenue, Suite 2
St. Petersburg, Florida 33707
Phone: (727) 490-7603
Web site: http://www.terrisfight.org/
E-mail: info@terrisfight.org
The Terri Schindler Schiavo Foundation, a nonprofit corporation,
was founded in 2001. The organization, which opposes euthanasia
and physician-assisted suicide, engages in an educational cam-
paign to build public support for its efforts. The foundation’s long-
term goal is to establish a network of Terri Schindler Schiavo
Centers to care for brain-injured patients.
The Web site provides information on activities and events,
features links to other organizations, offers ways to get involved,
and highlights the story of Terri Schindler Schiavo, in whose mem-
ory the organization is named.
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB)
3211 4th Street, NE
Washington, DC 20017-1194
Phone: (202) 541-3000
Web site: http://www.usccb.org/index.shtml
The United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB) was
formed in 2001 when two organizations, the National Conference
of Catholic Bishops and the United States Catholic Conference,
were combined. Today, the organization addresses numerous
issues, including abortion, capital punishment, euthanasia, envi-
ronment, labor, and poverty.
The Web site provides links to USCCB documents and other
materials relevant to the organization’s advocacy issues, as well as
an online version of the Bible and other documents related to
Catholicism.
The organization offers videos, DVDs, study guides, books,
materials related to the various issues USCCB addresses, as well
as numerous church-related documents.
218
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Organizations Overseas
Association pour le Droit de Mourir dans la Dignite
(ADMD)
50 rue de Chabrol
75010 Paris, France
When calling from the United States:
Phone: +33-1-48-00-04-92
Fax: +33-1-48-00-05-72
Web site: http://www.admd.net/
E-mail: infos@admd.net
Association pour le Droit de Mourir dans la Dignite (ADMD), or the
Association for the Right to Die with Dignity, works to make pain
relief accessible, to secure the right for patients to refuse treatment
to prolong life, to make the living will a legally recognized docu-
ment, and to make euthanasia legal.
The Web site summarizes the organization’s initiatives, high-
lights relevant legislation, and includes information about end-of-
life policies in France and other countries. In addition, the site fea-
tures a section about future goals.
ADMD’s Bulletin is published four times per year and the
Letter is published semiannually.
Care NOT Killing
Box 56322
London, England SE1 8XW
Phone: +020 7633 0770
Fax: +020 7681 1924
Web site: http://www.carenotkilling.org.uk/
E-mail: info@carenotkilling.org.uk
Care NOT Killing, an alliance of organizations and individuals,
promotes palliative care as an end-of-life option and opposes
euthanasia and assisted suicide. The organization works to
improve available palliative care options and campaigns against
legalizing euthanasia and assisted suicide.
The Web site offers information on the organization’s efforts,
provides information about bills and laws regarding euthanasia
and assisted suicide, and features links to anecdotal information,
articles, and documents.
Care NOT Killing offers an E-newsletter and issue alerts.
Organizations Overseas
219
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Dignity in Dying
13 Prince of Wales Terrace
London, England W8 5PG
Phone: +0870 777 7868
Web site: http://www.dignityindying.org.uk/
E-mail: info@dignityindying.org.uk
Dignity in Dying was founded in 1935 as the Voluntary
Euthanasia Society. Members approved the new name at the orga-
nization’s annual meeting in 2005. The organization is dedicated
to improving patient choice in end-of-life care. To that end,
Dignity in Dying engages in lobbying and defending patients’
legal rights, as well as advocating on behalf of terminally ill
patients who feel their wishes are being ignored. The organization
also works to educate people, especially in the legal and medical
professions, about end-of-life issues.
The Web site features stories from and about people who
faced, or are facing, end-of-life issues. It also outlines patients’
rights, provides opportunities for involvement, highlights news
and events, and offers information about living wills. In addition,
the site provides links to legislation, and legal documents.
Publications include the Dignity in Dying Report. This publi-
cation is geared toward the medical and legal communities, as
well as researchers, and it highlights research and other key infor-
mation in the realm of “assisted dying.” 
Dying with Dignity
55 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 802
Toronto, Ontario M4P 1G8
Canada
Phone: (416) 486-3998 or (800) 495-6156
Fax: (416) 486-5562
Web site: http://www.dyingwithdignity.ca/
E-mail: info@dyingwithdignity.ca
Dying with Dignity is a national organization dedicated to
enhancing the quality of dying by creating additional end-of-life
choices in Canada.
This Web site features information about living wills and
Dying with Dignity’s counseling program. The site also offers a
glossary, a summary of Canadian law on assisted dying, informa-
tion about laws related to end-of-life issues in other countries, a
reading list, and links to other organizations.
220
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The organization’s Web site includes links to various docu-
ments, including reports and speeches, relevant to end-of-life issues.
EXIT
17 Hart Street
Edinburgh, Scotland EH1 3RN
Phone: +44 131-556-4404
Web site: http://www.euthanasia.cc/
E-mail: exit@euthanasia.cc
Previously known as the Scottish Voluntary Euthanasia Society,
EXIT is dedicated to promoting personal choice in end-of-life deci-
sions. EXIT also campaigns for improvements in palliative care
and other end-of-life options.
The organization’s Web site offers extensive information and
resources on euthanasia, assisted suicide, and other matters relat-
ed to the end of life.
EXIT offers a “Living Will Info Pack” and several books for
sale. In addition, back issues of the EXIT Newsletter are available.
EXIT International
P.O. Box 37781
Darwin, NT 0821
Australia
Phone: +61 500 83 1929
Fax: +61 8 8983 2949
Web site: http://www.exitinternational.net/
E-mail: contact@exitinternational.net
EXIT International, previously known as the Voluntary
Euthanasia Research Foundation, was founded by Dr. Philip
Nitschke. The organization was established in response to the
repeal of Australia’s Rights of the Terminally Ill Act, considered
the first successful example of voluntary euthanasia legislation in
the world. In addition to advocating for new laws, EXIT
International works to provide people with information regarding
end-of-life options.
The Web site includes a history of the organization, biogra-
phical information about founder and director Dr. Philip Nitschke,
background information about Australia’s Rights of the
Terminally Ill Act, and anecdotal information about people Dr.
Nitschke has assisted in ending their lives.
EXIT International publishes a newsletter, Deliverance.
Organizations Overseas
221
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Friends at the End (FATE)
11 Westbourne Gardens
Glasgow, Scotland G12 9XD
Phone: +0141 334 3287
Fax: +0141 334 3287
Web site: http://www.friends-at-the-end.org.uk
E-mail: info@friends-at-the-end.org.uk
Friends at the End (FATE) is committed to increasing awareness
about choices available to people at the end of their lives and to
providing support to people who face end-of-life decisions. In
addition to funding and supporting research into issues related to
death, Friends at the End works to enhance education for the med-
ical community about death and terminal illness.
The Web site provides access to various resources related to
end-of-life issues, including living wills and a welfare attorney. It
also highlights meeting reports and provides materials for
research, including articles and legislative items.
FATE publishes a member newsletter.
Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance (OCRT)
Box 27026
Kingston, Ontario K7M 8W5
Canada
Phone: N/A 
Fax: (613) 547-9015
Web site: http://www.religioustolerance.org
Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance (OCRT) is a volun-
teer-based organization dedicated to promoting religious toler-
ance. The organization, founded in 1995, consists of an Agnostic,
an Atheist, a Christian, a Wiccan, and a Zen Buddhist. Together,
they address various issues through essays and other writings for
public consumption via the Internet.
The Web site contains background on the organization, as
well as thousands of articles on current events and controversial
issues, with a focus on issues that are controversial within the
realm of religion. The section devoted to euthanasia features an
introduction, information on the religious aspects of the issue, and
articles which examine the issue in various contexts.
222
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Right to Die Society of Canada (RDSC)
145 Macdonell Avenue
Toronto, Ontario, M6R 2A4 Canada
Phone: (416) 535-0690
Fax: (416) 530-0243
Web site: http://www.righttodie.ca/
E-mail: contact-rtd@RighttoDie.ca
The Right to Die Society of Canada was founded 1991. It is not a
nonprofit organization because its officers did not want the con-
straints that govern organizations with nonprofit status. The
organization, which operates with voluntary officers and advisers,
devotes its funds to printing and mailing newsletters, advocacy,
and public education activities.
In addition to a comprehensive history of the organization,
the Web site offers a “Researchers’ Buffet,” which includes view-
points from both sides of the right-to-die movement, as well as
news, legislation, and a glossary.
The Right to Die Society of Canada is one of five Canadian
organizations that collaborate to publish Free to Go, a quarterly
newsletter.
SAVES – The Living Will Society
P.O. Box 1460
Wandsbeck, KwaZulu-Natal 3631 South Africa
Phone: +031 266 8511
Fax: +031 267 2218
Web site: http://www.livingwill.co.za/
E-mail: livingwill@3i.co.za
SAVES – The Living Will Society is a nonprofit organization which
promotes the living will as a means to save patients and their
loved ones from suffering and pain, anxiety, valueless prolonga-
tion of terminal illness, existence without quality of life, and
spending life savings unnecessarily.
The Web site offers information about preparing a living
will, a link to membership, an explanation of informed consent,
and guidelines for medical practitioners.
Organizations Overseas
223
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Voluntary Euthanasia Society of New Zealand
P.O. Box 26 095
Epsom, Auckland 1030
New Zealand
Phone: +09 630 7035
Web site: http://www.ves.org.nz/contact.htm
E-mail: ves@clear.net.nz
The Voluntary Euthanasia Society of New Zealand is dedicated to
making it legal for a person who is terminally ill, or facing an
unacceptable quality of life, to decide to end life. This organization
was created when the Voluntary Euthanasia Society (Auckland)
Inc. and the Wellington Voluntary Euthanasia Society merged.
The Web site contains an overview of the concept of volun-
tary euthanasia, a brief summary of New Zealand’s existing laws
related to end-of-life issues, links to international news, and
research tools, including polls, articles, and links to other Web sites.
World Federation of Right to Die Societies
Web site: http://www.worldrtd.net/
The World Federation of Right to Die Societies, established in
1980, counts thirty-eight organizations from twenty-three coun-
tries among its members. The federation is committed to securing
and protecting an individual’s right to die. The World Federation
of Right to Die Societies meets every two years; these internation-
al conferences are hosted by one of the member organizations.
The Web site offers links to the member organizations,
opportunities to get involved, a section with news divided by
country, and links to other organizations.
A newsletter, the World Federation of Right to Die Societies
Newsletter, is published twice a year.
224
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

8
Resources
Resources to Assist in the
Study of Euthanasia
T
he books, articles, periodicals, and nonprint resources listed in
this section will provide readers with accessible outlets for
additional research on euthanasia and end-of-life issues. Given
the sheer volume of materials on the subjects, it was necessary to
adopt certain criteria to determine what should be included in this
list. First and foremost, the list of books includes only those that
are in print as of this writing. In addition, materials were included
only if there was a focus on euthanasia, assisted suicide, or other
end-of-life issues relevant to this publication. Finally, all of the
entries were examined for relevance and timeliness.
To facilitate use of this resource, the list is divided as follows:
• Print Resources
• Periodicals
• Nonprint resources
• Databases
• Internet sites
All of the sources are annotated and listed alphabetically
within each category.
225
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Print Resources
Medical-Bioethical
Books
Foley, Kathleen, and Herbert Hendin, eds. 2002. The Case against
Assisted Suicide. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
371 pp. ISBN: 0-8018-6792-4.
This book offers a collection of essays on the topic of assist-
ed suicide. Beginning with a chapter that addresses autonomy,
compassion, and rational suicide, the book, declaring that legal-
ized assisted suicide would pose risks for some populations,
includes a chapter highlighting concerns relevant to those con-
stituencies. Finally, in a section titled “A Better Way,” the authors,
along with Dame Cicely Saunders who founded the modern hos-
pice movement, explore hospice and palliative care options.
Jamison, Stephen. 1997. Assisted Suicide: A Decision-Making Guide
for Health Professionals. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers. 248
pp. ISBN: 0-7879-0873-8.
As the title notes, this book is geared toward health care pro-
fessionals. It provides information on the debate surrounding
assisted suicide and offers decision-making tools regarding a
patient’s request to die. The book also offers insight into family
dynamics and assistance for working through the myriad issues
associated with the concept of assisted suicide.
Magnusson, Roger S. 2002. Angels of Death: Exploring the Euthanasia
Underground. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 325 pp.
ISBN: 0-300-09439-6.
This book focuses on the practices of physician-assisted sui-
cide and euthanasia in the United States and Australia. The author
surveyed and interviewed health care professionals in both coun-
tries about instances in which euthanasia and physician-assisted
suicide occur. Interviews, using pseudonyms for the medical per-
sonnel, are included in the book.
McKhann, Charles F., 1999. A Time to Die: The Place for Physician
Assistance. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 268 pp. ISBN: 0-
300-07631-2.
226
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

A specialist in cancer surgery, Dr. Charles McKhann exam-
ines issues associated with dying in the United States, including
the needs of the patient, concerns and issues for physicians, legal
questions, and arguments against physician-assisted suicide. He
also argues on behalf of rational suicide and contrasts similar
cases in the United States and the Netherlands.
Articles
Campbell, Courtney S., and Jane Hare. 1995. “Conflicts of
Conscience: Hospice and Assisted Suicide.” Hastings Center Report
25 (3): 36–43.
The article addresses the unique issues that have arisen in
Oregon-based hospice agencies as a result of the passage of
Measure 16, Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act. In addition to infor-
mation about hospice in Oregon and a summary of the hospice
community’s concerns about the implications of Measure 16, the
article notes that the Oregon Hospice Association released a state-
ment expressing opposition to Measure 16. Finally, the article
highlights the ways Oregon’s hospice network prepared to cope
with Measure 16 following its approval by the state’s voters.
Darr, Kurt. 2000. “Physician-Assisted Suicide and Health Services
Delivery.” Hospital Topics 78 (2): 28–32.
The article begins by comparing euthanasia with physician-
assisted suicide and outlining the differences between the two
concepts. The article also offers an explanation and information
about Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act, highlights the physician-
related issues that arise in the context of end-of-life matters, and
frames the issue of physician-assisted suicide in terms of the deliv-
ery of health services and economics.
Ersek, Mary. 2005. “Assisted Suicide: Unraveling a Complex
Issue.” Nursing 35 (4):  48–52.
This article begins by defining the various terms that arise in
discussions of end-of-life issues. It also outlines arguments on
both sides, highlights existing laws, and provides key information
for healthcare professionals who might meet with end-of-life
assistance requests from patients.
Ferrell, Betty, and Rose Virani. 2000. “End-of-Life Care: Nurses
Speak Out.” Nursing 30 (7): 54–57.
Print Resources
227
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

This article begins by asking how well nurses serve terminally
ill patients. The answer, according to nurses surveyed by researchers
at the California-based City of Hope National Medical Center, is that
it could be better. The article outlines the survey responses.
Gorman, Daniel. 1999. “Active and Passive Euthanasia: The Cases
of Drs. Claudio Alberto de la Rocha and Nancy Morrison.”
Canadian Medical Association Journal 160 (6): 857–860.
This article begins by differentiating between passive
euthanasia and active euthanasia and offers two cases to illustrate
the differences and stimulate further examination of the issue of
active euthanasia. The author also employs hypothetical cases to
facilitate further exploration of the issues.
Loconte, Joe. 1998. “Hospice, Not Hemlock.” Policy Review 88: 40–48.
This article examines the issue of dying in the United States
and provides a wealth of information on the hospice option. In
addition to a history of hospice, the article offers specifics about
the types of care available. Arguments about the effectiveness of
hospice care are also presented.
Mogg, Marcelle. 2006. “The Right to Decide.” Australian Nursing
Journal 13 (8): 18–21.
The article, citing the cases of Terri Schiavo in the United
States and Maria Korp in Australia, provides an overview of the
Respecting Patient Choices (RPC) program, which originated at
the Austin Hospital in Victoria. The program is an advance care
planning initiative.
Mulligan, Margaret. 1996. “Nurse-Assisted Suicide: Indictment of
Physicians’ Care?” Physician’s Management 36 (9): 33.
This article reviews a study by David A. Asch, M.D., MBA
published in the New England Journal of Medicine. The study exam-
ined the issue of nurses performing euthanasia or assisted suicide.
This article reports the results and notes the author-acknowledged
weaknesses of the study.
Petrou, Michael. 2005. “A Time to Die.” Maclean’s 118 (36): 22–25.
The article uses anecdotes to compare the options available
to a terminally ill person in Canada with the options available to a
terminally ill person in Holland.
228
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Spinney, Laura. 2005. “Last Rights.” New Scientist 186 (2496)t: 46–49.
This article examines end-of-life issues. There is an anecdot-
al account of a woman who, suffering from amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS), or Lou Gehrig’s disease, struggles with deciding
whether to die by allowing the disease to take its course or hasten
her own death. The article also offers comparisons of existing laws
on end-of-life issues.
Spiritual-Social-Cultural
Books
Atwood Gailey, Elizabeth. 2003. Write to Death. Westport, CT:
Praeger. 185 pp. ISBN: 0-275-97713-7.
This book examines and analyzes the ways in which news
coverage of end-of-life issues has influenced public perception
and legislation on euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide. It
includes analysis of the news coverage surrounding Dr. Jack
Kevorkian and Karen Ann Quinlan, as well as an analysis of the
positive or negative news coverage in various publications includ-
ing U.S. News & World Report, the New York Times, and Newsweek.
Battin, Margaret Pabst. 2005. Ending Life: Ethics and the Way We Die.
New York: Oxford University Press. 344 pp. ISBN: 0-19-514027-3.
The book’s first section, “Dilemmas about Dying,” examines
various issues, including the concept of euthanasia and whether a
physician is ever obligated to assist a patient in dying. The section
on historical, religious, and cultural concerns includes an exami-
nation of the same-day deaths of Thomas Jefferson and John
Adams, as well as the ethical issues attached to the concept of sui-
cide bombing. The final section, which examines death in the
future, includes scrutiny of various issues that were not yet con-
cerns for previous generations who wrestled with end-of-life
issues, including genetic indicators that provide knowledge of
death.
Beauchamp, Tom L., ed. 1996. Intending Death: The Ethics of Assisted
Suicide and Euthanasia. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 234
pp. ISBN: 0-13-199555-3.
This book is a collection of essays which examine various
ethical issues related to assisted suicide and euthanasia. Through
Print Resources
229
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

these essays, the book addresses philosophical points, clinical
issues, and political, legal, and economic concerns.
Cauthen, Kenneth. 1999. The Ethics of Assisted Death. Lima, OH:
CSS Publishing Company. 101 pp. ISBN: 0-7880-1332-7.
This book highlights the arguments for and against physi-
cian-assisted death, outlines the personal stories of Karen Ann
Quinlan, Austin Bastable, Nancy Cruzan, and several others, and
analyzes legal rulings. It also offers the author’s own analysis,
with biblical and philosophical references to buttress his reason-
ing.
Cohen-Almagor, Raphael. 2001. The Right to Die with Dignity. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. 304 pp. ISBN: 0-8135-
2986-7.
This book examines the medical ethics concerns surrounding
right-to-die issues. In addition, it examines the sanctity and quali-
ty of life in issues of medical ethics and analyzes the role of the
patients’ loved ones in end-of-life decisions. The author provides
his own analysis and insight into Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act
and euthanasia policies and practices in the Netherlands.
Evans, Glen, and Norman L. Farberow. 2003. The Encyclopedia of
Suicide. New York: Facts on File. 329 pp. ISBN: 0-8160-4525-9.
This book is literally an encyclopedia of suicide. It begins
with a history of suicide and includes entries related to suicide
from A to Z. Assisted suicide, euthanasia, and several of the organ-
izations listed in Chapter 7 of this volume are among its entries.
Firestone, Robert W. 1997. Suicide and the Inner Voice: Risk
Assessment, Treatment, and Case Management. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications. 333 pp. ISBN: 0-7619-0555-3.
This book provides an overview of suicide, including suicide
among specific age groups, suicide prevention, risk assessments,
and treatment strategies. The chapter addressing suicide among
older people includes specific treatment notes and addresses the
right-to-die controversy.
Hamel, Ronald P., and Edwin R. DuBose, eds. 1996. Must We Suffer
Our Way to Death? Dallas, TX: Southern Methodist University
Press. 355 pp. ISBN: 0-87074-393-7.
230
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

This book is a collection of essays examining the concepts of
assisted suicide and euthanasia from various perspectives. The
first section addresses these concepts from various academic per-
spectives, including law, sociology, and medicine. The second sec-
tion, with essays by theologians, examines issues of assisted death
in the context of various religions.
Hawkins, Gail N., ed. 2002. Physician-Assisted Suicide. San Diego,
CA: Greenhaven Press. 75 pp. ISBN: 0-7377-1056-X.
This book is a collection of point-counterpoint essays
addressing a variety of topics related to physician-assisted suicide,
including ethics, public opinion, and whether citizens have a right
to physician-assisted suicide.
Humphry, Derek. 2002. Final Exit. New York: Dell Publishing. 220
pp. ISBN: 0-385-33653-5.
This book offers practical guidelines for people who are
“mortally ill and [desire] a quick end.” In the author’s introduc-
tion, he describes his own experience of assisting in the suicide of
his wife, Jean, at her request. The book contains chapters on vari-
ous topics, including seeking a physician to help, ways to die, and
choosing the time for death. In addition, practical matters, such as
life insurance, a checklist, and letters to write prior to death, are
also included.
Joiner, Thomas. 2005. Why People Die by Suicide. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. 276 pp. ISBN: 0-674-01901-6.
This book is the result of study and personal experience. The
book offers a human spin on the statistics, data, and other infor-
mation surrounding the issue of suicide. The book’s prologue
offers insight into the author’s personal experience and how it led
him to explore existing theories about suicide and develop his
own hypotheses.
Kopelman, Loretta M., and Kenneth A. De Ville, eds. 2001.
Physician-Assisted Suicide: What Are the Issues? Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers. 235 pp. ISBN: 0-7923-7142-9.
This book is a compilation of papers presented at a confer-
ence of the Department of Medical Humanities in the Brody
School of Medicine at East Carolina University and elsewhere. The
editors begin the book by providing background information on
Print Resources
231
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

physician-assisted suicide, including information about key legal
matters, the history of the issue, and opposing viewpoints. The
papers are divided into key topic areas, including the permissibil-
ity of physician-assisted suicide, challenging physician-assisted
suicide, clinical perspectives, and the future of the issue.
Larson, Edward J., and Darrel W. Amundsen. 1998. A Different
Death. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press. 288 pp. ISBN: 0-
8308-1518-X.
This book examines the concept of euthanasia vis-à-vis
Christian teachings. Chapters explore various issues, including
the concepts of euthanasia and suicide since early Christianity,
legal issues, and the right-to-die movement.
Lee, Barbara Coombs. 2003. Compassion in Dying: Stories of Dignity
and Choice. Troutdale, OR: NewSage Press. 137 pp. ISBN: 0-9391-
6549-X.
This book, by the president of Compassion in Dying, is a
series of personal stories about death on one’s own terms. The
book includes a foreword by former Oregon governor Barbara
Roberts highlighting Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act and how it
came to be.
Lewis, Milton James. 2007. Medicine and Care of the Dying: A
Modern History. Oxford; NY: Oxford University Press. 277 pp.
ISBN: 0-1951-7548-4.
Medicine and Care of the Dying: A Modern History covers a
plethora of issues including the dying person’s search for meaning
as well as pain management and other issues related to palliative
care.
Lewis, Penney. 2007. Assisted Dying and Legal Change. Oxford; NY:
Oxford University Press, 217 pp. ISBN: 978-0-19921-287-3.
This book focuses on the various legal issues related to
assisted dying, including legalization of providing such assis-
tance.
Long, Robert Emmet, ed. 1995. Suicide. New York: H.W. Wilson
Company. 162 pp. ISBN: 0-8242-0869-2.
This book offers a collection of articles from magazines and
other periodicals. One group of articles addresses the situation
232
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

surrounding the death of Nancy Cruzan and another focuses on
Dr. Jack Kevorkian and the issue of assisted suicide.
Lukas, Christopher, and Henry M. Seiden. 1998. Silent Grief: Living
in the Wake of Suicide. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson. 252 pp. ISBN:
0-7657-0056-5.
This book uses personal stories to relate experiences of suicide
survivors. It offers survivors information on what they can expect
following their attempted suicide and the emotional reactions that
can occur. Another section highlights some of the bargaining sur-
vivors do to ease the pain and otherwise cope. A final section out-
lines ways that survivors can help themselves and others.
Manning, Michael. 1998. Euthanasia and Physician-Assisted Suicide.
New York: Paulist Press. 120 pp. ISBN: 0-8091-3804-2.
This book, by a physician and priest, outlines the history of
euthanasia, including both secular and religious milestones. It out-
lines the slippery slope argument, addresses the issues of euthanasia
and physician-assisted suicide in the context of medical profession-
als, and highlights information from the Netherlands. It also empha-
sizes the importance of differentiating between the concepts of
killing someone and allowing them to die in euthanasia arguments,
since some view them as two separate issues, while others do not.
Marcus, Eric. 1996. Why Suicide? San Francisco: HarperSan
Francisco. 240 pp. ISBN: 0-06-251166-1.
This book addresses various issues related to suicide, includ-
ing suicide among teens and youth, suicide among the elderly,
and ways to cope with the suicide of a friend or loved one. The
book answers numerous questions about suicide, providing
everything from statistical information to information about laws
related to suicide. In addition, the book provides practical infor-
mation such as matters related to life insurance when suicide is the
cause of death.
McIntosh, John L., John F. Santos, Richard W. Hubbard, and James
C. Overholser. 1994. Elder Suicide: Research, Theory, and Treatment.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 260 pp.
ISBN: 1-55798-240-6.
This book examines the issue of suicide as it pertains specif-
ically to the elderly. One chapter, on special high-risk factors, notes
Print Resources
233
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

that the elderly are often at greater risk for suicide due to factors
including retirement, widowhood, and illness. The authors also
examine and analyze theories of suicide, clinical approaches spe-
cific to the elderly, and prevention.
Mishara, Brian L., ed. 1995. The Impact of Suicide. New York:
Springer Publishing. 230 pp. ISBN: 0-8261-8870-2.
This book examines the ways suicide impacts family mem-
bers and friends, helpers, the individual, and society. The book
contains useful facts, statistics, and other data, and offers informa-
tion on issues such as counseling.
Scherer, Jennifer M., and Rita J. Simon. 1999. Euthanasia and the
Right to Die. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 150 pp. ISBN: 0-
8476-9166-7.
This book provides historical information on issues related
to death and dying. It includes information from the United States,
Canada, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Australia, China,
Japan, South Africa, and Israel.
Smith, Wesley, J. 2003. Forced Exit: The Slippery Slope from Assisted
Suicide to Legalized Murder. Dallas, TX: Spence Publishing
Company. 364 pp. ISBN: 1-890626-48-1.
In his introduction, Wesley J. Smith tells the story of a dear
friend who chose to end her life. As he tells it, this experience was
pivotal for him: It motivated him to crusade against euthanasia
and eventually to write this book. He addresses various issues rel-
evant to euthanasia, including the concepts of “disposable peo-
ple” and “death fundamentalists,” or people who are obsessed
with death. He also examines the issue in the context of the
Netherlands and lists some of the most common arguments
against his own positions.
Szasz, Thomas. 1999. Fatal Freedom: The Ethics and Politics of Suicide.
Westport, CT: Praeger. 177 pp. ISBN: 0-275-96646-1.
In this book, the author argues that suicide should be a choice
for individuals. In support of that argument, the book’s chapters
offer a breakdown of the concept of suicide, including the terminol-
ogy surrounding it and the way it is addressed in our society. One
chapter, “Prescribing Suicide: Death as Treatment,” specifically
addresses the issues of euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide.
234
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Weir, Robert F., ed. 1997. Physician-Assisted Suicide. Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press. 266 pp. ISBN: 0-253-33282-6.
This book is a collection of essays which present various
viewpoints on the topic of physician-assisted suicide. In the sec-
tion on historical interpretations, one author examines the signifi-
cance of accurate or inaccurate history in contemporary legal deci-
sions. In the section on ethical assessments and positions, one
author posits that there are cases in which physician-assisted sui-
cide is morally justified. The section on medical practices and per-
spectives features essays examining the acceptability of physician-
assisted suicide as a medical practice.
Weisstub, David N., David C. Thomasma, Serge Gauthier, and
George F. Tomossy, eds. 2001. Aging: Decisions at the End of Life.
Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 261 pp. ISBN: 1-4020-01827.
This book is the final volume in the trilogy of the
International Library of Ethics, Law, and the New Medicine. The
book consists of papers on various topics related to end-of-life
issues. The papers are divided into topics, including quality of life,
palliative care, assisted death, suicide, and research ethics.
Werth, James L., Jr. 1996. Rational Suicide: Implications for Mental
Health Professionals. Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis. 152 pp.
ISBN: 1-5603-24244.
This book begins with an overview of suicide and recent
views on the topic of rational suicide. It also offers arguments
against rational suicide, criteria for determining rational suicide,
and ethical and legal considerations.
Whiting, Raymond. 2002. A Natural Right to Die. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press. 222 pp. ISBN: 0-313-31474-8.
In this book, the author notes that euthanasia is, de facto,
practiced in the United States. He argues that the historical aspects
of whether a right to die exists can be a useful tool in making
determinations, as a society, about end-of-life issues. In addition to
examining the history of the issue, he offers a study of the interna-
tional aspects and history and development surrounding the
right-to-die issue.
Yount, Lisa. 2000. Physician-Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia. New
York: Facts on File. 282 pp. ISBN: 0-8160-4021-4.
Print Resources
235
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

This book provides a thorough overview of end-of-life
issues. An overview, including an introduction to the concept,
legal highlights, and a chronology, is followed by information for
additional research. Appendices highlight Oregon’s Death with
Dignity Act and various key legal rulings.
Zucker, Marjorie B., ed. The Right to Die Debate. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press. 303 pp. ISBN: 0-313-30522-6.
This book provides a documentary history of the debate sur-
rounding right-to-die issues in the United States. The book begins
with excerpts from William Shakespeare and John Donne and
moves on to definitions of death, including language from Edgar
Allan Poe. The section on death in the nineteenth century includes
a letter from Florence Nightingale. The book also includes docu-
ments which address living wills, advance directives, patients’
rights, and medical powers of attorney. Legal citations include
documents from relevant Supreme Court cases, as well as docu-
ments and decisions from some lower courts, including various
state supreme courts.
Articles
Arnold, Elizabeth Mayfield. 2004. “Factors That Influence
Consideration of Hastening Death among People with Life-
Threatening Illnesses.” Health & Social Work 29 (1): 17–26.
This article notes that little research exists on why certain
people explore the option of assisted suicide while others in simi-
lar medical situations do not. The article cites various studies and
data in examining factors including pain, hope, and social sup-
port. In addition, the author conducted a survey of individuals
with life-threatening illnesses to gain better insight into the issue.
The results are reported in the article.
Cahill, Lisa Sowle. 2005. “Catholicism, Death and Modern
Medicine.” America 192 (14): 14–17.
This article compares the circumstances surrounding the
deaths of Pope John Paul II and Terri Schiavo and highlights a
speech Pope John Paul II gave on end-of-life issues in March 2004.
Critical analysis of the pope’s speech is included, as is discussion
of the speech’s relevance to the Schiavo case.
236
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Dixon, Nicholas. 1998. “On the Difference between Physician-
Assisted Suicide and Active Euthanasia.” Hastings Center Report 28
(5): 25–29.
In this article, the author argues that, despite the efforts of
some policy experts to establish a clear differentiation between
physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia, the same arguments
apply to both issues. The article highlights various arguments on
the issues and cites the reasons that they apply to both.
Driedger, Sharon Doyle with Jennifer Hunter, Nomi Morris, and
Mark Nichols. 1998. “Everyone Knows It Happens.” Maclean’s,
March 9, 50, 2 pp.
This article introduces the reader to several people who are
struggling with terminal illnesses and offers perspectives from
both sides of the right-to-die debate. The article also offers results
from a poll of Canadian physicians regarding euthanasia and pro-
vides information on palliative care.
Girsh, Faye. 2000. “Death with Dignity: Choices and Challenges.”
USA Today Magazine, March, 62–64.
The article begins by examining the options available for peo-
ple facing end-of-life decisions and cites surveys and studies which
buttress the idea of change in this area. In addition to anecdotal
information about people who have made various choices related
to the ends of their lives, the article highlights Oregon’s Death with
Dignity Act and urges readers to know their rights in this matter.
Gittelman, David K. 1999. “Euthanasia and Physician-Assisted
Suicide.” Southern Medical Journal 92 (4): 369–374.
This article defines euthanasia and physician-assisted sui-
cide and offers a history of the issues, results from polls on the
issues, an international perspective, and information on related
psychiatric issues. In addition, it discusses ethical and legal con-
cerns and examines the potential for abuse.
Grace, Julie. 1999. “Curtains for Dr. Death.” Time, April 5, 48.
This article, reporting that Dr. Jack Kevorkian was found
guilty of murder in the death of Thomas Youk, recounts details
from the trial. The article also provides highlights of the videotape,
aired on 60 Minutes, which resulted in Kevorkian’s trial and con-
Print Resources
237
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

viction. In addition, the article includes reaction from Youk’s
widow, Melody, and his brother, Terry.
Keizer, Garret. 2005. “Life Everlasting.” Harper’s Magazine,
February, 53–61.
This article highlights the case of Lloyd Thompson, a
Vermont physician who was reprimanded by the state medical
board for his role in the death of an 85-year-old patient. It also
examines existing euthanasia laws and provides information
about some organizations concerned with end-of-life issues.
Lauritzen, Paul. 2006. “Caring at the end.” Commonweal 133 (5):
14–16.
This article examines the case of Terri Schiavo, and the gen-
eral topic of withholding nutrition and hydration, vis-à-vis the
teachings of the Roman Catholic Church. The article cites state-
ments made by Pope John Paul II and quotations from various
people who weighed in on the Schiavo case.
Mackelprang, Romel D., and Romel W. Mackelprang. 2005.
“Historical and Contemporary Issues in End-of-Life Decisions:
Implications for Social Work.” Social Work 50  (4): 315–324.
This article examines end-of-life issues and places them in a
historical context. It includes a brief discussion of some existing
laws and the impact they have had on the issue to date. The arti-
cle also includes a section on end-of-life issues and decisions, espe-
cially as they relate to social work.
Martindale, Diane. 2005. “A Culture of Death.” Scientific American,
June, 44–46.
This article highlights Russel Ogden’s research into the
occurrences of laypeople (i.e., people with no medical training)
assisting in suicides. The research, which began as Ogden’s grad-
uate project, detailed the experiences of laypeople who had assist-
ed others in committing suicide.
Osgood, Nancy J. 1995. “Assisted Suicide and Older People—A
Deadly Combination: Ethical Problems in Permitting Assisted
Suicide.” Issues in Law and Medicine 10 (4): 415–435.
This article begins with a synopsis of the case of Janet
Adkins, a 54-year-old woman suffering from Alzheimer’s disease,
238
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

who sought Dr. Jack Kevorkian’s assistance with committing sui-
cide. The author provides statistics about suicide in the elderly
and addresses this issue.
Parks, Jennifer A. 2000. “Why Gender Matters to the Euthanasia
Debate.” Hastings Center Report 30 (1): 30–36.
This article asks whether men and women are treated differ-
ently when it comes to assistance in dying. The author provides
background on the topic and cites data related to Dr. Jack
Kevorkian’s patients in the United States and euthanasia in the
Netherlands. In addition, the author offers context for the issue by
providing arguments about additional areas in which women and
men are treated differently.
Rayner, Claire. 2000. “You Say Murder, I Say Euthanasia.” New
Statesman, June 19, 31.
This article describes a forum on euthanasia held at the Science
Museum in London, England. The forum marked the arrival of a
new exhibit featuring a euthanasia machine developed by Dr. Philip
Nitschke and donated to the museum by the Voluntary Euthanasia
Research Foundation of Australia. Based on the controversy sur-
rounding the forum and the exhibit, the author proposes that
requests for euthanasia be addressed on a case-by-case basis.
Rogatz, Peter. 2001. “The Positive Virtues of Physician-Assisted
Suicide.” Humanist 61 (6): 31–34.
This article explores the concept of physician-assisted sui-
cide, including arguments on both sides of the issue and high-
lights of relevant studies.
Spinney, Laura. 2003. “Playing God?” New Scientist 180 (2415):
48–51.
This article features an interview with Dr. Philip Nitschke, a
doctor who assisted in several suicides during the brief period
when that was legal in Australia’s Northern Territory.
Stevens, Jr., Kenneth R. 2006. “Emotional and Psychological Effects
of Physician-Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia on Participating
Physicians.” Issues in Law and Medicine 21 (3): 187–200.
This article reviews and evaluates published information
regarding physician-assisted suicide. Sources include publications
Print Resources
239
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

aimed at both the medical community and the public. The focus of
the article is determining the emotional and psychological impact
on physicians who assist patients in committing suicide.
Vatz, Richard E., and Lee S. Weinberg. 1999. “Dr. Kevorkian on the
Air: CBS and 60 Minutes Dropped the Ball.” USA Today Magazine,
May, 66–68.
This article outlines Dr. Jack Kevorkian’s appearance on 60
Minutes on November 22, 1998. During that episode, the program
aired a videotape of Dr. Kevorkian administering an injection to
Thomas Youk. Youk had Lou Gehrig’s disease (amyotrophic later-
al sclerosis [ALS]) and had requested Dr. Kevorkian’s assistance in
committing suicide. The authors of this article address the notion
of airing this videotape, highlight some of the ensuing reactions,
and provide information about Dr. Kevorkian.
Legal-Political
Books
Battin, Margaret P., Rosamond Rhodes, and Anita Silvers, eds.
1998. Physician-Assisted Suicide: Expanding the Debate. New York:
Routledge. 463 pp. ISBN: 0-4159-2002-7.
In their introduction, the editors note that the chapters in this
book address many of the issues that arose from the Supreme
Court’s 1997 decisions in Washington v. Glucksberg and Vacco v.
Quill, as well as Oregon’s 1994 vote to uphold Measure 16, the
state’s Death with Dignity Act. The book has sections on concep-
tual issues, considering those at risk, the impact of legalization,
and religious perspectives.
Colby, William H. 2002. Long Goodbye: The Deaths of Nancy Cruzan.
Carlsbad, CA: Hay House. 414 pp. ISBN: 1-4019-0011-9.
William H. Colby served as the Cruzan family’s attorney
during their legal fight to have Nancy Cruzan’s feeding tube
removed. In this book, Colby recounts how Cruzan, age 25, was
critically injured in an automobile accident and fell into a coma.
The book is Colby’s account of the legal aspects of the case and the
way it impacted Cruzan’s family, as well as the nation, in terms of
end-of-life issues.
240
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Dyck, Arthur J. 2001. When Killing Is Wrong: Physician-Assisted
Suicide and the Courts. Cleveland, OH: The Pilgrim Press. 127 pp.
ISBN: 0-8298-1417-5.
The author uses judicial rulings in physician-assisted suicide
cases in his examination of the overall issue of physician-assisted
suicide. The book discusses some of the most basic legal issues of
physician-assisted suicide, including what life-sustaining treat-
ment has meant in a legal context, and cites legal rulings in exam-
ining other key aspects of the issue.
Hillyard, Daniel, and John Dombrink. 2001. Dying Right. New
York: Routledge. 304 pp. ISBN: 0-415-92799-4.
This book provides a history of the death-with-dignity
movement in the United States. Chapters address specific issues
and highlights of the movement, including Oregon’s Death with
Dignity Act, legislation in other states, international laws and
viewpoints, polling information, and legal rulings.
Humphry, Derek. 1993. Lawful Exit. Junction City, OR: The Norris
Lane Press. 166 pp. ISBN: 0-9637280-0-8.
In this book, the author examines the illegality of assisted
suicide in the United States. In addition to recounting highlights of
legislative efforts to legalize assisted suicide, Humphry provides
analysis of court cases and includes information about the practice
of assisted suicide in the Netherlands.
Humphry, Derek, and Mary Clement. 1998. Freedom to Die: People,
Politics and the Right-to-die Movement. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
388 pp. ISBN: 0-312-19415-3.
In this book, the authors argue that the time has come to
legalize assisted suicide. The authors chronicle the right-to-die
movement, highlight specific cases including Karen Ann Quinlan
and those assisted by Dr. Jack Kevorkian, address arguments
against assisted suicide, and examine the possible future of the
movement.
Olick, Robert S. 2001. Taking Advance Directives Seriously:
Prospective Autonomy and Decisions near the End of Life. Washington,
DC: Georgetown University Press. 228 pp. ISBN: 0-87840-868-1.
This book offers a thorough overview of advance directives,
including clarification of complex issues. It also suggests changes
Print Resources
241
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

to improve the ways advance directives are used for end-of-life
care. The book provides insight into the legal aspects of this issue,
with special attention to Karen Ann Quinlan and Nancy Cruzan,
as well as legislative highlights.
Schneider, Carl E., ed. 2000. Law at the End of Life: The Supreme
Court and Assisted Suicide. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan
Press. 369 pp. ISBN: 0-472-11157-4.
This book examines the background of the Washington v.
Glucksberg case and includes sections on judicial principle, clinical
practice, and public policy. Contributors dissect the decision in
the case and offer insight in the areas of medicine, ethics, history,
and law. 
Smith, Donald J. 2002. Right-to-Die Policies in the American States:
Judicial and Legislative Innovation. New York: LFB Scholarly
Publishing. 312 pp. ISBN: 1-931202-40-0.
This book addresses what is known as passive euthanasia, or
refusing care that would prolong life. It addresses the issue from
judicial and legal perspectives, including case studies, an exami-
nation of policies, and in-depth looks at legislation, judicial inno-
vation, and places where the two branches meet.
Thomasma, David C., Thomasine Kimbrough-Kushner, Gerrit K.
Kimsma, and Chris Ciesielski-Carlucci, eds. 1998. Asking to Die:
Inside the Dutch Debate about Euthanasia. Boston: Kluwer Academic
Publishers. 584 pp. ISBN: 0-7923-5186-X.
This book examines euthanasia in the Netherlands, where it
is legal. The book focuses on the issue in a variety of ways, includ-
ing discussions of public policy, personal stories from physicians
and families, and the pros and cons associated with the issue. The
book contains material relevant to the United States, including a
comparison of practices in the Netherlands and the United States.
Articles
Bergman, Brian. 1998. “The Final Hours.” Maclean’s, March 19,
46–49.
This article recounts the events leading to a judge’s decision
against trying Dr. Nancy Morrison, a respirologist in Canada, for
murder. The death in question was that of Paul Mills, the patient
Dr. Morrison was accused of murdering by lethal injection. Mills,
242
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

65, had cancer and had faced numerous major surgeries; he report-
edly told at least one nurse that he wanted to die.
Bristo, Marc, and Robert L. Burgdorf, Jr. 1998. “Assisted Suicide: A
Disability Perspective.” Issues in Law and Medicine 14 (3): 273–300.
This article emphasizes the complexity of the issue of assist-
ed suicide by outlining the endless permutations that make each
situation unique and complicated. It highlights the issues
involved in the Supreme Court cases at the time of publication.
The author includes information from the perspective of persons
with disabilities and offers a conclusion and a position statement
from the National Council on Disability.
Cloud, John, and Abi Daruvalla. 2001. “A License to Kill?” Time
Europe, April 23, 60.
This article outlines the Dutch legalization of euthanasia,
noting that the country is the first to have legalized euthanasia.
The article compares the Dutch law with Oregon’s Death with
Dignity Act and cites polling information from Europe on the sub-
ject of the law.
Cohen-Almagor, Raphael. 2003. “Non-Voluntary and Involuntary
Euthanasia in the Netherlands: Dutch Perspectives.” Issues in Law
& Medicine 18 (3): 239–257.
This article begins with an explanation of the medical and
legal requirements for euthanasia in the Netherlands. It also
includes information from interviews with leading Netherlands-
based experts on euthanasia policy. The interviews focused on
cases of nonvoluntary (where consent cannot be given) and invol-
untary (without consent) euthanasia.
Corbett, Bryce, Susan Horsburgh, and Dietlind Lerner. 2003. “Her
Son’s Last Wish.” People, October 13, 83–84.
This article recounts the case of Vincent Humbert of France.
Following a motorcycle accident, Humbert, age 21, could not walk,
talk, see, smell, or taste. He wanted to die—and he asked his moth-
er, Marie, to help him. She did, and she was arrested for her actions.
Darr, Kurt. 1997. “Physician-Assisted Suicide and the Supreme
Court: Implications for Health Services Delivery.” Hospital Topics
75 (3): 4–6.
Print Resources
243
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

This article offers a breakdown of the Supreme Court deci-
sions in Washington v. Glucksberg and Vacco v. Quill, including the
rationale for the decisions and background on the issue of
euthanasia. Recognizing that these decisions will have implica-
tions for hospital administrators and other personnel, the author
includes a section on practical ways that hospitals can be prepared
to deal with these decisions.
Doig, Christopher James, Glenys Godlovitch, and Ian Mitchell.
2005. “Discontinuing Life Support in Comatose Patients: An
Example from Canadian Case Law.” Canadian Medical Association
Journal 172 (9): 1172–1173.
This article presents information about the case of a
Canadian man on life support and addresses the legal issues that
arose given the lack of an advance directive. The article also
includes information about other cases in Canada and mentions
the case of Terri Schiavo.
Gorsuch, Neil M. 2000. “The Right to Assisted Suicide and
Euthanasia.” Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy 23 (3): 599–710.
This article offers an in-depth study of the issue of euthana-
sia. Topics include the history of the issue, legal milestones,
detailed analysis of court decisions, and arguments for and
against. In addition to information about Oregon’s implementa-
tion of its Death with Dignity Act, the article offers feedback from
the Netherlands about that country’s experience with the issue.
Guthrie, Patricia. 2006. “Assisted Suicide Debated in the United
States.” Canadian Medical Association Journal 174 (6): 755–756.
This article contains information about existing assisted-suicide
laws in the United States, includes highlights of the Terri Schiavo
case and other timely legal matters, and notes that California’s law
is under legislative scrutiny at the time of publication.
Mariner, Wendy K. 1997. “Physician-Assisted Suicide and the
Supreme Court: Putting the Constitutional Claim To Rest.”
American Journal of Public Health 87 (12): 2058–2062.
This article examines Washington v. Glucksberg and Vacco v.
Quill, key Supreme Court cases on the subject of physician-assist-
ed suicide. The focus of the article is the constitutional issues asso-
ciated with these cases.
244
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Quirk, Patrick. 1998. “Euthanasia in the Commonwealth of
Australia.” Issues in Law and Medicine 13 (4): 425–446.
This article addresses the complex issue of euthanasia in
Australia. A chronology of events surrounding the issue is includ-
ed in the article’s appendix and the article contains a useful
description of Australian government to assist the reader in plac-
ing the issue in the proper context.
Short, Bradford William. 2005. “More History ‘Lite’ in Modern
American Bioethics.” Issues in Law and Medicine 21 (1): 3–34.
In this article, the author takes issue with the accuracy and
interpretation of historical quotations used to buttress support for
euthanasia. He asserts that accuracy is crucial because these quo-
tations, and the way they are interpreted, form part of the founda-
tion of contemporary judicial rulings.
Stone, Alan A. 1997. “Physician-Assisted Suicide and the
Psychiatric Profession.” Harvard Mental Health Letter 13 (7): 4–7.
This article uses the circumstances of Sigmund Freud’s death
as a springboard to pose contemporary and complex questions
about the issue of physicians assisting in the deaths of patients.
The article reviews the issues surrounding two cases which, hav-
ing been heard by the Second and Ninth Circuit Courts of Appeal,
respectively, were headed to the United States Supreme Court. In
addition, this article raises the question of whether psychiatric dis-
orders provide a justification for physician-assisted suicide.
Works of Fiction
Cook, Robin. 1995. Fatal Cure. New York: Berkeley Books. 449 pp.
ISBN: 0-425-14563-8.
In this book, the author creates a scenario in which managed
care plays a sinister role in leading a community down a slippery
slope to involuntary euthanasia. Set in a state-of-the-art communi-
ty hospital in Vermont, the novel tells the story of a husband-and-
wife medical team and their discovery of a euthanasia program
aimed at cutting health care costs.
Delblanco, Nicholas. 1995. In the Name of Mercy. New York: Warner
Books. 310 pp. ISBN: 0-446-51711-9.
Print Resources
245
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

This novel addresses several issues related to euthanasia. A
physician helps his wife, suffering from cancer, to die. Following
her death, he complies with requests for assistance with commit-
ting suicide from several patients who are facing terminal illness-
es. Eventually, he becomes less concerned about people’s wishes
and the deaths are no longer limited to those who wish to die.
Kellerman, Jonathan. Dr. Death. 2000. New York: Ballantine. 448
pp. ISBN: 0-345-41388-1
In this novel, protagonist Alex Delaware joins his friend,
Detective Milo Sturgis, in solving a puzzling mystery. The sce-
nario: Milo has a case in which Dr. Eldon Mate is found dead. The
deceased physician, known as Dr. Death for his repeated role in
helping people commit suicide, was found hooked up to the
machine he created to help people end their lives.
Picoult, Jodi. 1996. Mercy. New York: Pocket Books. 416 pp. ISBN:
0-7434-2244-9.
This book examines a case of a husband assisting his wife
with committing suicide in a small town in Massachusetts. The
setting is a rather eccentric community where the residents, who
are mostly of Scottish descent, grapple with various issues, includ-
ing affairs of the heart.
Solomon, Andrew. 1994. A Stone Boat. New York: Faber & Faber.
241 pp. ISBN: 0-4522-7498-2.
This is the story of a young man who helps his mother com-
mit suicide to end her battle with cancer. Set in the United States
and England, the novel also tells the young man’s story about his
own doubts regarding his sexual orientation.
Tolstoy, Leo. 1981. The Death of Ivan Ilych. New York: Bantam
Books. ISBN: 0-4515-2508-6.
This is a collection of Tolstoy’s short stories and essays that
address issues related to death and dying. All of the works in the
book provide a valuable look at the universal issues surrounding
death and dying, minus contemporary concerns such as managed
care that sometimes cloud the more timeless issues.
246
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Periodicals
Journal: Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior
Newsletters: Surviving Suicide and Newslink
American Association of Suicidology (AAS)
5221 Wisconsin Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20015
Web site: http://www.suicidology.org
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior is a quarterly journal that
addresses suicide-related issues from a variety of perspectives,
including biology, statistics, psychology, and sociology. Surviving
Suicide, which is also published on a quarterly basis, is a newsletter
aimed at those who have lost a loved one to suicide. Newslink, the
American Association of Suicidology’s official newsletter, is pub-
lished to keep members up to date on the organization’s activities.
Newsletter: Lifesavers
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (AFSP)
120 Wall Street, 22nd Floor
New York, New York 10005
Web site: http://www.afsp.org
Lifesavers, a quarterly newsletter, communicates important issues
and organizational activities.
Journals: Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics and American
Journal of Law & Medicine
American Society of Law, Medicine & Ethics (ASLME)
765 Commonwealth Avenue, Suite 1634
Boston, Massachusetts 02215
Web site: http://www.aslme.org/
The Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, a peer-reviewed journal, is
aimed at health care professionals, while the American Journal of
Law & Medicine highlights health law and legal and ethical matters
related to the practice of medicine.
Newsletter: ABCD Exchange
Americans for Better Care of the Dying (ABCD)
1700 Diagonal Road, Suite 635
Alexandria, Virginia 22314
Web site: http://www.abcd-caring.org
Periodicals
247
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

ABCD Exchange, published several times per year, covers organi-
zational activities provides information about end-of-life issues.
Newsletter: AUL Momentum
Americans United for Life (AUL)
310 South Peoria, Suite 300
Chicago, Illinois 60607
Web site: http://www.unitedforlife.org
AUL Momentum addresses public policy matters related to the
organization’s advocacy issues.
Journals: Omega: the Journal of Death and Dying, Death Studies,
The Journal of Loss and Trauma, and Mortality
Magazine: Living with Loss
Newsletter: Forum
Association for Death Education and Counseling (ADEC)
60 Revere Drive, Suite 500
Northbrook, Illinois 60062
Web site: http://www.adec.org
Omega: the Journal of Death and Dying addresses end-of-life issues,
including terminal illness and death and dying. Death Studies,
published ten times per year, addresses death-related issues,
including bereavement, suicide, and grief therapy. The Journal of
Loss and Trauma deals with issues related to personal loss, includ-
ing death, divorce, illness, and loss of a job. Mortality, published
four times per year, addresses issues of death and dying. Formerly
known as Bereavement Magazine, the Living with Loss magazine is
published four times per year and offers hope and healing. The
Forum, a quarterly newsletter, provides professional development
and other important information on a variety of topics related to
death and dying.
Newsletter: Update
Center for Christian Bioethics
Coleman Pavilion
11121 S. Loma Linda University
Loma Linda, California 92350
Web site: http://www.llu.edu/llu/bioethics/
Update, a quarterly newsletter, provides news and opinions on a vari-
ety of issues related to projects and issues of the Center for Christian
Bioethics. The publication also provides conference updates.
248
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Magazine: Compassion and Choices
Compassion and Choices
P.O. Box 101810
Denver, Colorado 80250-1810
Web site: http://www.compassionandchoices.org/
Compassion and Choices magazine is published four times per year. In
addition to information on the organization’s activities, the maga-
zine offers a calendar of events, national news, and reader feedback.
Newsletter: Death with Dignity Report
Death with Dignity National Center (DDNC)
520 SW 6th Avenue, Suite 1030
Portland, Oregon 97204
Web site: http://www.deathwithdignity.org
The Death with Dignity Report is a quarterly newsletter covering
current news and events about end-of-life issues, including legal
developments, legislative updates, organizational activities, and
personal stories.
Journal: Hastings Center Report
The Hastings Center
21 Malcolm Gordon Road
Garrison, New York 10524-4125
Web site: http://www.thehastingscenter.org
The Hastings Center Report is a bimonthly journal which addresses
ethical issues in health, medicine, and the environment. The Report
includes both articles and opinion-based pieces.
Magazine: Caring
Hospice Association of America (HAA)
228 Seventh Street, SE
Washington, DC 20003
Web site: http://www.hospice-america.org/
Caring magazine is a monthly publication which addresses various
issues related to home care of the dying and hospice, including pol-
icy issues, as well as technological and clinical developments.
Newsletter: Update
International Task Force on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide
P.O. Box 760
Steubenville, Ohio 43952
Periodicals
249
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Web site: http://www.iaetf.org or
http://www.internationaltaskforce.org
Update provides current information on euthanasia and assisted
suicide in a variety of areas, including legal cases, policy matters,
international news, and legislative developments.
Journal: Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal
The Kennedy Institute of Ethics at Georgetown University
Healy, 4th Floor
Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057
Web site: http://kennedyinstitute.georgetown.edu/
index.htm
The Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal offers an academic perspec-
tive on various issues in bioethics.
Newsletter: Quality Care Advocate
National Citizens’ Coalition for Nursing Home Reform
(NCCNHR)
1828 L Street, NW, Suite 801
Washington, D.C. 20036
Web site: http://www.nursinghomeaction.org
Quality Care Advocate features updates on policy developments,
legal news, and legislative updates.
Journal: The Journal of Pain and Symptom Management
Magazine: Insights
Newsletters: NewsBriefs, andNewsLine
The National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization 
(NHPCO)
1700 Diagonal Road, Suite 625
Alexandria, Virginia 22314
Web site:www.nhpco.org
The Journal of Pain and Symptom Management is a monthly peer-
reviewed journal. Insights magazine, published four times per
year, provides information and updates for professionals and vol-
unteers who work in a hospice and/or palliative care setting.
NewsBriefs is a weekly publication geared toward organizations
that provide hospice and/or palliative care. NewsLine, a monthly
publication, is also for these providers, as well as other NHPCO
member organizations. 
250
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Journal: Second Opinion
Newsletter: e-Ethics Newsletter
Park Ridge Center
205 West Touhy Avenue, Suite 203
Park Ridge, Illinois 60068-4202
Web site: http://www.parkridgecenter.org/
Second Opinion, published four times per year, examines ethical
issues related to health care. The e-Ethics Newsletter is published
monthly; it addresses ethical issues in various areas, including
health policy and clinical care.
Newsletter: Supportive Voice
Supportive Care Coalition: Pursuing Excellence in
Palliative Care
Sr. Karin Dufault, SP
c/o Providence Health System
4805 NE Glisen 2E07
Portland, Oregon 97213
Web site: http://www.SupportiveCareCoalition.org
Supportive Voice includes best practices in palliative care and offers
insights into caring for the dying.
Newsletters: Bulletin and The Letter
Association pour le Droit de Mourir dans la Dignite (ADMD)
50 rue de Chabrol
75010 Paris, France
Web site: http://www.admd.net/
Bulletin, published four times per year, highlights various topics
and includes organization news, personal stories, events, and
polling information. The Letter, published semiannually, provides
a forum for discussion of various matters, including ethical issues
related to the end of life.
Newsletter: Deliverance
EXIT International
PO Box 37781
Darwin NT 0821, Australia
Web site: http://www.exitinternational.net/
Deliverance, published monthly, includes legal updates, news about
the organization, updates about various chapters throughout the
world, editorials, and event information.
Periodicals
251
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Newsletter: FATE Newsletter
Friends at the End (FATE)
11 Westbourne Gardens
Glasgow, Scotland G12 9XD
Web site: http://www.friends-at-the-end.org.uk
FATE Newsletter highlights the organization’s activities, news, and
events and provides updates on legal developments and other
news related to end-of-life issues.
Newsletter: Free to Go
Right to Die Society of Canada (RDSC)
145 Macdonell Avenue
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M6R 2A4
Web site: http://www.righttodie.ca/
Free to Go, published quarterly by the RDSC in collaboration with
other Canadian organizations, provides news and updates on
developments within the collaborating organizations, legal devel-
opments, legislative news, international news and information,
anecdotes, and polling information in regard to right-to-die issues.
Nonprint Resources
In addition to the books, articles, and other materials mentioned
earlier in this chapter, there are numerous nonprint resources
that might prove valuable to researchers examining end-of-life
issues. This section provides information on videotapes and
DVDs (nonfiction and fiction), audio recordings, online databas-
es, and Internet sites.
Nonfiction Videotapes
Medical-Bioethical
Title: Difficult Decisions: When a Loved One Approaches Death
Format: VHS, DVD-R, Digital on Demand
Cost: $89.95
ISBN: 0-7365-2295-6
Source: Films Media Group
252
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

(800) 257-5126
http://www.films.com
Two families, assisted by a doctor, an ethicist, and others, face dif-
ficult decisions on behalf of loved ones nearing death in an inten-
sive care unit. 
Title: Tired of Living, Feared of Dying
Format: VHS
Cost: $295 (rental: $75)
Source: The Filmmakers Library
124 East 40th Street
New York, New York 10016
(212) 808-4980 
http://www.filmakers.com
Assisted dying is legal in the Netherlands, where this video was
made. Seven people share their reasons for seeking assistance with
dying; their family members and physicians also express their
thoughts and feelings. 
Spiritual-Social-Cultural
Title: Defining Life: Should One Help a Loved One Die?
Format: VHS
Cost: $295 (rental: $55)
Producer: Beverly Peterson
Source: The Filmakers Library
124 East 40th Street
New York, New York 10016
(212) 808-4980
http://www.filmakers.com
This video provides a glimpse of the struggle family members and
friends experience when faced with a loved one’s request for assis-
tance with committing suicide. 
Title: Doctor Death: Medical Ethics and Doctor-Assisted Suicide
Format: VHS, DVD
Cost: $89.95
Producer: Universal Television, Inc.
ISBN: 1-56950-362-1
Source: Films Media Group
(800) 257-5126
http://www.films.com
Nonprint Resources
253
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

This piece highlights Phil Donahue’s interview of Dr. Jack
Kevorkian about physician-assisted suicide.
Title: Is This Life Worth Living?
Format: VHS
Cost: $195 (rental: $55)
Producer: Slawomir Grunberg
Source: The Filmmakers Library
124 East 40th Street
New York, New York 10016
(212) 808-4980 
http://www.filmakers.com
This video allows viewers to enter the lives of three families who
are caring for severely brain-damaged or comatose loved ones.
Title: Physician-Assisted Suicide: Not Worth Living?
Format: VHS
Cost: $19.99
Publisher: Focus on the Family
Author: John Eldredge
Source: Gospel Light
(800) 446-7735
http://www.gospellight.com
This video addresses euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide
from a biblical standpoint. 
Title: Religion and Euthanasia
Format: DVD-R, VHS
Cost: $89.95
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
(800) 257-5126
http://www.films.com
Euthanasia is examined in medical and religious contexts.
Highlights include discussion of Dr. Jack Kevorkian’s efforts and
legal issues. 
254
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Legal-Political
Title: Michigan v. Kevorkian: The Ethics of Assisted Suicide
Format: DVD
Date: 2002
Cost: $34.95
Publisher: National Film Network LLC
ISBN: 0-8026-0091-3
Source: National Film Network
(800) 431-4586
http://www.nationalfilmnetwork.com
This DVD highlights Dr. Jack Kevorkian’s trial and his efforts to
legalize assisted suicide. It includes interviews with family mem-
bers of people he assisted in committing suicide. 
Title: In Re Michael Martin: A Battle over Life Support
Format: DVD
Date: 2002
Cost: $34.95
Publisher: Choices Inc.
ISBN: 0-8026-0090-5
Source: National Film Network
(800) 431-4586
http://www.nationalfilmnetwork.com
Michael Martin was critically injured in a car accident. This video
tells the story of his wife’s efforts to remove him from life support. 
Title: Who Owns My Life?
Format: VHS
Cost: $350 (rental: $65)
Producer: Canadian Broadcasting Corporation
Source: The Filmmakers Library
124 East 40th Street
New York, New York 10016
(212) 808-4980 
http://www.filmakers.com
This video tells the story of Sue Rodriguez. Rodriguez suffered
from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), commonly known as
Lou Gehrig’s disease. She took her quest for the right to die to the
Supreme Court of Canada. 
Nonprint Resources
255
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Audiocassettes
Title: Final Exit
Author: Derek Humphry
Publisher: Dove Entertainment, Inc.
Date: October 1991
ISBN: 1-5580-0480-7
Cost: $24.95
Source: http://www.amazon.com
This is an audiocassette of Derek Humphry’s book Final Exit.
Title: Misguided Mercy: Euthanasia and Physician-
Assisted Suicide
Author: Catholic Ministry of Health Care Professionals
Publisher: Alba House
Source: Alba House 
(800) 533-2522
http://www.albahouse.org
Databases
AgeLine
Maintained by AARP (formerly the American Association of
Retired Persons), this database contains abstracts of materials
related to aging. It is accessible at http://www.aarp.org/
research/ageline.
ERIC
Sponsored by the Institute of Education Sciences (IES), a division
of the U.S. Department of Education, this database allows
researchers to search nearly 1.2 million citations related to educa-
tion. ERIC (Education Resources Information Center) is accessible
online at http://www.eric.ed.gov. 
PubMed
Maintained by the U.S. National Library of Medicine, this data-
base provides access to more than 16 million records for biomed-
ical research, including articles dating back to the 1950s. MED-
LINE, BIOETHICSLINE, and other medical resources are includ-
ed in PubMed. It is accessible online at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/entrez/query.fcgi?DB=pubmed.
256
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

WESTLAW
This database provides a means to conduct research on legal
issues. Occasional users of the subscription service can charge
their research sessions to a credit card. The service is accessible
online at http://www.westlaw.com.
Internet Sites 
Americans for Better Care of the Dying (ABCD)
Web site: http://www.abcd-caring.org
The organization’s Web site includes links to news and events and
information on existing laws and legislative activity, as well as
online publications and references.
Association for Death Education and Counseling (ADEC)
Web site: http://www.adec.org
In addition to a general overview of the organization, the Web site
offers professional resources, information about events, resources
for people who are coping with loss, and information about certi-
fications in Thanatology (the study of death and dying).
Children’s Hospice International (CHI)
Web site: http://www.chionline.org/
The Web site offers information about the Children’s Hospice
International Program for All-Inclusive Care for Children and
their Families (CHI PACC) and access to resources and news
updates.
Citizens United Resisting Euthanasia (CURE)
Web site: http://mysite.verizon.net/cureltd/index.html
The Web site outlines this organization’s mission and goals and
offers news, educational resources, and links.
Compassion and Choices
Web site: http://www.compassionandchoices.org/
The Web site explains the services provided by Compassion and
Choices, outlines the ways in which the organization works to
address end-of-life issues, and offers opportunities for involvement.
Internet Sites
257
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Death with Dignity National Center (DDNC)
Web site: http://www.deathwithdignity.org
The Web site includes extensive background information on
Oregon’s Death with Dignity law, including chronological and
historical information. The site also offers a news search tool and
features resources geared toward students, physicians, legal pro-
fessionals, lawmakers, and the general public.
Euthanasia Research Guidance Organization (ERGO)
Web site: http://www.finalexit.org/
The Web site provides an overview of right-to-die issues, includ-
ing international laws on assisted suicide, key figures, and chrono-
logical information. There is a free listserv and a store that features
books, e-books, videos, and documents.
Final Exit Network
Web site: http://www.finalexitnetwork.org
The Web site outlines the Final Exit Network’s Exit Guide pro-
gram, which offers a person facing the end of life the opportunity
to work with a guide who explains options, including self-deliver-
ance. The site also includes information about membership, vol-
unteer opportunities, and events.
Hospice Association of America (HAA)
Web site: http://www.nahc.org/haa/
The Web site features information about legal, regulatory, and leg-
islative issues as they relate to hospice. Other highlights include a
consumer’s guide to hospice, a history of hospice, a fact sheet, sta-
tistics, and the Hospice Patient’s Bill of Rights.
Hospice Education Institute
Web site: http://www.hospiceworld.org
The Hospice Education Institute’s Web site provides an overview
of the organization, including information about its services. The
site also features information about the hospice movement and
hospice-related seminars.
International Task Force on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide
Web site: http://www.iaetf.org
The Web site features an overview of the organization, including
news and activities. An online book store includes publications,
documents, videos, and other items for sale.
258
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

National Center for Death Education (NCDE) at
Mount Ida College
Web site: http://www.mountida.edu/sp.cfm?pageid=307
The NCDE Web site provides information on courses and pro-
grams relevant to the area of Thanatology. The site also features a
link to NCDE’s library.
National Hospice Foundation (NHF)
Web site: http://www.nationalhospicefoundation.org
NHF’s Web site includes a history of the organization and infor-
mation about hospice and palliative care.
The National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization
(NHPCO)
Web site: http://www.nhpco.org
The Web site offers an overview about hospice and palliative care
and highlights information about conferences. The site also high-
lights resources and information geared to people facing end-of-
life issues and decisions.
Not Dead Yet
Web site: http://www.notdeadyet.org
Not Dead Yet’s Web site provides an overview of the organization
as well as articles, fact sheets, links to other organizations, a list of
partner organizations, and highlights of court cases.
Supportive Care Coalition: Pursuing Excellence
in Palliative Care
Web site: http://www.SupportiveCareCoalition.org
The Web site offers a variety of resources related to palliative care
and features a section with resources on ethics issues.
Terri Schindler Schiavo Foundation (TSSF)
Web site: http://www.terrisfight.org/
The Web site of the Terri Schindler Schiavo Foundation includes
an overview, including information about Terri Schiavo, for whom
the organization is named, and includes information about activi-
ties and events, links to other organizations, and opportunities for
advocacy.
Internet Sites
259
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Association pour le Droit de Mourir dans la Dignite (ADMD)
Web site: http://www.admd.net/
ADMD’s Web site includes an overview of the organization and its
activities and initiatives, highlights relevant legislation, and fea-
tures information about end-of-life policies in France and other
countries.
Care NOT Killing
Web site: http://www.carenotkilling.org.uk/
Care NOT Killing’s Web site provides an overview of the organi-
zation, highlights bills and laws regarding euthanasia and assist-
ed suicide, and includes links to other resources.
Dignity in Dying
Web site: http://www.dignityindying.org.uk/
The Web site highlights real-life accounts from and about people
who faced, or are facing, end-of-life issues. It includes sections on
patients’ rights, opportunities for involvement, news and events,
and living wills and offers links to legislation and legal docu-
ments.
Dying with Dignity
Web site: http://www.dyingwithdignity.ca/
This Web site highlights the organization’s counseling program
and offers information about living wills. There is also a glossary,
information about Canadian and international laws on the subject
of assisted dying, and additional resources such as a reading list
and links to other organizations.
EXIT
Web site: http://www.euthanasia.cc/
EXIT’s Web site features a plethora of resources on euthanasia,
assisted suicide, and other matters related to the end of life.
EXIT International
Web site: http://www.exitinternational.net/
The Web site provides an overview of EXIT International, includ-
ing a biography of founder and director Dr. Philip Nitschke, and
information about people who have requested his assistance in
ending their lives. The site also offers information about
Australia’s Rights of the Terminally Ill Act.
260
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Friends at the End (FATE)
Web site: http://www.friends-at-the-end.org.uk
The Web site offers information related to end-of-life issues,
including living wills and materials for research, including articles
and legislative items.
Right to Die Society of Canada (RDSC)
Web site: http://www.righttodie.ca/
The Web site includes a history of the organization and extensive
resources, including information from both sides of the right-to-
die movement.
SAVES – The Living Will Society
Web site: http://www.livingwill.co.za/
The Web site includes information about preparing a living will,
an explanation of the concept of informed consent, and guidelines
for medical practitioners.
Voluntary Euthanasia Society of New Zealand
Web site: http://www.ves.org.nz/contact.htm
The Web site explains what voluntary euthanasia means and fea-
tures information about New Zealand’s laws related to end-of-life
issues. The site also offers links to international news and other
resources.
The World Federation of Right to Die Societies
Web site: http://www.worldrtd.net/
The Web site includes an overview of the organization and fea-
tures links to member organizations, international news about
end-of-life issues, and links to other organizations.
Internet Sites
261
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Glossary
active euthanasia
euthanasia performed on an individual without the
individual’s participation.
advance directive
a legal document that provides a person with a way
to make end-of-life wishes known, e.g., whether the person wants certain
types of medical treatment to be performed at the end of life.
appeal
to request that a higher court review the decision in a legal case.
assisted suicide
taking one’s own life purposely with the assistance of
another person.
attending physician
a doctor who has primary responsibility for a par-
ticular patient’s condition.
autopsy  examination by a pathologist of a deceased person to deter-
mine cause of death.
bioethics
in medical contexts, this area of study generally examines
issues of ethics in the context of various disciplines including medicine,
sociology, psychology, philosophy, and law.
brain death
lack of brain function when stimulated. This diagnosis is
subject to confirmation by an electroencephalogram.
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
a procedure to restart a heart
after it has stopped beating and the patient has stopped breathing. CPR
can involve manual pressure to the chest and air applied by mouth to the
patient’s mouth, electric shocks to the chest, or intravenous drugs.
case law
a law that has its foundation in a legal ruling rather than from
legislation.
coma
an unconscious state. Although patients cannot be roused from
this state, they can emerge from it.
comfort care
see palliative care.
conflict of interest
when an individual’s personal or business interests
clash with his or her objectivity in a situation involving an entrusted duty.
consent
voluntary permission given by a person who is competent to
make decisions.
263
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

conservator
a person, assigned by a court of law, responsible for mak-
ing decisions on behalf of another who is not competent to do so.
constitutional right
a privilege guaranteed to citizens by the
Constitution of the United States.
coroner
the person legally responsible for investigating the cause of death
in a situation in which suspicious circumstances require an investigation.
death certificate
a legal document that, at a minimum, includes the time
and cause of death. The death certificate is completed by the patient’s
attending physician.
depressive suicide
suicide that occurs as a result of a patient’s
depressed state (sometimes contrasted with rational suicide).
do not resuscitate (DNR)
a document prepared by a patient indicating
the patient’s wishes to forego extraordinary measures, such as CPR.
double effect
the prescribing of a particular drug or drugs to relieve
pain or otherwise ease a patient’s suffering which may cause death as a
collateral result.
durable power of attorney
a legal document in which an individual can
designate another person to act as an advocate and make legally binding
decisions if the individual becomes too ill, or becomes incompetent, to
make decisions.
ethics
principles that guide the actions of an individual or group.
eugenics
a selection process that involves eliminating people with cer-
tain undesired characteristics and promotes reproduction by people with
certain desired characteristics.
euthanasia
derived from the Greek eu and thanatos, meaning “good
death.”
health care proxy
a legal document in which an individual names a per-
son who will make health care decisions if the individual is unable to do so.
home care
medical care administered in the patient’s home.
hospice
a facility or service which provides palliative care (or comfort
care) to terminally ill patients. Hospice care also includes counseling and
support for the patient’s family members.
informed consent
a legal right of patients to receive all information rel-
evant to medical procedures and medications prescribed for them. Under
informed consent, patients also have the right to refuse care.
inpatient
a patient admitted for an overnight stay or longer to a med-
ical facility for treatment.
inquest
a legal proceeding conducted in the event of a suspicious death.
intensive care unit (ICU)
a hospital unit devoted to providing constant
and extensive monitoring, as well as specialized care for critically ill patients.
264
Glossary
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

involuntary euthanasia
euthanasia performed on an individual who
has not requested it.
life support
medical interventions which sustain life when the body is
no longer capable of doing so.
medico-legal
relevant to both medical and legal matters.
mercy killing
when an individual ends another person’s life as a means
of ending that person’s suffering. (This is a separate concept from volun-
tary euthanasia, which is predicated on the person’s stated wish to die.)
natural death
death that does not involve heroic measures or any
attempt to sustain life.
next of kin
the person who is the patient’s closest living relative.
nonvoluntary euthanasia
euthanasia performed on a person who is
unable to consent due to incompetence.
outpatient
an individual who is treated in a medical facility for a peri-
od of less than one day.
palliative care
care that includes pain relief and making the patient as
comfortable as possible but does not include any attempt to extend life.
This type of care is common among hospice programs.
passive euthanasia
death that results from the decision to forego
actions that could save an individual’s life.
pathologist
a physician who researches the cause of illness and disease.
persistent vegetative state (PVS)
a condition characterized by the lack
of mental functioning. Some definitions include a specific time period as
operative to determining if a persistent vegetative state exists.
physician-assisted suicide
taking one’s own life purposely with the
assistance of a physician.
primary care physician
the physician who provides general medical
care to a patient.
prognosis
the anticipated result of a patient’s disease or illness.
proxy
an individual authorized to act on behalf of another person.
pseudo dementia
symptoms triggered by depression which mimic
dementia. Such symptoms may include memory problems, confusion,
apathy, and the loss of ability to care for oneself.
rational suicide
suicide borne of a deliberate and rational decision to take
one’s own life. (This term is sometimes contrasted with depressive suicide.)
restraining order
a court order that forbids an individual from taking a
particular action.
self-deliverance  a term sometimes favored over suicide to indicate that
the decision to die was borne of a rational choice.
Glossary
265
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

slippery slope
the notion that if something that is perceived as negative
is allowed to happen, similar negative actions of greater harm will follow.
The slippery slope argument is sometimes applied to euthanasia in the
context that if one type of euthanasia becomes acceptable, all types of
euthanasia will eventually become acceptable.
suicide
intentionally taking one’s own life.
suicide clause
a provision found in some life insurance policies that
states that benefits will not be paid if the death was the result of suicide.
terminal illness
disease or condition that will result in death.
thanatology
the study of death.
ventilator
a machine that provides lung function to a person who is
unable to breathe.
voluntary euthanasia
euthanasia that occurs as a result of a request by
the patient.
ward of the court
an individual whose well-being is under the jurisdic-
tion of a court of law.
266
Glossary
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

AAS. See American Association of
Suicidology
ABCD. See Americans for Better
Care of the Dying
Abortion, 2
Abuse, 49–51
Accountability, 192
ACPA. See American Chronic
Pain Association
Active euthanasia
definition of, 1–2, 32
types of, 2, 32
See also Euthanasia
ADEC. See Association for Death
Education and
Counseling
Adkins, Janet
biographical information on,
127–128
ADMD. See Association pour le
Droit de Mourir dans la
Dignite
Admiraal, Pieter
biographical information on,
128
Adria, Ruth, 83
Advance directive, 8, 10, 11, 40,
64–65
Adventists, 153
Africa, 78–81
AFSP. See American Foundation
for Suicide Prevention
Age of Reason, 5
Aging with Dignity, 199
Ahronheim, Judith, 185
Aid in Dying Communication
Project, 200
AIDS, 148
Algeria, 79
ALL. See American Life League
All Headline News, 71
Alpers, Ann, 191
ALS. See Amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS)
Alzheimer’s Association, 148
Alzheimer’s disease, 39–40, 148
AMA. See American Medical
Association
America magazine, 20, 22
American Association of Retired
Persons (AARP)
statement on physician-assist-
ed suicide, 175
American Association of
Suicidology (AAS),
148–149, 200–202
American Cancer Society, 148
American Chronic Pain
Association (ACPA), 201
American Counseling
Association, 201–203
American Foundation for Suicide
Prevention (AFSP), 149,
202
American Journal of Public Health,
73
267
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

American Life League (ALL), 203
American Medical Association
(AMA), 203
Council on Ethical and Judicial
Affairs, 183
American Medical Association
Complete Medical
Encyclopedia, 13
American Psychological
Association (APA), 204
American Society of Law,
Medicine and Ethics
(ASLME), 204
American Unitarian Association,
24
Americans for Better Care of the
Dying (ABCD), 205
Americans United for Life (AUL),
205
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS; Lou Gehrig’s dis-
ease), 34, 148
Andrews, Kevin, 77–78, 139
biographical information on,
129
Angels of Death: Exploring the
Euthanasia Underground
(Magnusson), 148
“Anna, Ambiguity, and the
Promise: A Lutheran
Theologian Reflects on
Assisted Death” (Childs),
53–54
APA. See American Psychological
Association
Arinze, Cardinal Francis, 80, 81
Arthur Koestler: The Story of a
Friendship (Mikes), 175
Artificial heart program, 183–184
Asai, Atsushi, 89
Asch, David A., 184
ASLME. See American Society of
Law, Medicine and Ethics
Assisted suicide, 3
definition of, 1, 32–33
motivation for, 148
See also Euthanasia; Physician-
assisted suicide;
Self-deliverance; Suicide
Assisted Suicide Funding
Restriction Act, 158
Association for Death Education
and Counseling (ADEC),
206
Association pour le Droit de
Mourir dans la Dignite
(ADMD), 219
AUL. See Americans United for
Life
Australia, 76–78, 159, 188–189
Australian Medical Association,
77
Autonomy, 34, 49–50
Baby boomer generation, 56
Back, Anthony L., 46–47, 48
Baptist Church, 153
Barefoot doctors, 91
Barmakian, Joseph, 65
Battin, Margaret Pabst, 48–49, 141
biographical information on,
129
Belgium, 92–93
Benedict XVI (Joseph Ratzinger)
biographical information on,
129–130
Beresford, Larry, 194
Berry, Jason, 45
Bioethical issues. See Medical-
bioethical issues
Bioethics SWAT team, 89–90
Blogs, 155
Brain death, 13
Brennan, William, 190
British National Health Service, 73
British Voluntary Euthanasia
Society, 71
Brunel University, 72
Buddhism, 23–24
Budo, Lori L., 44–45
268
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Buffalo News, 19
Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, 69
Burke, Lillian, 186
Cahill, Lisa Sowle, 22
Callahan, Daniel
biographical information on,
130–131
Campbell, Courtney, 23–24, 51, 53
Canada, 81–83
health care in, 156
Cancer, 34, 148
Capital punishment, 2
Care NOT Killing, 219
The Case against Assisted Suicide:
For the Right to End-of-Life
Care (ed. Foley and
Hendin), 14–15, 33, 35,
48, 50, 63–64, 75, 150
Catholic Church, 21–23, 52–53
in Africa, 80
Declaration on Euthanasia,
21–22, 152, 165–172
and euthanasia, 4, 152
and suffering, 52, 53
and suicide, 151–152
Catholic Health Association, 52
Catholicism, 21–23
“Catholicism, Death and Modern
Medicine” (Cahill), 22
CBS, 43, 154
CDC. See Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
Center for Christian Bioethics,
206–207
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), 148
CHI. See Children’s Hospice
International
Child abuse, 195
Children’s Action, 87
Children’s Defense Fund, 20
Children’s Hospice International
(CHI), 207
Childs, James M., Jr., 53–54
China, 91–92
Chochiniv, Harvey M., 33
Christakis, Nicholas A., 153
Christian Reformed Church of
North America, 153
Christian Science, 153
Christian Science Monitor, 84
Christianity
and euthanasia, 3–4
and suicide, 51
See also Catholic Church;
Religion
Church of Christ, 153
Church of the Nazarene, 153
Citizens United Resisting
Euthanasia (CURE), 207
Clark, Barney, 183
Clinton, Bill, 158
Cohen, Felicia, 50
Cohen, Herbert, 184–185
Coleman, Diane
biographical information on,
131
Colombia, 93–95
Colonial America, 5
Colorado Collective for Medical
Decisions, 36–37
Colorado Trust, 36–37
Comfort care, 15, 92. See also
Hospice care; Palliative
care
Communication, 186–187
doctor-patient, 17, 47
Compassion and Choices, 208
Compassion in Dying, 59
Compassion in Dying: Stories of
Dignity and Choice (Lee),
196
Compassion in Dying et al. v. State
of Washington, 59, 188
Contemplating Suicide (Fairbairn),
187
Continuity of care, 16, 41
Cooper, Jessica, 43, 154
Index
269
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Corporations, 16
Council on Ethical and Judicial
Affairs, 183
Cox, Donald, 183, 192
Cruzan, Nancy, 6, 8–10, 11, 185,
189–190
biographical information on,
131–132
effects of case of, 10
Cruzan v. Director, Missouri
Department of Health, 9–10
excerpts from, 189–190, 194
Cultural issues, 55–58. See also
Spiritual-social-cultural
issues
Culture of poverty, 56–58
Culture of youth, 56
CURE. See Citizens United
Resisting Euthanasia
Curlin, Farr A., 18
Danforth, John, 10
DDNC. See Death with Dignity
National Center
De Facto euthanasia, 57–58
“Deadly Days in Darwin”
(Kissane), 35
Death
difficult, 187
discussions of, effects of, 31
fear of, 56
global data on, 69–70
by neglect, 155
Death and Dignity: Making Choices
and Taking Charge (Quill),
183, 187
Death registration system, 69–70
Death with Dignity Act. See
Oregon Death with
Dignity Act
Death with Dignity National
Center (DDNC), 208
Deciding to Forego Life-Sustaining
Treatment: A Report on the
Ethical, Medical and Legal
Issues in Treatment
Decisions, 191
Decisions, medical. See Medical
decisions
Declaration of Geneva, 163–164
Declaration on Euthanasia (Catholic
Church), 21–22, 150,
165–172
Deliverance machine, 77
Depression, 33, 149
and the elderly, 193
in United Kingdom, 71
“Depression and the Will to Live
in Terminally Ill Patients”
(Chochiniv and
Schwartz), 33
Deutsch Welle, 87, 88
Dickey, Nancy, 183
Dignitas, 71–72
Dignity in Dying, 220
Disabled people. See People with
disabilities
Dispatch, 79
DNR. Se Do not resuscitate
Do not resuscitate (DNR), 40
“Doctor-Patient Communication
about Physician-Assisted
Suicide” (Back), 47
Doctor-patient relationship,
16–19, 186, 192
in China, 92
and communication, 17, 47
and managed care, 40–41
in the Netherlands, 75
and religion, 18–19
See also Physicians
“Doctors Must Not Kill” (Gaylin,
Kass, Pellegrino, and
Siegler), 191
Dorff, Elliot N., 21
Double effect, 25–26, 47–49
Dresser, Rebecca, 26
Due Process Clause, 59
Durable power of Attorney, 24–25
Durable power of attorney, 8
270
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

“Dutch Move to Enact Law
Making Euthanasia
Easier” (Simons), 185
Dutch Voluntary Euthanasia
Society, 75
“The Duty of Using Artificial
Means of Preserving
Life” (Kelly), 193
DVDs, 154
Dying with Dignity, 220–221
The Economist, 93
Egypt, 79
Elderly people, 50
and depression, 193
and suicide, 148–149
Emergency medical services
(EMS), 38
Employers, and health insurance,
57
EMS. See Emergency medical
services
The End of Life: Euthanasia and
Morality (Rachels), 184,
193
England, 70
Episcopal Church, 153
Equal Protection Clause, 59
ERGO. See Euthanasia Research
Guidance Organization
Ethics boards, 90
Ethiopia, 79
Ethnic Variations in Dying, Death
and Grief (ed. Irish, et al.),
186
Eugenics, in Nazi Germany, 86
Euthanasia
in Africa, 79–81
arguments in favor of, 182–190
arguments opposed to,
190–195
attitudes toward, 2–6
in Australia, 76–78
in Belgium, 92–93
in Canada, 82–83
in China, 91–92
in Colombia, 94–95
definition of, 1, 32, 148
discussions of, effects of, 31
in France, 84–85
in Germany, 86–88
as global issue, 69–70. See also
individual countries
history of, 1–12
and individuals and organiza-
tions, documents related
to, 174–175
instances of, 41–43
in Japan, 89–90
and legal-political issues,
25–27, 58–65, 157–160,
187–190, 194–195
and legal-political issues, doc-
uments related to,
175–181
and medical-bioethical issues,
12–20, 34–51, 182–185,
190–193
and medical-bioethical issues,
documents related to,
160–164
in the Netherlands, 74–76
origin of term, 2–3
and religion, documents relat-
ed to, 164–174
and spiritual-social-cultural
issues, 21–25, 51–58,
150–155, 185–187,
193–194
and spiritual-social-cultural
issues, documents related
to, 163–175
and suicide, difference
between, 187
types of, 32
in United Kingdom, 71–73
in United States, 72–73, 75–76,
78, 79–81, 83, 85, 88, 90,
92, 93, 94–95
See also Active euthanasia;
Index
271
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Assisted suicide; Passive
euthanasia; Physician-
assisted suicide; Self-
deliverance; Suicide
“Euthanasia and Religion”
(Campbell), 51, 53
Euthanasia and the Right to Die
(Scherer and Simon),
56–57, 74–75, 76–77, 151
Euthanasia Laws Bill of 1996,
77–78
Euthanasia program, in Nazi
Germany, 5–6, 86–87
Euthanasia Research Guidance
Organization (ERGO),
209
EXIT, 221
EXIT International, 221
Fairbairn, Gavin, 187
Family issues, 34–35, 184, 190–191
FATE. See Friends at the End
Final Exit Network, 209
Final Passages: Positive Choices for
the Dying and Their Loved
Ones (Ahronheim and
Weber), 185
First Reading Speech (Perron), 189
Foley, Kathleen, 63–64, 150
biographical information on,
132–133
Foti, Charles C., 44–45
Fourteenth Amendment, 59
France, 83–85, 86
Friends at the End (FATE), 222
Frings, Cardinal Joseph, 130
Funding, of health care, 73
Futurist, 23
Garwood, David, 72
Gaviria, Carlos, 94
Gaylin, Willard, 191
Germany, 86–88. See also Nazi
Germany
Girsh, Faye
biographical information on, 133
Glucksberg, Harold, 59
Good death, 2–3
Good Housekeeping, 17
Great Britain, 70, 159
Greater Baton Rouge Business
Report, 45
Greece, 33
Greeks, 3
Griesa, Thomas, 60
Guardian, 72
A Guide to Self-Deliverance, 71
HAA. See Hospice Association of
America
Hall, Eleanor, 89
Harris, Harold, 175
The Hastings Center, 210
Health care, 15–20, 73
in Africa, 79
in Australia, 76
in Belgium, 92
in Canada, 81–82, 156
in China, 91
in Colombia, 93–94
and economic factors, 155–156
in France, 84
funding of, 73
in Germany, 86
in Japan, 88–89
in the Netherlands, 74
and poverty, 50, 56–58
in United Kingdom, 71, 72
in United States, 73
Health care proxy, 8, 34
Health insurance, 19–20
among demographic groups, 20
and poverty, 57–58
Health insurance industry,
155–156
Health maintenance organiza-
tions (HMOs), 15
and doctor-patient relation-
ship, 40–41
272
Index
Euthanasia, continued
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Hemlock’s Cup (Cox), 183, 192
Hendin, Herbert, 63–64, 75, 150
biographical information on,
133–134
Hinduism, 23–24
Hippocratic Oath, 160–161
Hitler, Adolf, 5–6, 86, 87
HIV/AIDS, 148
HLI. See Human Life
International
HMOs. See Health maintenance
organizations
Holland. See Netherlands
Hospice Association of America
(HAA), 210–211
Hospice care, 14–15, 148, 193
in France, 84
at home, 150
in hospice facility, 150
See also Comfort care; Palliative
care
Hospice Education Institute, 211
The Hospice Handbook (Beresford),
194
Hospice movement, 150
Hospital ethics boards, 90
How We Die: Reflections on Life’s
Final Chapter (Nuland),
193
Human Life International (HLI),
211
Humane death, 5
Humbert, Marie, 84, 85, 134
Humbert, Vincent, 84, 85
biographical information on,
134
Humphry, Ann, 139
Humphry, Derek, 190
biographical information on,
134–135
Hurricane Katrina, 43–45
I Ask the Right to Die (Je Vous
Demande le Droit de
Mourir), 84
“‘I Will Give No Deadly Drug’:
Why Doctors Must Not
Kill” (Kass), 48
Illinois, 195
Improving life, and technological
innovation, 38
Income, and health care, 56–57
Incompetent people, and abuse,
50
Infants, handicapped, 195
Informed consent, 187–188
Intensive care unit, 186
International codes, of medical
ethics, 161–164
International Herald Tribune, 86
International Task Force on
Euthanasia and Assisted
Suicide, 212
Internet, 154, 155
Involuntary euthanasia, 155
definition of, 2, 32
See also Active euthanasia
“Involuntary Euthanasia of
Defective Newborns: A
Legal Analysis”
(Robertson), 195
Irish, Donald, 186
Islam, 23
and suicide, 51, 153
Japan, 88–90
Jehovah’s Witnesses, 153
Jenner, Harald, 87
John Paul II (Karol Wojtyla),
22–23, 52, 53, 80, 152
biographical information on,
135–136
Jordan, Eddie, 45
Journal of Family Practice, 18
Judaism, 21
and euthanasia, 4
and passive euthanasia,
152–153
and suicide, 51
Index
273
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Kamisar, Yale
biographical information on,
136
Karnofsky, David, 190
Kass, Leon, 48, 191
Kelly, Gerald, 193
The Kennedy Institute of Ethics at
Georgetown University,
212–213
Kevorkian, Jack, 42–43, 127–128,
144-145, 154, 158
biographical information on,
136–137
Kissane, David W., 35
Koestler, Arthur
“Suicide Note,” excerpts from,
174–175
Koestler, Cynthia, 174, 175
Kolff, Willem, 183–184
Koop, C. Everett, 192
Koppell, Oliver, 59–60
Kübler Ross, Elisabeth
biographical information on,
137
Kutner, Luis
biographical information on,
137–138
Landman, Willem, 80
Landry, Cheryl A., 44–45
Larue, Gerald, 135
Laryngoscope, 5
Law at the End of Life: The
Supreme Court and
Assisted Suicide (ed.
Schneider), 25, 26
Le Fanu, James, 72
Lee, Barbara Coombs
biographical information on,
138
Legal cases. See individual cases
Legal issues, 158
Legal-political issues, 25–27,
58–65, 157–160
documents related to, 175–181
and euthanasia, arguments in
favor of, 187–190
and euthanasia, arguments
opposed to, 194–195
Legalization, 49, 61
Legislation, 7. See also individual
acts
Libya, 79
Life-sustaining treatment, 9,
11–12, 22, 87–88. See also
Medical treatment
Light, Donald, 73
Litigation, 40
Living will, 7–8, 24–25, 64–65
in Germany, 87–88
Lo, Bernard, 191
Lou Gehrig’s disease. See
Amyotrophic lateral scle-
rosis
Lutheran Church, 53–54, 153
and Missouri Synod of the
Lutheran Church,
164–165
Lynn, Joanne, 50
MacLean Center for Clinical
Medical Ethics, 213
Magnusson, Roger S., 148
Mali, 79
Managed care, 15–16
and doctor-patient relation-
ship, 40–41
“Managing Death: The Growing
Acceptance of Euthanasia
in Contemporary
American Society”
(Christakis), 153
Marcus, Eric, 149
Marker, Rita
biographical information on,
138–139
Martyrdom, 4
Mauritius, 79
McKhann, Charles F., 15, 33–34, 42,
46, 49, 50–51, 56, 87, 152
274
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

on physician-assisted dying,
182–183
McNeilly, Irene, 82–83
McNeilly, Keith, 82
Measure 16, 27, 60–61, 175. See
also Death with Dignity
Act
Measure 51, 158. See also Death
with Dignity Act
Media, 153–154
Medicaid, 156
Medical-bioethical issues, 12–20,
34–51
documents related to, 160–164
and euthanasia, arguments in
favor of, 182–185
and euthanasia, arguments
opposed to, 190–193
Medical decisions, 36–37
and abuse, 49–51
Medical ethics, international
codes of, 161–164
Medical technology, 6, 190. See
also Technological inno-
vation; Technology
Medical treatment
and medical decisions, 36–37
suspension of, 87–88
See also Life-sustaining treat-
ment
Medications, 6
Memorial Medical Center, 44–45
Menden, Germany, 86–87
Mental illness
and suicide, 149
See also Depression
Mercy killing, 2, 32, 148. See also
Involuntary euthanasia
Michigan, 157, 158
Middle Ages, 4
Mikes, George, 175
Millard, Killick, 71
Minelli, Ludwig, 71–72
Minyard, Frank, 45
Missouri, 9–10
Missouri Synod of the Lutheran
Church
euthanasia document of,
164–165
Mormon Church, 153
Moschovis, Peter P., 18
Moynihan, Lord, 71
Mueller, Pamela, 195
Mueller, Robert, 195
Murphy, Donald J., 36–37
Muscular Dystrophy
Associations, 148
Must We Suffer Our Way to Death?
(ed. Hamel and DuBose),
21, 53, 153
Natanson v. Kline, 188
National Center for Death
Education (NCDE), 213
National Citizens’ Coalition for
Nursing Home Reform
(NCCNHR), 214
National Hospice and Palliative
Care Organization
(NHPCO), 215
National Hospice Foundation
(NHF), 214–215
National Right to Life Committee
(NRLC), 216
Nazi Germany
euthanasia program in, 5–6,
86–87
See also Germany
Nazi Party, 86, 87
NCCNHR. See National Citizens’
Coalition for Nursing
Home Reform
NCDE. See National Center for
Death Education
Neglect, death by, 155
Netherlands, 74–76, 159, 184–185
New England Journal of Medicine,
41
New Orleans Times Picayune, 44
New Scientist, 39
Index
275
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

New York State, 59–60
health insurance in, 19
Newsweek, 20, 22–23
NHF. See National Hospice
Foundation
NHPCO. See National Hospice
and Palliative Care
Organization
Nitschke, Philip, 77
biographical information on,
139
Nonvoluntary euthanasia
definition of, 2, 32
See also Active euthanasia
Northern Australia Legislative
Assembly, 188–189
Northern Ireland, 70
Not Dead Yet, 216
NRLC. See National Right to Life
Committee
Nuland, Sherwin, 193
Nurses
and accountability, 192
on physician-assisted suicide,
184
“Nurses Speak Out: Does a
Terminal Patient Have
the Right to Die?”, 193
Nutrition and hydration, 9, 11–12.
See also Life-sustaining
treatment
O’Connor, Sandra Day, 189
OCRT. See Ontario Consultants
on Religious Tolerance
OHD. See Oregon Health
Division
Olick, Robert S., 8, 40, 64
Ontario Consultants on Religious
Tolerance (OCRT), 222
Ophthalmoscope, 5
Oregon Death with Dignity Act,
27, 36, 41, 60–64, 75, 93,
94, 95, 156–157, 158,
159–160
excerpts from, 177–181
“The Oregon Experiment” (Foley
and Hendin), 63–64
Oregon Health Division (OHD),
63
Oregon Health Services
Commission, 158
Pacemakers, 6
Pain, 13–14
Pain medication, 26
Pain Relief Promotion Act,
158–159
Palliative care, 15, 26, 49. See also
Comfort care; Hospice
care
Park Ridge Center, 217
Passion, 191–192
Passive euthanasia
definition of, 1–2, 32
and Judaism, 152–153
See also Euthanasia
Patient
abuse, 50
anxiety, 17
disabled, 38–39, 50. See also
People with disabilities
elderly, 50. See also Elderly
people
embarrassment, 17
harm to, 183
incompetent, 39–40, 50
poor, 50. See also Poverty
See also Doctor-patient relation-
ship
Patient Self Determination Act
(PSDA), 10
Pellegrino, Edmund, 191
biographical information on,
139–140
Pentecostal Church of God, 153
People with disabilities, 38–39, 50
and euthanasia program in
Germany, 86–87
People’s Daily, 91, 92
276
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Perron, Marshall, 77, 78, 129,
188–189
Persistent vegetative state (PVS),
14
Personality, 190–191
Philanthropy Magazine, 36
Physical suffering, 34, 36
and pain medication, 26
and spiritual issues, 4, 52, 53
Physician-Assisted Death (ed.
Humber, Almeder, and
Kasting), 156
Physician-Assisted Dying: The Case
for Palliative Care and
Patient Choice (ed. Quill
and Battin), 47
Physician-assisted suicide, 2
arguments in favor of, 182–190
arguments opposed to,
190–195
definition of, 1, 32
discussions of, effects of, 31
and individuals and organiza-
tions, documents related
to, 174–175
instances of, 41–43
and legal-political issues,
25–27, 58–65, 157–160,
187–190, 194–195
and legal-political issues, doc-
uments related to,
175–181
and medical-bioethical issues,
12–20, 34–51, 182–185,
190–193
and medical-bioethical issues,
documents related to,
160–164
and religion, documents relat-
ed to, 164–174
spiritual-social-cultural issues,
150–155
and spiritual-social-cultural
issues, 21–25, 51–58,
185–187, 193–194
and spiritual-social-cultural
issues, documents related
to, 164–175
See also Assisted suicide;
Euthanasia; Self-deliver-
ance; Suicide
Physicians, 5
and accountability, 192
and pain, 14
and passion, 191–192
on physician-assisted suicide,
156–157, 185
prosecution of, 24, 54–55, 153
role of, 46–51
See also Doctor-patient relation-
ship
Pius XII, 152
Political issues, 158–160. See also
Legal-political issues
Polling methodology, 81, 156–157
Postma, Gertruida
biographical information on,
140
Pou, Anna, 44–45
Poverty
and health care, 50, 56–58
and health insurance, 57–58
PPOs. See Preferred Provider
Organizations
Preferred provider organizations
(PPOs), 15
and doctor-patient relation-
ship, 40–41
Presbyterian Church, 153
Preservation of life, 52
President’s Commission for the
Study of Ethical
Problems in Medicine
and Biomedical and
Behavioral Research, 191
Prevention of Hereditarily Ill
Offspring, 87
Preventive care, 57
Profits, 16
Promoting a Suicide Attempt, 188
Index
277
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Prosecution, of physicians, 24,
54–55, 153
Protestant churches
and euthanasia, 4
and suicide, 51
PSDA. See Patient Self
Determination Act
PVS. See Persistent vegetative state
Pythagoreans, 3
Quality of life, 13, 35–36, 46
and people with disabilities, 39
and technological innovation,
38
Quill, Timothy, 48–49, 59–60, 187
biographical information on,
140
on patient harm, 183
Quill v. N.Y. Attorney General, 59
Quill v. Vacco, 156, 181
Quinlan, Karen Ann, 6–7, 8–9, 10,
11
biographical information on,
141–142
effects of case of, 7–8
Rachels, James, 184, 193
biographical information on,
142
Rational suicide, 151
definition of, 33–34
Ratzinger, Joseph. See Benedict
XVI
Rayner, Claire, 39
RDSC. See Right to Die Society of
Canada
Reformed Judaism
and suicide, 51
See also Judaism
Rehnquist, William, 60, 181, 189
Religion, 21–25, 151–153
and doctor-patient relation-
ship, 18–19
and euthanasia, documents
related to, 164–174
and suicide, 51, 151–152
See also individual churches and
religions; Spiritual issues
Renaissance, 4–5
Report/Newsmagazine, 82
Respirator, removal of, 7. See also
Life–sustaining treatment
Réunion, 79
The Right to Die Debate (Zucker),
175, 181
The Right to Die (Humphry and
Wickett), 190
Right-to-die movement, 159
Right to Die Society of Canada
(RDSC), 223
The Right to Die with Dignity,
24–25, 54–55, 172–174
Rights of the Terminally Ill
(ROTI) Act, 76–78, 157,
188–189
Rinpoche, Sogyal, 186
Roberts, Barbara, 159–160
Roberts, Frank, 159–160
Robertson, John A., 195
Rodriguez, Sue, 82
“The Role of Critical Care Nurses
in Euthanasia and Assist -
ed Suicide” (Asch), 184
Roman Empire, 3–4
Rosochacki, Zandy, 80
Rothman, David, 182, 192
Rothstein, Barbara, 59, 188
ROTI Act. See Rights of the
Terminally Ill Act
Sacred Congregation for the
Doctrine of the Faith, 21,
165
San Diego Union Tribune, 94
Saunders, Dame Cicely, 14–15,
150, 193
biographical information on,
142–143
SAVES–The Living Will Society,
223
278
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Saving life, and technological
innovation, 37–38
Scalia, Antonin, 189
Scherer, Jennifer M., 56–57, 74–75,
76–77, 151, 156
Schiavo, Michael, 11, 85, 143, 154,
155, 158
Schiavo, Terri Schindler, 6, 10–11,
64, 65, 84, 85, 154, 155,
158
biographical information on,
143
effects of case of, 11–12
Schindler, Mary, 11, 143, 154, 155,
158
Schindler, Robert, 11, 143, 154,
155, 158
Schneider, Carle E., 25, 26
Schroeder, Alfred, 187–188
Schwartz, Leonard, 33
Scientific discovery, 4–5
Scotland, 70
Scott, Richard, 135
Seale, Clive, 72
Secularization, 153
Self-deliverance, 2
definition of, 33
See also Assisted suicide;
Euthanasia; Physician-
assisted suicide; Suicide
Self-determination, 24–25, 34,
54–55, 153
Semantics, 191
Siddartha Gautama, 23
Siegler, Mark, 191
Simmons, Rick, 44
Simon, Rita J., 56–57, 74–75,
76–77, 151, 156
Simons, Marlise, 185
Sinclair, Allan, 82–83
60 Minutes (TV news program),
43, 154
Slippery slope, 75, 76
in Nazi Germany, 87
Smith, Wesley J., 36
biographical information on,
143–144
Snyderman, Nancy, 17–18
Social issues. See Spiritual-social-
cultural issues
South Africa, 79–80
South African Law Commission,
80
Southern Baptist Church, 153
Spiritual advisors, 53–54
Spiritual issues, 51–55
and physical suffering, 4
See also Religion; Spiritual-
social-cultural issues
Spiritual-social-cultural issues,
21–25, 51–58, 150–155
documents related to, 164–175
and euthanasia, arguments in
favor of, 185–187
and euthanasia, arguments
opposed to, 193–194
See also Cultural issues;
Spiritual issues
St. Petersburg Times, 11, 64, 65
Sterilization, compulsory, 87
Stethoscope, 5
Stevens, John Paul, 194
Stranger on the Square, by Arthur
and Cynthia Koestler
(Harris, Harold), 175
Strangers at the Bedside (Rothman),
182, 192
Suffering. See Physical suffering
Suicide, 2, 3–4
in Colonial America, 5
definition of, 1, 32–33
and the elderly, 148–149
and euthanasia, difference
between, 187
guidelines, disseminating
information about, 71
and mental illness, 149
motivation for, 149
and religion, 51, 151–152
in United Kingdom, 71
Index
279
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

See also Assisted suicide;
Euthanasia; Physician-
assisted suicide; Self-
deliverance
Suicide Act of 1961, 71
“Suicide Note,” excerpts from,
174–175
Supportive Care Coalition:
Pursuing Excellence in
Palliative Care, 217–218
“The Supreme Court and End-of-
Life Care: Principled
Distinctions or Slippery
Slope?” (Dresser), 26
Surgical techniques, 6
Surveys, 156–157
Switzerland, 71–72
Sybrandy, Jaap, 139
Sybrandy, Klazien, 139
T4, 87
Taber’s Cyclopedic Medical
Dictionary, 14
Tada, Joni Eareckson
biographical information on,
144
Taking Advance Directives Seriously
(Olick), 8, 40, 64
“Taking the ‘Right to Die’ Issue to
the Supreme Court”
(White), 185, 187
Talmud, 152–153. See also Judaism
Technological innovation
and improving life, 38
and quality of life, 38
and saving life, 37–38
See also Medical technology;
Technology
Technology, 21–22, 155
and Catholic Church, 52–53
See also Medical technology;
Technological innovation
Telegraph, 72
Tenet Healthcare, 44–45
Terminology, 32, 34–35
Terri Schindler Schiavo
Foundation (TSSF), 218
The Tibetan Book of Living and
Dying (Rinpoche), 186
A Time to Die: The Place for
Physician Assistance
(McKhann), 15, 33–34,
50–51, 151–152, 183
Timothy E. Quill v. G. Oliver
Koppell, 59
Tradition, 55–58
Treatment. See Life-sustaining
treatment; Medical treat-
ment
TSSF. See Terri Schindler Schiavo
Foundation
Tunisia, 79
UNESCO Courier, 51
Unitarian Universalist
Association (UUA),
24–25, 153
Unitarian Universalist Church,
54–55
Unitarian Universalist General
Assembly, 54
Unitarian Universalists, 24–25
and Right to Die with Dignity,
24–25, 54–55, 172–174
United Church of Christ, 153
United Kingdom, 70–73, 86
United Pentecostal Church, 153
United States
euthanasia in, compared with
Africa, 79–81
euthanasia in, compared with
Australia, 78
euthanasia in, compared with
Belgium, 93
euthanasia in, compared with
Canada, 83
euthanasia in, compared with
China, 92
euthanasia in, compared with
Colombia, 94–95
280
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

euthanasia in, compared with
France, 85
euthanasia in, compared with
Germany, 88
euthanasia in, compared with
Japan, 90
euthanasia in, compared with
the Netherlands, 75–76
Euthanasia in, compared with
United Kingdom, 72–73
health care in, 73
United States Conference of
Catholic Bishops
(USCCB), 218
Universal health care
in Canada, 83
See also Health care
Universalist Church of America,
24
Update, 72
U.S. Constitution, 9, 58–60, 158,
175–176
excerpts from, 176–177
U.S. Holocaust Museum, 87
U.S. Living Will Registry, 65
U.S. Supreme Court, 25–26
opinions on euthanasia, 181
See also individual cases
USCCB. See United States
Conference of Catholic
Bishops
“Useless” people, 86–87
UUA. See Unitarian Universalist
Association
Vaccines, 6
Vacco, Dennis, 60
Vacco v. Quill, 25–26, 59–60
Villot, Cardinal Jean, 152
Vitalism, 53
Voluntary euthanasia
definition of, 2, 32
See also Active euthanasia
Voluntary Euthanasia Laws Bill,
159
Voluntary Euthanasia Society of
New Zealand, 224
Voluntary Euthanasia Society of
Scotland, 71
“Vulnerable People: Practical
Rejoinders to Claims in
Favor of Assisted Suicide”
(Cohn and Lynn), 50
Wales, 70
Washington Post, 43, 44, 80
Washington State, 59, 60
Washington v. Glucksberg, 25–26,
59, 60, 158, 181
Weber, Doron, 185
Weblogs, 155
“When Is CPR Futile?” (Alpers
and Lo), 191
White, Christy Cruzan, 185, 187
Why Suicide? (Marcus), 149
Wickett, Ann, 134, 190
Wojtyla, Karol. See John Paul II
World Congress of Family
Doctors, 80
World Federation of Right to Die
Societies, 224
World Medical Association
international code of, 161–163
Youk, Thomas, 42–43, 136, 154, 158
biographical information on,
144–145
Youth, culture of, 56
Zucker, Marjorie B., 175, 181
Index
281
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

About the Authors
Jennifer Fecio McDougall is a freelance writer and editor with
extensive experience in local government and nonprofit organiza-
tions. She earned a Master of Public Administration (MPA) degree
at Canisius College in Buffalo, New York. She lives in Buffalo with
her husband, Alex, and their daughter, Maeve.
Martha Gorman has written numerous books and articles, among
them the first edition of Euthanasia: A Reference Handbook. She is a
writer, publisher, and activist living in Buffalo, New York.
283
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868


