
Everyday Math Demystified

Demystiﬁed Series
Advanced Statistics Demystiﬁed
Algebra Demystiﬁed
Anatomy Demystiﬁed
Astronomy Demystiﬁed
Biology Demystiﬁed
Business Statistics Demystiﬁed
Calculus Demystiﬁed
Chemistry Demystiﬁed
College Algebra Demystiﬁed
Earth Science Demystiﬁed
Everyday Math Demystiﬁed
Geometry Demystiﬁed
Physics Demystiﬁed
Physiology Demystiﬁed
Pre-Algebra Demystiﬁed
Project Management Demystiﬁed
Statistics Demystiﬁed
Trigonometry Demystiﬁed

Everyday Math Demystified
STAN GIBILISCO
McGRAW-HILL
New York
Chicago
San Francisco
Lisbon
London
Madrid
Mexico City
Milan
New Delhi
San Juan
Seoul
Singapore
Sydney
Toronto

Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of
America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior
written permission of the publisher. 
0-07-147106-5
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title:  0-07-143119-5. 
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence
of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with
no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been printed
with initial caps. 
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use
in corporate training programs. For more information, please contact George Hoare, Special Sales, at
george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069. 
TERMS OF USE 
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all
rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of
1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer,
reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense
the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial
and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if
you fail to comply with these terms. 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR
WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE
OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED
THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not
warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will
be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any
inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill
has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall
McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar
damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possi-
bility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim
or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise. 
DOI: 10.1036/0071431195

We hope you enjoy this
McGraw-Hill eBook! If
you’d like more information about this book,
its author, or related books and websites,
please click here.
Professional
Want to learn more?

To Samuel, Tim, and Tony from Uncle Stan

This page intentionally left blank 

CONTENTS
Preface
xv
PART 1:
EXPRESSING QUANTITIES
1
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
3
Sets
6
Numbering Systems
8
Integers
10
Rational, Irrational, and Real Numbers
14
Number Operations
19
More Principles Worth Memorizing
23
Still More Principles
26
Quiz
30
CHAPTER 2
How Variables Relate
33
This versus That
33
vii
For more information about this title, click here 

Simple Graphs
38
Tweaks, Trends, and Correlation
43
Quiz
49
CHAPTER 3
Extreme Numbers
52
Subscripts and Superscripts
52
Power-of-10 Notation
54
In Action
60
Approximation and Precedence
65
Signiﬁcant Figures
68
Quiz
71
CHAPTER 4
How Things Are Measured
74
Systems of Units
75
Base Units in SI
76
Other Units in SI
83
Conversions
87
Quiz
91
Test: Part 1
93
CONTENTS
viii

PART 2:
FINDING UNKNOWNS
103
CHAPTER 5
Basic Algebra
105
Single-Variable Linear Equations
105
Two-by-Two Linear Equations
110
Quiz
116
CHAPTER 6
More Algebra
119
Quadratic Equations
119
Beyond Reality
129
One-Variable, Higher-Order Equations
133
Quiz
140
CHAPTER 7
A Statistics Sampler
143
Experiments and Variables
143
Populations and Samples
146
Distributions
149
More Deﬁnitions
154
Quiz
163
CHAPTER 8
Taking Chances
165
The Probability Fallacy
165
CONTENTS
ix

Deﬁnitions
167
Properties of Outcomes
172
Permutations and Combinations
181
Quiz
184
Test: Part 2
187
PART 3:
SHAPES AND PLACES
197
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
199
Fundamental Rules
199
Triangles
208
Quadrilaterals
214
Circles and Ellipses
223
Quiz
226
CHAPTER 10
Geometry in Space
229
Points, Lines, and Planes
229
Straight-Edged Objects
235
Cones, Cylinders, and Spheres
240
Quiz
247
CONTENTS
x

CHAPTER 11
Graphing It
250
The Cartesian Plane
250
Straight Lines in the Cartesian Plane
254
The Polar Coordinate Plane
260
Some Examples
263
Quiz
271
CHAPTER 12
A Taste of Trigonometry
274
More about Circles
274
Primary Circular Functions
277
Secondary Circular Functions
283
The Right Triangle Model
287
Pythagorean Extras
290
Quiz
292
Test: Part 3
295
PART 4:
MATH IN SCIENCE
307
CHAPTER 13
Vectors and 3D
309
Vectors in the Cartesian Plane
309
Rectangular 3D Coordinates
313
CONTENTS
xi

Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
316
Flat Planes in Space
323
Straight Lines in Space
326
Quiz
330
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
332
Growth by Addition
332
Growth by Multiplication
338
Exponential Functions
345
Rules for Exponentials
347
Logarithms
350
Rules for Logarithms
352
Graphs Based on Logarithms
355
Quiz
359
CHAPTER 15
How Things Move
362
Mass and Force
362
Displacement
367
Speed and Velocity
368
Acceleration
373
CONTENTS
xii

Momentum
378
Quiz
381
Test: Part 4
384
Final Exam
396
Answers to Quiz, Test, and
Exam Questions
424
Suggested Additional References
428
Index
431
CONTENTS
xiii

This page intentionally left blank 

PREFACE
This book is for people who want to reﬁne their math skills at the high-school
level. It can serve as a supplemental text in a classroom, tutored, or home-
schooling environment. It should also be useful for career changers
who want to refresh or augment their knowledge. I recommend that you
start at the beginning and complete a chapter a week. An hour or two
daily ought to be enough time for this. When you’re done, you can use
this book as a permanent reference.
This course has an abundance of practice quiz, test, and exam questions.
They are all multiple-choice, and are similar to the sorts of questions used
in standardized tests. There is a short quiz at the end of every chapter.
The quizzes are ‘‘open-book.’’ You may (and should) refer to the chapter
texts when taking them. When you think you’re ready, take the quiz,
write down your answers, and then give your answers to a friend. Have the
friend tell you your score, but not which questions you got wrong.
The answers are listed in the back of the book. Stick with a chapter until
you get most of the answers correct.
This book is divided into multi-chapter sections. At the end of each
section, there is a multiple-choice test. Take these tests when you’re done
with the respective sections and have taken all the chapter quizzes. The
section tests are ‘‘closed-book,’’ but the questions are easier than those in
the quizzes. A satisfactory score is 75% or more correct. Again, answers are
in the back of the book.
There is a ﬁnal exam at the end of this course. It contains questions drawn
uniformly from all the chapters. A satisfactory score is at least 75% correct
answers. With the section tests and the ﬁnal exam, as with the quizzes, have
a friend tell you your score without letting you know which questions
you missed. That way, you will not subconsciously memorize the answers.
You can check to see where your knowledge is strong and where it is not.
xv
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

When you’re ﬁnished with this supplemental course, you’ll have an
advantage over your peers. You’ll have the edge when it comes to ﬁguring
out solutions to problems in a variety of situations people encounter in
today’s technological world. You’ll understand the ‘‘why,’’ as well as the
‘‘what’’ and the ‘‘how.’’
Suggestions for future editions are welcome.
Stan Gibilisco
Acknowledgments
Illustrations in this book were generated with CorelDRAW. Some of the clip
art is courtesy of Corel Corporation.
I extend thanks to Emma Previato of Boston University, who helped with
the technical editing of the manuscript.
PREFACE
xvi
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

Everyday Math Demystified

This page intentionally left blank 

PART ONE
Expressing
Quantities
1
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER
1
Numbers and
Arithmetic
Mathematics is expressed in language alien to people unfamiliar with it.
Someone talking about mathematics can sound like a rocket scientist.
Written mathematical documents are often laden with symbology. Before
you proceed further, look over Table 1-1. It will help you remember symbols
used in basic mathematics, and might introduce you to a few symbols you’ve
never seen before!
If at ﬁrst some of this stuﬀseems theoretical and far-removed from ‘‘the
everyday world,’’ think of it as basic training, a sort of math boot camp. Or
better yet, think of it as the classroom part of drivers’ education. It was good
to have that training so you’d know how to read the instrument panel, ﬁnd
the turn signal lever, adjust the mirrors, control the headlights, and read the
road signs. So get ready for a drill. Get ready to think logically. Get your
mind into math mode.
3
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Table 1-1
Symbols used in basic mathematics.
Symbol
Description
{ }
Braces; objects between them are elements of a set
)
Logical implication; read ‘‘implies’’
()
Logical equivalence; read ‘‘if and only if ’’
8
Universal quantiﬁer; read ‘‘for all’’ or ‘‘for every’’
9
Existential quantiﬁer; read ‘‘for some’’
|
Logical expression; read ‘‘such that’’
&
Logical conjunction; read ‘‘and’’
N
The set of natural numbers
Z
The set of integers
Q
The set of rational numbers
R
The set of real numbers
1
The set with no elements; read ‘‘the empty set’’ or ‘‘the null set’’
\
Set intersection; read ‘‘intersect’’
[
Set union; read ‘‘union’’

Proper subset; read ‘‘is a proper subset of ’’

Subset; read ‘‘is a subset of ’’
2
Element; read ‘‘is an element of ’’ or ‘‘is a member of ’’
=2
Non-element; read ‘‘is not an element of ’’ or ‘‘is not a member of ’’
¼
Equality; read ‘‘equals’’ or ‘‘is equal to’’
6¼
Not-equality; read ‘‘does not equal’’ or ‘‘is not equal to’’
(Continued )
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
4

Table 1-1
Continued.
Symbol
Description

Approximate equality; read ‘‘is approximately equal to’’
<
Inequality; read ‘‘is less than’’

Weak inequality; read ‘‘is less than or equal to’’
>
Inequality; read ‘‘is greater than’’

Weak inequality; read ‘‘is greater than or equal to’’
þ
Addition; read ‘‘plus’’

Subtraction, read ‘‘minus’’

Multiplication; read ‘‘times’’ or ‘‘multiplied by’’
 
*
 
Quotient; read ‘‘over’’ or ‘‘divided by’’
/
:
Ratio or proportion; read ‘‘is to’’
Logical expression; read ‘‘such that’’
!
Product of all natural numbers from 1 up to a certain value; read ‘‘factorial’’
( )
Quantiﬁcation; read ‘‘the quantity’’
[ ]
Quantiﬁcation; used outside ( )
{ }
Quantiﬁcation; used outside [ ]
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
5

Sets
A set is a collection or group of deﬁnable elements or members. Set elements
commonly include:
*
points on a line
*
instants in time
*
coordinates in a plane
*
coordinates in space
*
coordinates on a display
*
curves on a graph or display
*
physical objects
*
chemical elements
*
locations in memory or storage
*
data bits, bytes, or characters
*
subscribers to a network
If an object or number (call it a) is an element of set A, this fact is
written as:
a 2 A
The 2 symbol means ‘‘is an element of.’’
SET INTERSECTION
The intersection of two sets A and B, written A \ B, is the set C such that
the following statement is true for every element x:
x 2 C if and only if x 2 A and x 2 B
The \ symbol is read ‘‘intersect.’’
SET UNION
The union of two sets A and B, written A [ B, is the set C such that the
following statement is true for every element x:
x 2 C if and only if x 2 A or x 2 B
The [ symbol is read ‘‘union.’’
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
6

SUBSETS
A set A is a subset of a set B, written A  B, if and only if the following
holds true:
x 2 A implies that x 2 B
The  symbol is read ‘‘is a subset of.’’ In this context, ‘‘implies that’’ is
meant in the strongest possible sense. The statement ‘‘This implies that’’ is
equivalent to ‘‘If this is true, then that is always true.’’
PROPER SUBSETS
A set A is a proper subset of a set B, written A  B, if and only if the following
both hold true:
x 2 A implies that x 2 B
as long as A 6¼ B
The  symbol is read ‘‘is a proper subset of.’’
DISJOINT SETS
Two sets A and B are disjoint if and only if all three of the following
conditions are met:
A 6¼ 1
B 6¼ 1
A \ B ¼ 1
where 1 denotes the empty set, also called the null set. It is a set that doesn’t
contain any elements, like a basket of apples without the apples.
COINCIDENT SETS
Two non-empty sets A and B are coincident if and only if, for all elements x,
both of the following are true:
x 2 A implies that x 2 B
x 2 B implies that x 2 A
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
7

Numbering Systems
A number is an abstract expression of a quantity. Mathematicians deﬁne
numbers in terms of sets containing sets. All the known numbers can be
built up from a starting point of zero. Numerals are the written symbols
that are agreed-on to represent numbers.
NATURAL AND WHOLE NUMBERS
The natural numbers, also called whole numbers or counting numbers, are built
up from a starting point of 0 or 1, depending on which text you consult.
The set of natural numbers is denoted N. If we include 0, we have this:
N ¼ f0 1 2 3 . . .  n . . .g
In some instances, 0 is not included, so:
N ¼ f1 2 3 4 . . .  n . . .g
Natural numbers can be expressed as points along a geometric ray or
half-line, where quantity is directly proportional to displacement (Fig. 1-1).
DECIMAL NUMBERS
The decimal number system is also called base 10 or radix 10. Digits in this
system are the elements of the set {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}. Numerals are
written out as strings of digits to the left and/or right of a radix point,
which is sometimes called a ‘‘decimal point.’’
In the expression of a decimal number, the digit immediately to the left of
the radix point is multiplied by 1, and is called the ones digit. The next digit
to the left is multiplied by 10, and is called the tens digit. To the left of this
are digits representing hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands, and so on.
The ﬁrst digit to the right of the radix point is multiplied by a factor of
1/10, and is called the tenths digit. The next digit to the right is multiplied
by 1/100, and is called the hundredths digit. Then come digits representing
thousandths, ten-thousandths, and so on.
Fig. 1-1.
The natural numbers can be depicted as points on a half-line or ray.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
8

BINARY NUMBERS
The binary number system is a scheme for expressing numbers using only the
digits 0 and 1. It is sometimes called base 2. The digit immediately to the left
of the radix point is the ‘‘ones’’ digit. The next digit to the left is the ‘‘twos’’
digit; after that comes the ‘‘fours’’ digit. Moving further to the left, the digits
represent 8, 16, 32, 64, and so on, doubling every time. To the right of the
radix point, the value of each digit is cut in half again and again, that is,
1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, 1/32, 1/64, and so on.
When you work with a computer or calculator, you give it a decimal
number that is converted into binary form. The computer or calculator does
its operations with zeros and ones, also called digital low and high states.
When the process is complete, the machine converts the result back into
decimal form for display.
OCTAL AND HEXADECIMAL NUMBERS
The octal number system uses eight symbols. Every digit is an element of the
set {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}. Starting with 1, counting in the octal system goes like
this: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, . . . 16, 17, 20, 21, . . . 76, 77, 100, 101, . . . 776,
777, 1000, 1001, and so on.
Yet another scheme, commonly used in computer practice, is the hexa-
decimal number system, so named because it has 16 symbols. These digits are
the decimal 0 through 9 plus six more, represented by A through F, the ﬁrst
six letters of the alphabet. Starting with 1, counting in the hexadecimal
system goes like this: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F, 10, 11, . . . 1E,
1F, 20, 21, . . . FE, FF, 100, 101, . . . FFE, FFF, 1000, 1001, and so on.
PROBLEM 1-1
What is the value of the binary number 1001011 in the decimal system?
SOLUTION 1-1
Note the decimal values of the digits in each position, proceeding from right
to left, and add them all up as a running sum. The right-most digit, 1, is mul-
tiplied by 1. The next digit to the left, 1, is multiplied by 2, for a running sum
of 3. The digit to the left of that, 0, is multiplied by 4, so the running sum is
still 3. The next digit to the left, 1, is multiplied by 8, so the running sum is 11.
The next two digits to the left of that, both 0, are multiplied by 16 and 32,
respectively, so the running sum is still 11. The left-most digit, 1, is multiplied
by 64, for a ﬁnal sum of 75. Therefore, the decimal equivalent of 1001011
is 75.
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
9

PROBLEM 1-2
What is the value of the binary number 1001.011 in the decimal system?
SOLUTION 1-2
To solve this problem, begin at the radix point. Proceeding to the left ﬁrst,
ﬁgure out the whole-number part of the expression. The right-most digit, 1,
is multiplied by 1. The next two digits to the left, both 0, are multiplied
by 2 and 4, respectively, so the running sum is still 1. The left-most
digit, 1, is multiplied by 8, so the ﬁnal sum for the whole-number part of
the expression is 9.
Return to the radix point and proceed to the right. The ﬁrst digit, 0, is
multiplied by 1/2, so the running sum is 0. The next digit to the right, 1,
is multiplied by 1/4, so the running sum is 1/4. The right-most digit, 1, is
multiplied by 1/8, so the ﬁnal sum for the fractional part of the expression
is 3/8.
Adding the fractional value to the whole-number value in decimal form
produces the decimal equivalent of 1001.011, which is 9-3/8.
Integers
The set of natural numbers can be duplicated and inverted to form an
identical, mirror-image set:
N ¼ f0  1  2  3 . . .g
The union of this set with the set of natural numbers produces the set of
integers, commonly denoted Z:
Z ¼ N [ N
¼ f. . .   3  2  1 0 1 2 3 . . .g
POINTS ALONG A LINE
Integers can be expressed as points along a line, where quantity is directly
proportional to displacement (Fig. 1-2). In the illustration, integers
Fig. 1-2.
The integers can be depicted as points on a line.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
10

correspond to points where hash marks cross the line. The set of natural
numbers is a proper subset of the set of integers:
N  Z
For any number a, if a 2 N, then a 2 Z. This is formally written:
8a: a 2 N ) a 2 Z
The converse of this is not true. There are elements of Z (namely, the negative
integers) that are not elements of N.
ADDITION OF INTEGERS
Addition is symbolized by the plus sign (þ). The result of this operation is
a sum. Subtraction is symbolized by a long dash (). The result of this
operation is a diﬀerence. In a sense, these operations ‘‘undo’’ each other.
For any integer a, the addition of an integer a to a quantity is equivalent
to the subtraction of the integer a from that quantity. The subtraction of
an integer a from a quantity is equivalent to the addition of the integer a
to that quantity.
MULTIPLICATION OF INTEGERS
Multiplication is symbolized by a tilted cross (), a small dot (), or some-
times in the case of variables, by listing the numbers one after the other
(for example, ab). Occasionally an asterisk (*) is used. The result of this
operation is a product.
On the number line of Fig. 1-2, products are depicted by moving away
from the zero point, or origin, either toward the left or toward the right
depending on the signs of the numbers involved. To illustrate a  b ¼ c, start
at the origin, then move away from the origin a units b times. If a and b are
both positive or both negative, move toward the right; if a and b have
opposite sign, move toward the left. The ﬁnishing point corresponds to c.
The preceding three operations are closed over the set of integers. This
means that if a and b are integers, then a þ b, a  b, and a  b are integers.
If you add, subtract, and multiply integers by integers, you can never get
anything but another integer.
DIVISION OF INTEGERS
Division is symbolized by a forward slash (/) or a dash with dots above and
below (). The result of this operation is called a quotient. When a quotient
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
11

is expressed as a ratio or as a proportion, a colon is often used between the
numbers involved.
On the number line of Fig. 1-2, quotients are depicted by moving in
toward the origin, either toward the left or toward the right depending on
the signs of the numbers involved. To illustrate a/b ¼ c, it is easiest to
envision the product b  c ¼ a performed ‘‘backwards.’’ (Or you can simply
use a calculator!)
The operation of division, unlike the operations of addition, subtraction,
and multiplication, is not closed over the set of integers. If a and b are
integers, then a/b might be an integer, but this is not necessarily the case.
Division gives rise to a more comprehensive set of numbers, which we’ll look
at shortly. The quotient a/b is not deﬁned at all if b ¼ 0.
EXPONENTIATION WITH INTEGERS
Exponentiation, also called raising to a power, is symbolized by a superscript
numeral. The result of this operation is known as a power.
If a is an integer and b is a positive integer, then ab is the result of
multiplying a by itself b times. For example:
23 ¼ 2  2  2 ¼ 8
34 ¼ 3  3  3  3 ¼ 81
If a is an integer and c is a negative integer, then ac is the result of
multiplying a by itself c times and then dividing 1 by the result. For example,
23 ¼ 1=ð2  2  2Þ ¼ 1=8
34 ¼ 1=ð3  3  3  3Þ ¼ 1=81
PRIME NUMBERS
Let p be a nonzero natural number. Suppose ab ¼ p, where a and b are
natural numbers. Further suppose that either of the following statements is
true for all a and b:
ða ¼ 1Þ & ðb ¼ pÞ
ða ¼ pÞ & ðb ¼ 1Þ
Then p is deﬁned as a prime number. In other words, a natural number p is
prime if and only if its only two natural-number factors are 1 and itself.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
12

The ﬁrst several prime numbers are 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31,
and 37. Sometimes 1 is not included in this list, although technically it meets
the above requirement for ‘‘prime-ness.’’
PRIME FACTORS
Suppose n is a natural number. Then there exists a unique sequence of prime
numbers p1, p2, p3, . . . , pm, such that both of the following statements are
true:
p1  p2  p3  . . .  pm
p1  p2  p3  . . .  pm ¼ n
The numbers p1, p2, p3, . . . , pm are called the prime factors of the natural num-
ber n. Every natural number n has one, but only one, set of prime factors.
This is an important principle known as the Fundamental Theorem of
Arithmetic.
PROBLEM 1-3
What are the prime factors of 80?
SOLUTION 1-3
Here’s a useful hint for ﬁnding the prime factors of any natural number n:
Unless n is a prime number, all of its prime factors are less than or equal
to n/2. In this case n ¼ 80, so we can be certain that all the prime factors
of 80 are less than or equal to 40.
Finding the prime factors is largely a matter of repeating this divide-by-2
process over and over, and making educated guesses to break down the
resulting numbers into prime factors. We can see that 80 ¼ 2  40. Breaking it
down further:
80 ¼ 2  ð2  20Þ
¼ 2  2  ð2  10Þ
¼ 2  2  2  2  5
PROBLEM 1-4
Is the number 123 prime? If not, what are its prime factors?
SOLUTION 1-4
The number 123 is not prime. It can be factored into 123 ¼ 41  3. The
numbers 41 and 3 are both prime, so they are the prime factors of 123.
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
13

Rational, Irrational, and Real Numbers
The natural numbers, or counting numbers, have plenty of interesting
properties. But when we start dividing them by one another or performing
fancy operations on them like square roots, trigonometric functions, and
logarithms, things can get downright fascinating.
QUOTIENT OF TWO INTEGERS
A rational number (the term derives from the word ratio) is a quotient of two
integers, where the denominator is not zero. The standard form for a rational
number a is:
a ¼ m=n
where m and n are integers, and n 6¼ 0. The set of all possible such quotients
encompasses the entire set of rational numbers, denoted Q. Thus,
Q ¼ fr j r ¼ m=ng
where m 2 Z, n 2 Z, and n 6¼ 0. The set of integers is a proper subset of the
set of rational numbers. Thus, the natural numbers, the integers, and the
rational numbers have the following relationship:
N  Z  Q
DECIMAL EXPANSIONS
Rational numbers can be denoted in decimal form as an integer, followed
by a radix point, followed by a sequence of digits. (See Decimal numbers
above for more details concerning this notation.) The digits following the
radix point always exist in either of two forms:
*
a ﬁnite string of digits
*
an inﬁnite string of digits that repeat in cycles
Examples of the ﬁrst type of rational number, known as terminating
decimals, are:
3=4 ¼ 0:750000 . . .
9=8 ¼ 1:1250000 . . .
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
14

Examples of the second type of rational number, known as nonterminating,
repeating decimals, are:
1=3 ¼ 0:33333 . . .
1=6 ¼ 0:166666 . . .
RATIONAL-NUMBER ‘‘DENSITY’’
One of the most interesting things about rational numbers is the fact that
they are ‘‘dense.’’ Suppose we assign rational numbers to points on a line,
in such a way that the distance of any point from the origin is directly
proportional to its numerical value. If a point is on the left-hand side of
the point representing 0, then that point corresponds to a negative number;
if it’s on the right-hand side, it corresponds to a positive number. If we mark
oﬀonly the integers on such a line, we get a picture that looks like Fig. 1-2.
But in the case of the rational numbers, there are points all along the line, not
only at those places where the hash marks cross the line.
If we take any two points a and b on the line that correspond to rational
numbers, then the point midway between them corresponds to the rational
number (a þ b)/2. This is true no matter how many times we repeat the
operation. We can keep cutting an interval in half forever, and if the end
points are both rational numbers, then the midpoint is another rational
number. Figure 1-3 shows an example of this. It is as if you could take a piece
Fig. 1-3.
An interval can be repeatedly cut in half, generating rational numbers
without end.
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
15

of paper and keep folding it over and over, and never get to the place where
you couldn’t fold it again.
It is tempting to suppose that points on a line, deﬁned as corresponding to
rational numbers, are ‘‘inﬁnitely dense.’’ They are, in a sense, squeezed
together ‘‘inﬁnitely tight’’ so that every point in between any two points must
correspond to some rational number. But do the rational numbers account
for all of the points along a true geometric line? The answer, which surprises
many folks the ﬁrst time they hear it, is ‘‘No.’’
IRRATIONAL NUMBERS
An irrational number is a number that cannot be expressed as the ratio of two
integers. Examples of irrational numbers include:
*
the length of the diagonal of a square that is one unit on each edge
*
the circumference-to-diameter ratio of a circle.
All irrational numbers share the property of being inexpressible in decimal
form. When an attempt is made to express such a number in this form,
the result is a nonterminating, nonrepeating decimal. No matter how many
digits are speciﬁed to the right of the radix point, the expression is only
an approximation of the actual value of the number. The set of irrational
numbers can be denoted S. This set is entirely disjoint from the set of rational
numbers. That means that no irrational number is rational, and no rational
number is irrational:
S \ Q ¼ 1
REAL NUMBERS
The set of real numbers, denoted R, is the union of the sets of rational and
irrational numbers:
R ¼ Q [ S
For practical purposes, R can be depicted as the set of points on a continuous
geometric line, as shown in Fig. 1-2. (In theoretical mathematics, the asser-
tion that the points on a geometric line correspond one-to-one with the real
numbers is known as the Continuum Hypothesis.) The real numbers are related
to the rational numbers, the integers, and the natural numbers as follows:
N  Z  Q  R
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
16

The operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division can
be deﬁned over the set of real numbers. If # represents any one of these
operations and x and y are elements of R with y 6¼ 0, then:
x # y 2 R
REAL-NUMBER ‘‘DENSITY’’
Do you sense something strange going on here? We’ve just seen that the
rational numbers, when depicted as points along a line, are ‘‘dense.’’ No
matter how close together two rational-number points on a line might be,
there is always another rational-number point between them. But this doesn’t
mean that the rational-number points are the only points on a line.
Every rational number corresponds to some point on a number line such as
the one shown in Fig. 1-2. But the converse of this statement is not true.
There are some points on the line that don’t correspond to rational numbers.
A good example is the positive number that, when multiplied by itself,
produces the number 2. This is approximately equal to 1.41421. Another
example is the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter, a constant
commonly called pi and symbolized p. It’s approximately equal to 3.14159.
The set of real numbers is more ‘‘dense’’ than the set of rational numbers.
How many times more dense? Twice? A dozen times? A hundred times?
It turns out that the set of real numbers, when depicted as the points on a
line, is inﬁnitely more dense than the set of real numbers. This is hard to
imagine, and a proof of it is beyond the scope of this book. You might think
of it this way: Even if you lived forever, you would die before you could
name all the real numbers.
SHADES OF INFINITY
The symbol @0 (aleph-null or aleph-nought) denotes the cardinality of the
set of rational numbers. The cardinality of the real numbers is denoted
@1 (aleph-one). These ‘‘numbers’’ are called inﬁnite cardinals or transﬁnite
cardinals.
Around the year 1900, the German mathematician Georg Cantor proved
that these two ‘‘numbers’’ are not the same. The inﬁnity of the real numbers
is somehow larger than the inﬁnity of the rational numbers:
@1 > @0
The elements of N can be paired oﬀone-to-one with the elements of Z or Q,
but not with the elements of S or R. Any attempt to pair oﬀthe elements of N
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
17

and S or N and R results in some elements of S or R being left over without
corresponding elements in N. This reﬂects the fact that the elements of N, Z,
or Q can be deﬁned in terms of a listing scheme (Fig. 1-4 is an example), but
the elements of S or R cannot. It also reﬂects the fact that the points on a
real-number line are more ‘‘dense’’ than the points on a line denoting the
natural numbers, the integers, or the rational numbers.
PROBLEM 1-5
What is 4/7, expressed using only a radix point and decimal digits?
SOLUTION 1-5
You can divide this out ‘‘longhand,’’ or you can use a calculator that has a
display with a lot of digits. The result is:
4=7 ¼ 0:571428571428571428 . . .
That is zero, followed by a radix point, followed by the sequence of digits
571428 repeating over and over without end.
Fig. 1-4.
A tabular listing scheme for the rational numbers. Proceed as shown by the
gray line. If a box is empty, or if the number in it is equivalent to one encountered
previously (such as 3/3 or 2/4), skip the box without counting it.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
18

PROBLEM 1-6
What is the value of 3.367367367 . . . expressed as a fraction?
SOLUTION 1-6
First consider only the portion to the right of the radix point. This is a repeat-
ing sequence of the digits 367, over and over without end. Whenever you
see a repeating sequence of several digits to the right of a radix point, its
fractional equivalent is found by dividing that sequence of digits by an
equal number of nines. In this case:
0:367367367 . . . ¼ 367=999
To get the value of 3.367367367 . . . as a fraction, simply add 3 to the above,
getting:
3:367367367 . . . ¼ 3-367=999
In this context, the dash between the whole number portion and the frac-
tional portion of the expression serves only to separate them for notational
clarity. (It isn’t a minus sign!)
Number Operations
Several properties, also called principles or laws, are recognized as valid for
the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division for all
real numbers. Here are some of them. It’s not a bad idea to memorize
these. You probably learned them in elementary school.
ADDITIVE IDENTITY ELEMENT
When 0 is added to any real number a, the sum is always equal to a.
The number 0 is said to be the additive identity element:
a þ 0 ¼ a
MULTIPLICATIVE IDENTITY ELEMENT
When any real number a is multiplied by 1, the product is always equal to a.
The number 1 is said to be the multiplicative identity element:
a  1 ¼ a
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
19

ADDITIVE INVERSES
For every real number a, there exists a unique real number a such that the
sum of the two is equal to 0. The numbers a and a are called additive
inverses:
a þ ðaÞ ¼ 0
MULTIPLICATIVE INVERSES
For every nonzero real number a, there exists a unique real number 1/a such
that the product of the two is equal to 1. The numbers a and 1/a are called
multiplicative inverses:
a  ð1=aÞ ¼ 1
The multiplicative inverse of a real number is also called its reciprocal.
COMMUTATIVE LAW FOR ADDITION
When any two real numbers are added together, it does not matter in which
order the sum is performed. The operation of addition is said to be commu-
tative over the set of real numbers. For all real numbers a and b, the following
equation is valid:
a þ b ¼ b þ a
COMMUTATIVE LAW FOR MULTIPLICATION
When any two real numbers are multiplied by each other, it does not matter
in which order the product is performed. The operation of multiplication,
like addition, is commutative over the set of real numbers. For all real
numbers a and b, the following equation is always true:
a  b ¼ b  a
A product can be written without the ‘‘times sign’’ () if, but only if, doing so
does not result in an ambiguous or false statement. The above expression is
often seen written this way:
ab ¼ ba
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
20

If a ¼ 3 and b ¼ 52, however, it’s necessary to use the ‘‘times sign’’ and
write this:
3  52 ¼ 52  3
The reason becomes obvious if the above expression is written without using
the ‘‘times signs.’’ This results in a false statement:
352 ¼ 523
ASSOCIATIVE LAW FOR ADDITION
When adding any three real numbers, it does not matter how the addends are
grouped. The operation of addition is associative over the set of real numbers.
For all real numbers a1, a2, and a3, the following equation holds true:
ða1 þ a2Þ þ a3 ¼ a1 þ ða2 þ a3Þ
ASSOCIATIVE LAW FOR MULTIPLICATION
When multiplying any three real numbers, it does not matter how the
multiplicands are grouped. Multiplication, like addition, is associative
over the set of real numbers. For all real numbers a, b, and c, the following
equation holds:
ðabÞc ¼ aðbcÞ
DISTRIBUTIVE LAWS
For all real numbers a, b, and c, the following equation holds. The operation
of multiplication is distributive with respect to addition:
aðb þ cÞ ¼ ab þ ac
The above statement logically implies that multiplication is distributive with
respect to subtraction, as well:
aðb  cÞ ¼ ab  ac
The distributive law can also be extended to division as long as there aren’t
any denominators that end up being equal to zero. For all real numbers a, b,
and c, where a 6¼ 0, the following equations are valid:
ðab þ acÞ=a ¼ ab=a þ ac=a ¼ b þ c
ðab  acÞ=a ¼ ab=a  ac=a ¼ b  c
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
21

PRECEDENCE OF OPERATIONS
When addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and exponentiation
(raising
to
a
power)
appear
in
an
expression
and
that
expression
must be simpliﬁed, the operations should be performed in the following
sequence:
*
Simplify all expressions within parentheses, brackets, and braces from
the inside out.
*
Perform all exponential operations, proceeding from left to right.
*
Perform all products and quotients, proceeding from left to right.
*
Perform all sums and diﬀerences, proceeding from left to right.
The following are examples of this process, in which the order of the numer-
als and operations is the same in each case, but the groupings diﬀer:
½ð2 þ 3Þð3  1Þ2 2
¼ ½5  ð4Þ2 2
¼ ð5  16Þ2
¼ 802 ¼ 6400
½ð2 þ 3  ð3Þ  1Þ2 2
¼ ½ð2 þ ð9Þ  1Þ2 2
¼ ð82Þ2
¼ 642 ¼ 4096
A note of caution is in order here: This rule doesn’t apply to exponents
of exponents. For example, 33 raised to the power of 3 is equal to
273 or 19,683. But 3 raised to the power of 33 is equal to 327 or
7,625,597,484,987.
PROBLEM 1-7
What is the value of the expression 5  6 þ 8  1?
SOLUTION 1-7
First, multiply 5 times 6, getting the product 30. Then add 8 to this,
getting 22. Finally subtract 1, getting 23. Thus:
5  6 þ 8  1 ¼ 23
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
22

PROBLEM 1-8
What is the value of the expression 5  (6 þ 8  1)?
SOLUTION 1-8
First ﬁnd the sum 6 þ 8, which is 14. Then subtract 1 from this, getting 13.
Finally multiply 13 by 5, getting 65. Thus:
5  ð6 þ 8  1Þ ¼ 65
More Principles Worth Memorizing
The following rules and deﬁnitions apply to arithmetic operations for real
numbers, with the constraint that no denominator can ever be equal to
zero. It’s good to memorize these, because an ‘‘automatic’’ knowledge of
them can save you some time as you hack your way through the occasional
forest of calculations that life is bound to confront you with. After a while,
these laws will seem like nothing more or less than common sense.
ZERO NUMERATOR
For all nonzero real numbers a, if 0 is divided by a, then the result is equal
to 0. This equation is always true:
0=a ¼ 0
ZERO DENOMINATOR
For all real numbers a, if a is divided by 0, then the result a/0 is undeﬁned.
Perhaps a better way of saying this is that, whatever such an ‘‘animal’’
might happen to be, it is not a real number! Within the set of real numbers,
there’s no such thing as the ratio of a number or variable to 0.
If you’re into playing around with numbers, you can have lots of fun
trying to deﬁne ‘‘division by 0’’ and explore the behavior of ratios with zero
denominators. If you plan to go on such a safari, however, take note: The
‘‘animals’’ can be unpredictable, and you had better fortify your mind with
lots of ammunition and heavy armor.
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
23

MULTIPLICATION BY ZERO
Whenever a real number is multiplied by 0, the product is equal to 0. The
following equations are true for all real numbers a:
a  0 ¼ 0
0  a ¼ 0
ZEROTH POWER
Whenever a nonzero real number is taken to the zeroth power, the result is
equal to 1. The following equation is true for all real numbers a except 0:
a0 ¼ 1
ARITHMETIC MEAN
Suppose that a1, a2, a3, . . . , an be real numbers. The arithmetic mean, denoted
mA (also known as the average) of a1, a2, a3, . . . , an is equal to the sum of the
numbers, divided by the number of numbers. Mathematically:
mA ¼ ða1 þ a2 þ a3 þ . . . þ anÞ=n
PRODUCT OF SIGNS
When two real numbers with plus signs (meaning positive, or larger than 0)
or minus signs (meaning negative, or less than 0) are multiplied by each
other, the following rules apply:
ðþÞðþÞ ¼ ðþÞ
ðþÞðÞ ¼ ðÞ
ðÞðþÞ ¼ ðÞ
ðÞðÞ ¼ ðþÞ
QUOTIENT OF SIGNS
When two real numbers with plus or minus signs are divided by each other,
the following rules apply:
ðþÞ=ðþÞ ¼ ðþÞ
ðþÞ=ðÞ ¼ ðÞ
ðÞ=ðþÞ ¼ ðÞ
ðÞ=ðÞ ¼ ðþÞ
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
24

POWER OF SIGNS
When a real number with a plus sign or a minus sign is raised to a positive
integer power n, the following rules apply:
ðþÞn ¼ ðþÞ
ðÞn ¼ ðÞ if n is odd
ðÞn ¼ ðþÞ if n is even
RECIPROCAL OF RECIPROCAL
For all nonzero real numbers, the reciprocal of the reciprocal is equal to
the original number. The following equation holds for all real numbers a
provided that a 6¼ 0:
1=ð1=aÞ ¼ a
PRODUCT OF SUMS
For all real numbers a, b, c, and d, the product of (a þ b) with (c þ d) is given
by the following formula:
ða þ bÞðc þ dÞ ¼ ac þ ad þ bc þ bd
CROSS MULTIPLICATION
Given two quotients or ratios expressed as fractions, the numerator of the ﬁrst
times the denominator of the second is equal to the denominator of the ﬁrst
times the numerator of the second. Mathematically, for all real numbers a,
b, c, and d where neither a nor b is equal to 0, the following statement is valid:
a=b ¼ c=d , ad ¼ bc
RECIPROCAL OF PRODUCT
For any two nonzero real numbers, the reciprocal (or minus-one power)
of their product is equal to the product of their reciprocals. If a and b are
both nonzero real numbers:
1=ðabÞ ¼ ð1=aÞð1=bÞ
ðabÞ1 ¼ a1b1
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
25

PRODUCT OF QUOTIENTS
The product of two quotients or ratios, expressed as fractions, is equal to the
product of their numerators divided by the product of their denominators.
For all real numbers a, b, c, and d, where b 6¼ 0 and d 6¼ 0:
ða=bÞðc=dÞ ¼ ðacÞ=ðbdÞ
RECIPROCAL OF QUOTIENT
For any two nonzero real numbers, the reciprocal (or minus-one power) of
their quotient or ratio is equal to the quotient inverted or the ratio reversed.
If a and b are real numbers where a 6¼ 0 and b 6¼ 0:
1=ða=bÞ ¼ b=a
ða=bÞ1 ¼ b=a
Still More Principles
The following general laws of arithmetic can be useful from time to time. You
don’t really have to memorize them, as long as you can look them up when
you need them. (But if you want to memorize them, go right ahead.)
QUOTIENT OF PRODUCTS
The quotient or ratio of two products can be rewritten as a product of two
quotients or ratios. For all real numbers a, b, c, and d, where cd 6¼ 0:
ðabÞ=ðcdÞ ¼ ða=cÞðb=dÞ
¼ ða=dÞðb=cÞ
QUOTIENT OF QUOTIENTS
The quotient or ratio of two quotients or ratios can be rewritten either as
a product of two quotients or ratios, or as the quotient or ratio of two
products. For all real numbers a, b, c, and d, the following equations hold
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
26

as long as b 6¼ 0, c 6¼ 0, and d 6¼ 0:
ða=bÞ=ðc=dÞ ¼ ða=bÞðd=cÞ
¼ ða=cÞðd=bÞ
¼ ðadÞ=ðbcÞ
SUM OF QUOTIENTS (COMMON DENOMINATOR)
If two quotients or ratios have the same nonzero denominator, their sum is
equal to the sum of the numerators, divided by the denominator. For all
real numbers a, b, and c, where c 6¼ 0:
a=c þ b=c ¼ ða þ bÞ=c
SUM OF QUOTIENTS (GENERAL)
If two quotients or ratios have diﬀerent nonzero denominators, their sum
must be found using a speciﬁc formula. For all real numbers a, b, c, and d,
where b 6¼ 0 and d 6¼ 0:
a=b þ c=d ¼ ðad þ bcÞ=ðbdÞ
INTEGER ROOTS
Suppose that a is a positive real number. Also suppose that n is a positive
integer. Then the nth root of a can also be expressed as the 1/n power of a.
Thus, the second root (or square root) is the same thing as the 1/2 power;
the third root (or cube root) is the same thing as the 1/3 power; the fourth
root is the same thing as the 1/4 power; and so on.
RATIONAL-NUMBER POWERS
Suppose that a is a real number. Also suppose that b is a rational number
such that b ¼ m/n, where m and n are integers and n 6¼ 0. Then the following
formula holds:
ab ¼ am=n ¼ ðamÞ1=n ¼ ða1=nÞm
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
27

NEGATIVE POWERS
Suppose that a is a real number. Also suppose that b is a rational number.
Then the following formula holds:
ab ¼ ð1=aÞb ¼ 1=ðabÞ
SUM OF POWERS
Suppose that a is a real number. Also suppose that b and c are rational num-
bers. Then the following formula holds:
aðbþcÞ ¼ abac
DIFFERENCE OF POWERS
Suppose a is a nonzero real number. Also suppose that b and c are rational
numbers. Then the following formula holds:
aðbcÞ ¼ ab=ac
LET a 5 x, b 5 y, AND c 5 z
In mathematical literature, the expression ‘‘Let such-and-such be the case’’
is often used instead of ‘‘Suppose that such-and-such is true’’ or ‘‘Imagine
such-and-such.’’ When you are admonished to ‘‘let’’ things be a certain
way, you are in eﬀect being asked to imagine, or suppose, that they are so.
That’s the way the next few principles are stated. Also, diﬀerent variables
are used in the next few statements: x replaces a, y replaces b, and z replaces
c. It’s a good idea to get used to this sort of variability (along with repetitive-
ness, ironically) to arm your mind against the assaults of mathematical
discourse.
PRODUCT OF POWERS
Let x be a real number. Let y and z be rational numbers. Then the following
formula holds:
xyz ¼ ðxyÞz ¼ ðxzÞy
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
28

QUOTIENT OF POWERS
Let x be a real number. Let y and z be rational numbers, with the constraint
that z 6¼ 0. Then the following formula holds:
xy=z ¼ ðxyÞ1=z
POWER OF RECIPROCAL
Let x be a nonzero real number. Let n be a natural number. Then the nth
power of the reciprocal of x is equal to the reciprocal of x to the nth
power. That is:
ð1=xÞn ¼ 1=ðxnÞ
POWERS OF SUM
Let x and y be real numbers. Then the following formulas hold:
ðx þ yÞ2 ¼ x2 þ 2xy þ y2
ðx þ yÞ3 ¼ x3 þ 3x2y þ 3xy2 þ y3
ðx þ yÞ4 ¼ x4 þ 4x3y þ 6x2y2 þ 4xy3 þ y4
POWERS OF DIFFERENCE
Let x and y be real numbers. Then the following formulas hold:
ðx  yÞ2 ¼ x2  2xy þ y2
ðx  yÞ3 ¼ x3  3x2y þ 3xy2  y3
ðx  yÞ4 ¼ x4  4x3y þ 6x2y2  4xy3 þ y4
PROBLEM 1-9
What is the value of (1/27)1/3?
SOLUTION 1-9
We are seeking the 1/3 power (or the cube root) of 1/27. This means we are
looking for some number which, when multiplied by itself and then multi-
plied by itself again, will produce 1/27.
Imagine some number y such that (1/y)3 ¼ (1/y)(1/y)(1/y) ¼ 1/27. Then y
must be the cube root of 27. Using a calculator, the cube root of 27 is found
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
29

to be 3. From this we can conclude that 1/y ¼ 1/3, and thus that (1/3)3 ¼ 1/27.
The value we seek, the cube root (or 1/3 power) of 1/27, is therefore 1/3.
PROBLEM 1-10
Find the sum of 2/7 and 5/8.
SOLUTION 1-10
Use the formula for the sum of quotients in general, stated earlier in this
chapter. As long as b and d are nonzero, the following holds for all real
numbers a, b, c, and d:
a=b þ c=d ¼ ðad þ bcÞ=ðbdÞ
Assign a ¼ 2, b ¼ 7, c ¼ 5, and d ¼ 8. Then plug the numbers into the formula:
2=7 þ ð5=8Þ ¼ ½ð2  8Þ þ ð7  5Þ =ð7  8Þ
¼ ½16 þ ð35Þ =56
¼ 19=56
Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
The reciprocal of a number is the same thing as the
(a) additive inverse
(b) exponent
(c) minus-one power
(d) cube root
2.
What is the value of 24  3 þ 2?
(a) 46
(b) 50
(c) 80
(d) This expression is ambiguous without parentheses to tell us the
precedence of the operations.
3.
The sum of 3/x and 5/x, where x represents any real number other
than 0, is
(a) 8/(x2)
(b) 8/(2x)
(c) 8/x
(d) 15/x
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
30

4.
The square of b/4, where b represents any rational number, is
(a) b2/4
(b) b2/8
(c) b2/16
(d) bb/256
5.
Figure 1-5 is called a Venn diagram. It denotes sets as circular regions
(including their interiors) on a surface. What does the shaded region in
this illustration represent?
(a) A þ B
(b) A \ B
(c) A [ B
(d) A  B
6.
In Fig. 1-5, the objects labeled P, Q, and R represent individual points.
Which of the following statements is true?
(a) P 2 (A [ B)
(b) Q 2 (A \ B)
(c) R 2 1
(d) P  A
7.
Suppose q, r, and s represent real numbers. Which of the following
statements is not true in general, unless constraints are imposed on
one or more of the variables?
(a) q(r þ s) ¼ qrqs
(b) q/s  r/s ¼ (q  r)/s
(c) (q þ r) þ s ¼ q þ (r þ s)
(d) (qr)s ¼ q(rs)
8.
When we write 34.34343434 . . . , we are writing a representation of
(a) an irrational number
(b) a nonterminating, nonrepeating decimal
(c) a nondenumerable number
(d) a rational number
Fig. 1-5.
Illustration for Quiz Questions 5 and 6.
CHAPTER 1
Numbers and Arithmetic
31

9.
The 1/2 power of a number is the same thing as
(a) the square root of that number
(b) half of that number
(c) the number minus 1/2
(d) nothing; it is not deﬁned
10.
Suppose x, y, and z are positive real numbers. What is the value of
x(yz) when y ¼ z?
(a) 0
(b) 1
(c) x
(d) It is not deﬁned.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
32

CHAPTER
2
How Variables
Relate
Tables and graphs portray relationships between changeable quantities known
as variables. Tables and graphs show how the values of variables compare
with, and in some cases aﬀect, one another. When a table or graph is well com-
posed, it can reveal phenomena that would otherwise be impossible to see.
This versus That
Consider the following statements. Each of them represents a situation that
could occur in everyday life.
*
The outdoor air temperature varies with the time of day.
*
The time the sun is above the horizon on June 21 varies with the
latitude of the observer.
33
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

*
The time required for a wet rag to dry depends on the air temperature.
All of these expressions involve something that depends on something else. In
the ﬁrst case, a statement is made concerning temperature versus time; in the
second case, a statement is made concerning sun-up time versus latitude; in
the third case, a statement is made concerning time versus temperature.
Here, the term versus means ‘‘depending on.’’
INDEPENDENT VARIABLES
An independent variable can change in value, but its value is not inﬂuenced by
anything else in a given scenario. Time is often treated as an independent
variable. A lot of things depend on time.
When two or more variables are interrelated, at least one of the variables is
independent, but they are not all independent. A common and simple
situation is one in which there are two variables, one of which is independent.
In the three situations described above, the independent variables are time,
latitude, and air temperature.
DEPENDENT VARIABLES
A dependent variable can change in value, but its value is aﬀected by
at least one other factor in a situation. In the scenarios described above,
the air temperature, the sun-up time, and time are dependent variables.
When two or more variables are interrelated, at least one of them is
dependent, but they cannot all be dependent. Something that’s an independent
variable in one instance can be a dependent variable in another case. For
example, the air temperature is a dependent variable in the ﬁrst situation
described above, but it is an independent variable in the third situation.
SCENARIOS ILLUSTRATED
The three scenarios described above lend themselves to illustration. In order,
they are shown crudely in Fig. 2-1.
Figure 2-1A shows an example of outdoor air temperature versus time
of day. Drawing B shows the sun-up time (the number of hours per day in
which the sun is above the horizon) versus latitude on June 21, where points
south of the equator have negative latitude and points north of the equator
have positive latitude. Drawing C shows the time it takes for a rag to dry,
plotted against the air temperature.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
34

The scenarios represented by Figs. 2-1A and C are ﬁction, having been
contrived for this discussion. But Fig. 2-1B represents a physical reality; it is
true astronomical data for June 21 of every year on earth.
RELATIONS
All three of the graphs in Fig. 2-1 represent relations. In mathematics,
a relation is an expression of the way two or more variables compare or
interact. (It could just as well be called a relationship, a comparison, or an
interaction.) Figure 2-1B, for example, is a graph of the relation between
the latitude and the sun-up time on June 21.
Fig. 2-1.
Three ‘‘this-versus-that’’ scenarios. At A, air temperature versus time of day; at B,
sun-up time versus latitude; at C, time for rag to dry versus air temperature.
CHAPTER 2
How Variables Relate
35

When dealing with relations, the statements are equally valid if the vari-
ables are stated the other way around. Thus, Fig. 2-1B shows a relation
between the sun-up time on June 21 and the latitude. In a relation, ‘‘this
versus that’’ means the same thing as ‘‘that versus this.’’ Relations can always
be expressed in graphical form.
FUNCTIONS
A function is a special type of mathematical relation. A relation describes how
variables compare with each other. In a sense, it is ‘‘passive.’’ A function
transforms, processes, or morphs the quantity represented by the independ-
ent variable into the quantity represented by the dependent variable.
A function is ‘‘active.’’
All three of the graphs in Fig. 2-1 represent functions. The changes in the
value of the independent variable can, in some sense, be thought of as
causative factors in the variations of the value of the dependent variable. We
might re-state the scenarios this way to emphasize that they are functions:
*
The outdoor air temperature is a function of the time of day.
*
The sun-up time on June 21 is a function of the latitude of the observer.
*
The time required for a wet rag to dry is a function of the air
temperature.
A relation can be a function only when every element in the set of its
independent variables has at most one correspondent in the set of dependent
variables. If a given value of the dependent variable in a relation has more
than one independent-variable value corresponding to it, then that relation
might nevertheless be a function. But if any given value of the independent
variable corresponds to more than one dependent-variable value, that
relation is not a function.
REVERSING THE VARIABLES
In graphs of functions, independent variables are usually represented by
horizontal axes, and dependent variables are usually represented by vertical
axes. Imagine a movable, vertical line in a graph, and suppose that you
can move it back and forth. A curve represents a function if and only if it
never intersects the movable vertical line at more than one point.
Imagine that the independent and dependent variables of the functions
shown in Fig. 2-1 are reversed. This results in some weird assertions:
*
The time of day is a function of the outdoor air temperature.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
36

*
The latitude of an observer is a function of the sun-up time on June 21.
*
The air temperature is a function of the time it takes for a wet rag
to dry.
The ﬁrst two of these statements are clearly ridiculous. Time does not depend
on temperature. You can’t make time go backwards by cooling things oﬀor
make it rush into the future by heating things up. Your geographic location is
not dependent on how long the sun is up. If that were true, you would be at a
diﬀerent latitude a week from now than you are today, even if you don’t go
anywhere (unless you live on the equator!).
If you turn the graphs of Figs. 2-1A and B sideways to reﬂect the
transposition of the variables and then perform the vertical-line test, you’ll
see that they no longer depict functions. So the ﬁrst two of the above
assertions are not only absurd; they are false.
Figure 2-1C represents a function, at least in theory, when ‘‘stood on its
ear.’’ The statement is still strange, but it can at least be true under certain
conditions. The drying time of a standard-size wet rag made of a standard
material could be used to infer air temperature experimentally (although
humidity and wind speed would be factors too). When you want to determine
whether or not a certain graph represents a mathematical function, use the
vertical-line test, not the common-sense test!
PROBLEM 2-1
Figure 2-2 represents ﬂuctuations in the prices of two hypothetical stocks,
called Stock X and Stock Y, over a portion of a business day. Do either
or both of these curves represent stock price as functions of time?
SOLUTION 2-1
Both of the curves represent stock price as functions of time. You can
determine this using the vertical-line test. Neither of the curves intersects a
movable, vertical line more than once. Thus, both curves represent functions
of the independent variable (time).
PROBLEM 2-2
Suppose, in the situation shown by Fig. 2-2, the stock price is consid-
ered the independent variable, and time is considered the dependent
variable. Do either or both of the curves represent time as functions of
stock price?
SOLUTION 2-2
To determine this, plot the graphs by ‘‘standing the curves on their ears,’’
as shown in Fig. 2-3. (The curves are rotated 90 degrees counterclockwise,
CHAPTER 2
How Variables Relate
37

and then mirrored horizontally.) Using the vertical-line test, it is apparent
that time can be considered a function of the price of Stock X, but not a
function of the price of Stock Y.
Simple Graphs
When the variables in a function can attain only a few values (called discrete
values), graphs can be rendered in simpliﬁed forms. Here are some of the
most common types.
Fig. 2-3.
Another illustration for Problem 2-2.
Fig. 2-2.
Illustration for Problems 2-1 and 2-2.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
38

VERTICAL BAR GRAPHS
In a vertical bar graph, the independent variable is shown on the horizontal
axis and the dependent variable is shown on the vertical axis. Function
values are portrayed as the heights of bars having equal widths. Figure 2-4
is a vertical bar graph of the price of the hypothetical Stock Y at intervals
of 1 hour.
HORIZONTAL BAR GRAPHS
In a horizontal bar graph, the independent variable is shown on the vertical
axis and the dependent variable is shown on the horizontal axis. Function
values are portrayed as the widths of bars having equal heights. Figure 2-5
is a horizontal bar graph of the price of the hypothetical Stock Y at intervals
of 1 hour. This type of graph is used much less often than the vertical bar
graph. This is because it is customary to place the independent variable on
the horizontal axis and the dependent variable on the vertical axis in any
graph, when possible.
HISTOGRAMS
A histogram is a bar graph applied to a special situation called a distribution.
An example is a portrayal of the grades a class receives on a test, such as is
shown in Fig. 2-6. Here, each vertical bar represents a letter grade (A, B, C,
D, or F). The height of the bar represents the percentage of students in the
class receiving that grade.
Fig. 2-4.
Vertical bar graph of hypothetical stock price versus time.
CHAPTER 2
How Variables Relate
39

In Fig. 2-6, the values of the dependent variable are written at the top
of each bar. In this case, the percentages add up to 100%, based on the
assumption that all of the people in the class are present, take the test, and
turn in their papers. The values of the dependent variable are annotated
this way in some bar graphs. It’s a good idea to write in these numbers if
there aren’t too many bars in the graph, but it can make the graph look
messy or confusing if there are a lot of bars.
In some bar graphs showing percentages, the values do not add up to
100%. We’ll see an example of this shortly.
NOMOGRAPHS
A nomograph is a one-dimensional graph that consists of two graduated
scales lined up directly with each other. Such graphs are useful when the
Fig. 2-5.
Horizontal bar graph of hypothetical stock price versus time.
Fig. 2-6.
A histogram is a bar graph that shows a statistical distribution.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
40

magnitude of a speciﬁc quantity must be compared according to two diﬀerent
unit scales. In Fig. 2-7, a nomograph compares temperature readings in
degrees Celsius (also called centigrade) and degrees Fahrenheit.
POINT-TO-POINT GRAPHS
In a point-to-point graph, the scales are similar to those used in continuous-
curve graphs such as Figs. 2-2 and 2-3. But the values of the function in
a point-to-point graph are shown only for a few selected points, which are
connected by straight lines.
In the point-to-point graph of Fig. 2-8, the price of Stock Y (from Fig. 2-2)
is plotted on the half-hour from 10:00 A.M. to 3:00 P.M. The resulting
‘‘curve’’ does not exactly show the stock prices at the in-between times.
But overall, the graph is a fair representation of the ﬂuctuation of the stock
over time.
When plotting a point-to-point graph, a certain minimum number of
points must be plotted, and they must all be suﬃciently close together. If a
Fig. 2-7.
An example of a nomograph for converting temperature readings.
CHAPTER 2
How Variables Relate
41

point-to-point graph showed the price of Stock Y at hourly intervals, it would
not come as close as Fig. 2-8 to representing the actual moment-to-moment
stock-price function. If a point-to-point graph showed the price at 15-minute
intervals, it would come closer than Fig. 2-8 to the moment-to-moment
stock-price function.
CHOOSING SCALES
When composing a graph, it’s important to choose sensible scales for
the dependent and independent variables. If either scale spans a range of
values much greater than necessary, the resolution (detail) of the graph will
be poor. If either scale does not have a large enough span, there won’t
be enough room to show the entire function; some of the values will be
‘‘cut oﬀ.’’
PROBLEM 2-3
Figure 2-9 is a hypothetical bar graph showing the percentage of the work
force in a certain city that calls in sick on each day during a particular
work week. What, if anything, is wrong with this graph?
SOLUTION 2-3
The dependent-variable scale is too large. It would be better if the horizontal
scale showed values only in the range of 0 to 10%. The graph could also be
improved by listing percentage numbers at the right-hand side of each bar.
Another way to improve the graph would be to put the independent variable
on the horizontal axis and the dependent variable on the vertical axis, making
the graph a vertical bar graph instead of a horizontal bar graph.
Fig. 2-8.
A point-to-point graph of hypothetical stock price versus time.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
42

PROBLEM 2-4
What’s going on with the percentage values depicted in Fig. 2-9? It is
apparent that the values don’t add up to 100%. Shouldn’t they?
SOLUTION 2-4
No. If they did, it would be a coincidence (and a bad reﬂection on the attitude
of the work force in that city during that week). This is a situation in
which the sum of the percentages in a bar graph does not have to be
100%. If everybody showed up for work every day for the whole week, the
sum of the percentages would be 0, and Fig. 2-9 would be perfectly legitimate
showing no bars at all.
Tweaks, Trends, and Correlation
Graphs can be approximated or modiﬁed by ‘‘tweaking.’’ Certain charac-
teristics can also be noted, such as trends and correlation. Here are a few
examples.
LINEAR INTERPOLATION
The term interpolate means ‘‘to put between.’’ When a graph is incomplete,
estimated data can be put in the gap(s) in order to make the graph
look complete. An example is shown in Fig. 2-10. This is a graph of the
price of the hypothetical Stock Y from Fig. 2-2, but there’s a gap during
Fig. 2-9.
Illustration for Problems 2-3 and 2-4.
CHAPTER 2
How Variables Relate
43

the noon hour. We don’t know exactly what happened to the stock price
during that hour, but we can ﬁll in the graph using linear interpolation.
A straight line is placed between the end points of the gap, and then the
graph looks complete.
Linear interpolation almost always produces a somewhat inaccurate
result. But sometimes it is better to have an approximation than to have no
data at all. Compare Fig. 2-10 with Fig. 2-2, and you can see that the linear
interpolation error is considerable in this case.
CURVE FITTING
Curve ﬁtting is an intuitive scheme for approximating a point-to-point graph,
or ﬁlling in a graph containing one or more gaps, to make it look like a
continuous curve. Figure 2-11 is an approximate graph of the price of
hypothetical Stock Y, based on points determined at intervals of half an
hour, as generated by curve ﬁtting. This does not precisely represent the
actual curve of Fig. 2-2, but it comes close most of the time.
Curve ﬁtting becomes increasingly accurate as the values are determined
at more and more frequent intervals. When the values are determined
infrequently, this scheme can be subject to large errors, as is shown by the
example of Fig. 2-12.
EXTRAPOLATION
The term extrapolate means ‘‘to put outside of.’’ When a function has a
continuous-curve graph where time is the independent variable, extrapolation
Fig. 2-10.
An example of linear interpolation. The thin solid line represents the interpolation
of the values for the gap in the actual available data (heavy dashed curve).
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
44

is the same thing as short-term forecasting. Two examples are shown in
Fig. 2-13.
In Fig. 2-13A, the price of the hypothetical Stock X from Fig. 2-2 is
plotted until 2:00 P.M., and then an attempt is made to forecast its price for
an hour into the future, based on its past performance. In this case, linear
extrapolation, the simplest form, is used. The curve is simply projected ahead
as a straight line. Compare this graph with Fig. 2-2. In this case, linear
extrapolation works fairly well.
Figure 2-13B shows the price of the hypothetical Stock Y (from Fig. 2-2)
plotted until 2:00 P.M., and then linear extrapolation is used in an attempt to
Fig. 2-11.
Approximation of hypothetical stock price as a continuous function of time,
making use of curve ﬁtting. The solid curve represents the approximation; the dashed curve
represents the actual price as a function of time.
Fig. 2-12.
An example of curve ﬁtting in which not enough data samples are taken, causing
signiﬁcant errors. The solid line represents the approximation; the dashed curve represents the
actual price as a function of time.
CHAPTER 2
How Variables Relate
45

predict its behavior for the next hour. As you can see by comparing this
graph with Fig. 2-2, linear extrapolation does not work well in this scenario.
Extrapolation is best done by computers. Machines can notice subtle
characteristics of functions that humans miss. Some graphs are easy to
extrapolate, and others are not. In general, as a curve becomes more
complicated, extrapolation becomes subject to more error. Also, as the extent
(or distance) of the extrapolation increases for a given curve, the accuracy
decreases.
TRENDS
A function is said to be nonincreasing if the value of the dependent variable
never grows any larger (or more positive) as the value of the independent
Fig. 2-13.
Examples of linear extrapolation. The solid lines represent the forecasts; the
dashed curves represent the actual data. In the case shown at A, the prediction is fairly
good. In the case shown at B, the linear extrapolation is way oﬀ.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
46

variable increases. If the dependent variable in a function never gets any
smaller (or more negative) as the value of the independent variable increases,
the function is said to be nondecreasing.
The dashed curve in Fig. 2-14 shows the behavior of a hypothetical
Stock Q, whose price never rises throughout the period under consideration.
This function is nonincreasing. The solid curve shows a hypothetical
Stock R, whose price never falls throughout the period. This function is
nondecreasing.
Sometimes the terms trending downward and trending upward are used
to describe graphs. These terms are subjective; diﬀerent people might
interpret them diﬀerently. Everyone would agree that Stock Q in Fig. 2-14
trends downward while Stock R trends upward. But a stock that rises
and falls several times during a period might be harder to deﬁne in this
respect.
CORRELATION
Graphs can show the extent of correlation between the values of two variables
when the values are obtained from a ﬁnite number of experimental samples.
If, as the value of one variable generally increases, the value of the
other generally increases too, the correlation is considered positive.
If the opposite is true – the value of one variable increases as the other
generally decreases – the correlation is considered negative. If the points
are randomly scattered all over the graph, then the correlation is considered
to be zero.
Fig. 2-14.
The price of Stock Q is nonincreasing versus time, and the price of Stock R is
nondecreasing versus time.
CHAPTER 2
How Variables Relate
47

Figure 2-15 shows ﬁve examples of point sets. At A the correlation is zero.
At B and C, the correlation is positive. At D and E, the correlation is
negative.
PROBLEM 2-5
Suppose, as the value of the independent variable in a function changes, the
value of the dependent variable does not change. This is called a constant
function. Is its graph nonincreasing or nondecreasing?
SOLUTION 2-5
According to our deﬁnitions, the graph of a constant function is both non-
increasing and nondecreasing. Its value never increases, and it never
decreases.
PROBLEM 2-6
Is there any type of function for which linear interpolation is perfectly
accurate, that is, ‘‘ﬁlls in the gap’’ with zero error?
Fig. 2-15.
Point plots showing zero correlation (A), weak positive correlation (B), strong
positive correlation (C), weak negative correlation (D), and strong negative correlation (E).
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
48

SOLUTION 2-6
Yes. If the graph of a function is known to be a straight line, then linear inter-
polation can be used to ‘‘ﬁll in a gap’’ and the result will be free of error.
An example is the speed of a car that accelerates at a known, constant
rate. If its speed-versus-time graph appears as a perfectly straight line with
a small gap, then linear interpolation can be used to determine the car’s
speed at points inside the gap, as shown in Fig. 2-16. In this graph, the
heavy dashed line represents actual measured data, and the thinner solid
line represents interpolated data.
Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
Suppose a graph is drawn showing temperature in degrees Celsius (8C)
as a function of time for a 24-hour day. The temperature measure-
ments are accurate to within 0.1 8C, and the readings are taken
every 15 minutes. The day’s highest temperature is þ23.8 8C at 3:45
P.M. The day’s lowest temperature is þ13.5 8C at 5:30 A.M. A reason-
able range for the temperature scale in this graph is
(a) 0.0 8C to þ100.0 8C
(b) 100.0 8C to þ100.0 8C
(c) þ15.0 8C to þ20.0 8C
(d) þ10.0 8C to þ30.0 8C
Fig. 2-16.
Illustration for Problem 2-6.
CHAPTER 2
How Variables Relate
49

2.
In a constant function:
(a) the value of the dependent variable constantly increases as the
value of the independent variable increases
(b) the value of the dependent variable constantly decreases as the
value of the independent variable increases
(c) the value of the independent variable does not change
(d) the value of the dependent variable does not change
3.
In Fig. 2-17, which of the curves represents y as a function of x?
(a) Curve A only.
(b) Curve B only.
(c) Both curves A and B.
(d) Neither curve A nor curve B.
4.
In Fig. 2-17, which of the curves represents x as a function of y?
(a) Curve A only.
(b) Curve B only.
(c) Both curves A and B.
(d) Neither curve A nor curve B.
5.
In Fig. 2-17, which of the curves represents a relation between x and y?
(a) Curve A only.
(b) Curve B only.
(c) Both curves A and B.
(d) Neither curve A nor curve B.
Fig. 2-17.
Illustration for Quiz Questions 3 through 6.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
50

6.
In Fig. 2-17, which of the curves can represent a constant function of
one variable versus the other?
(a) Curve A only.
(b) Curve B only.
(c) Both curves A and B.
(d) Neither curve A nor curve B.
7.
It is reasonable to suppose that the number of traﬃc accidents per
year on a given section of highway is positively correlated with
(a) the number of cars that use the highway
(b) the number of sunny days in the year
(c) the number of alternative routes available
(d) the number of police oﬃcers that use the highway
8.
Suppose a large data ﬁle is downloaded from the Internet. The speed
of the data, in bits per second (bps), is plotted as a function of time
in seconds. In this situation, time is
(a) a dependent variable
(b) an independent variable
(c) a constant function
(d) nondecreasing
9.
Suppose the path of a hurricane is plotted as a curve on a map, with
the latitude and longitude lines as graphic coordinates. A prediction
of the future path of the storm can be attempted using
(a) interpolation
(b) extrapolation
(c) curve ﬁtting
(d) correlation
10.
Suppose the path of a hurricane is plotted as a series of points on
a map, representing the position of the storm at 6-hour intervals.
A continuous graph of the storm’s path can be best approximated
using
(a) a bar graph
(b) extrapolation
(c) curve ﬁtting
(d) correlation
CHAPTER 2
How Variables Relate
51

CHAPTER
3
Extreme Numbers
A special technique is used to express, and to make calculations involving,
gigantic and minuscule numbers. The scheme is like using a mathematical
telescope or microscope. How many grains of sand are there on all the
beaches in the world? What is the ratio of the diameter of a golf ball to the
diameter of the moon? How many times brighter is the sun than a birthday
candle?
Subscripts and Superscripts
Subscripts are used to modify the meanings of units, constants, and variables.
A subscript is placed to the right of the main character (without spacing)
and is set below the base line. Superscripts almost always represent
exponents (the raising of a base quantity to a power). A superscript is placed
to the right of the main character (without spacing) and is set above the
base line.
52
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

EXAMPLES OF SUBSCRIPTS
Numeric subscripts are never italicized. Alphabetic subscripts sometimes are.
Here are three examples of subscripted quantities:
Z0
read ‘‘Z sub nought’’ or ‘‘Z sub zero’’:
stands for characteristic impedance of a transmission line
Rout
read ‘‘R sub out’’;
stands for output resistance in an electronic circuit
yn
read ‘‘y sub n’’;
represents a variable
Ordinary numbers are not normally modiﬁed with subscripts, so you are not
likely to see expressions like this:
35
9:7755p
16x
Constants and variables can come in many ‘‘ﬂavors.’’ Some physical
constants are assigned subscripts by convention. An example is me, represent-
ing the mass of an electron at rest. Sometimes, points in three-dimensional
space are represented using ordered triples like (x1, x2, x3) rather than (x, y, z).
This subscripting scheme becomes especially convenient if you’re talking
about points in a higher-dimensional space, for example, (x1, x2, x3, . . . , x26).
EXAMPLES OF SUPERSCRIPTS
Numeric superscripts are never italicized, but alphabetic superscripts usually
are. Examples of superscripted quantities are:
23
read ‘‘two cubed’’;
represents 2  2  2
ex
read ‘‘e to the xth’’;
represents the exponential function of x
y1/2
read ‘‘y to the one-half’’;
represents the square root of y
There is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between 23 and 2! There’s also a big diﬀerence
between the expression e that symbolizes the natural-logarithm base
(approximately 2.71828) and ex, which can represent e raised to a variable
power, or which is sometimes used in place of the words ‘‘exponential func-
tion.’’ Those little superscripts have a huge eﬀect.
CHAPTER 3
Extreme Numbers
53

Power-of-10 Notation
Scientists and engineers express extreme numerical values using power-of-10
notation, also called scientiﬁc notation.
STANDARD FORM
A numeral in standard power-of-10 notation is written as follows:
m:n1n2n3 . . . np  10z
where the dot (:) is a period, written on the base line (not a raised dot indi-
cating multiplication), and is called the radix point or decimal point. The
numeral m (to the left of the radix point) is a digit from the set {1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9}. The numerals n1, n2, n3, and so on up to np (to the right of
the radix point) are digits from the set {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}. The
value z, which is the power of 10, can be any integer: positive, negative,
or zero. Here are some examples of numbers written in standard scientiﬁc
notation:
2:56  106
8:0773  1018
1:000  100
ALTERNATIVE FORM
In certain countries, and in some old books and papers, a slight variation on
the above theme is used. The alternative power-of-10 notation requires that m
always be equal to 0. When the above quantities are expressed this way, they
appear as decimal fractions larger than 0 but less than 1, and the value of the
exponent is increased by 1 compared with the standard form:
0:256  107
0:80773  1017
0:1000  101
These expressions represent the same numbers as the previous three, even
though they’re written diﬀerently.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
54

THE ‘‘TIMES SIGN’’
The multiplication sign in a power-of-10 expression can be denoted in various
ways. Most scientists in America use the cross symbol (), as in the examples
shown above. But a small dot raised above the base line () is sometimes used
to represent multiplication in power-of-10 notation. When written that way,
the above numbers look like this in the standard form:
2:56  106
8:0773  1018
1:000  100
This small dot should not be confused with a radix point. The dot symbol
is preferred when multiplication is required to express the dimensions of a
physical unit. An example is the kilogram-meter per second squared, which
is symbolized kg  m=s2 or kg  m  s2:
Another alternative multiplication symbol in power-of-10 notation is the
asterisk ( ). You will occasionally see numbers written like this:
2:56  106
8:0773  1018
1:000  100
PLAIN-TEXT EXPONENTS
Once in a while, you will have to express numbers in power-of-10 notation
using plain, unformatted text. This is the case, for example, when transmit-
ting information within the body of an e-mail message (rather than as an
attachment). Some calculators and computers use this system. The letter E
indicates that the quantity immediately following is a power of 10. In this
format, the above quantities are written:
2:56E6
8:0773E  18
1:000E0
In an alternative format, the exponent is always written with two numerals,
and always includes a plus sign or a minus sign, so the above expressions
CHAPTER 3
Extreme Numbers
55

appear as:
2:56Eþ06
8:0773E18
1:000Eþ00
Another alternative is to use an asterisk to indicate multiplication, and the
symbol ^ to indicate a superscript, so the expressions look like this:
2:56  10 ^6
8:0773  10 ^18
1:000  10 ^ 0
In all of these examples, the numerical values represented are identical.
Respectively, if written out in full, they are:
2560000
0:0000000000000000080773
1:000
ORDERS OF MAGNITUDE
As you can see, power-of-10 notation makes it possible to easily write down
numbers that denote unimaginably gigantic or tiny quantities. Consider the
following:
2:55  1045589
9:8988  107654321
Imagine the task of writing either of these numbers out in ordinary decimal
form! In the ﬁrst case, you’d have to write the numerals 255, and then follow
them with a string of 45,587 zeros. In the second case, you’d have to write a
minus sign, then a numeral zero, then a radix point, then a string of 7,654,320
zeros, then the numerals 9, 8, 9, 8, and 8.
Now consider these two numbers:
2:55  1045592
9:8988  107654318
These look a lot like the ﬁrst two, don’t they? Look more closely. Both of
these new numbers are 1000 times larger than the original two. You can
tell by looking at the exponents. Both exponents are larger by 3. The number
45,592 is 3 more than 45,591, and the number 7,754,318 is 3 larger than
7,754,321. (Numbers grow larger in the mathematical sense as they become
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
56

more positive or less negative.) The second pair of numbers is 3 orders of
magnitude larger than the ﬁrst pair of numbers. They look almost the
same here, and they would look essentially identical if they were written
out in full decimal form. But they are as diﬀerent as a meter is from a
kilometer.
The order-of-magnitude concept makes it possible to construct number
lines, charts, and graphs with scales that cover huge spans of values. Three
examples are shown in Fig. 3-1. Drawing A shows a number line spanning
3 orders of magnitude, from 1 to 1000. Illustration B shows a number line
spanning 10 orders of magnitude, from 103 to 107. Illustration C shows a
graph whose horizontal scale spans 10 orders of magnitude, from 103 to 107,
and whose vertical scale extends from 0 to 10.
Fig. 3-1.
At A, a number line spanning three orders of magnitude. At B, a number line
spanning 10 orders of magnitude. At C, a coordinate system whose horizontal scale spans
10 orders of magnitude, and whose vertical scale extends linearly from 0 to 10.
CHAPTER 3
Extreme Numbers
57

If you’re astute, you’ll notice that while the 0-to-10 scale is the easiest
to directly envision, we can’t really say how many orders of magnitude it
covers. This is because, no matter how many times you cut a nonzero number
to 1/10 its original size, you can never reach zero. In a certain sense, a linear
scale (a scale where all the graduations are the same distance apart) ranging
from 0 to any positive or negative value covers inﬁnitely many orders of
magnitude.
TO USE OR NOT TO USE
In printed literature, power-of-10 notation is generally used only when the
power of 10 is large or small. If the exponent is between 2 and 2 inclusive,
numbers are written out in plain decimal form as a rule. If the exponent is 3
or 3, numbers are sometimes written out, and are sometimes written in
power-of-10 notation. If the exponent is 4 or smaller, or if it is 4 or larger,
values are expressed in power-of-10 notation as a rule.
Some calculators, when set for power-of-10 notation, display all numbers
that way, even those that normally shouldn’t be. This can be confusing,
especially when the power of 10 is zero and the calculator is set to display
a lot of digits. Most people understand the expression 8.407 more easily
than 8.407000000Eþ00, for example, even though they represent the same
number.
PREFIX MULTIPLIERS
Special verbal preﬁxes, known as preﬁx multipliers, are commonly used by
physicists and engineers to express orders of magnitude. Table 3-1 shows
the preﬁx multipliers used for factors ranging from 1024 to 1024.
PROBLEM 3-1
By how many orders of magnitude does a terahertz diﬀer from a megahertz?
(The hertz is a unit of frequency, equivalent to a cycle per second.)
SOLUTION 3-1
Refer to Table 3-1. A terahertz represents 1012 hertz, and a megahertz repre-
sents 106 hertz. The exponents diﬀer by 6. Therefore, a terahertz diﬀers from
a megahertz by 6 orders of magnitude.
PROBLEM 3-2
What, if anything, is wrong with the number 344.22  107 as an expression in
power-of-10 notation?
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
58

Table 3-1
Preﬁx multipliers and their abbreviations.
Designator
Symbol
Multiplier
yocto-
y
1024
zepto-
z
1021
atto-
a
1018
femto-
f
1015
pico-
p
1012
nano-
n
109
micro-
m or mm
106
milli-
m
103
centi-
c
102
deci-
d
101
(none)
–
100
deka-
da or D
101
hecto-
h
102
kilo-
K or k
103
mega-
M
106
giga-
G
109
tera-
T
1012
peta-
P
1015
exa-
E
1018
zetta-
Z
1021
yotta-
Y
1024
CHAPTER 3
Extreme Numbers
59

SOLUTION 3-2
This is a legitimate number, but it is not written in the correct format for
scientiﬁc notation. The number to the left of the multiplication symbol
should be at least 1, but smaller than 10. To convert the number to the proper
format, ﬁrst divide the portion to the left of the ‘‘times sign’’ by 100, so it
becomes 3.4422. Then multiply the portion to the right of the ‘‘times sign’’
by 100, increasing the exponent by 2 so it becomes 109. This produces the
same number in correct power-of-10 format: 3.4422  109.
In Action
Let’s see how power-of-10 notation works when we want to do simple arith-
metic using extreme numbers.
ADDITION
Addition is best done by converting the numbers to ordinary decimal form
before performing the operation. Scientiﬁc notation doesn’t work very well
with addition unless both numbers happen to be expressed in the same
power of 10. Here are a couple of examples:
ð3:045  105Þ þ ð6:853  106Þ
¼ 304500 þ 6853000
¼ 7157500
¼ 7:1575  106
ð3:045  104Þ þ ð6:853  107Þ
¼ 0:0003045 þ 0:0000006853
¼ 0:0003051853
¼ 3:051853  104
ð3:045  105Þ þ ð6:853  107Þ
¼ 304500 þ 0:0000006853
¼ 304500:0000006853
¼ 3:045000000006853  105
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
60

SUBTRACTION
Subtraction follows the same basic rules as addition:
ð3:045  105Þ  ð6:853  106Þ
¼ 304500  6853000
¼ 6548500
¼ 6:548500  106
ð3:045  104Þ  ð6:853  107Þ
¼ 0:0003045  0:0000006853
¼ 0:0003038147
¼ 3:038147  104
ð3:045  105Þ  ð6:853  107Þ
¼ 304500  0:0000006853
¼ 304499:9999993147
¼ 3:044999999993147  105
MULTIPLICATION
When numbers are multiplied in power-of-10 notation, the coeﬃcients
(the numbers to the left of the multiplication symbol) are multiplied by
each other. Then the exponents are added. Finally, the product is reduced
to standard form. Here are three examples, using the same three number
pairs as before:
ð3:045  105Þ  ð6:853  106Þ
¼ ð3:045  6:853Þ  ð105  106Þ
¼ 20:867385  10ð5þ6Þ
¼ 20:867385  1011
¼ 2:0867385  1012
CHAPTER 3
Extreme Numbers
61

ð3:045  104Þ  ð6:853  107Þ
¼ ð3:045  6:853Þ  ð104  107Þ
¼ 20:867385  10½4þð7Þ 
¼ 20:867385  1011
¼ 2:0867385  1010
ð3:045  105Þ  ð6:853  107Þ
¼ ð3:045  6:853Þ  ð105  107Þ
¼ 20:867385  10ð57Þ
¼ 20:867385  102
¼ 2:0867385  101
¼ 0:20867385
This last number is written out in plain decimal form because the exponent is
between 2 and 2 inclusive.
DIVISION
When numbers are divided in power-of-10 notation, the coeﬃcients are
divided by each other. Then the exponents are subtracted. Finally, the
quotient is reduced to standard form. Here’s how division works, with the
same three number pairs we’ve been using:
ð3:045  105Þ=ð6:853  106Þ
¼ ð3:045=6:853Þ  ð105=106Þ
 0:444331  10ð56Þ
¼ 0:444331  101
¼ 0:0444331
ð3:045  104Þ=ð6:853  107Þ
¼ ð3:045=6:853Þ  ð104=107Þ
 0:444331  10½4ð7Þ 
¼ 0:444331  103
¼ 4:44331  102
¼ 444:331
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
62

ð3:045  105Þ=ð6:853  107Þ
¼ ð3:045=6:853Þ  ð105=107Þ
 0:444331  10½5ð7Þ 
¼ 0:444331  1012
¼ 4:44331  1011
Note the squiggly equal signs ( ) in the above equations. This symbol means
‘‘is approximately equal to.’’ The numbers here don’t divide out neatly, so the
decimal portions are approximated.
EXPONENTIATION
When a number is raised to a power in scientiﬁc notation, both the coeﬃcient
and the power of 10 itself must be raised to that power, and the result
multiplied. Consider this example:
ð4:33  105Þ3
¼ ð4:33Þ3  ð105Þ3
¼ 81:182737  10ð53Þ
¼ 81:182737  1015
¼ 8:1182727  1016
If you are a mathematical purist, you will notice gratuitous parentheses in the
second and third lines here. These are included to minimize the chance for
confusion. It is more important that the result of a calculation be correct
than that the expression be mathematically lean.
Let’s consider another example, in which the exponent is negative:
ð5:27  104Þ2
¼ ð5:27Þ2  ð104Þ2
¼ 27:7729  10ð42Þ
¼ 27:7729  108
¼ 2:77729  107
CHAPTER 3
Extreme Numbers
63

TAKING ROOTS
To ﬁnd the root of a number in power-of-10 notation, think of the root as a
fractional exponent. The square root is equivalent to the 1/2 power. The cube
root is the same thing as the 1/3 power. In general, the nth root of a number
(where n is a positive integer) is the same thing as the 1/n power. When roots
are regarded this way, it is easy to multiply things out in exactly the same way
as is done with whole-number exponents. Here is an example:
ð5:27  104Þ1=2
¼ ð5:27Þ1=2  ð104Þ1=2
 2:2956  10½4ð1=2Þ 
¼ 2:2956  102
¼ 0:02956
Note the squiggly equal sign in the third line. The square root of 5.27 is an
irrational number, and the best we can do is to approximate its decimal
expansion because it cannot be written out in full. Also, the exponent in
the ﬁnal result is within the limits for which we can write the number out
in plain decimal form, so power-of-10 notation is not needed to express the
end product here.
PROBLEM 3-3
State the rule for multiplication in scientiﬁc notation, using the variables
u and v to represent the coeﬃcients and the variables m and n to represent
the exponents.
SOLUTION 3-3
Let u and v be real numbers greater than or equal to 1 but less than 10, and
let m and n be integers. Then the following equation holds true:
ðu  10mÞðv  10nÞ ¼ uv  10ðmþnÞ
PROBLEM 3-4
State the rule for division in scientiﬁc notation, using the variables u and v to
represent the coeﬃcients and the variables m and n to represent the exponents.
SOLUTION 3-4
Let u and v be real numbers greater than or equal to 1 but less than 10, and
let m and n be integers. Then the following equation holds true:
ðu  10mÞ=ðv  10nÞ ¼ u=v  10ðmnÞ
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
64

PROBLEM 3-5
State the rule for exponentiation in scientiﬁc notation, using the variable
u to represent the coeﬃcient, and the variables m and n to represent the
exponents.
SOLUTION 3-5
Let u be a real number greater than or equal to 1 but less than 10, and let
m and n be integers. Then the following equation holds true:
ðu  10mÞn ¼ un  10ðmnÞ
Exponents m and n can be real numbers in general. They need not be
restricted to integer values. But that subject is too advanced for this chapter.
We’ll be dealing with them in Chapter 14, when we get to logarithms and
exponential functions.
Approximation and Precedence
Numbers in the real world are not always exact. This is especially true in
observational science and in engineering. Often, we must approximate.
There are two ways of doing this: truncation (simpler but less accurate)
and rounding (a little more diﬃcult, but more accurate).
TRUNCATION
The process of truncation involves the deletion of all the numerals to the
right of a certain point in the decimal part of an expression. Some electronic
calculators use truncation to ﬁt numbers within their displays. For example,
the number 3.830175692803 can be shortened in steps as follows:
3:830175692803
3:83017569280
3:8301756928
3:830175692
3:83017569
3:8301756
3:830175
3:83017
3:83
3:8
3
CHAPTER 3
Extreme Numbers
65

ROUNDING
Rounding is the preferred method of rendering numbers in shortened form.
In this process, when a given digit (call it r) is deleted at the right-hand
extreme of an expression, the digit q to its left (which becomes the new r
after the old r is deleted) is not changed if 0  r  4. If 5  r  9, then q is
increased by 1 (‘‘rounded up’’). Most electronic calculators use rounding
rather than truncation. If rounding is used, the number 3.830175692803
can be shortened in steps as follows:
3:830175692803
3:83017569280
3:8301756928
3:830175693
3:83017569
3:8301757
3:830176
3:83018
3:8302
3:830
3:83
3:8
4
PRECEDENCE
In scientiﬁc notation, as in regular arithmetic, operations should be per-
formed in a certain order when they appear together in an expression.
When more than one type of operation appears, and if you need to simplify
the expression, the operations should be done in the following order:
*
Simplify all expressions within parentheses, brackets, and braces from
the inside out.
*
Perform all exponential operations, proceeding from left to right.
*
Perform all products and quotients, proceeding from left to right.
*
Perform all sums and diﬀerences, proceeding from left to right.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
66

Here are two examples of expressions simpliﬁed according to the above
rules of precedence. Note that the order of the numerals and operations is
the same in each case, but the groupings diﬀer.
3:4  105 þ 5:0  104
¼ ð3:4  105Þ þ ð5:0  104Þ
¼ ð340;000 þ 0:0005Þ
¼ 3:400005  105
3:4  ð105 þ 5:0Þ  104
¼ 3:4  100;005  10;000
¼ 3;400;170;000
¼ 3:40017  109
Suppose you’re given a complicated expression and there are no paren-
theses, brackets, or braces in it. This is not ambiguous if the above-mentioned
rules are followed. Consider this example:
z ¼ 3x3 þ 4x2y  12xy2  5y3
If this were written with parentheses, brackets, and braces to emphasize the
rules of precedence, it would look like this:
z ¼ ½3ðx3Þ þ f4½ðx2Þy g  f12½xðy2Þ g  ½5ðy3Þ 
Because we have agreed on the rules of precedence, we can do without the
parentheses, brackets, and braces. Nevertheless, if there is any doubt about
a crucial equation, you’re better oﬀto use a couple of unnecessary paren-
theses than to make a costly mistake.
PROBLEM 3-6
What is the value of 2 þ 3  4 þ 5?
SOLUTION 3-6
First, perform the multiplication operation, obtaining the expression
2 þ 12 þ 5. Then add the numbers, obtaining the ﬁnal value 19. Therefore:
2 þ 3  4 þ 5 ¼ 19
CHAPTER 3
Extreme Numbers
67

Significant Figures
The number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures, also called signiﬁcant digits, in a power-of-
10 number is important in real-world mathematics, because it indicates the
degree of accuracy to which we know a particular value.
MULTIPLICATION, DIVISION, AND EXPONENTIATION
When multiplication, division, or exponentiation is done using power-of-10
notation, the number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures in the result cannot legitimately
be greater than the number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures in the least-exact expression.
You might wonder why, in some of the above examples, we come up
with answers that have more digits than any of the numbers in the original
problem. In pure mathematics, where all numbers are assumed exact, this
is not an issue. But in real life, and especially in experimental science and
engineering, things are not so clean-cut.
Consider the two numbers x ¼ 2.453  104 and y ¼ 7.2  107. The following
is a perfectly valid statement in pure mathematics:
xy ¼ 2:453  104  7:2  107
¼ 2:453  7:2  1011
¼ 17:6616  1011
¼ 1:76616  1012
But if x and y represent measured quantities, as in experimental physics
for example, the above statement needs qualiﬁcation. We must pay close
attention to how much accuracy we claim.
HOW ACCURATE ARE WE?
When you see a product or quotient containing a bunch of numbers in
scientiﬁc notation, count the number of single digits in the coeﬃcients of
each number. Then take the smallest number of digits. That’s the number
of signiﬁcant ﬁgures you can claim in the ﬁnal answer or solution.
In the above example, there are four single digits in the coeﬃcient of x, and
two single digits in the coeﬃcient of y. So you must round oﬀthe answer,
which appears to contain six signiﬁcant ﬁgures, to two. It is important to use
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
68

rounding, and not truncation. You should conclude that:
xy ¼ 2:453  104  7:2  107
¼ 1:8  1012
In situations of this sort, if you insist on being rigorous, you should use
squiggly equal signs throughout, because you are always dealing with
approximate values. But most folks are content to use ordinary equals
signs. It is universally understood that physical measurements are inherently
inexact, and writing squiggly lines can get tiresome.
Suppose you want to ﬁnd the quotient x/y instead of the product xy?
Proceed as follows:
x=y ¼ ð2:453  104Þ=ð7:2  107Þ
¼ ð2:453=7:2Þ  103
¼ 0:3406944444 . . .  103
¼ 3:406944444 . . .  104
¼ 3:4  104
WHAT ABOUT ZEROS?
Sometimes, when you make a calculation, you’ll get an answer that lands
on a neat, seemingly whole-number value. Consider x ¼ 1.41421 and y ¼
1.41422. Both of these have six signiﬁcant ﬁgures. The product, taking signi-
ﬁcant ﬁgures into account, is:
xy ¼ 1:41421  1:41422
¼ 2:0000040662
¼ 2:00000
This looks like it’s exactly equal to 2. In pure mathematics, 2.00000 ¼ 2.
But in practical math, those ﬁve zeros indicate how near the exact number 2
we believe the resultant to be. We know the answer is very close to a
mathematician’s idea of the number 2, but there is an uncertainty of up to
plus-or-minus 0.000005 (written  0.000005). When we claim a certain
number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures, zero is as important as any of the other nine
digits in the decimal number system.
CHAPTER 3
Extreme Numbers
69

ADDITION AND SUBTRACTION
When measured quantities are added or subtracted, determining the number
of signiﬁcant ﬁgures can involve subjective judgment. The best procedure is
to expand all the values out to their plain decimal form (if possible), make
the calculation as if you were a pure mathematician, and then, at the end
of the process, decide how many signiﬁcant ﬁgures you can reasonably claim.
In some cases, the outcome of determining signiﬁcant ﬁgures in a sum or
diﬀerence is similar to what happens with multiplication or division. Take,
for example, the sum x þ y, where x ¼ 3.778800  106 and y ¼ 9.22  107.
This calculation proceeds as follows:
x ¼ 0:000003778800
y ¼ 0:000000922
x þ y ¼ 0:0000047008
¼ 4:7008  106
¼ 4:70  106
In other instances, one of the values in a sum or diﬀerence is insigniﬁcant
with respect to the other. Let’s say that x ¼ 3.778800  104, while y ¼ 9.22 
107. The process of ﬁnding the sum goes like this:
x ¼ 37788:00
y ¼ 0:000000922
x þ y ¼ 37788:000000922
¼ 3:7788000000922  104
In this case, y is so much smaller than x that it doesn’t signiﬁcantly aﬀect the
value of the sum. Here, it is best to regard y, in relation to x or to the sum
x þ y, as the equivalent of a gnat compared with a watermelon. If a gnat
lands on a watermelon, the total weight does not appreciably change, nor
does the presence or absence of the gnat have any eﬀect on the accuracy of
the scales. We can conclude that the ‘‘sum’’ here is the same as the larger
number. The value y is akin to a nuisance or a negligible error:
x þ y ¼ 3:778800  104
PROBLEM 3-7
What is the product of 1.001  105 and 9.9  106, taking signiﬁcant ﬁgures
into account?
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
70

SOLUTION 3-7
Multiply the coeﬃcients and the powers of 10 separately:
ð1:001  105Þð9:9  106Þ
¼ ð1:001  9:9Þ  ð105  106Þ
¼ 9:9099  101
¼ 0:99099
We must round this to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures, because that is the most we
can legitimately claim. The expression does not have to be written out in
power-of-10 form. Therefore:
ð1:001  105Þð9:9  106Þ ¼ 0:99
Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
Two numbers diﬀer in size by exactly 4 orders of magnitude. This is a
factor of:
(a) 4
(b) 16
(c) 256
(d) 10,000
2.
Suppose the population of a certain city is found to be 226,496 people.
What is this expressed to three signiﬁcant ﬁgures in power-of-10
notation?
(a) 2.26  105
(b) 2.27  105
(c) 227,000
(d) 2.26Eþ06
3.
Suppose we invent a new unit called the widget (symbol: Wi). What
should we call a quantity of 1012 Wi?
(a) One milliwidget (1 mWi).
(b) One nanowidget (1 nWi).
(c) One picowidget (1 pWi).
(d) One kilowidget (1 kWi).
CHAPTER 3
Extreme Numbers
71

4.
What is the value of 5  32  5?
(a) 20
(b) 40
(c) 220
(d) There is no way to tell; this is an ambiguous expression.
5.
What is 8.899  105  2.02  1012, taking signiﬁcant ﬁgures into
account?
(a) 2.02  1012
(b) 9  105
(c) 6.88  105
(d) 8.899  105
6.
What is the product of 8.72  105 and 6.554  105, taking signiﬁcant
ﬁgures into account?
(a) 57.2
(b) 57.15
(c) 57.151
(d) 57.1509
7.
Suppose a mathematical expression contains addition, multiplication,
and exponentiation, all without any parentheses, brackets, or braces.
Which operation should be performed last?
(a) The exponentiation.
(b) The multiplication.
(c) The addition.
(d) It doesn’t matter.
8.
Suppose we measure a quantity and get 5.53  104 units, accurate to
three signiﬁcant ﬁgures. Within what range of whole-number units
can we say the actual value is?
(a) 55,299 units to 56,301 units.
(b) 55,290 units to 56,310 units.
(c) 55,250 units to 55,349 units.
(d) 55,200 units to 55,299 units.
9.
What is the proper power-of-10 way of writing 416,803?
(a) 416.803  103
(b) 41.6803Eþ04
(c) 0.0416803  107
(d) None of the above.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
72

10.
What is the order in which the operations should be performed in the
following expression?
S ¼ xðy þ zÞ  w2
(a) Addition, then subtraction, then exponentiation, and ﬁnally mul-
tiplication.
(b) Addition, then exponentiation, then multiplication, and ﬁnally
subtraction.
(c) Multiplication, then exponentiation, then subtraction, and
ﬁnally addition.
(d) Subtraction, multiplication, exponentiation, and ﬁnally addition.
CHAPTER 3
Extreme Numbers
73

CHAPTER
4
How Things Are
Measured
Numbers by themselves are abstract. Units make numbers concrete. We can
say that a quantity is this wide, is that heavy, lasts this long, or is that hot; it
extends for this many millimeters, weighs that many pounds, lasts this many
hours, or is heated to that many degrees Celsius. Some of the material in this
chapter might at ﬁrst seem too scientiﬁc to be considered ‘‘everyday math.’’
But when it comes to math, it’s always important to know precisely what you
mean when you say something. After you’ve gone through this material,
nobody will be able to legitimately say that you don’t know what you’re talk-
ing about when you quote units of measurement.
74
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Systems of Units
There are various systems of physical units. The meter/kilogram/second (mks)
system, also called the metric system and which is essentially the same as the
International System, is favored in most of the developed world. The centi-
meter/gram/second (cgs) system is less often used. The foot/pound/second
( fps) system, also called the English system, is popular among nonscientists
in the United States. Each system has several fundamental, or base, units
from which all the others are derived.
THE INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM (SI)
The International System is abbreviated SI (for the words Syste`me Inter-
national in French). This scheme in its earlier form, mks, has existed since
the 1800s, but was more recently deﬁned by the General Conference on
Weights and Measures.
The base units in SI quantify displacement, mass, time, temperature, electric
current, brightness of light, and amount of matter. Respectively, the units in
SI are known as the meter, the kilogram, the second, the Kelvin (or degree
Kelvin), the ampere, the candela, and the mole.
THE CGS SYSTEM
In the centimeter/gram/second (cgs) system, the base units are the centimeter
(exactly 0.01 meter), the gram (exactly 0.001 kilogram), the second (identical
to the SI second), the degree Celsius (approximately the number of Kelvins
minus 273.15), the ampere (identical to the SI ampere), the candela (identical
to the SI candela), and the mole (identical to the SI mole).
THE ENGLISH SYSTEM
In the English or fps system, the base units are the foot (approximately 30.5
centimeters), the pound (equivalent to about 2.2 kilograms in the gravita-
tional ﬁeld at the earth’s surface), and the second (identical to the SI second).
Other units include the degree Fahrenheit (where water freezes at 32 degrees
and boils at 212 degrees at standard sea-level atmospheric pressure), the
ampere (identical to the SI ampere), the candela (identical to the SI candela),
and the mole (identical to the SI mole).
CHAPTER 4
How Things Are Measured
75

Base Units in SI
In all systems of measurement, the base units are those from which all the
others can be derived. Base units represent some of the most elementary
properties or phenomena we observe in nature.
THE METER
The fundamental unit of distance, length, linear dimension, or displacement
(all these terms mean essentially the same thing) is the meter, symbolized by
the non-italicized, lowercase English letter m.
The original deﬁnition of the meter was based on the notion of dividing the
shortest possible surface route between the north pole and the equator of the
earth, as it would be measured if it passed through Paris, France (Fig. 4-1),
into 10 million (107) identical units. Mountains, bodies of water, and other
barriers were ignored; the earth was imagined to be a perfectly round, smooth
ball. The circumference of the earth was therefore determined to be 40
million (4.000  107) m, give or take a little depending on which great circle
around the globe one happened to choose.
Nowadays, the meter is deﬁned more precisely as the distance a beam of
light travels through a perfect vacuum in 1/299,792,458, or 3.33564095 
109, of a second. This is approximately the length of an adult’s full
stride when walking at a brisk pace, and is a little longer than an English
yard.
Various units smaller or larger than the meter are often employed to
measure or deﬁne displacement. A millimeter (mm) is 0.001 m. A micrometer
Fig. 4-1.
There are about 10,000,000 meters between the earth’s north pole and the equator.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
76

(m or ) is 0.000001 m or 106 m. Sometimes the micrometer is called the
micron, but that term is technically out-of-date. A nanometer (nm) is 109 m.
A kilometer (km) is 1000 m.
THE KILOGRAM
The base SI unit of mass is the kilogram, symbolized by the lowercase, non-
italicized pair of English letters kg.
Originally, the kilogram was deﬁned as the mass of a cube of pure liquid
water measuring exactly 0.1 m on each edge (Fig. 4-2). That is still an
excellent deﬁnition, but these days, scientists have come up with something
more absolute. A kilogram is the mass of a sample of platinum–iridium alloy
that is kept at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures. This object
is called the international prototype of the kilogram.
It’s important to realize that mass is not the same thing as weight. A mass
of 1 kg maintains this same mass no matter where it is located. That standard
platinum–iridium ingot would have a mass of 1 kg on the moon, on Mars, or
in intergalactic space. Weight, in contrast, is a force exerted by gravitation
on a given mass. On the surface of the earth, a 1-kg mass happens to weigh
about 2.2 pounds.
Various units smaller or larger than the kilogram are used to measure
or deﬁne mass. A gram (g) is 0.001 kg. A milligram (mg) is 0.000001 kg or
106 kg. A microgram (mg) is 109 kg. A nanogram (ng) is 1012 g. A metric ton
is 1000 kg.
Fig. 4-2.
Originally, the kilogram was deﬁned as the mass of 0.001 cubic meter of
pure liquid water.
CHAPTER 4
How Things Are Measured
77

THE SECOND
The SI unit of time is the second, symbolized by the lowercase, non-italic
English letter s. Sometimes it is abbreviated using its ﬁrst three letters, sec.
The second was originally deﬁned as exactly 1/60 of a minute, which is
exactly 1/60 of an hour, which in turn is exactly 1/24 of a mean solar day.
(The solar day is deﬁned as the length of time it takes for the sun to pass from
due south to due south again as observed from the earth’s northern hemi-
sphere; the mean solar day is the average length of all the solar days in a
year.) A second was thought of as 1/86,400 of a mean solar day, and that is
still an excellent deﬁnition (Fig. 4-3). But more recently, with the availability
of atomic time standards, 1 s has been formally deﬁned as the amount of
time taken for a certain isotope of elemental cesium to oscillate through
9,192,631,770 (9.192631770  109) complete cycles.
A second happens to be the time it takes for a ray of light to travel
2.99792458  108 m through space. This is about three-quarters of the way
to the moon. You might have heard of the moon being a little more than
one light-second away from earth. If you are old enough to remember the
conversations earth-based personnel carried on with Apollo astronauts as the
space travelers walked around on the moon, you will recall the delay between
comments or questions from earthlings and replies from the moonwalkers.
Fig. 4-3.
Originally, the second was deﬁned as (1/60)(1/60)(1/24), or 1/86,400, of a mean
solar day.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
78

The astronauts were not hesitating; it took more than 2 s for radio signals to
make a round trip between the earth and moon.
Units smaller than the second are often employed to measure or deﬁne
time. A millisecond (ms) is 0.001 s; a microsecond (ms) is 0.000001 s or 106 s;
a nanosecond (ns) is 109 s.
THE KELVIN
The SI unit of temperature is the Kelvin, symbolized K or 8K (uppercase and
non-italicized). It is a measure of how much heat exists relative to absolute
zero, which represents the absence of all heat and which is therefore the
coldest possible temperature. A temperature of 0 8K represents absolute
zero. There are never any negative temperature readings on the Kelvin
scale.
Formally, the Kelvin is deﬁned as a temperature increment (an increase
or decrease) of 1/273.16, or 0.0036609, part of the thermodynamic tem-
perature of the triple point of pure water. The triple point of water is the
temperature and pressure at which it can exist as vapor, liquid, and ice
in equilibrium. It’s almost, but not exactly, the same as the freezing point.
Pure water at sea level freezes (or melts) at þ273.158K, and boils (or
condenses) at þ373.158K.
THE AMPERE
The ampere, symbolized by the non-italic, uppercase English letter A (or
abbreviated as amp), is the unit of electric current. A ﬂow of approximately
6.241506  1018 electrons per second, past a given ﬁxed point in an electrical
conductor, represents a current of 1 A.
Various units smaller than the ampere are often employed to measure or
deﬁne current. A milliampere (mA) is 0.001 A, or a ﬂow of 6.241506  1015
electrons per second past a given ﬁxed point. A microampere (mA) is
0.000001 A or 106 A, or a ﬂow of 6.241506  1012 electrons per second.
A nanoampere (nA) is 109 A; it is the smallest unit of electric current you are
likely to hear about. It represents a ﬂow of 6.241506  109 electrons per
second past a given ﬁxed point.
The most rigorous deﬁnition of the ampere is highly theoretical: 1 A is
the amount of constant charge-carrier ﬂow through two straight, parallel,
inﬁnitely thin, perfectly conducting wires, placed 1 m apart in a vacuum, that
results in a certain amount of force (2  107 newton) per meter of distance.
The newton will be deﬁned shortly.
CHAPTER 4
How Things Are Measured
79

THE CANDELA
The candela, symbolized by the non-italicized, lowercase pair of English
letters cd, is the unit of luminous intensity. It is equivalent to 1/683 of a
watt of radiant energy, emitted at a frequency of 5.40  1014 hertz (cycles
per second), in a solid angle of 1 steradian. The watt and the steradian will
be deﬁned shortly.
There is a simpler, although crude, deﬁnition of the candela: 1 cd is
roughly the amount of light emitted by an ordinary candle. (That’s why
brightness used to be expressed in units called candlepower.) Yet another
deﬁnition tells it this way: 1 cd represents the radiation from a surface area of
1.667  106 square meters of a perfectly-radiating object called a blackbody,
at the solidiﬁcation temperature of pure platinum.
THE MOLE
The mole, symbolized or abbreviated by the non-italicized, lowercase English
letters mol, is the standard unit of material quantity. It is also known
as Avogadro’s number, and is a huge number, approximately equal to
6.022169  1023. This is the number of atoms in exactly 12 g (0.012 kg) of
carbon 12, the most common isotope of elemental carbon with six protons
and six neutrons in the nucleus.
The mole arises naturally in the physical world, especially in chemistry.
It is one of those numbers for which the cosmos seems to have reserved a
special place.
You’ll sometimes hear about units called millimoles (mmol) and kilomoles
(kmol). A quantity of 1 mmol represents 0.001 mol or 6.022169  1020;
a quantity of 1 kmol represents 1000 mol or 6.022169  1026. The mole is an
example of a dimensionless unit because it does not express any particular
physical phenomenon. It’s just a certain standardized number, like a dozen
(12) or a gross (144).
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
The history of the International System of Units is interesting. The deﬁni-
tions of the base units have gone through a lot of evolution! If you want
to know more, visit the following Web site (valid at the time of this writing):
http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Units/history.html
If this URL (uniform resource locator) does not bring up the right informa-
tion, or if the link is broken, bring up one of the popular search engines such
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
80

as Google (http://www.google.com) or Yahoo (http://www.yahoo.com), and
input ‘‘International System of Units’’ using the phrase-search feature.
A NOTE ABOUT SYMBOLOGY
Until now, we’ve been rigorous about mentioning that symbols and abbrevia-
tions consist of lowercase or uppercase, non-italicized letters or strings of
letters. That’s important, because if this distinction is not made, especially
relating to the use of italics, the symbols or abbreviations for physical
units can be confused with the constants, variables, or coeﬃcients that appear
in equations.
When a letter is italicized, it almost always represents a constant, a vari-
able, or a coeﬃcient. When it is non-italicized, it often represents a physical
unit or a preﬁx multiplier. A good example is s, which represents second,
versus s, which is often used to represent linear dimension or displacement.
Another example is m, representing meter or meters, as compared with m,
which is used to denote the slope of a line in a graph.
From now on, we won’t belabor this issue every time a unit symbol or
abbreviation comes up. But don’t forget it. Like the business about signi-
ﬁcant ﬁgures, this seemingly trivial thing can matter a lot!
PROBLEM 4-1
Suppose a pan of water is heated uniformly at the steady rate of 0.001 8K per
second from 290 8K to 320 8K. (Water is a liquid at these temperatures on the
earth’s surface.) Draw a graph of this situation, where time is the independent
variable and is plotted on the horizontal axis, and temperature is the depen-
dent variable and is plotted on the vertical axis for values between 311 8K and
312 8K only. Optimize the time scale.
SOLUTION 4-1
The optimized graph is shown in Fig. 4-4. Note that it’s a straight line, indi-
cating that the temperature of the water rises at a constant rate. Because a
change of only 0.001 8K takes place every second, it takes 1000 seconds for
the temperature to rise the 1 8K from 311 8K to 312 8K. The time scale is
therefore graduated in relative terms from 0 to 1000.
PROBLEM 4-2
Draw a ‘‘zoomed-in’’ version of the graph of Fig. 4-4, showing only the
temperature range from 311.30 8K to 311.40 8K. Use a relative time scale,
starting at 0. Again, optimize the time scale.
CHAPTER 4
How Things Are Measured
81

SOLUTION 4-2
See Fig. 4-5. The line is in the same position on the coordinate grid as the
one shown in the previous example. The scales, however, have both been
‘‘magniﬁed’’ or ‘‘zoomed-into’’ by a factor of 10.
PROBLEM 4-3
How many electrons ﬂow past a given point in 3.00 s, given an electrical
current of 2.00 A? Express the answer to three signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
SOLUTION 4-3
From the deﬁnition of the ampere, we know that 1.00 A of current represents
the ﬂow of 6.241506  1018 electrons per second past a point per second
Fig. 4-4.
Illustration for Problem 4-1.
Fig. 4-5.
Illustration for Problem 4-2.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
82

of time. Therefore, a current of 2.00 A represents twice this many electrons,
or 1.2483012  1019, ﬂowing past the point each second. In 3.00 seconds,
three times that many electrons pass the point. That’s 3.7449036  1019
electrons. Rounding oﬀto three signiﬁcant ﬁgures, we get the answer:
3.74  1019 electrons pass the point in 3.00 s.
Other Units in SI
The preceding seven units can be combined to generate many other units.
Sometimes, the so-called derived units are expressed in terms of the base
units, although such expressions can be confusing (for example, seconds
cubed or kilograms to the minus-one power). If you ever come across com-
binations of units that seem nonsensical, don’t be alarmed. You are looking
at a derived unit that has been put down in terms of base units.
THE RADIAN
The standard unit of plane angular measure is the radian (rad). It is the angle
subtended by an arc on a circle, whose length, as measured on the circle, is
equal to the radius of the circle as measured on a ﬂat geometric plane con-
taining the circle. Imagine taking a string and running it out from the center
of a circle to some point on the edge, and then laying that string down
around the periphery of the circle. The resulting angle is 1 rad. Another deﬁ-
nition goes like this: one radian is the angle between the two straight edges of
a slice of pie whose straight and curved edges all have the same length r
(Fig. 4-6). It is equal to about 57.2958 angular degrees.
Fig. 4-6.
One radian is the angle at the apex of a slice of pie whose straight and curved edges
all have the same length r.
CHAPTER 4
How Things Are Measured
83

THE ANGULAR DEGREE
The angular degree, symbolized by a little elevated circle (8) or by the three-
letter abbreviation deg, is equal to 1/360 of a complete circle. The history of
the degree is uncertain, although one theory says that ancient mathematicians
chose it because it represents approximately the number of days in the year.
One angular degree is equal to approximately 0.0174533 radians.
THE STERADIAN
The standard unit of solid angular measure is the steradian, symbolized sr.
A solid angle of 1 sr is represented by a cone with its apex at the center of
a sphere, intersecting the surface of the sphere in a circle such that, within
the circle, the enclosed area on the sphere is equal to the square of the radius
of the sphere (Fig. 4-7). There are 4p, or approximately 12.56636, steradians
in a complete sphere.
THE NEWTON
The standard unit of mechanical force is the newton, symbolized N. One
newton is the amount of force that it takes to make a mass of 1 kg accelerate
at a rate of one meter per second squared (1 m/s2). Jet or rocket engine
Fig. 4-7.
One steradian is a solid angle that deﬁnes an area on a sphere equal to the square of
the radius of the sphere.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
84

propulsion is measured in newtons. Force is equal to the product of mass and
acceleration; reduced to base units in SI, newtons are equivalent to kilogram-
meters per second squared (kg  m/s2).
THE JOULE
The standard unit of energy is the joule, symbolized J. This is a small unit in
real-world terms. One joule is the equivalent of a newton-meter (N  m).
If reduced to base units in SI, the joule can be expressed in terms of unit
mass multiplied by unit distance squared per unit time squared:
1 J ¼ 1 kg  m2=s2
THE WATT
The standard unit of power is the watt, symbolized W. One watt is equivalent
to one joule of energy expended per second of time (1 J/s). Power is a measure
of the rate at which energy is produced, radiated, or consumed. The expres-
sion of watts in terms of SI base units begins to get esoteric:
1 W ¼ 1 kg  m2=s3
You won’t often hear about an electric bulb being rated at ‘‘60 kilogram-
meters squared per second cubed,’’ but technically, this is equivalent to
saying that the bulb is rated at 60 W.
Various units smaller or larger than the watt are often employed to
measure or deﬁne power. A milliwatt (mW) is 0.001 W. A microwatt (mW) is
0.000001 W or 106 W. A nanowatt (nW) is 109 W. A kilowatt (kW) is
1000 W. A megawatt (MW) is 1,000,000 W or 106 W.
THE COULOMB
The standard unit of electric charge quantity is the coulomb, symbolized C.
This is the electric charge that exists in a congregation of approximately
6.241506  1018 electrons. It also happens to be the electric charge contained
in that number of protons, anti-protons, or positrons (anti-electrons). When
you walk along a carpet with hard-soled shoes in the winter, or anywhere the
humidity is very low, your body builds up a static electric charge that can be
expressed in coulombs (or more likely a fraction of one coulomb). Reduced
to base units in SI, one coulomb is equal to one ampere-second (1 A  s).
CHAPTER 4
How Things Are Measured
85

The coulomb, like the mole, is a dimensionless unit. It represents a numeric
quantity. In fact, 1 C is equivalent to approximately 1.0365  105 mol. The
coulomb is always used in reference to quantity of particles that carry a unit
electric charge; but that is simply a matter of convention.
THE VOLT
The standard unit of electric potential or potential diﬀerence, also called elec-
tromotive force (EMF), is the volt, symbolized V. One volt is equivalent to
one joule per coulomb (1 J/C). The volt is, in real-world terms, a moderately
small unit of electric potential.
A standard dry cell of the sort you ﬁnd in a ﬂashlight (often erroneously
called a ‘‘battery’’), produces about 1.5 V. Most automotive batteries in the
United States produce between 12 V and 13.5 V. Some high-powered radio
and audio ampliﬁers operate with voltages in the hundreds or even thousands.
You’ll sometimes encounter expressions of voltage involving preﬁx
multipliers. A millivolt (mV) is 0.001 V. A microvolt (mV) is 0.000001 V or
106 V. A nanovolt (nV) is 109 V. A kilovolt (kV) is 1000 V. A megavolt (MV)
is 1,000,000 V or 106 V.
THE OHM
The standard unit of electrical resistance is the ohm, symbolized by the upper-
case Greek letter omega () or sometimes simply written out in full as
‘‘ohm.’’ Resistance is mathematically related to the current and the voltage
in any direct-current (dc) electrical circuit.
When a current of 1 A ﬂows through a resistance of 1  a voltage of 1 V
appears across that resistance. If the current is doubled to 2 A and the
resistance remains at 1 , the voltage doubles to 2 V; if the current is cut by
a factor of 4 to 0.25 A, the voltage likewise drops by a factor of 4 to 0.25 V.
The ohm is thus equivalent to a volt per ampere (1 V/A).
The ohm is a small unit of resistance, and you will often see resistances
expressed in units of thousands or millions of ohms. A kilohm (k or k) is
1000 ; a megohm (M or M) is 1,000,000 .
THE HERTZ
The standard unit of frequency is the hertz, symbolized Hz. It was formerly
called the cycle per second or simply the cycle. If a wave has a frequency
of 1 Hz, it goes through one complete cycle every second. If the frequency
is 2 Hz, the wave goes through two cycles every second, or one cycle every
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
86

1/2 second. If the frequency is 10 Hz, the wave goes through 10 cycles every
second, or one cycle every 1/10 second.
The hertz is used to express audio frequencies, for example the pitch of a
musical tone. The hertz is also used to deﬁne the frequencies of wireless signals,
both transmitted and received. It can even represent signal bandwidth.
The hertz is a small unit in the real world, and 1 Hz represents an extremely
low frequency. More often, you will hear about frequencies that are meas-
ured in thousands, millions, billions (thousand-millions), or trillions (million-
millions) of hertz. These units are called kilohertz (kHz), megahertz (MHz),
gigahertz (GHz), and terahertz (THz), respectively.
In terms of SI units, the hertz is mathematically simple, but the concept
is esoteric for some people to grasp: it is an ‘‘inverse second’’ (s1) or ‘‘per
second’’ (/s).
PROBLEM 4-4
It has been said that the clock speed of the microprocessor in an average
personal computer doubles every year. Suppose that is precisely true, and
continues to be the case for at least a decade to come. If the average micro-
processor clock speed on January 1, 2005 is 10 GHz, what will be the average
microprocessor clock speed on January 1, 2008?
SOLUTION 4-4
The speed will double 3 times; that means it will be 23, or 8, times as great.
Thus, on January 1, 2008, the average personal computer will have a micro-
processor rated at 10 GHz  8 ¼ 80 GHz.
PROBLEM 4-5
In the preceding scenario, what will be the average microprocessor clock
speed on January 1, 2015?
SOLUTION 4-5
In this case the speed will double 10 times; it will become 210, or 1024, times
as great. That means the speed will be 10 GHz  1024, or 10,240 GHz. This is
better expressed as 10.240 THz which, because we are told the original speed
to only two signiﬁcant ﬁgures, is best rounded to an even 10 THz.
Conversions
With all the diﬀerent systems of units in use throughout the world, the busi-
ness of conversion from one system to another has become the subject matter
CHAPTER 4
How Things Are Measured
87

for Web sites. Nevertheless, in order to get familiar with how units relate to
each other, it’s a good idea to do a few manual calculations before going
online and letting your computer take over the ‘‘dirty work.’’ The problems
below are some examples; you can certainly think of other unit-conversion
situations that you are likely to encounter in your everyday aﬀairs.
Table 4-1 can serve as a guide for converting base units.
DIMENSIONS
When converting from one unit system to another, always be sure you’re
talking about the same quantity or phenomenon. For example, you cannot
convert meters squared to centimeters cubed, or candela to meters per
second. You must keep in mind what you’re trying to express, and be sure
you are not, in eﬀect, trying to change an apple into a drinking glass.
The particular thing that a unit quantiﬁes is called the dimension of the
quantity or phenomenon. Thus, meters per second, feet per hour, and fur-
longs per fortnight represent expressions of the speed dimension; seconds,
minutes, hours, and days are expressions of the time dimension.
PROBLEM 4-6
Suppose you step on a scale and it tells you that you weigh 120 pounds.
How many kilograms does that represent?
SOLUTION 4-6
Assume you are on the planet earth, so your mass-to-weight conversion can
be deﬁned in a meaningful way. (Remember, mass is not the same thing as
weight.) Use Table 4-1. Multiply by 0.4535 to get 54.42 kg. Because you
are given your weight to only three signiﬁcant ﬁgures, you should round
this oﬀto 54.4 kg.
PROBLEM 4-7
You are driving in Europe and you see that the posted speed limit is
90 kilometers per hour (km/hr). How many miles per hour (mi/hr) is this?
SOLUTION 4-7
In this case, you only need to worry about miles versus kilometers;
the ‘‘per hour’’ part doesn’t change. So you convert kilometers to miles.
First remember that 1 km ¼ 1000 m; then 90 km ¼ 90,000 m ¼ 9.0  104 m.
The conversion of meters to statute miles (these are the miles used on
land) requires that you multiply by 6.214  104. Therefore, you multiply
9.0  104 by 6.214  104 to get 55.926. This must be rounded oﬀto 56, or
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
88

Table 4-1
Conversions for base units in the International System (SI) to units in other
systems. When no coeﬃcient is given, it is exactly equal to 1.
To convert:
To:
Multiply by:
Conversely, multiply by:
meters (m)
nanometers (nm)
109
109
meters (m)
microns (m)
106
106
meters (m)
millimeters (mm)
103
103
meters (m)
centimeters (cm)
102
102
meters (m)
inches (in)
39.37
0.02540
meters (m)
feet (ft)
3.281
0.3048
meters (m)
yards (yd)
1.094
0.9144
meters (m)
kilometers (km)
103
103
meters (m)
statute miles (mi)
6.214  104
1.609  103
meters (m)
nautical miles
5.397  104
1.853  103
kilograms (kg)
nanograms (ng)
1012
1012
kilograms (kg)
micrograms (mg)
109
109
kilograms (kg)
milligrams (mg)
106
106
kilograms (kg)
grams (g)
103
103
kilograms (kg)
ounces (oz)
35.28
0.02834
kilograms (kg)
pounds (lb)
2.205
0.4535
kilograms (kg)
English tons
1.103  103
907.0
seconds (s)
minutes (min)
0.01667
60.00
seconds (s)
hours (h)
2.778  104
3.600  103
seconds (s)
days (dy)
1.157  105
8.640  104
(Continued )
CHAPTER 4
How Things Are Measured
89

two signiﬁcant ﬁgures, because the posted speed limit quantity, 90, only goes
that far.
PROBLEM 4–8
How many feet per second is the above-mentioned speed limit? Use the
information in Table 4-1.
SOLUTION 4-8
Let’s convert kilometers per hour to kilometers per second ﬁrst. This requires
division by 3600, the number of seconds in an hour. Thus, 90 km/hr ¼
90/3600 km/s ¼ 0.025 km/s. Next, convert kilometers to meters. Multiply by
Table 4-1
Continued.
To convert:
To:
Multiply by:
Conversely,
multiply by:
seconds (s)
years (yr)
3.169  108
3.156  107
degrees Kelvin (8K)
degrees Celsius (8C)
Subtract 273
Add 273
degrees Kelvin (8K)
degrees Fahrenheit (8F)
Multiply by 1.80,
then subtract 459
Multiply by 0.556,
then add 255
degrees Kelvin (8K)
degrees Rankine (8R)
1.80
0.556
amperes (A)
carriers per second
6.24  1018
1.60  1019
amperes (A)
nanoamperes (nA)
109
109
amperes (A)
microamperes (mA)
106
106
amperes (A)
milliamperes (mA)
103
103
candela (cd)
microwatts per
steradian (mW/sr)
1.464  103
6.831  104
candela (cd)
milliwatts per
steradian (mW/sr)
1.464
0.6831
candela (cd)
watts per
steradian (W/sr)
1.464  103
683.1
moles (mol)
coulombs (C)
9.65  104
1.04  105
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
90

1000 to obtain 25 m/s as the posted speed limit. Finally, convert meters
to feet. Multiply 25 by 3.281 to get 82.025. This must be rounded oﬀto
82 ft/sec because the posted speed limit is expressed to only two signiﬁcant
ﬁgures.
Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
Which of the following terms commonly represents more than one
measurable quantity or phenomenon?
(a) meter
(b) pound
(c) radian
(d) degree
2.
The mole is a unit that expresses the
(a) number of electrons in an ampere
(b) number of particles in a sample
(c) distance from the sun to a planet
(d) time required for an electron to orbit an atomic nucleus
3.
The nomograph of Fig. 4-8 can be used to convert:
(a) feet to meters
(b) inches to centimeters
(c) miles to kilometers
(d) grams to pounds
4.
A joule is the equivalent of a
(a) foot-pound
(b) meter per second
(c) kilogram per meter
(d) watt-second
Fig. 4-8.
Illustration for Quiz Question 3.
CHAPTER 4
How Things Are Measured
91

5.
An example of a dimensionless unit is
(a) the kilogram
(b) the meter
(c) the second
(d) none of the above
6.
Force is equivalent to
(a) mass multiplied by distance
(b) mass multiplied by time
(c) mass multiplied by acceleration
(d) mass multiplied by speed
7.
Two islands are 1345 nautical miles apart. How many kilometers is
this?
(a) 2492
(b) 2164
(c) 1853
(d) It is impossible to say without more information.
8.
The number of kilograms an object has can be converted to pounds
only if you also know the
(a) temperature of the object
(b) size of the object
(c) gravitational strength on the planet where the object is located
(d) number of moles of atoms in the object
9.
The pound is a unit of
(a) mass
(b) distance
(c) acceleration
(d) none of the above
10.
The SI system is an expanded form of the
(a) English system
(b) metric system
(c) European system
(d) American system
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
92

Test: Part 1
Do not refer to the text when taking this test. You may draw diagrams or use
a calculator if necessary. A good score is at least 30 correct. Answers are in
the back of the book. It’s best to have a friend check your score the ﬁrst time,
so you won’t memorize the answers if you want to take the test again.
1.
The binary number 10010 is equivalent to the decimal number
(a) 8
(b) 12
(c) 16
(d) 18
(e) 34
2.
In the graph of Fig. Test 1-1, how many orders of magnitude are
shown on the horizontal axis?
(a) 1
(b) 2
(c) 10
(d) 100
(e) Inﬁnitely many.
93
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

3.
In Fig. Test 1-1, why does the graph of y ¼ x look like a curve, not a
straight line?
(a) Because one scale is linear (graduated evenly) and the other is not.
(b) Because neither scale is linear.
(c) Because both scales are linear.
(d) Because y is not a function of x in this example.
(e) Because the two scales encompass the same range of values.
4.
Suppose you graph the barometric pressure at 30-minute intervals
during the passage of a hurricane, with time on the horizontal scale
and pressure (in millibars) on the vertical scale. After you have plotted
the points, you connect them with a curve that represents your ‘‘best
educated guess’’ as to the moment-to-moment pressure. In this graph,
the pressure is
(a) the independent variable
(b) the dependent variable
(c) a function
(d) a relation
(e) a coeﬃcient
5.
In the graph described in the previous question, suppose you connect
the points with straight lines to get an approximate graph of the
barometric pressure plotted with respect to time. This lets you infer
the pressure at any given point in time according to
(a) extrapolation
(b) inversion
Fig. Test 1-1.
Illustration for Part One Test Questions 2 and 3.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
94

(c) linear interpolation
(d) exponentiation
(e) curve ﬁtting
6.
In the graph described in Question 4, suppose you connect the points
with a ‘‘best educated guess’’ curve in an attempt to create a precise,
moment-to-moment graph of the barometric pressure plotted with
respect to time. This lets you infer the pressure at any given point in
time according to
(a) extrapolation
(b) inversion
(c) linear interpolation
(d) exponentiation
(e) curve ﬁtting
7.
Consider a number that is equal to 5.00  220. In power-of-10
notation, rounded to three signiﬁcant ﬁgures, this is
(a) 5.24  106
(b) 2.00  103
(c) 5.12  103
(d) 1.00  1020
(e) impossible to determine without more information
8.
Fig. Test 1-2 shows the speed of an accelerating car (in meters per
second) as a function of time (in seconds). The fact that the graph
is a straight line indicates that the rate of acceleration (expressed
in meters per second per second, or m/s2) is constant. What is this
constant acceleration?
(a) 1 m/s2
(b) 2 m/s2
(c) 10 m/s2
(d) 20 m/s2
(e) It cannot be determined without more information.
9.
In the scenario shown by Fig. Test 1-2, suppose a mass of one kilogram
(1 kg) is substituted for the car. According to the laws of physics, con-
stant acceleration of an object having constant mass is produced by a
constant force or thrust. Force is expressed in units of kilogram-meters
per second per second (kg  m/s2), also known as newtons (N), as you
learned in Chapter 4. What force, in newtons, is necessary to cause a
1-kg mass to accelerate at the rate shown by the graph?
(a) 1 N
(b) 2 N
Test: Part 1
95

(c) 10 N
(d) 20 N
(e) It cannot be determined without more information.
10.
In a graph intended to show the correlation between two variables,
the total absence of any correlation is indicated by points that
(a) all lie near a horizontal line
(b) all lie near a vertical line
(c) are scattered all over the graph
(d) all lie tightly clustered near the center of the graph
(e) are arranged in some manner other than the four described above
11.
How does a numeral diﬀer from a number?
(a) A number represents a diagram, but a numeral represents a set.
(b) A numeral is a symbol that represents a number.
(c) A number is a symbol that represents a numeral.
(d) Numerals are letters of the alphabet, but numbers are symbols
such as the plus sign, the minus sign, and the forward slash.
(e) There is no diﬀerence.
12.
What is the value of 3  5  6/3 þ 10?
(a) 6
(b) 9/10
(c) 40
(d) 3
(e) It is undeﬁned, because it is ambiguous as written.
13.
In a vertical bar graph, function values are portrayed as
(a) the heights of bars having equal width
Fig. Test 1-2.
Illustration for Part One Test Questions 8 and 9.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
96

(b) the widths of bars having equal height
(c) points connected by straight lines
(d) points connected by a curve
(e) points plotted all by themselves, not connected by anything
14.
The milligram is a unit of
(a) temperature
(b) electrical quantity
(c) brightness of light
(d) frequency
(e) mass
15.
The mole is an example of a
(a) linear unit
(b) nonlinear unit
(c) dimensional unit
(d) dimensionless unit
(e) temporal unit
16.
The sum of two integers
(a) is always an integer
(b) is always a positive integer
(c) cannot be a rational number
(d) is never zero
(e) is always a dependent variable
17.
A radian is equivalent to approximately
(a) 57.3 meters of displacement
(b) 57.3 degrees of angular measure
(c) 57.3 degrees Kelvin
(d) 57.3 degrees Fahrenheit
(e) 57.3 degrees Celsius
18.
In order to get the Fahrenheit (8F) temperature when the Kelvin
temperature (8K) is known, this formula is commonly used:
 F ¼ 1:800  K  459:67
Suppose we are told that the temperature outdoors is 300 8K. What is
the temperature in 8F to the maximum justiﬁable number of signiﬁ-
cant ﬁgures?
(a) 80.3 8F
(b) 80.33 8F
(c) 287 8F
Test: Part 1
97

(d) 287.4 8F
(e) None of the above.
19.
If the independent and dependent variables of a function are
reversed, the result
(a) is always a function
(b) is sometimes a function
(c) is never a function
(d) is not deﬁned
(e) has negative correlation
20.
Suppose there are two quantities, and one of them is exactly 0.001
the size of the other. These quantities diﬀer by
(a) 0.001 orders of magnitude
(b) 1 order of magnitude
(c) 3 orders of magnitude
(d) 10 orders of magnitude
(e) 1000 orders of magnitude
21.
In the octal system, the number 67 is followed by the number
(a) 68
(b) 69
(c) 70
(d) 77
(e) 100
22.
The numbers 6.78870000  106 and 6.7887  106 diﬀer in the
sense that
(a) the ﬁrst is expressed with a greater degree of accuracy than the
second
(b) the ﬁrst is four orders of magnitude larger than the second
(c) the ﬁrst is only a small fraction of the second
(d) the ﬁrst is rounded, but the second is truncated
(e) the ﬁrst is the reciprocal of the second
23.
Every rational number is
(a) a natural number
(b) an integer
(c) a real number
(d) positive
(e) nonzero
24.
Consider that a meter (m) is equivalent to 39.37 inches (in), a foot (ft)
is equivalent to 12.000 in, and a statute mile (mi) is equivalent
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
98

to 5280 ft. Based on this information, how many feet are there in a
kilometer?
(a) 3281 ft
(b) 1609 ft
(c) 440.0 ft
(d) 1.732  104 ft
(e) More information is needed to calculate this.
25.
Based on the information given in the previous question, how many
millimeters (mm) are there in a statute mile?
(a) 6.336  104 mm
(b) 1.341  105 mm
(c) 1.609  106 mm
(d) 6.336  107 mm
(e) More information is needed to calculate this.
26.
In the hexadecimal system, the number 11 is followed by the number
(a) 12
(b) A
(c) B
(d) 1A
(e) 1B
27.
How many radians are there in a degree Kelvin?
(a) Approximately 57.3, the same number of degrees as there are in a
radian.
(b) Approximately 273.15, the diﬀerence between 8K and 8C.
(c) Approximately 360, the number of degrees in a complete circle.
(d) It depends on the radius of the circle under consideration.
(e) This question is meaningless because the units are incompatible.
28.
Suppose a and b are rational numbers, both larger than 1 but less
than 10, and both expressed in decimal form to the same number
of signiﬁcant ﬁgures. Suppose m and n are integers. What is the
product of a  10m and b  10n?
(a) There is no way to express this in the general case.
(b) (a þ b)  10mn
(c) ab  10mn
(d) ab  (10m)n
(e) ab  10(m þ n)
29.
The steradian is a unit of
(a) solid angular measure
Test: Part 1
99

(b) temperature
(c) visible-light brightness
(d) frequency
(e) electrical current
30.
In Fig. Test 1-3, the gray shaded area represents
(a) the set A  B
(b) the set A \ B
(c) the set A [ B
(d) the set A  B
(e) the set A
31.
In Fig. Test 1-3, which of the points P, Q, or R lies within the set
A \ B?
(a) Point P only.
(b) Point Q only.
(c) Points P and R.
(d) Points Q and R.
(e) None of the points.
32.
In Fig. Test 1-4, the point shown represents
(a) a natural number
(b) an integer
(c) a rational number
(d) an irrational number
(e) none of the above
33.
A one-dimensional graph, consisting of two scales lined directly up
against each other, is called a
(a) linear comparison
(b) bar graph
(c) correlation graph
(d) nomograph
(e) functional graph
Fig. Test 1-3.
Illustration for Part One Test Questions 30 and 31.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
100

34.
One millionth of a kilometer is equal to
(a) 1 meter
(b) 10 meters
(c) 1 millimeter
(d) 10 millimeters
(e) 1 micrometer
35.
In a graph intended to show the correlation between two variables,
strong negative correlation is indicated by points that
(a) all lie near a horizontal line
(b) all lie near a vertical line
(c) are scattered all over the graph
(d) all lie tightly clustered near the center of the graph
(e) are arranged in some manner other than the four described
above
36.
Suppose you are performing calculations on a computer, and you
end up with the expression 5.000000000E45. This is
(a) a number between 0 and 1
(b) a number greater than 1
(c) a number between 1 and 0
(d) a number less than 1
(e) a number too large to be deﬁned
37.
The reciprocal of 5.000000000E45 can be expressed as
(a) 2  1044
(b) 2  1044
(c) 5  1045
(d) 5  1044
(e) none of the above
38.
In Fig. Test 1-5, the solid curve represents an approximation of stock
price versus time, based on points plotted
(a) continuously
(b) at regular time intervals
Fig. Test 1-4.
Illustration for Part One Test Question 32.
Test: Part 1
101

(c) at regular stock-price intervals
(d) at random
(e) by extrapolation
39.
In Fig. Test 1-5, suppose stock price is considered as a function of
time. We can call this
(a) a nondecreasing function
(b) a nonincreasing function
(c) both a nondecreasing and a nonincreasing function
(d) neither a nondecreasing nor a nondecreasing function
(e) a relation, but not a legitimate function
40.
In the hexadecimal number system, the single-digit numerals are
(a) 1 and 2
(b) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10
(c) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8
(d) 1, 2, 3, and 4
(e) none of the above
Fig. Test 1-5.
Illustration for Part One Test Questions 38 and 39.
PART 1
Expressing Quantities
102

PART TWO
Finding Unknowns
103
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER
5
Basic Algebra
Linear equations have variables that are not raised to any power (except 1 or 0).
They are the simplest equations to solve, although when there are four or more
linear equations in four or more variables, the solution process can be messy.
In this chapter, we’ll deal with linear equations in one and two variables.
Single-Variable Linear Equations
The objective of solving a single-variable equation is to get it into a form
where the expression on the left-hand side of the equality symbol is exactly
equal to the variable being sought (for example, x), and a deﬁned expression
not containing that variable is on the right.
ELEMENTARY RULES
There are several ways in which an equation in one variable can be manipu-
lated to obtain a solution, assuming a solution exists. Any and all of the
105
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

principles outlined in Chapter 1 can be applied toward this result. In addi-
tion, the following rules can be applied in any order, and any number of
times.
Addition of a quantity to each side: Any deﬁned constant, variable, or
expression can be added to both sides of an equation, and the result is
equivalent to the original equation.
Subtraction of a quantity from each side: Any deﬁned constant, variable,
or expression can be subtracted from both sides of an equation, and the result
is equivalent to the original equation.
Multiplication of each side by a nonzero quantity: Both sides of an equation
can be multiplied by a nonzero constant, variable, or expression, and the
result is equivalent to the original equation.
Division of each side by a quantity: Both sides of an equation can be divided
by a nonzero constant, by a variable that cannot attain a value of zero, or
by an expression that cannot attain a value of zero over the range of its
variable(s), and the result is equivalent to the original equation.
BASIC EQUATION IN ONE VARIABLE
Consider an equation of the following form:
ax þ b ¼ cx þ d
where a, b, c, and d are real numbers, and a 6¼ c. This equation is solved as
follows:
ax þ b ¼ cx þ d
ax ¼ cx þ d  b
ax  cx ¼ d  b
ða  cÞx ¼ d  b
x ¼ ðd  bÞ=ða  cÞ
STANDARD FORM
Any single-variable linear equation can be reduced to this form, called the
standard form:
ax þ b ¼ 0
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
106

where a and b are constants, and x is the variable. The value on the right-
hand side of the equals sign is always 0 when a linear equation is in standard
form.
ILLUSTRATING THE SOLUTION
Suppose we substitute y for 0 in the standard form of a linear equation.
This produces a relation where y is the dependent variable and x is the
independent variable:
ax þ b ¼ y
Let’s create a graph of this relation for particular values of a and b, say a ¼ 2
and b ¼ 3, so the linear equation is
2x þ 3 ¼ y
Put the x-values on the horizontal axis and the y-values on the vertical axis.
Plot several test points by setting x at certain values, calculating the y values
that result, and then plotting the points on the graph. You should get
something that looks like Fig. 5-1. The graph is a straight line. Try this for
several diﬀerent combinations of constants a and b. You will ﬁnd that
the graph always turns out as a straight line. That’s where the term ‘‘linear
equation’’ comes from!
The solution to the single-variable equation ax þ b ¼ 0 is indicated by the
point where the straight-line graph for ax þ b ¼ y crosses the x axis (that is,
Fig. 5-1.
When the equation 2x þ 3 ¼ y is plotted as a graph, it turns out to be a straight line.
CHAPTER 5
Basic Algebra
107

the horizontal axis). That is, it is the value of x for the particular case where
y ¼ 0. In Fig. 5-1, this happens to be x ¼ 3/2.
PROBLEM 5-1
Solve the following equation for x. Show the results on a graph similar
to Fig. 5-1, by replacing the 0 on the right-hand side of the equation by
the variable y.
4x þ 3 ¼ 0
SOLUTION 5-1
To solve 4x þ 3 ¼ 0, proceed like this:
4x þ 3 ¼ 0
4x ¼ 3 ðsubtract 3 from each sideÞ
x ¼ 3=4 ðdivide each side by 4Þ
The graph of the equation 4x þ 3 ¼ y is shown in Fig. 5-2. Note where the
straight line crosses the x axis.
PROBLEM 5-2
Solve the following equation for x. Show the results on a graph similar
to Fig. 5-1, by reducing the equation to the standard form ax þ b ¼ 0,
and then replacing the 0 on the right-hand side of the equation by the
variable y.
7x  4 ¼ 3x þ 1
Fig. 5-2.
Illustration for Problem 5-1.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
108

SOLUTION 5-2
To solve 7x  4 ¼ 3x þ 1, proceed like this:
7x  4 ¼ 3x þ 1
7x ¼ 3x þ 5 ðadd 4 to each sideÞ
4x ¼ 5 ðsubtract 3x from each sideÞ
x ¼ 5=4 ðdivide each side by 4Þ
To reduce the equation to the standard form, proceed this way:
7x  4 ¼ 3x þ 1
4x  4 ¼ 1 ðsubtract 3x from each sideÞ
4x  5 ¼ 0 ðsubtract 1 from each sideÞ
The graph of the equation 4x  5 ¼ y is shown in Fig. 5-3. Note where the
straight line crosses the x axis; this shows the solution x ¼ 5/4.
PROBLEM 5-3
Solve the following equation for x. Show the results on a graph similar
to Fig. 5-1, by replacing the 0 on the right-hand side of the equation by
the variable y.
2x  4 ¼ 3x
Fig. 5-3.
Illustration for Problem 5-2.
CHAPTER 5
Basic Algebra
109

SOLUTION 5-3
To solve 2x  4 ¼ 3x, proceed like this:
2x  4 ¼ 3x
4 ¼ 5x ðadd 2x to each sideÞ
4=5 ¼ x ðdivide each side by 6Þ
x ¼ 4=5 ðswitch sidesÞ
To reduce the equation to the standard form, perform this single step:
 2x  4 ¼ 3x
 5x  4 ¼ 0 ðsubtract 3x from each sideÞ
The graph of the equation 5x  4 ¼ y is shown in Fig. 5-4. Note where
the straight line crosses the x axis; this shows the solution x ¼ 4/5.
Two-by-Two Linear Equations
A pair of linear equations in two variables, called a two-by-two (2  2) set of
linear equations, takes the following general form:
a1x þ b1y þ c1 ¼ 0
a2x þ b2y þ c2 ¼ 0
where x and y represent the variables, and the a’s, b’s, and c’s represent
constants.
Fig. 5-4.
Illustration for Problem 5-3.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
110

2 3 2 SUBSTITUTION METHOD
Consider a 2  2 set of linear equations in the above form. The substitution
method of solving these equations consists in performing either of the follow-
ing sequences of steps. If a1 6¼ 0, use Sequence A. If a1 ¼ 0, use Sequence B.
If both a1 ¼ 0 and a2 ¼ 0, the set of equations is in fact a pair of equations
in terms of a single variable, and the following steps are irrelevant.
Sequence A. First, solve the ﬁrst equation for x in terms of y:
a1x þ b1y þ c1 ¼ 0
a1x ¼ b1y  c1
x ¼ ðb1y  c1Þ=a1
Next, substitute the above-derived solution for x in place of x in the second
equation from the original pair, obtaining:
a2½ðb1y  c1Þ=a1 þ b2y þ c2 ¼ 0
Solve this single-variable equation for y, using the previously outlined rules
for solving single-variable equations. Assuming a solution exists, it can be
substituted for y in either of the original equations, deriving a single-variable
equation in terms of x. Solve for x, using the previously outlined rules for
solving single-variable equations.
Sequence B. Because a1 ¼ 0, the ﬁrst equation has only one variable, and is
in the following form:
b1y þ c1 ¼ 0
Solve this equation for y:
b1y ¼ c1
y ¼ c1=b1
This can be substituted for y in the second equation from the original pair,
obtaining:
a2x þ b2ðc1=b1Þ þ c2 ¼ 0
a2x  b2ðc1=b1Þ þ c2 ¼ 0
a2x ¼ b2ðc1=b1Þ  c2
x ¼ ½b2ðc1=b1Þ  c2 =a2
CHAPTER 5
Basic Algebra
111

2 3 2 ADDITION METHOD
Consider again the following set of two linear equations in two variables:
a1x þ b1y þ c1 ¼ 0
a2x þ b2y þ c2 ¼ 0
where a1, a2, b1, b2, c1, and c2 are constants, and the variables are represented
by x and y. The addition method involves performing two separate and
independent steps:
*
Multiply one or both equations through by constant values to cancel
out the coeﬃcients of x, and then solve for y.
*
Multiply one or both equations through by constant values to cancel
out the coeﬃcients of y, and then solve for x.
The scheme for solving for y begins by multiplying the ﬁrst equation through
by a2, and the second equation through by a1, and then adding the two
resulting equations:
a2a1x  a2b1y  a2c1 ¼ 0
a1a2x þ a1b2y þ a1c2 ¼ 0
ða1b2  a2b1Þy þ a1c2  a2c1 ¼ 0
Next, add a2c1 to each side, obtaining:
ða1b2  a2b1Þy þ a1c2 ¼ a2c1
Next, subtract a1c2 from each side, obtaining:
ða1b2  a2b1Þy ¼ a2c1  a1c2
Finally, divide through by a1b2  a2b1, obtaining:
y ¼ ða2c1  a1c2Þ=ða1b2  a2b1Þ
For this to be valid, the denominator must be nonzero. This means the
products a1b2 and a2b1 must not be equal to each other.
The process of solving for x is similar. Consider again the original set of
simultaneous linear equations:
a1x þ b1y þ c1 ¼ 0
a2x þ b2y þ c2 ¼ 0
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
112

Multiply the ﬁrst equation through by b2, and the second equation through
by b1, and then add the two resulting equations:
a1b2x  b1b2y  b2c1 ¼ 0
a2b1x þ b1b2y þ b1c2 ¼ 0
ða2b1  a1b2Þx þ b1c2  b2c1 ¼ 0
Next, add b2c1 to each side, obtaining:
ða2b1  a1b2Þx þ b1c2 ¼ b2c1
Next, subtract b1c2 from each side, obtaining:
ða2b1  a1b2Þx ¼ b2c1  b1c2
Finally, divide through by a2b1  a1b2, obtaining:
x ¼ ðb2c1  b1c2Þ=ða2b1  a1b2Þ
For this to be valid, the denominator must be nonzero; this means
a1b2 6¼ a2b1.
WHERE TWO LINES CROSS
When you have a pair of linear equations in two variables, you can graph
them both, and they will always both appear as straight lines. Try this
with several diﬀerent pairs of linear equations, letting the horizontal
axis show x values and the vertical axis show y values. Usually, the two
lines intersect at some point, although once in a while they are parallel,
and don’t intersect anywhere.
The solution to a pair of linear equations in two variables (if a solution
exists) corresponds to the x and y values of the intersection point for the
lines representing the equations. If the two lines are parallel, then there is
no solution.
Graphing a pair of linear equations is not a good way to ﬁnd the solution,
or even of determining whether or not a solution exists. This is because
graphing is a tedious and approximate business. It’s a lot of work to generate
the graphs for a pair of equations, and once you have drawn them, ﬁguring
out where (or even if) the lines intersect is subject to estimation errors. It’s
easiest to solve 2  2 sets of linear equations using the addition method.
That’s the scheme that we’ll use in the next two problems. We’ll graph them,
too, but only as an aid to visualizing the situations.
CHAPTER 5
Basic Algebra
113

PROBLEM 5-4
Use the 2  2 addition method to solve the following pair of linear equations,
reducing them to standard form and then ‘‘plugging in’’ the constants to the
general equations for x and y derived above.
2x  y ¼ 2
x þ 3y ¼ 3
SOLUTION 5-4
To convert the ﬁrst equation to standard form, subtract 2 from each side. To
convert the second equation to standard form, add 3 to each side. This gives
us the following:
2x  y  2 ¼ 0
x þ 3y þ 3 ¼ 0
The constants in the ﬁrst equation are a1 ¼ 2, b1 ¼ 1, and c1 ¼ 2. The con-
stants in the second equation are a2 ¼ 1, b2 ¼ 3, and c2 ¼ 3. Therefore, we
can solve for x by ‘‘plugging in’’ the appropriate constants to the following
general equation:
x ¼ ðb2c1  b1c2Þ=ða2b1  a1b2Þ
¼ ½3  ð2Þ  ð1Þ  3 =½ð1Þ  ð1Þ  2  3 
¼ ½6  ð3Þ =ð1  6Þ
¼ ð3Þ=ð5Þ
¼ 3=5
We can solve for y by ‘‘plugging in’’ the appropriate constants as follows:
y ¼ ða2c1  a1c2Þ=ða1b2  a2b1Þ
¼ ½ð1Þ  ð2Þ  2  3 =½2  3  ð1Þ  ð1Þ 
¼ ð2  6Þ=ð6  1Þ
¼ 4=5
Thus, x ¼ 3/5 and y ¼ 4/5. Sometimes this is expressed by writing the
numbers one after the other, between parentheses, separated by a comma,
but without any space after the comma:
ðxyÞ ¼ ð3=5 4=5Þ
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
114

PROBLEM 5-5
Use the 2  2 addition method to solve the original pair of equations from
the previous problem directly, rather than by substituting constants into
the general forms of the equations.
SOLUTION 5-5
Here are the original two equations again:
2x  y ¼ 2
x þ 3y ¼ 3
To solve for x, we must get the y terms to cancel out when we add the two
equations. This can be accomplished by multiplying both sides of the top
equation by 3 and then adding the two resulting equations together:
6x  3y ¼ 6
x þ 3y ¼ 3
5x ¼ 3
Then divide both sides of this equation by 5 to get x ¼ 3/5.
To solve for y, we must get the x terms to cancel out when we add the two
equations. In order to make this happen, multiply both sides of the bottom
equation by 2, and then add the two resulting equations together:
2x  y ¼ 2
2x þ 6y ¼ 6
5y ¼ 4
Then divide both sides by 5 to get y ¼ 4/5.
PROBLEM 5-6
Draw the straight-line graphs from the two equations in Problems 5-4 and
5-5, showing their intersection point at (x,y) ¼ (3/5, 4/5).
SOLUTION 5-6
We haven’t learned the quick-and-easy way to graph linear equations yet.
That stuﬀis reserved for a later chapter. For now, just pick some numbers
for x and plot the resulting points for y. Two points should do for both
equations, because we know they’ll be straight lines; from basic geometry
we know that any straight line can be uniquely determined by two points.
The result should look like Fig. 5-5.
CHAPTER 5
Basic Algebra
115

Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
Which of the following is not a legitimate way to manipulate an
equation in which the variable is x?
(a) Subtract 1 from both sides.
(b) Divide both sides by 0.
(c) Multiply both sides by a constant.
(d) Add 2x to both sides.
2.
The term ‘‘linear,’’ when used to describe an equation, comes from
the fact that
(a) such equations look like straight lines when graphed in two
variables
(b) the variables change at constant rates
(c) such equations are straightforward and simple
(d) the variables are actually constants
3.
The solution to the equation 3x þ 7 ¼ 2x þ 3 is
(a) undeﬁned
(b) equal to any and all real numbers
(c) equal to 4/5
(d) equal to 5/4
4.
Suppose the two straight lines in Fig. 5-6 represent linear equations
in standard form, except that the 0 on the right-hand side of the
Fig. 5-5.
Illustration for Problem 5-6.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
116

equals sign is replaced by y. Examine line A. It appears from this
graph that when y ¼ 0, the value of x
(a) is equal to 0
(b) is positive (greater than 0)
(c) is negative (less than 0)
(d) is not deﬁned
5.
Suppose the two straight lines in Fig. 5-6 represent linear equations in
standard form, except that the 0 on the right-hand side of the equals
sign is replaced by y. Examine line A. It appears from this graph
that when y is positive (greater than 0), the value of x
(a) is equal to 0
(b) is positive (greater than 0)
(c) is negative (less than 0)
(d) is not deﬁned
6.
Suppose the two straight lines in Fig. 5-6 represent linear equations in
standard form, except that the 0 on the right-hand side of the equals
sign is replaced by y. Examine line B. It appears from this graph that
when y ¼ 0, the value of x
(a) can be any real number
(b) is positive (greater than 0)
(c) is equal to 0
(d) is not deﬁned
7.
Suppose the two straight lines in Fig. 5-6 represent linear equations in
standard form, except that the 0 on the right-hand side of the equals
Fig. 5-6.
Illustration for Quiz Questions 4 through 7.
CHAPTER 5
Basic Algebra
117

sign is replaced by y. Examine line B. It appears from this graph that
when y ¼ 3, the value of x
(a) can be any real number
(b) is positive (greater than 0)
(c) is equal to 0
(d) is not deﬁned
8.
Examine Fig. 5-7. Suppose lines A and B represent a pair of linear
equations in two variables, x and y. How many solutions exist to
this pair of equations?
(a) None.
(b) One.
(c) Two.
(d) Inﬁnitely many.
9.
Which of the following statements is true of any or all solutions (x, y)
to the pair of linear equations shown by lines A and B in Fig. 5-7?
(a) x ¼ 3
(b) y ¼ 3
(c) (x, y) ¼ 3
(d) x þ y ¼ 3
10.
What is the unique solution (x, y) to the equation 2x þ 2y ¼ 0?
(a) x ¼ 2
(b) y ¼ 2
(c) x þ y ¼ 0
(d) An additional equation in x and y is necessary to answer this.
Fig. 5-7.
Illustration for Quiz Questions 8 and 9.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
118

CHAPTER
6
More Algebra
When the variable, or unknown, in an equation is raised to a power, things
get interesting. The larger the exponents attached to the variables, the more
interesting things become, and the more diﬃcult it gets to solve the equation.
In this chapter, we’ll look into the basics of quadratic, cubic, and higher-
order equations in one variable. Even if you’re not a mathematician or a
scientist, you’ll encounter equations like these once in a while, so it’s good
to know about them.
Quadratic Equations
A one-variable, second-order equation, also called a second-order equation in
one variable or, more often, a quadratic equation, can be written in the follow-
ing standard form:
ax2 þ bx þ c ¼ 0
where a, b, and c are constants, a is not equal to 0, and x is the variable.
The constants a, b, and c are also known as coeﬃcients.
119
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

SOME EXAMPLES
Any equation that can be converted into the above form is a quadratic
equation. Alternative forms are:
mx2 þ nx ¼ p
qx2 ¼ rx þ s
ðx þ tÞðx þ uÞ ¼ 0
where m, n, p, q, r, s, t, and u are constants. Here are some examples of
quadratic equations in various forms:
x2 þ 2x þ 1 ¼ 0
3x2  4x ¼ 2
4x2 ¼ 3x þ 5
ðx þ 4Þðx  5Þ ¼ 0
GET IT INTO FORM
Some quadratic equations are easy to solve. Others are diﬃcult. The ﬁrst step
in ﬁnding the value(s) of the variable in a quadratic is to get the equation
either into standard form or into factored form.
The ﬁrst equation above is already in standard form. It is ready for an
attempt at solution, which, as we will shortly see, is easy.
The second equation above can be reduced to standard form by
subtracting 2 from each side:
3x2  4x ¼ 2
3x2  4x  2 ¼ 0
The third equation above can be reduced to standard form by adding 3x to
each side and then subtracting 5 from each side:
4x2 ¼ 3x þ 5
4x2 þ 3x ¼ 5
4x2 þ 3x  5 ¼ 0
An interesting aside: these are not the only ways the equations can be reduced
to standard form. They can be multiplied through by any nonzero constant,
and the resulting equations are still in standard form.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
120

The fourth equation above is in factored form. This is a convenient form,
because a quadratic equation denoted this way can be solved without having
to do any work. Look at it closely:
ðx þ 4Þðx  5Þ ¼ 0
The expression on the left-hand side of the equals sign is zero if either of the
two factors is zero. If x ¼ 4, then here is what happens when we ‘‘plug it in’’:
ð4 þ 4Þð4  5Þ ¼ 0
0  9 ¼ 0 ðIt works!Þ
If x ¼ 5, then here’s what occurs:
ð5 þ 4Þð5  5Þ ¼ 0
9  0 ¼ 0 ðIt works again!Þ
It is obvious which values for the variable in a factored quadratic will work as
solutions. Simply take the additive inverses (negatives) of the constants in
each factor. It’s so easy, in fact, that you must think there’s a catch. There
is, of course. Most quadratic equations are diﬃcult to get neatly into factored
form.
A COUPLE OF NITS
Here are a couple of little things that should be cleared up right away, so you
never get confused about them.
Suppose you run across a quadratic like this:
xðx þ 3Þ ¼ 0
You might want to imagine this equation written out like this:
ðx þ 0Þðx þ 3Þ ¼ 0
This makes it easy to see that the solutions are x ¼ 0 or x ¼ 3. Of course,
adding 0 to a variable doesn’t change anything except to make an equation
longer. But it can clarify the process of solving some equations.
In case you forgot, at the beginning of this section it was mentioned that a
quadratic equation might have only one real-number solution. Here is an
example of the factored form of such an equation:
ðx  11Þðx  11Þ ¼ 0
In standard form, the equation looks like this:
x2  22x þ 121 ¼ 0
CHAPTER 6
More Algebra
121

Some purists might say, ‘‘This equation has two real-number solutions, and
they are both equal to 11.’’
PROBLEM 6-1
Convert
the
following
quadratic
equations
into
factored
form
with
real-number coeﬃcients:
x2  2x  15 ¼ 0
x2 þ 4 ¼ 0
SOLUTION 6-1
The ﬁrst equation turns out to have a ‘‘clean’’ factored equivalent:
ðx þ 3Þðx  5Þ ¼ 0
The second equation does not have any real-numbered solutions, so the
problem, as stated, can’t be solved. Getting the second equation into factored
form requires that you know something about complex numbers, and we’ll
get into that subject in a moment. You can tell that something is peculiar
about this equation if you subtract 4 from each side:
x2 þ 4 ¼ 0
x2 ¼ 4
No real number can be substituted for x in this equation in order to make it a
true statement. That is because no real number, when squared, produces
a negative real-number result.
PROBLEM 6-2
Put the following factored equations into standard quadratic form:
ðx þ 5Þðx  1Þ ¼ 0
xðx þ 4Þ ¼ 0
SOLUTION 6-2
Both of these can be converted to standard form by multiplying the factors.
In the ﬁrst case, it can be done in two steps:
ðx þ 5Þðx  1Þ ¼ 0
x2  x þ 5x þ ½5  ð1Þ ¼ 0
x2 þ 4x  5 ¼ 0
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
122

In the second case, it can be done in a single step:
xðx þ 4Þ ¼ 0
x2 þ 4x ¼ 0
THE QUADRATIC FORMULA
Examine these two quadratic equations:
3x2  4x ¼ 2
4x2 ¼ 3x þ 5
These can be reduced to standard form:
3x2  4x  2 ¼ 0
4x2 þ 3x  5 ¼ 0
You might stare at these equations for a long time before you get any ideas
about how to factor them. Eventually, you might wonder why you are wast-
ing your time. These equations do not ‘‘want’’ to be factored. Fortunately,
there is a formula you can use to solve quadratic equations in general.
Consider the general quadratic equation:
ax2 þ bx þ c ¼ 0
where a 6¼ 0. The solution(s) to this equation can be found using this formula:
x ¼ ½b  ðb2  4acÞ1=2 =2a
The symbol  is read ‘‘plus-or-minus’’ and is a way of compacting two
mathematical expressions into one. Written separately, the equations are:
x ¼ ½b þ ðb2  4acÞ1=2 =2a
x ¼ ½b  ðb2  4acÞ1=2 =2a
The fractional exponent means the 1/2 power, another way of expressing the
square root.
Plugging in
Examine this equation once again:
3x2  4x  2 ¼ 0
CHAPTER 6
More Algebra
123

The coeﬃcients are as follows:
a ¼ 3
b ¼ 4
c ¼ 2
Plugging these numbers into the quadratic formula produces solutions, as
follows:
x ¼ f4  ½ð4Þ2  ð4  3  2Þ 1=2g=ð2  3Þ
¼ 4  ð16  24Þ1=2=ð6Þ
¼ 4  ð8Þ1=2=ð6Þ
We are confronted with the square root of 8 in the solution. What is this?
It isn’t a real number, but how can we ignore it? We’ll look into this
matter shortly. For now, let’s work out a couple of problems with quadratics
involving only the real numbers.
THE PARABOLA
When we substitute y for 0 in the standard form of a quadratic equation,
and then graph the resulting relation with x on the horizontal axis and y
on the vertical axis, we get a curve called a parabola.
Suppose we want to plot a graph of the following equation:
ax2 þ bx þ c ¼ y
First, we determine the coordinates of the following point (x0, y0):
x0 ¼ b=ð2aÞ
y0 ¼ c  b2=ð4aÞ
This point represents the base point of the parabola; that is, the point at
which the curvature is sharpest. Once this point is known, we must ﬁnd
four more points by ‘‘plugging in’’ values of x somewhat greater than and
less than x0, and then determining the corresponding y-values. These
x-values, call them x2, x1, x1, and x2, should be equally spaced on either
side of x0, such that:
x2 < x1 < x0 < x1 < x2
x1  x2 ¼ x0  x1 ¼ x1  x0 ¼ x2  x1
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
124

This gives us ﬁve points that lie along the parabola, and that are symmetri-
cal relative to the axis of the curve. The graph can then be inferred if the
points are wisely chosen. Some trial and error might be required. If a > 0,
the parabola opens upward. If a < 0, the parabola opens downward.
Plotting a parabola
Consider the following formula:
y ¼ x2 þ 2x þ 1
Using the above formula to calculate the base point, we get this:
x0 ¼ 2=2 ¼ 1
y0 ¼ 1  4=4 ¼ 1  1 ¼ 0
Therefore ðx0 y0Þ ¼ ð1 0Þ
We plot this point ﬁrst, as shown in Fig. 6-1. Next, we plot points spaced at
1-unit horizontal-axis intervals on either side of x0, as follows:
x2 ¼ x0  2 ¼ 3
y2 ¼ ð3Þ2 þ 2  ð3Þ þ 1 ¼ 9  6 þ 1 ¼ 4
Therefore ðx2 y2Þ ¼ ð3 4Þ
Fig. 6-1.
Graph of the quadratic equation y ¼ x2 þ 2x þ 1.
CHAPTER 6
More Algebra
125

x1 ¼ x0  1 ¼ 2
y1 ¼ ð2Þ2 þ 2  ð2Þ þ 1 ¼ 4  4 þ 1 ¼ 1
Therefore ðx1 y1Þ ¼ ð2 1Þ
x1 ¼ x0 þ 1 ¼ 0
y1 ¼ 02 þ 2  0 þ 1 ¼ 0 þ 0 þ 1 ¼ 1
Therefore ðx1 y1Þ ¼ ð0 1Þ
x2 ¼ x0 þ 2 ¼ 1
y2 ¼ 12 þ 2  1 þ 1 ¼ 1 þ 2 þ 1 ¼ 4
Therefore ðx2 y2Þ ¼ ð1 4Þ
From these ﬁve points, the parabola can be inferred. It is shown as a solid,
heavy curve in Fig. 6-1.
Plotting another parabola
Let’s try another example, this time with a parabola that opens downward.
Consider the following formula:
y ¼ 2x2 þ 4x  5
The base point is:
x0 ¼ 4= 4 ¼ 1
y0 ¼ 5  16=ð8Þ ¼ 5 þ 2 ¼ 3
Therefore ðx0 y0Þ ¼ ð1  3Þ
This point is plotted ﬁrst, as shown in Fig. 6-2. Next, we plot the following
points:
x2 ¼ x0  2 ¼ 1
y2 ¼ 2  ð1Þ2 þ 4  ð1Þ  5 ¼ 2  4  5 ¼ 11
Therefore ðx2 y2Þ ¼ ð1  11Þ
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
126

x1 ¼ x0  1 ¼ 0
y1 ¼ 2  02 þ 4  0  5 ¼ 5
Therefore ðx1 y1Þ ¼ ð0  5Þ
x1 ¼ x0 þ 1 ¼ 2
y1 ¼ 2  22 þ 4  2  5 ¼ 8 þ 8  5 ¼ 5
Therefore ðx1 y1Þ ¼ ð2  5Þ
x2 ¼ x0 þ 2 ¼ 3
y2 ¼ 2  32 þ 4  3  5 ¼ 18 þ 12  5 ¼ 11
Therefore ðx2 y2Þ ¼ ð3  11Þ
From these ﬁve points, the parabola is inferred. It is the solid, heavy curve
in Fig. 6-2.
PROBLEM 6-3
Find the real-number solution(s) to the following equation by factoring:
x2 þ 14x þ 49 ¼ 0
Fig. 6-2.
Graph of the quadratic equation y ¼ 2x2 þ 4x  5.
CHAPTER 6
More Algebra
127

SOLUTION 6-3
Assuming this equation can be put into factored form, let’s suppose the
equation looks like this:
ðx þ tÞðx þ uÞ ¼ 0
In this case, the solutions are x ¼ t and x ¼ u. The trick is ﬁnding t
and u such that we get the original equation when the factors are
multiplied together. The above generalized equation looks like this when
multiplied out:
ðx þ tÞðx þ uÞ ¼ 0
x2 þ ux þ tx þ tu ¼ 0
x2 þ ðu þ tÞx þ tu ¼ 0
Are there any numbers t and u whose sum equals 14 and their product equals
49? It should not take you long to see that the answer is yes; this works out if
t ¼ 7 and u ¼ 7. If we substitute these values into the generalized, factored
quadratic and then multiply it out, we get the original equation that we
want to solve:
ðx þ 7Þðx þ 7Þ ¼ 0
x2 þ 7x þ 7x þ 49 ¼ 0
x2 þ 14x þ 49 ¼ 0
Therefore, there is a single real-number solution to this equation: x ¼ 7.
PROBLEM 6-4
Use the quadratic formula to solve the equation from the previous problem.
SOLUTION 6-4
Here is the equation in standard form again:
x2 þ 14x þ 49 ¼ 0
The coeﬃcients from the general form, and which are deﬁned in the quadratic
formula above, are as follows:
a ¼ 1
b ¼ 14
c ¼ 49
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
128

Here is what happens when we plug these coeﬃcients into the quadratic
formula:
x ¼ f14  ½ð14Þ2  ð4  1  49Þ 1=2g=ð2  1Þ
¼ 14  ð196  196Þ1=2


=2
¼ 14  01=2


=2
¼ 14=2
¼ 7
Beyond Reality
Mathematicians symbolize the positive square root of 1, called the unit
imaginary number, by using the lowercase italic letter i. Scientists and engi-
neers symbolize it using the letter j, and henceforth, we will too.
IMAGINARY NUMBERS
Any imaginary number can be obtained by multiplying j by some real
number q. The real number q is customarily written after j if q is positive or
zero. If q happens to be a negative real number, then the absolute value of q is
written after j. Examples of imaginary numbers are j3, j5, j2.787, and jp.
The set of imaginary numbers can be depicted along a number line, just as
can the real numbers. The so-called imaginary number line is usually shown
standing on end, that is, vertically (Fig. 6-3). In a sense, the real-number
line and the imaginary-number line are fraternal twins. As is the case with
human twins, these two number lines, although they share similarities, are
independent. The sets of imaginary and real numbers have one value, 0, in
common. Thus:
j0 ¼ 0
COMPLEX NUMBERS
A complex number consists of the sum of some real number and some
imaginary number. The general form for a complex number k is:
k ¼ p þ jq
where p and q are real numbers.
CHAPTER 6
More Algebra
129

Mathematicians, scientists, and engineers denote the set of complex
numbers by placing the real-number and imaginary-number lines at right
angles to each other, intersecting at the points on both lines corresponding
to 0. The result is a rectangular coordinate plane (Fig. 6-4). Every point on
this plane corresponds to a unique complex number, and every complex
number corresponds to a unique point on the plane.
Now that you know a little about complex numbers, you might want to
examine the solution to the following equation again:
3x2  4x  2 ¼ 0
Recall that the solution, derived using the quadratic formula, contains
the quantity (8)1/2. An engineer or physicist would write this as j81/2, so
the solution to the quadratic is:
x ¼ ð4  j81=2Þ=ð6Þ
This can be simpliﬁed to the standard form of a complex number, and then
reduced to the lowest fractional form. Step-by-step, the simpliﬁcation process
Fig. 6-3.
The imaginary number line is just like the real number line, except that it is ‘‘stood
on end’’ and all the quantities are multiplied by j.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
130

goes like this:
x ¼ ð4  j81=2Þ=ð6Þ
¼ 4=6  j½81=2=ð6Þ 
¼ 2=3  j½2  21=2=ð6Þ 
¼ 2=3  j½2=ð6Þ  21=2 
¼ 2=3  jð1=3  21=2Þ
¼ 2=3  ½jð1=3  21=2Þ 
¼ 2=3  jð1=3  21=2Þ
This might not look any ‘‘simpler’’ at ﬁrst glance, but it’s good practice to
state complex numbers in standard form, and reduced to lowest fractions.
The last step, in which the minus sign disappears, is justiﬁed because adding
a negative is the same thing as subtracting a positive, and subtracting a
negative is the same thing as adding a positive.
Fig. 6-4.
The complex number plane portrays real numbers on the horizontal axis and
imaginary numbers on the vertical axis.
CHAPTER 6
More Algebra
131

The two complex solutions to the equation can be stated separately
this way:
x ¼ 2=3 þ jð1=3  21=2Þ
or
x ¼ 2=3  jð1=3  21=2Þ
PROBLEM 6-5
Solve the following equation using the quadratic formula:
x2 þ 9 ¼ 0
SOLUTION 6-5
In standard form showing all three coeﬃcients a, b, and c, the equation
looks like this:
1x2 þ 0x þ 9 ¼ 0
Thus the coeﬃcients are:
a ¼ 1
b ¼ 0
c ¼ 9
Plugging these numbers into the quadratic formula yields:
x ¼ f0  ½02  ð4  1  9Þ 1=2g=ð2  1Þ
¼  ð36Þ1=2=2
¼  j6=2
¼  j3
PROBLEM 6-6
Write out the quadratic equation from the preceding problem in factored
form.
SOLUTION 6-6
This would be tricky if we didn’t already know the solutions. But we do, so
it’s easy:
ðx þ j3Þðx  j3Þ ¼ 0
You can verify that this works by ‘‘plugging in’’ the solutions derived from
the quadratic formula in the previous problem.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
132

One-Variable, Higher-Order Equations
As the exponents in single-variable equations get bigger, ﬁnding the
solutions becomes a more challenging business. In the olden days, a lot of
insight, guesswork, and tedium was involved in solving such equations.
Today, scientists have the help of computers, and when problems are
encountered containing equations with variables raised to large powers,
they just let a computer take over. The material here is presented so you
won’t be taken aback if you ever come across one-variable, higher-order
equations.
THE CUBIC
A cubic equation, also called a one-variable, third-order equation or a
third-order equation in one variable, can be written in the following standard
form:
ax3 þ bx2 þ cx þ d ¼ 0
where a, b, c, and d are constants, x is the variable, and a 6¼ 0.
If you’re lucky, you’ll be able to reduce a cubic equation to factored form
to ﬁnd real-number solutions r, s, and t:
ðx þ rÞðx þ sÞðx þ tÞ ¼ 0
Don’t count on being able to factor a cubic equation. Sometimes it’s easy,
but most of the time it is nigh impossible. There is a cubic formula that can
be used in a manner similar to the way in which the quadratic formula is
used for quadratic equations, but it’s complicated, and is beyond the scope
of this discussion.
Plotting cubics
When we substitute y for 0 in the standard form of a cubic equation and
then graph the resulting relation with x on the horizontal axis and y on
the vertical axis, a curve with a characteristic shape results.
Figure 6-5 is a graph of the simplest possible cubic equation:
x3 ¼ y
CHAPTER 6
More Algebra
133

The domain and range of this function both encompass the entire set of real
numbers. This makes the cubic curve diﬀerent from the parabola, whose
range is always limited to only a portion of the set of real numbers.
Figure 6-6 is a graph of another simple cubic:
ð1=2Þx3 ¼ y
In this case, the domain and range also span all the real numbers.
Fig. 6-5.
Graph of the cubic equation x3 ¼ y.
Fig. 6-6.
Graph of the cubic equation (1/2)x3 ¼ y.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
134

The inﬂection point, or the place where the curve goes from concave down-
ward to concave upward, is at the origin (0, 0) in both Fig. 6-5 and Fig. 6-6.
This is because the coeﬃcients b, c, and d are all equal to 0. When these
coeﬃcients are nonzero, the inﬂection point is not necessarily at the origin.
THE QUARTIC
A quartic equation, also called a one-variable, fourth-order equation or a fourth-
order equation in one variable, can be written in the following standard form:
ax4 þ bx3 þ cx2 þ dx þ e ¼ 0
where a, b, c, d, and e are constants, x is the variable, and a 6¼ 0.
Once in a while you will be able to reduce a quartic equation to factored
form to ﬁnd real-number solutions r, s, t, and u:
ðx þ rÞðx þ sÞðx þ tÞðx þ uÞ ¼ 0
As is the case with the cubic, you will be lucky if you can factor a quartic
equation into this form and thus ﬁnd four real-number solutions with ease.
Plotting quartics
When we substitute y for 0 in the standard form of a quartic equation and
then graph the resulting relation with x on the horizontal axis and y on
the vertical axis, a curve with a ‘‘parabola-like’’ shape is the result. But this
curve is not a true parabola. It is distorted – ﬂattened down in a sense – as
can be seen when it is compared with a true parabola. The bends in the
curve are sharper than those in the parabola, and the curve ‘‘takes oﬀ’’
more steeply beyond the bends.
Figure 6-7 is a graph of the simplest possible quartic equation:
x4 ¼ y
The domain encompasses the whole set of real numbers, but the range of
this function spans only the non-negative real numbers. Figure 6-8 is a
graph of another simple quartic:
ð1=2Þx4 ¼ y
In this case, the domain spans all the real numbers, but the range spans only
the non-positive real numbers.
You are welcome to ‘‘play around’’ with various quartic equations to see
what their graphs look like. Their shapes, positions, and orientations can
vary depending on the values of the coeﬃcients b, c, d, and e.
CHAPTER 6
More Algebra
135

THE QUINTIC
A quintic equation, also called a one-variable, ﬁfth-order equation or a ﬁfth-
order equation in one variable, can be written in the following standard form:
ax5 þ bx4 þ cx3 þ dx2 þ ex þ f ¼ 0
where a, b, c, d, e, and f are constants, x is the variable, and a 6¼ 0.
Fig. 6-7.
Graph of the quartic equation x4 ¼ y.
Fig. 6-8.
Graph of the quartic equation (1/2)x4 ¼ y.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
136

There is a remote possibility that, if you come across a quintic, you’ll be
able to reduce it to factored form to ﬁnd real-number solutions r, s, t,
u, and v:
ðx þ rÞðx þ sÞðx þ tÞðx þ uÞðx þ vÞ ¼ 0
As is the case with the cubic and the quartic, you will be lucky if you can
factor a quintic equation into this form.
Plotting quintics
When we substitute y for 0 in the standard form of a quintic equation and
then graph the resulting relation with x on the horizontal axis and y on
the vertical axis, the resulting curve looks something like that of the graph
of the cubic equation. The diﬀerence is that the bends are sharper, and the
graphs run oﬀmore steeply toward ‘‘positive inﬁnity’’ and ‘‘negative inﬁnity’’
beyond the bends.
Figure 6-9 is a graph of the simplest possible quintic equation:
x5 ¼ y
The domain and range of this function both span the set of reals. Figure 6-10
is a graph of another simple quintic:
ð1=2Þx5 ¼ y
In this case, the domain and range also span all the real numbers.
Fig. 6-9.
Graph of the quintic equation x5 ¼ y.
CHAPTER 6
More Algebra
137

The inﬂection point for the graph of the quintic is at the origin in both
Fig. 6-9 and Fig. 6-10. As in the case of equations of lower order that are
shown in this chapter, the reason is that the coeﬃcients other than a are all
equal to 0.
THE nth-ORDER EQUATION
A one-variable, nth-order equation can be written in the following standard
form:
a1xn þ a2xn1 þ a3xn2 þ    þ an2x2 þ an1x þ an ¼ 0
where a1, a2, . . . , an are constants, x is the variable, and a1 6¼ 0. We won’t
even think about trying to factor an equation like this in general, although
speciﬁc cases might lend themselves to factorization. Solving nth-order
equations, where n > 5, practically demands the use of a computer.
PROBLEM 6-7
What happens to the general shape of the graph of the following equation if
n is a positive even integer and n becomes larger without limit?
xn ¼ y
SOLUTION 6-7
If x ¼ 0, then y ¼ 0. If x ¼ 1 or x ¼ 1, then y ¼ 1. These two facts are true no
matter what the value of n, as long as it is even. As n increases, the curve
Fig. 6-10.
Graph of the quintic equation (1/2)x5 ¼ y.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
138

tends more and more toward 0 from the positive side when 1<x<0 and
when 0 < x < 1. Also, the curve rises ever-more-steeply toward ‘‘positive
inﬁnity’’ (þ1) when x < 1 or x > 1. Figure 6-11 is an approximate draw-
ing of the graph of the equation x998 ¼ y. The bends are not perfectly
squared-oﬀ, but they’re pretty close. The curve ‘‘takes oﬀ’’ in almost, but
not perfectly, vertical directions.
PROBLEM 6-8
What happens to the general shape of the graph of the following equation if
n is a positive odd integer and n becomes larger without limit?
xn ¼ y
SOLUTION 6-8
If x ¼ 0, then y ¼ 0. If x ¼ 1, then y ¼ 1. If x ¼ 1, then y ¼ 1. These two
facts are true regardless of the value of n, as long as it is odd. As n increases,
the curve tends more and more toward 0 from the negative side when
1 < x < 0, and more and more toward 0 from the positive side when
0 < x < 1. The curve descends ever-more-steeply toward ‘‘negative inﬁnity’’
(1) when x < 1, and rises ever-more-steeply toward ‘‘positive inﬁnity’’
(þ1) when x > 1. Figure 6-12 is an approximate drawing of the graph of
the equation x999 ¼ y. As with the curve shown in Fig. 6-11, the ‘‘take-oﬀ’’
slopes are almost, but not quite, vertical.
Fig. 6-11.
Illustration for Problem 6-7.
CHAPTER 6
More Algebra
139

Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
A point on the graph of a function where the curve goes from concave
upward to concave downward is called
(a) an inﬂection point
(b) a focal point
(c) a base point
(d) a slope point
2.
The general form of a quadratic equation is:
ax2 þ bx þ c ¼ 0
Suppose a is a negative real number, b and c are real numbers, and
(b2  4ac) ¼ 0. Then which of the following statements is true?
(a) The equation has a real-number solution.
(b) The equation has two diﬀerent real-number solutions.
(c) The equation has no real-number solutions.
(d) The equation has no solutions at all.
3.
The equation x5 ¼ 3x2 þ 2 is an example of
(a) a second-order equation
Fig. 6-12.
Illustration for Problem 6-8.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
140

(b) a third-order equation
(c) a fourth-order equation
(d) a ﬁfth-order equation
4.
Which of the following equations has a graph that is not a parabola?
(a) x2 ¼ y
(b) x2 þ 2x ¼ y
(c) 5x2  2x þ 4 ¼ y
(d) 4x þ 5 ¼ y
5.
In standard form, the factored equation (x  10)(x þ 10) ¼ 0 is:
(a) x2 þ 10x þ 100 ¼ 0
(b) x2  10x  100 ¼ 0
(c) x2 þ 100 ¼ 0
(d) x2  100 ¼ 0
6.
What is, or are, the real-number solutions of the equation (x  10)
(x þ 10) ¼ 0?
(a) 10
(b) 10
(c) 10 and 10
(d) There are none.
7.
Which of the following numbers, when multiplied by itself, is equal
to 100?
(a) 10
(b) 10
(c) j10
(d) 10 þ j10
8.
The domain of the function 2x3  x2 þ 4x þ 2 ¼ y consists of
(a) the set of real numbers greater than 2
(b) the set of real numbers smaller than 2
(c) the set of real numbers greater than or equal to 0
(d) the entire set of real numbers
9.
Consider the following equation:
ðx  6Þðx þ j10Þðx  14Þðx þ j2Þ ¼ 0
Which of the following numbers is not a solution to this equation?
(a) 6
(b) 14
(c) j2
(d) j10
CHAPTER 6
More Algebra
141

10.
The solution(s) to the equation x2  2 ¼ 0 is or are
(a) imaginary
(b) real, but irrational
(c) real and rational
(d) nonexistent
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
142

CHAPTER
7
A Statistics Sampler
If you want to understand anything about a scientiﬁc discipline, you must
know the terminology. Statistics is no exception. This chapter deﬁnes some
of the most common terms used in statistics.
Experiments and Variables
Statistics is the analysis of information. In particular, statistics is concerned
with data: information expressed as measurable or observable quantities.
Statistical data is usually obtained by looking at the real world or universe,
although it can also be generated by computers in ‘‘artiﬁcial worlds.’’
EXPERIMENT
In statistics, an experiment is an act of collecting data with the intent of learn-
ing or discovering something. For example, we might conduct an experiment
143
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

to determine the most popular channels for frequency-modulation (FM)
radio broadcast stations whose transmitters are located in American
towns having less than 5000 people. Or we might conduct an experiment
to determine the lowest barometric pressures inside the eyes of all the
Atlantic hurricanes that take place during the next 10 years.
Experiments often, but not always, require specialized instruments to
measure quantities. If we conduct an experiment to ﬁgure out the average test
scores of high-school seniors in Wyoming who take a certain standardized
test at the end of this school year, the only things we need are the time,
energy, and willingness to collect the data. But a measurement of the
minimum pressure inside the eye of a hurricane requires sophisticated
hardware in addition to time, energy, and courage.
VARIABLE (IN GENERAL)
In mathematics, a variable, also called an unknown, is a quantity whose
value is not necessarily speciﬁed, but that can be determined according to
certain rules. Mathematical variables are expressed using italicized letters
of the alphabet, usually in lowercase. For example, in the expression
x þ y þ z ¼ 5, the letters x, y, and z are variables that represent numbers.
In statistics, variables are similar to those in mathematics. But there
are some subtle distinctions. Perhaps most important is this: In statistics, a
variable is always associated with one or more experiments.
DISCRETE VARIABLE
In statistics, a discrete variable is a variable that can attain only speciﬁc
values. The number of possible values is countable. Discrete variables
are like the channels of a television set or digital broadcast receiver. It’s
easy to express the value of a discrete variable, because it can be assumed
exact.
When a disc jockey says ‘‘This is radio 97.1,’’ it means that the assigned
channel center is at a frequency of 97.1 megahertz, where a megahertz (MHz)
represents a million cycles per second. The assigned channels in the FM
broadcast band are separated by an increment (minimum diﬀerence)
of 0.2 MHz. The next lower channel from 97.1 MHz is at 96.9 MHz, and
the next higher one is at 97.3 MHz. There is no ‘‘in between.’’ No two
channels can be closer together than 0.2 MHz in the set of assigned standard
FM broadcast channels in the United States. The lowest channel is at
88.1 MHz and the highest is at 107.9 MHz (Fig. 7-1).
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
144

Other examples of discrete variables are:
*
The number of people voting for each of the various candidates in a
political election.
*
The scores of students on a standardized test (expressed as a percent-
age of correct answers).
*
The number of car drivers caught speeding every day in a certain town.
*
The earned-run averages of pitchers in a baseball league (in runs per 9
innings or 27 outs).
All these quantities can be expressed as exact values.
CONTINUOUS VARIABLE
A continuous variable can attain inﬁnitely many values over a certain span or
range. Instead of existing as speciﬁc values in which there is an increment
between any two, a continuous variable can change value to an arbitrarily
tiny extent.
Continuous variables are something like the set of radio frequencies to
which an analog FM broadcast receiver can be tuned. The radio frequency is
adjustable continuously, say from 88 MHz to 108 MHz for an FM headset
receiver with analog tuning (Fig. 7-2). If you move the tuning dial a little,
you can make the received radio frequency change by something less than
0.2 MHz, the separation between adjacent assigned transmitter channels.
There is no limit to how small the increment can get. If you have a light
enough touch, you can adjust the received radio frequency by 0.02 MHz, or
0.002 MHz, or even 0.000002 MHz.
Other examples of continuous variables are:
*
Temperature in degrees Celsius.
*
Barometric pressure in millibars.
*
Brightness of a light source in candela.
*
Intensity of the sound from a loudspeaker in decibels with respect to
the threshold of hearing.
Fig. 7-1.
The individual channels in the FM broadcast band constitute values of a
discrete variable.
CHAPTER 7
A Statistics Sampler
145

Such quantities can never be determined exactly. There is always some instru-
ment or observation error, even if that error is so small that it does not have a
practical eﬀect on the outcome of an experiment.
Populations and Samples
In statistics, the term population refers to a particular set of items, objects,
phenomena, or people being analyzed. These items, also called elements,
can be actual subjects such as people or animals, but they can also be
numbers or deﬁnable quantities expressed in physical units.
Consistent with the above deﬁnitions of variables, some examples of
populations are as follows:
*
Assigned radio frequencies (in megahertz) of all FM broadcast trans-
mitters in the United States.
*
Temperature readings (in degrees Celsius) at hourly intervals last
Wednesday at various locations around the city of New York.
*
Minimum barometric-pressure levels (in millibars) at the centers of
all the hurricanes in recorded history.
*
Brightness levels (in candela) of all the light bulbs in oﬃces in
Minneapolis.
*
Sound-intensity levels (in decibels relative to the threshold of hearing)
of all the electric vacuum cleaners in the world.
SAMPLE, EVENT, AND CENSUS
A sample of a population is a subset of that population. It can be a set
consisting of only one value, reading, or measurement singled out from a
population, or it can be a subset that is identiﬁed according to certain
Fig. 7-2.
The frequency to which an analog FM broadcast receiver can be set is an example
of a continuous variable.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
146

characteristics. The physical unit (if any) that deﬁnes a sample is always the
same as the physical unit that deﬁnes the main, or parent, population. A sin-
gle element of a sample is called an event.
Consistent with the above deﬁnitions of variables, some samples are:
*
Assigned radio frequencies of FM broadcast stations whose transmit-
ters are located in the state of Ohio.
*
Temperature readings at 1:00 P.M. local time last Wednesday at
various locations around the city of New York.
*
Minimum barometric-pressure levels at the centers of Atlantic
hurricanes during the decade 1991–2000.
*
Brightness levels of halogen bulbs in oﬃces in Minneapolis.
*
Sound-intensity levels of the electric vacuum cleaners used in all the
households in Rochester, Minnesota.
When a sample consists of the whole population, it is called a census. When
a sample consists of a subset of a population whose elements are chosen at
random, it is called a random sample.
RANDOM VARIABLE
A random variable is a discrete or continuous variable whose value cannot
be predicted in any given instance. Such a variable is usually deﬁned
within a certain range of values, such as 1 through 6 in the case of a
thrown die, or from 88 MHz to 108 MHz in the case of an FM broadcast
channel.
It is often possible to say, in a given scenario, that some values of a
random variable are more likely to turn up than others. In the case of a
thrown die, assuming the die is not ‘‘weighted,’’ all of the values 1 through 6
are equally likely to turn up. When considering the FM broadcast channels of
public radio stations, it is tempting to suppose (but this would have to be
conﬁrmed by observation) that transmissions are made more often at the
lower radio-frequency range than at the higher range. Perhaps you have
noticed that there is a greater concentration of public radio stations in the
4-MHz-wide sample from 88 MHz to 92 MHz than in, say, the equally wide
sample from 100 MHz to 104 MHz.
In order for a variable to be random, the only requirement is that it be
impossible to predict its value in any single instance. If you contemplate
throwing a die one time, you can’t predict how it will turn up. If you
contemplate throwing a dart one time at a map of the United States while
wearing a blindfold, you have no way of knowing, in advance, the lowest
radio frequency of all the FM broadcast stations in the town nearest the
point where the dart will hit.
CHAPTER 7
A Statistics Sampler
147

FREQUENCY
The frequency of a particular outcome (result) of an event is the number
of times that outcome occurs within a speciﬁc sample of a population.
Don’t confuse this with radio broadcast or computer processor frequencies!
In statistics, the term ‘‘frequency’’ means ‘‘often-ness.’’ There are two species
of statistical frequency: absolute frequency and relative frequency.
Suppose you toss a die 6000 times. If the die is not ‘‘weighted,’’ you should
expect that the die will turn up showing one dot approximately 1000 times,
two dots approximately 1000 times, and so on, up to six dots approximately
1000 times. The absolute frequency in such an experiment is therefore
approximately 1000 for each face of the die. The relative frequency for
each of the six faces is approximately 1 in 6, which is equivalent to about
16.67%.
PARAMETER
A speciﬁc, well-deﬁned characteristic of a population is known as a parameter
of that population. We might want to know such parameters as the follow-
ing, concerning the populations mentioned above:
*
The most popular assigned FM broadcast frequency in the United
States.
*
The highest temperature reading in the city of New York as determined
at hourly intervals last Wednesday.
*
The average minimum barometric-pressure level or measurement at the
centers of all the hurricanes in recorded history.
*
The lowest brightness level found in all the light bulbs in oﬃces in
Minneapolis.
*
The highest sound-intensity level found in all the electric vacuum
cleaners used in the world.
STATISTIC
A speciﬁc characteristic of a sample is called a statistic of that sample.
We might want to know such statistics as these, concerning the samples
mentioned above:
*
The most popular assigned frequency for FM broadcast stations in
Ohio.
*
The highest temperature reading at 1:00 P.M. local time last
Wednesday in New York.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
148

*
The average minimum barometric-pressure level or measurement at
the centers of Atlantic hurricanes during the decade 1991–2000.
*
The lowest brightness level found in all the halogen bulbs in oﬃces
in Minneapolis.
*
The highest sound-intensity level found in electric vacuum cleaners
used in households in Rochester, Minnesota.
Distributions
A distribution is a description of the set of possible values that a random vari-
able can take. This can be done by noting the absolute or relative frequency.
A distribution can be illustrated in terms of a table, or in terms of a graph.
DISCRETE VERSUS CONTINUOUS
Table 7-1 shows the results of a single, hypothetical experiment in which a
die is tossed 6000 times. Figure 7-3 is a vertical bar graph showing the
same data as Table 7-1. Both the table and the graph are distributions that
describe the behavior of the die. If the experiment is repeated, the results
will diﬀer. If a huge number of experiments is carried out, assuming the
die is not ‘‘weighted,’’ the relative frequency of each face (number) turning
up will approach 1 in 6, or approximately 16.67%.
Table 7-1
Results of a single, hypothetical experiment
in which an ‘‘unweighted’’ die is tossed 6000 times.
Face of die
Number of times face turns up
1
968
2
1027
3
1018
4
996
5
1007
6
984
CHAPTER 7
A Statistics Sampler
149

Table 7-2 shows the number of days during the course of a 365-day year in
which measurable precipitation occurs within the city limits of ﬁve diﬀerent
hypothetical towns. Figure 7-4 is a horizontal bar graph showing the same
data as Table 7-2. Again, both the table and the graph are distributions.
If the same experiment were carried out for several years in a row, the results
would diﬀer from year to year. Over a period of many years, the relative fre-
quencies would converge towards certain values, although long-term climate
change might have eﬀects not predictable or knowable in our lifetimes.
Both of
the preceding examples involve discrete variables.
When
a distribution is shown for a continuous variable, a graph must be used.
Figure 7-5 is a distribution that denotes the relative amount of energy
available from sunlight, per day during the course of a calendar year, at a
hypothetical city in the northern hemisphere.
Fig. 7-3.
Results of a single, hypothetical experiment in which an ‘‘unweighted’’ die is tossed
6000 times.
Table 7-2
Number of days on which measurable rain
occurs in a speciﬁc year, in ﬁve hypothetical towns.
Town name
Number of days in year
with measurable precipitation
Happyville
108
Joytown
86
Wonderdale
198
Sunnywater
259
Rainy Glen
18
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
150

FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION
In both of the above examples (the ﬁrst showing the results of 6000 die tosses
and the second showing the days with precipitation in ﬁve hypothetical
towns), the scenarios are portrayed with frequency as the dependent variable.
This is true of the tables as well as the graphs. Whenever frequency is
Fig. 7-4.
Measurable precipitation during a hypothetical year, in ﬁve diﬀerent
imaginary towns.
Fig. 7-5.
Relative energy available from sunlight, per day, during the course of a calendar
year at a hypothetical location.
CHAPTER 7
A Statistics Sampler
151

portrayed as the dependent variable in a distribution, that distribution is
called a frequency distribution.
Suppose we complicate the situation involving dice. Instead of one person
tossing one die 6000 times, we have ﬁve people tossing ﬁve diﬀerent dice, and
each person tosses the same die 6000 times. The dice are colored red, orange,
yellow, green, and blue, and are manufactured by ﬁve diﬀerent companies,
called Corp. A, Corp. B, Corp. C, Corp. D, and Corp. E, respectively. Four
of the dice are ‘‘weighted’’ and one is not. There are thus 30,000 die tosses to
tabulate or graph in total. When we conduct this experiment, we can tabulate
the data in at least two ways.
Ungrouped frequency distribution
The simplest way to tabulate the die toss results as a frequency distribution is
to combine all the tosses and show the total frequency for each die face 1
through 6. A hypothetical example of this result, called an ungrouped
frequency distribution, is shown in Table 7-3. We don’t care about the weight-
ing characteristics of each individual die, but only about potential biasing
of the entire set. It appears that, for this particular set of dice, there is
some bias in favor of faces 4 and 6, some bias against faces 1 and 3, and little
or no bias either for or against faces 2 and 5.
Table 7-3
An ungrouped frequency distribution showing
the results of a single, hypothetical experiment in which ﬁve
diﬀerent dice, some ‘‘weighted’’ and some not, are each
tossed 6000 times.
Face of die
Toss results
for all die
1
4857
2
4999
3
4626
4
5362
5
4947
6
5209
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
152

Grouped frequency distribution
If we want to be more detailed, we can tabulate the frequency for each die
face 1 through 6 separately for each die. A hypothetical product of this eﬀort,
called a grouped frequency distribution, is shown in Table 7-4. The results are
grouped according to manufacturer and die color. From this distribution, it is
apparent that some of the dice are heavily ‘‘weighted.’’ Only the green die,
manufactured by Corp. D, seems to lack any bias. If you are astute, you
will notice (or at least strongly suspect) that the green die here is the same
die, with results gathered from the same experiment, as is portrayed in
Table 7-1 and Fig. 7-3.
PROBLEM 7-1
Suppose you add up all the numbers in each column of Table 7-4. What
should you expect, and why? What should you expect if the experiment is
repeated many times?
SOLUTION 7-1
Each column should add up to 6000. This is the number of times each die
(red, orange, yellow, green, or blue) is tossed in the experiment. If the
sum of the numbers in any of the columns is not equal to 6000, then the
Table 7-4
A grouped frequency distribution showing the results of a
single, hypothetical experiment in which ﬁve diﬀerent dice, some
‘‘weighted’’ and some not, and manufactured by ﬁve diﬀerent
companies, are each tossed 6000 times.
Face of die
Toss results by manufacturer
Red
Corp. A
Orange
Corp. B
Yellow
Corp. C
Green
Corp. D
Blue
Corp. E
1
625
1195
1689
968
380
2
903
1096
1705
1027
268
3
1300
890
1010
1018
408
4
1752
787
540
996
1287
5
577
1076
688
1007
1599
6
843
956
368
984
2058
CHAPTER 7
A Statistics Sampler
153

experiment was done in a faulty way, or else there is an error in the com-
pilation of the table. If the experiment is repeated many times, the sums of
the numbers in each column should always be 6000.
PROBLEM 7-2
Suppose you add up all the numbers in each row of Table 7-4. What should
you expect, and why? What should you expect if the experiment is repeated
many times?
SOLUTION 7-2
The sums of the numbers in the rows will vary, depending on the bias of the
set of dice considered as a whole. If, taken all together, the dice show any
bias, and if the experiment is repeated many times, the sums of the numbers
should be consistently lower for some rows than for other rows.
PROBLEM 7-3
Each small rectangle in a table, representing the intersection of one row
with one column, is called a cell of the table. What do the individual numbers
in the cells of Table 7-4 represent?
SOLUTION 7-3
The individual numbers are absolute frequencies. They represent the actual
number of times a particular face of a particular die came up during the
course of the experiment.
More Definitions
Here are some more deﬁnitions you should learn in order to get comfortable
reading or talking about statistics.
CUMULATIVE ABSOLUTE FREQUENCY
When data are tabulated, the absolute frequencies are often shown in one or
more columns. Look at Table 7-5, for example. This shows the results of the
tosses of the blue die in the experiment we looked at a while ago. The ﬁrst
column shows the number on the die face. The second column shows the
absolute frequency for each face, or the number of times each face turned
up during the experiment. The third column shows the cumulative absolute
frequency, which is the sum of all the absolute frequency values in table
cells at or above the given position.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
154

The cumulative absolute frequency numbers in a table always ascend
(increase) as you go down the column. The highest cumulative absolute
frequency value should be equal to the sum of all the individual absolute
frequency numbers. In this instance, it is 6000, the number of times the blue
die was tossed.
CUMULATIVE RELATIVE FREQUENCY
Relative frequency values can be added up down the columns of a table, in
exactly the same way as the absolute frequency values are added up. When
this is done, the resulting values, usually expressed as percentages, show
the cumulative relative frequency.
Examine Table 7-6. This is a more detailed analysis of what happened with
the blue die in the above-mentioned experiment. The ﬁrst, second, and fourth
columns in Table 7-6 are identical with the ﬁrst, second, and third columns in
Table 7-5. The third column in Table 7-6 shows the percentage represented
by each absolute frequency number. These percentages are obtained by
dividing the number in the second column by 6000, the total number of
tosses. The ﬁfth column shows the cumulative relative frequency, which is
the sum of all the relative frequency values in table cells at or above the given
position.
The cumulative relative frequency percentages in a table, like the
cumulative absolute frequency numbers, always ascend as you go down
Table 7-5
Results of an experiment in which a ‘‘weighted’’ die is tossed 6000 times,
showing absolute frequencies and cumulative absolute frequencies.
Face of die
Absolute frequency
Cumulative absolute frequency
1
380
380
2
268
648
3
408
1056
4
1287
2343
5
1599
3942
6
2058
6000
CHAPTER 7
A Statistics Sampler
155

the column. The total cumulative relative frequency should be equal to
100%. In this sense, the cumulative relative frequency column in a table can
serve as a checksum, helping to ensure that the entries have been tabulated
correctly.
MEAN
The mean for a discrete variable in a distribution is the mathematical average
of all the values. If the variable is considered over the entire population,
the average is called the population mean. If the variable is considered
over a particular sample of a population, the average is called the sample
mean. There can be only one population mean for a population, but
there can be many diﬀerent sample means. The mean is often denoted by
the lowercase Greek letter mu, in italics (). Sometimes it is also denoted
by an italicized lowercase English letter, usually x, with a bar (vinculum)
over it.
Table 7-7 shows the results of a 10-question test, given to a class of 100
students. As you can see, every possible score is accounted for. There are
some people who answered all 10 questions correctly; there are some who
did not get a single answer right. In order to determine the mean score for
the whole class on this test – that is, the population mean, called p – we
must add up the scores of each and every student, and then divide by 100.
Table 7-6
Results of an experiment in which a ‘‘weighted’’ die is tossed 6000
times, showing absolute frequencies, relative frequencies, cumulative absolute
frequencies, and cumulative relative frequencies.
Face of die
Absolute
frequency
Relative
frequency
Cumulative
absolute frequency
Cumulative
relative frequency
1
380
6.33%
380
6.33%
2
268
4.47%
648
10.80%
3
408
6.80%
1056
17.60%
4
1287
21.45%
2343
39.05%
5
1599
26.65%
3942
65.70%
6
2058
34.30%
6000
100.00%
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
156

First, let’s sum the products of the numbers in the ﬁrst and second columns.
This will give us 100 times the population mean:
ð10  5Þ þ ð9  6Þ þ ð8  19Þ þ ð7  17Þ þ ð6  18Þ þ ð5  11Þ
þ ð4  6Þ þ ð3  4Þ þ ð2  4Þ þ ð1  7Þ þ ð0  3Þ
¼ 50 þ 54 þ 152 þ 119 þ 108 þ 55 þ 24 þ 12 þ 8 þ 7 þ 0
¼ 589
Dividing this by 100, the total number of test scores (one for each student
who turns in a paper), we obtain p ¼ 589/100 ¼ 5.89.
The teacher in this class has assigned letter grades to each score. Students
who scored 9 or 10 correct received grades of A; students who got scores of 7
or 8 received grades of B; those who got scores of 5 or 6 got grades of C;
those who got scores of 3 or 4 got grades of D; those who got less than 3
correct answers received grades of F. The assignment of grades, informally
known as the ‘‘curve,’’ is a matter of teacher temperament and doubtless
Table 7-7
Scores on a 10-question test taken by 100 students.
Test score
Absolute frequency
Letter grade
10
5
A
9
6
A
8
19
B
7
17
B
6
18
C
5
11
C
4
6
D
3
4
D
2
4
F
1
7
F
0
3
F
CHAPTER 7
A Statistics Sampler
157

would seem arbitrary to the students who took this test. (Some people might
consider the ‘‘curve’’ in this case to be overly lenient, while a few might think
it is too severe.)
PROBLEM 7-4
What are the sample means for each grade in the test whose results are
tabulated in Table 7-7? Use rounding to determine the answers to two
decimal places.
SOLUTION 7-4
Let’s call the sample means sa for the grade of A, sb for the grade of B, and
so on down to sf for the grade of F.
To calculate sa, note that 5 students received scores of 10, while 6
students got scores of 9, both scores good enough for an A. This is a total of
5 þ 6, or 11, students getting the grade of A. Therefore:
sa ¼ ½ð5  10Þ þ ð6  9Þ =11
¼ ð50 þ 54Þ=11
¼ 104=11
¼ 9:45
To ﬁnd sb, observe that 19 students scored 8, and 17 students scored 7.
Thus, 19 þ 17, or 36, students received grades of B. Calculating:
sb ¼ ½ð19  8Þ þ ð17  7Þ =36
¼ ð152 þ 119Þ=36
¼ 271=36
¼ 7:53
To determine sc, check the table to see that 18 students scored 6, while 11
students scored 5. Therefore, 18 þ 11, or 29, students did well enough for
a C. Grinding out the numbers yields this result:
sc ¼ ½ð18  6Þ þ ð11  5Þ =29
¼ ð108 þ 55Þ=29
¼ 163=29
¼ 5:62
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
158

To calculate sd, note that 6 students scored 4, while 4 students scored 3.
This means that 6 þ 4, or 10, students got grades of D:
sd ¼ ½ð6  4Þ þ ð4  3Þ =10
¼ ð24 þ 12Þ=10
¼ 36=10
¼ 3:60
Finally, we determine sf. Observe that 4 students got scores of 2,
7 students got scores of 1, and 3 students got scores of 0. Thus, 4 þ 7 þ 3, or
14, students failed the test:
sf ¼ ½ð4  2Þ þ ð7  1Þ þ ð3  0Þ =14
¼ ð8 þ 7 þ 0Þ=14
¼ 15=14
¼ 1:07
MEDIAN
If the number of elements in a distribution is even, then the median is the
value such that half the elements have values greater than or equal to it,
and half the elements have values less than or equal to it. If the number of
elements is odd, then the median is the value such that the number of
elements having values greater than or equal to it is the same as the number
of elements having values less than or equal to it. The word ‘‘median’’ is
synonymous with ‘‘middle.’’
Table 7-8 shows the results of the 10-question test described above, but
instead of showing letter grades in the third column, the cumulative absolute
frequency is shown instead. The tally is begun with the top-scoring papers
and proceeds in order downward. (It could just as well be done the other way,
starting with the lowest-scoring papers and proceeding upward.) When the
scores of all 100 individual papers are tallied this way, so they are in order,
the scores of the 50th and 51st papers – the two in the middle – are found to
be 6 correct. Thus, the median score is 6, because half the students scored 6 or
above, and the other half scored 6 or below.
It’s possible that in another group of 100 students taking this same test, the
50th paper would have a score of 6 while the 51st paper would have a score
of 5. When two values ‘‘compete,’’ the median is equal to their average.
In this case it would be midway between 5 and 6, or 5.5.
CHAPTER 7
A Statistics Sampler
159

MODE
The mode for a discrete variable is the value that occurs the most often. In the
test whose results are shown in Table 7-7, the most ‘‘popular’’ or often-
occurring score is 8 correct answers. There were 19 papers with this score.
No other score had that many results. Therefore, the mode in this case is 8.
Suppose that another group of students took this test, and there were two
scores that occurred equally often? For example, suppose 16 students got 8
answers right, and 16 students also got 6 answers right? In this case there are
two modes: 6 and 8. This distribution would be called a bimodal distribution.
It’s even possible that three scores would be equally popular, resulting in a
trimodal distribution.
Now imagine there are only 99 students in a class, and there are exactly
9 students who get each of the 11 possible scores (from 0 to 10 correct answers).
Table 7-8
The median can be determined by tabulating the cumulative
absolute frequencies.
Test score
Absolute frequency
Cumulative absolute frequency
10
5
5
9
6
11
8
19
30
7
17
47
6 (partial)
3
50
6 (partial)
15
65
5
11
76
4
6
82
3
4
86
2
4
90
1
7
97
0
3
100
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
160

In this distribution, there is no mode. Or, we might say, the mode is not
deﬁned.
PROBLEM 7-5
Draw a vertical bar graph showing all the absolute-frequency data from
Table 7-5, the results of a ‘‘weighted’’ die-tossing experiment. Portray
each die face on the horizontal axis. Let light gray vertical bars show the
absolute frequency numbers, and let dark gray vertical bars show the
cumulative absolute frequency numbers.
SOLUTION 7-5
Figure 7-6 shows such a graph. The numerical data is not listed at the tops
of the bars in order to avoid excessive clutter.
PROBLEM 7-6
Draw a horizontal bar graph showing all the relative-frequency data from
Table 7-6, another portrayal of the results of a ‘‘weighted’’ die-tossing experi-
ment. Show each die face on the vertical axis. Let light gray horizontal
bars show the relative frequency percentages, and dark gray horizontal
bars show the cumulative relative frequency percentages.
SOLUTION 7-6
Figure 7-7 is an example of such a graph. Again, the numerical data is not
listed at the ends of the bars, in the interest of neatness.
PROBLEM 7-7
Draw a point-to-point graph showing the absolute frequencies of the
10-question test described by Table 7-7. Mark the population mean, the
median, and the mode with distinctive vertical lines, and label them.
Fig. 7-6.
Illustration for Problem 7-5.
CHAPTER 7
A Statistics Sampler
161

SOLUTION 7-7
Figure 7-8 is an example of such a graph. Numerical data is included for the
population mean, median, and mode.
Fig. 7-7.
Illustration for Problem 7-6.
Fig. 7-8.
Illustration for Problem 7-7.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
162

Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
Suppose a large number of people take a 200-question test, and
every single student gets exactly 100 answers right. In this case, the
mode is
(a) equal to 0
(b) equal to 200
(c) equal to the mean
(d) undeﬁned
2.
In a frequency distribution:
(a) the frequency is the dependent variable
(b) the median is always equal to the mean
(c) the mode represents the average value
(d) the mean is always equal to the mode
3.
A tabulation of cumulative absolute frequency values is useful in
determining
(a) the mode
(b) the dependent variable
(c) the median
(d) the mean
4.
A subset of a population is known as
(a) a sample
(b) a continuous variable
(c) a random variable
(d) a discrete variable
5.
Imagine that 11 people take a 10-question test. Suppose one student
gets 10 correct answers, one gets 9 correct, one gets 8 correct, and
so on, all the way down to one student getting none correct. The
mean, accurate to three decimal places, is
(a) 4.545
(b) 5.000
(c) 5.500
(d) undeﬁned
6.
Imagine that 11 people take a 10-question test. Suppose one student
gets 10 correct answers, one gets 9 correct, one gets 8 correct, and
CHAPTER 7
A Statistics Sampler
163

so on, all the way down to one student getting none correct. The
median, accurate to three decimal places, is
(a) 4.545
(b) 5.000
(c) 5.500
(d) undeﬁned
7.
Imagine that 11 people take a 10-question test. Suppose one student
gets 10 correct answers, one gets 9 correct, one gets 8 correct, and so
on, all the way down to one student getting none correct. The mode,
accurate to three decimal places, is
(a) 4.545
(b) 5.000
(c) 5.500
(d) undeﬁned
8.
Suppose a variable  (lambda, pronounced ‘‘LAM-da,’’ a lowercase
Greek letter commonly used in physics and engineering to represent
wavelength) can attain a value equal to any positive real number.
In this instance,  is an example of
(a) a continuous variable
(b) a discrete variable
(c) an absolute variable
(d) a relative variable
9.
The largest cumulative absolute frequency in a set of numbers is
equal to
(a) the sum of all the individual absolute frequency values
(b) twice the mean
(c) twice the median
(d) twice the mode
10.
Which of the following is an expression of the most often-occurring
value in a set of values?
(a) The average.
(b) The mode.
(c) The median.
(d) None of the above.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
164

CHAPTER
8
Taking Chances
Probability is the proportion or percentage of the time that speciﬁed things
happen. The term probability is also used in reference to the art and science
of determining the proportion or percentage of the time that speciﬁed things
happen.
The Probability Fallacy
We say something is true because we’ve seen or deduced it. If we believe
something is true or has taken place but we aren’t sure, it’s tempting to
say it is or was ‘‘likely.’’ It’s wise to resist this temptation.
BELIEF
When people formulate a theory, they often say that something ‘‘probably’’
happened in the distant past, or that something ‘‘might’’ exist somewhere,
165
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

as-yet undiscovered, at this moment. Have you ever heard that there is
a ‘‘good chance’’ that extraterrestrial life exists? Such a statement is meaning-
less. Either it exists, or it does not.
If you say ‘‘I believe the universe began with an explosion,’’ you are stating
the fact that you believe it, not the fact that it is true or that it is ‘‘probably’’
true. If you say ‘‘The universe began with an explosion!’’ your statement
is logically sound, but it is a statement of a theory, not a proven fact. If you
say ‘‘The universe probably started with an explosion,’’ you are in eﬀect
suggesting that there were multiple pasts and the universe had an explosive
origin in more than half of them. This is an instance of what can be called
the probability fallacy (abbreviated PF), wherein probability is injected into
a discussion inappropriately.
Whatever is, is. Whatever is not, is not. Whatever was, was. Whatever
was not, was not. Either the universe started with an explosion, or it didn’t.
Either there is life on some other world, or there isn’t.
PARALLEL WORLDS?
If we say that the ‘‘probability’’ of life existing elsewhere in the cosmos is
20%, we are in eﬀect saying, ‘‘Out of n observed universes, where n is
some large number, 0.2n universes have been found to have extraterrestrial
life.’’ That doesn’t mean anything to those of us who have seen only one
universe!
It is worthy of note that there are theories involving so-called fuzzy truth,
in which some things ‘‘sort of happen.’’ These theories involve degrees of
truth that span a range over which probabilities can be assigned to occur-
rences in the past and present. An example of this is quantum mechanics,
which is concerned with the behavior of subatomic particles. Quantum
mechanics can get so bizarre that some scientists say, ‘‘If you claim to
understand this stuﬀ, then you are lying.’’ We aren’t going to deal with
anything that esoteric.
WE MUST OBSERVE
Probability is usually deﬁned according to the results of observations,
although it is sometimes deﬁned on the basis of theory alone. When the
notion of probability is abused, seemingly sound reasoning can be employed
to come to absurd conclusions. This sort of thing is done in industry every
day, especially when the intent is to get somebody to do something that
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
166

will cause somebody else to make money. Keep your ‘‘probability fallacy
radar’’ on when navigating through the real world.
If you come across an instance where an author (including me) says
that something ‘‘probably happened,’’ ‘‘is probably true,’’ or ‘‘is likely to
take place,’’ think of it as another way of saying that the author believes
or suspects that something happened, is true, or is expected to take place on
the basis of experimentation or observation.
Definitions
Here are deﬁnitions of some common terms that will help us understand
what we are talking about when we refer to probability.
EVENT VERSUS OUTCOME
The terms event and outcome are easily confused. An event is a single occur-
rence or trial in the course of an experiment. An outcome is the result of an
event.
If you toss a coin 100 times, there are 100 separate events. Each event is a
single toss of the coin. If you throw a pair of dice simultaneously 50 times,
each act of throwing the pair is an event, so there are 50 events.
Suppose, in the process of tossing coins, you assign ‘‘heads’’ a value of 1
and ‘‘tails’’ a value of 0. Then when you toss a coin and it comes up ‘‘heads,’’
you can say that the outcome of that event is 1. If you throw a pair of dice
and get a sum total of 7, then the outcome of that event is 7.
The outcome of an event depends on the nature of the hardware and
processes involved in the experiment. The use of a pair of ‘‘weighted’’ dice
usually produces diﬀerent outcomes, for an identical set of events, than a pair
of ‘‘unweighted’’ dice. The outcome of an event also depends on how the
event is deﬁned. There is a diﬀerence between saying that the sum is 7 in a
toss of two dice, as compared with saying that one of the die comes up 2
while the other one comes up 5.
SAMPLE SPACE
A sample space is the set of all possible outcomes in the course of an
experiment. Even if the number of events is small, a sample space can be
large.
CHAPTER 8
Taking Chances
167

If you toss a coin four times, there are 16 possible outcomes. These are
listed in Table 8-1, where ‘‘heads’’ ¼ 1 and ‘‘tails’’ ¼ 0. (If the coin happens to
land on its edge, you disregard that result and toss it again.)
If a pair of dice, one red and one blue, is tossed once, there are 36 possible
outcomes in the sample space, as shown in Table 8-2. The outcomes are
Table 8-1
The sample space for an experiment in
which a coin is tossed four times. There are 16
possible outcomes; ‘‘heads’’ ¼ 1 and ‘‘tails’’ ¼ 0.
Event 1
Event 2
Event 3
Event 4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
168

denoted as ordered pairs, with the face-number of the red die listed ﬁrst and
the face-number of the blue die listed second.
MATHEMATICAL PROBABILITY
Let x be a discrete random variable that can attain n possible values, all
equally likely. Suppose an outcome H results from exactly m diﬀerent values
of x, where m  n. Then the mathematical probability pmath(H) that outcome
H will result from any given value of x is given by the following formula:
pmathðHÞ ¼ m=n
Expressed as a percentage, the probability p%(H ) is:
pmath%ðHÞ ¼ 100m=n
If we toss an ‘‘unweighted’’ die once, each of the six faces is as likely to
turn up as each of the others. That is, we are as likely to see 1 as we are to
see 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6. In this case, there are 6 possible values, so n ¼ 6. The
mathematical probability of any one of the faces turning up (m ¼ 1) is equal
to pmath(H) ¼ 1/6. To calculate the mathematical probability of either of
any two diﬀerent faces turning up (say 3 or 5), we set m ¼ 2; therefore
pmath(H) ¼ 2/6 ¼ 1/3. If we want to know the mathematical probability that
any one of the six faces will turn up, we set m ¼ 6, so the formula gives us
Table 8-2
The sample space for an experiment consisting of a single
event, in which a pair of dice (one red, one blue) is tossed once. There
are 36 possible outcomes, shown as ordered pairs (red, blue).
Red !
Blue #
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
(1,1)
(2,1)
(3,1)
(4,1)
(5,1)
(6,1)
2
(1,2)
(2,2)
(3,2)
(4,2)
(5,2)
(6,2)
3
(1,3)
(2,3)
(3,3)
(4,3)
(5,3)
(6,3)
4
(1,4)
(2,4)
(3,4)
(4,4)
(5,4)
(6,4)
5
(1,5)
(2,5)
(3,5)
(4,5)
(5,5)
(6,5)
6
(1,6)
(2,6)
(3,6)
(4,6)
(5,6)
(6,6)
CHAPTER 8
Taking Chances
169

pmath(H) ¼ 6/6 ¼ 1. The respective percentages pmath%(H) in these cases are
16.67% (approximately), 33.33% (approximately), and 100% (exactly).
Mathematical probabilities can only exist within the range 0 to 1 (or 0% to
100%) inclusive. The following formulas describe this constraint:
0  pmathðHÞ  1
0%  pmath%ðHÞ  100%
We can never have a mathematical probability of 2, or 45%, or 6, or
556%. When you give this some thought, it is obvious. There is no way
for something to happen less often than never. It’s also impossible for some-
thing to happen more often than all the time.
EMPIRICAL PROBABILITY
In order to determine the likelihood that an event will have a certain outcome
in real life, we must rely on the results of prior experiments. The chance of
something happening based on experience or observation is called empirical
probability.
Suppose we are told that a die is ‘‘unweighted.’’ How does the person who
tells us this know that it is true? If we want to use this die in some application,
such as when we need an object that can help us to generate a string of
random numbers from the set {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}, we can’t take on faith the
notion that the die is ‘‘unweighted.’’ We have to check it out. We can analyze
the die in a lab and ﬁgure out where its center of gravity is; we measure how
deep the indentations are where the dots on its faces are inked. We can scan
the die electronically, X-ray it, and submerge it in (or ﬂoat it on) water.
But to be absolutely certain that the die is ‘‘unweighted,’’ we must toss it
many thousands of times, and be sure that each face turns up, on the average,
1/6 of the time. We must conduct an experiment – gather empirical evidence –
that supports the contention that the die is ‘‘unweighted.’’ Empirical
probability is based on determinations of relative frequency, which was
discussed in the last chapter.
As with mathematical probability, there are limits to the range an
empirical probability ﬁgure can attain. If H is an outcome for a particular
single event, and the empirical probability of H taking place as a result of
that event is denoted pemp(H), then:
0  pempðHÞ  1
0%  pemp%ðHÞ  100%
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
170

PROBLEM 8-1
Suppose a new cholesterol-lowering drug comes on the market. If the drug is
to be approved by the government for public use, it must be shown eﬀective,
and it must also be shown not to have too many serious side eﬀects. So it is
tested. During the course of testing, 10,000 people, all of whom have been
diagnosed with high cholesterol, are given this drug. Imagine that 7289 of
the people experience a signiﬁcant drop in cholesterol. Also suppose that
307 of these people experience adverse side eﬀects. If you have high choles-
terol and go on this drug, what is the empirical probability pemp(B) that
you will derive beneﬁt? What is the empirical probability pemp(A) that you
will experience adverse side eﬀects?
SOLUTION 8-1
Some readers will say that this question cannot be satisfactorily answered
because the experiment is not good enough. Is 10,000 test subjects a large
enough number? What physiological factors aﬀect the way the drug works?
How about blood type, for example? Ethnicity? Gender? Blood pressure?
Diet? What constitutes ‘‘high cholesterol’’? What constitutes a ‘‘signiﬁcant
drop’’ in cholesterol level? What is an ‘‘adverse side eﬀect’’? What is the
standard drug dose? How long must the drug be taken in order to know if
it works? For convenience, we ignore all of these factors here, even though,
in a true scientiﬁc experiment, it would be an excellent idea to take them all
into consideration.
Based on the above experimental data, shallow as it is, the relative
frequency of eﬀectiveness is 7289/10,000 ¼ 0.7289 ¼ 72.89%. The relative
frequency of ill eﬀects is 307/10,000 ¼ 0.0307 ¼ 3.07%. We can round these
oﬀto 73% and 3%. These are the empirical probabilities that you will derive
beneﬁt, or experience adverse eﬀects, if you take this drug in the hope of
lowering your high cholesterol. Of course, once you actually use the drug,
these probabilities will lose all their meaning for you. You will eventually say
‘‘The drug worked for me’’ or ‘‘The drug did not work for me.’’ You will say,
‘‘I had bad side eﬀects’’ or ‘‘I did not have bad side eﬀects.’’
REAL-WORLD EMPIRICISM
Empirical probability is used by scientists to make predictions. It is not good
for looking at aspects of the past or present. If you try to calculate the empiri-
cal probability of the existence of extraterrestrial life in our galaxy, you can
play around with formulas based on expert opinions, but once you state a
numeric ﬁgure, you commit the PF. If you say the empirical probability
that a hurricane of category 3 or stronger struck the US mainland in 1992
CHAPTER 8
Taking Chances
171

equals x% (where x < 100) because at least one hurricane of that intensity hit
the US mainland in x of the years in the 20th century, historians will tell
you that is rubbish, as will anyone who was in Homestead, Florida on
August 24, 1992.
Imperfection is inevitable in the real world. We can’t observe an inﬁnite
number of people and take into account every possible factor in a drug test.
We cannot toss a die an inﬁnite number of times. The best we can hope for
is an empirical probability ﬁgure that gets closer and closer to the ‘‘absolute
truth’’ as we conduct a better and better experiment. Nothing we can
conclude about the future is a ‘‘totally sure bet.’’
Properties of Outcomes
Here are some formulas that describe properties of outcomes in various
types of situations. Don’t let the symbology intimidate you. It is all based
on the set theory notation covered in Chapter 1.
LAW OF LARGE NUMBERS
Suppose you toss an ‘‘unweighted’’ die many times. You get numbers turning
up, apparently at random, from the set {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}. What will the average
value be? For example, if you toss the die 100 times, total up the numbers
on the faces, and then divide by 100, what will you get? Call this number d
(for die). It is reasonable to suppose that d will be fairly close to the mean, :
d  
d  ð1 þ 2 þ 3 þ 4 þ 5 þ 6Þ=6
¼ 21=6
¼ 3:5
It’s possible, in fact likely, that if you toss a die 100 times you’ll get a value
of d that is slightly more or less than 3.5. This is to be expected because
of ‘‘reality imperfection.’’ But now imagine tossing the die 1000 times, or
100,000 times, or even 100,000,000 times! The ‘‘reality imperfections’’ will be
smoothed out by the fact that the number of tosses is so huge. The value of d
will converge to 3.5. As the number of tosses increases without limit, the
value of d will get closer and closer to 3.5, because the opportunity for
repeated coincidences biasing the result will get smaller and smaller.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
172

The foregoing scenario is an example of the law of large numbers. In a
general, informal way, it can be stated like this: ‘‘As the number of events
in an experiment increases, the average value of the outcome approaches the
mean.’’ This is one of the most important laws in all of probability theory.
INDEPENDENT OUTCOMES
Two outcomes H1 and H2 are independent if and only if the occurrence of one
does not aﬀect the probability that the other will occur. We write it this way:
pðH1 \ H2Þ ¼ pðH1ÞpðH2Þ
Figure 8-1 illustrates this situation in the form of a Venn diagram. The
intersection is shown by the darkly shaded region.
A good example of independent outcomes is the tossing of a penny and a
nickel. The face (‘‘heads’’ or ‘‘tails’’) that turns up on the penny has no eﬀect
on the face (‘‘heads’’ or ‘‘tails’’) that turns up on the nickel. It does not matter
whether the two coins are tossed at the same time or at diﬀerent times. They
never interact with each other.
To illustrate how the above formula works in this situation, let p(P)
represent the probability that the penny turns up ‘‘heads’’ when a penny and
a nickel are both tossed once. Clearly, p(P) ¼ 0.5 (1 in 2). Let p(N) represent
the probability that the nickel turns up ‘‘heads’’ in the same scenario. It’s
obvious that p(N) ¼ 0.5 (also 1 in 2). The probability that both coins turn up
‘‘heads’’ is, as you should be able to guess, 1 in 4, or 0.25. The above formula
states it this way, where the intersection symbol \ can be translated as ‘‘and’’:
pðP \ NÞ ¼ pðPÞpðNÞ
¼ 0:5  0:5
¼ 0:25
Fig. 8-1.
Venn diagram showing intersection.
CHAPTER 8
Taking Chances
173

MUTUALLY EXCLUSIVE OUTCOMES
Let H1 and H2 be two outcomes that are mutually exclusive; that is, they have
no elements in common:
H1 \ H2 ¼ 1
In this type of situation, the probability of either outcome occurring is equal
to the sum of their individual probabilities. Here’s how we write it, with the
union symbol [ translated as ‘‘either/or’’:
pðH1 [ H2Þ ¼ pðH1Þ þ pðH2Þ
Figure 8-2 shows this as a Venn diagram.
When two outcomes are mutually exclusive, they cannot both occur. A
good example is the tossing of a single coin. It’s impossible for ‘‘heads’’ and
‘‘tails’’ to both turn up on a given toss. But the sum of the two probabilities
(0.5 for ‘‘heads’’ and 0.5 for ‘‘tails’’ if the coin is ‘‘balanced’’) is equal to the
probability (1) that one or the other outcome will take place.
Another example is the result of a properly run, uncomplicated election
for a political oﬃce between two candidates. Let’s call the candidates Mrs.
Anderson and Mr. Boyd. If Mrs. Anderson wins, we get outcome A, and if
Mr. Boyd wins, we get outcome B. Let’s call the respective probabilities of
their winning p(A) and p(B). We might argue about the actual values of p(A)
and p(B). We might obtain empirical probability ﬁgures by conducting a poll
prior to the election, and get the idea that pemp(A) ¼ 0.29 and pemp(B) ¼ 0.71.
The probability that either Mrs. Anderson or Mr. Boyd will win is equal
to the sum of p(A) and p(B), whatever these values happen to be, and we can
be sure it is equal to 1 (assuming neither of the candidates quits during
the election and is replaced by a third, unknown person, and assuming there
Fig. 8-2.
Venn diagram showing a pair of mutually exclusive outcomes.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
174

are no write-ins or other election irregularities). Mathematically:
pðA [ BÞ ¼ pðAÞ þ pðBÞ
¼ pempðAÞ þ PempðBÞ
¼ 0:29 þ 0:71
¼ 1
COMPLEMENTARY OUTCOMES
If two outcomes H1 and H2 are complementary, then the probability,
expressed as a ratio, of one outcome is equal to 1 minus the probability,
expressed as a ratio, of the other outcome. The following equations hold:
pðH2Þ ¼ 1  pðH1Þ
pðH1Þ ¼ 1  pðH2Þ
Expressed as percentages:
p%ðH2Þ ¼ 100  p%ðH1Þ
p%ðH1Þ ¼ 100  p%ðH2Þ
Figure 8-3 shows this as a Venn diagram.
The notion of complementary outcomes is useful when we want to ﬁnd the
probability that an outcome will fail to occur. Consider again the election
between Mrs. Anderson and Mr. Boyd. Imagine that you are one of those
peculiar voters who call themselves ‘‘contrarians,’’ and who vote against,
rather than for, candidates in elections. You are interested in the probability
Fig. 8-3.
Venn diagram showing a pair of complementary outcomes.
CHAPTER 8
Taking Chances
175

that ‘‘your candidate’’ (the one you dislike more) will lose. According to the
pre-election poll, pemp(A) ¼ 0.29 and pemp(B) ¼ 0.71. We might state this
inside-out as:
pempð:BÞ ¼ 1  pempðBÞ
¼ 1  0:71
¼ 0:29
pempð:AÞ ¼ 1  pempðAÞ
¼ 1  0:29
¼ 0:71
where the ‘‘droopy minus sign’’ (:) stands for the ‘‘not’’ operation, also
called logical negation. If you are fervently wishing for Mr. Boyd to lose,
then you can guess from the poll that the likelihood of your being happy
after the election is equal to pemp(:B), which is 0.29 in this case.
Note that in order for two outcomes to be complementary, the sum
of their probabilities must be equal to 1. This means that one or the other
(but not both) of the two outcomes must take place; they are the only two
possible outcomes in a scenario.
NONDISJOINT OUTCOMES
Outcomes H1 and H2 are called nondisjoint if and only if they have at least
one element in common:
H1 \ H2 6¼ 1
In this sort of case, the probability of either outcome is equal to the sum of
the probabilities of their occurring separately, minus the probability of their
occurring simultaneously. The equation looks like this:
pðH1 [ H2Þ ¼ pðH1Þ þ pðH2Þ  pðH1 \ H2Þ
Figure 8-4 shows this as a Venn diagram. The intersection of probabilities
is subtracted in order to ensure that the elements common to both sets
(represented by the lightly shaded region where the two sets overlap) are
counted only once.
PROBLEM 8-2
Imagine that a certain high school has 1000 students. The new swimming and
diving coach, during his ﬁrst day on the job, is looking for team prospects.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
176

Suppose that the following are true:
*
200 students can swim well enough to make the swimming team
*
100 students can dive well enough to make the diving team
*
30 students can make either team or both teams
If the coach wanders through the hallways blindfolded and picks a student
at random, determine the probabilities, expressed as ratios, that the coach
will pick
*
a fast swimmer; call this p(S)
*
a good diver; call this p(D)
*
someone good at both swimming and diving; call this p(S \ D)
*
someone good at either swimming or diving, or both; call this
p(S [ D)
SOLUTION 8-2
This problem is a little tricky. We assume that the coach has objective criteria
for evaluating prospective candidates for his teams! That having been said,
we must note that the outcomes are not mutually exclusive, nor are they inde-
pendent. There is overlap, and there is interaction. We can ﬁnd the ﬁrst three
answers immediately, because we are told the numbers:
pðSÞ ¼ 200=1000 ¼ 0:200
pðDÞ ¼ 100=1000 ¼ 0:100
pðS \ DÞ ¼ 30=1000 ¼ 0:030
In order to calculate the last answer – the total number of students
who can make either team or both teams – we must ﬁnd p(S [ D) using
Fig. 8-4.
Venn diagram showing a pair of nondisjoint outcomes.
CHAPTER 8
Taking Chances
177

this formula:
pðS [ DÞ ¼ pðSÞ þ pðDÞ  pðS \ DÞ
¼ 0:200 þ 0:100  0:030
¼ 0:270
This means that 270 of the students in the school are potential candidates
for either or both teams. The answer is not 300, as one might at ﬁrst expect.
That would be the case only if there were no students good enough to
make both teams. We mustn’t count the exceptional students twice.
(However well somebody can act like a porpoise, he or she is nevertheless
only one person!)
MULTIPLE OUTCOMES
The formulas for determining the probabilities of mutually exclusive and
nondisjoint outcomes can be extended to situations in which there are
three possible outcomes.
Three mutually exclusive outcomes. Let H1, H2, and H3 be three mutually
exclusive outcomes, such that the following facts hold:
H1 \ H2 ¼ 1
H1 \ H3 ¼ 1
H2 \ H3 ¼ 1
The probability of any one of the three outcomes occurring is equal to the
sum of their individual probabilities (Fig. 8-5):
pðH1 [ H2 [ H3Þ ¼ pðH1Þ þ pðH2Þ þ pðH3Þ
Three nondisjoint outcomes. Let H1, H2, and H3 be three nondisjoint
outcomes. This means that one or more of the following facts is true:
H1 \ H2 6¼ 1
H1 \ H3 6¼ 1
H2 \ H3 6¼ 1
The probability of any one of the outcomes occurring is equal to the sum of
the probabilities of their occurring separately, minus the probabilities of each
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
178

pair occurring simultaneously, minus the probability of all three occurring
simultaneously (Fig. 8-6):
pðH1 [ H2 [ H3Þ
¼ pðH1Þ þ pðH2Þ þ pðH3Þ
 pðH1 \ H2Þ  pðH1 \ H3Þ  pðH2 \ H3Þ
 pðH1 \ H2 \ H3Þ
PROBLEM 8-3
Consider again the high school with 1000 students. The coach seeks people
for the swimming, diving, and water polo teams in the same wandering,
blindfolded way as before. Suppose the following is true of the students in
the school:
*
200 people can make the swimming team
*
100 people can make the diving team
*
150 people can make the water polo team
*
30 people can make both the swimming and diving teams
*
110 people can make both the swimming and water polo teams
*
20 people can make both the diving and water polo teams
*
10 people can make all three teams
If the coach staggers around and tags students at random, what is the
probability, expressed as a ratio, that the coach will, on any one tag, select
a student who is good enough for at least one of the sports?
Fig. 8-5.
Venn diagram showing three mutually exclusive outcomes.
CHAPTER 8
Taking Chances
179

SOLUTION 8-3
Let the following expressions stand for the respective probabilities, all
representing the results of random selections by the coach (and all of
which we are told):
*
Probability that a student can swim fast enough ¼ p(S) ¼ 200/1000 ¼
0.200
*
Probability that a student can dive well enough ¼ p(D) ¼ 100/1000 ¼
0.100
*
Probability that a student can play water polo well enough ¼ p(W) ¼
150/1000 ¼ 0.150
*
Probability that a student can swim fast enough and dive well
enough ¼ p(S \ D) ¼ 30/1000 ¼ 0.030
*
Probability that a student can swim fast enough and play water polo
well enough ¼ p(S \ W) ¼ 110/1000 ¼ 0.110
*
Probability that a student can dive well enough and play water polo
well enough ¼ p(D \ W) ¼ 20/1000 ¼ 0.020
*
Probability that a student can swim fast enough, dive well enough, and
play water polo well enough ¼ p(S \ D \ W) ¼ 10/1000 ¼ 0.010
In order to calculate the total number of students who can end up play-
ing at least one sport for this coach, we must ﬁnd p(S [ D [ W) using
H1
H 2
H1
H 2
U
H3
H1
U H3
U
H2
H3
H1
H 2
U
U H3
Fig. 8-6.
Venn diagram showing three nondisjoint outcomes.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
180

this formula:
pðS [ D [ WÞ ¼ pðSÞ þ pðDÞ þ pðWÞ
 pðS \ DÞ  pðS \ WÞ  pðD \ WÞ
 pðS \ D \ WÞ
¼ 0:200 þ 0:100 þ 0:150
 0:030  0:110  0:020  0:010
¼ 0:280
This means that 280 of the students in the school are potential prospects.
Permutations and Combinations
In probability, it is often necessary to choose small sets from large ones, or to
ﬁgure out the number of ways in which certain sets of outcomes can take
place. Permutations and combinations are the two most common ways this
is done.
FACTORIAL
When working with multiple possibilities, it’s necessary to be familiar
with a function called the factorial. This function applies only to the natural
numbers. (It can be extended to more values, but then it is called the gamma
function.) The factorial of a number is indicated by writing an exclamation
point after it.
If n is a natural number and n  1, the value of n! is deﬁned as the product
of all natural numbers less than or equal to n:
n! ¼ 1  2  3  4  . . .  n
If n ¼ 0, then by convention, n! ¼ 1. The factorial is not deﬁned for negative
numbers.
It’s easy to see that as n increases, the value of n! goes up rapidly, and when
n reaches signiﬁcant values, the factorial skyrockets. There is a formula for
approximating n! when n is large:
n!  nn=en
where e is a constant called the natural logarithm base, and is equal to
approximately 2.71828. The squiggly equals sign emphasizes the fact that
the value of n! using this formula is approximate, not exact.
CHAPTER 8
Taking Chances
181

PROBLEM 8-4
Write down the values of the factorial function for n ¼ 0 through n ¼ 15, in
order to illustrate just how fast this value ‘‘blows up.’’
SOLUTION 8-4
The results are shown in Table 8-3. It’s perfectly all right to use a
calculator here. It should be capable of displaying a lot of digits. Most per-
sonal computers have calculators that are good enough for this purpose.
Table 8-3
Values of n! for n ¼ 0 through n ¼ 15. This
table constitutes the solution to Problem 8-4.
Value of n
Value of n!
0
0
1
1
2
2
3
6
4
24
5
120
6
720
7
5040
8
40,320
9
362,880
10
3,628,800
11
39,916,800
12
479,001,600
13
6,227,020,800
14
87,178,291,200
15
1,307,674,368,000
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
182

PROBLEM 8-5
Determine the approximate value of 100! using the formula given above.
SOLUTION 8-5
A calculator is not an option here; it is a requirement. You should use one
that has an ex (or natural exponential) function key. In case your calculator
does not have this key, the value of the exponential function can be found
by using the natural logarithm key and the inverse function key together.
It will also be necessary for the calculator to have an xy key (also
called x^y) that lets you ﬁnd the value of a number raised to its own
power. In addition, the calculator should be capable of displaying numbers
in scientiﬁc notation, also called power-of-10 notation. Most personal com-
puter calculators are adequate if they are set for scientiﬁc mode.
Using the above formula for n ¼ 100:
100!  ð100100Þ=e100
 ð1:00  10200Þ=ð2:688117  1043Þ
 3:72  10156
The numeral representing this number, if written out in full, would be a
string of digits too long to ﬁt on most text pages without taking up two
or more lines. Your calculator will probably display it as something
like 3.72eþ156 or 3.72 E 156. In these displays, the ‘‘e’’ or ‘‘E’’ does not
refer to the natural logarithm base. Instead, it means ‘‘times 10 raised to
the power of.’’
PERMUTATIONS
When working with problems in which items are taken from a larger set in
speciﬁc order, the idea of a permutation is useful. Suppose q and r are
both positive integers. Let q represent a set of items or objects taken r at a
time in a speciﬁc order. The possible number of permutations in this situation
is symbolized qPr and can be calculated as follows:
qPr ¼ q!=ðq  rÞ!
COMBINATIONS
Let q represent a set of items or objects taken r at a time in no particular
order, and where both q and r are positive integers. The possible number
CHAPTER 8
Taking Chances
183

of combinations in this situation is symbolized qCr and can be calculated as
follows:
qCr ¼ qPr=r! ¼ q!=½r!ðq  rÞ! 
PROBLEM 8-6
How many permutations are there if you have 10 apples, taken 5 at a time in
a speciﬁc order?
SOLUTION 8-6
Use the above formula for permutations, plugging in q ¼ 10 and r ¼ 5:
10P5 ¼ 10!=ð10  5Þ!
¼ 10!=5!
¼ 10  9  8  7  6
¼ 30240
PROBLEM 8-7
How many combinations are there if you have 10 apples, taken 5 at a time in
no particular order?
SOLUTION 8-7
Use the above formula for combinations, plugging in q ¼ 10 and r ¼ 5. We
can use the formula that derives combinations based on permutations,
because we already know from the previous problem that 10P5 ¼ 30,240:
10C5 ¼ 10P5=5!
¼ 30240=120
¼ 252
Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
Empirical probability is based on
(a) observation or experimentation
(b) theoretical models only
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
184

(c) continuous outcomes
(d) standard deviations
2.
What is the number of possible combinations of 7 objects taken 3 at a
time?
(a) 10
(b) 21
(c) 35
(d) 210
3.
What is the number of possible permutations of 7 objects taken 3 at a
time?
(a) 10
(b) 21
(c) 35
(d) 210
4.
The diﬀerence between permutations and combinations lies in the
fact that
(a) permutations take order into account, but combinations do not
(b) combinations take order into account, but permutations do not
(c) combinations involve only continuous variables, but permuta-
tions involve only discrete variables
(d) permutations involve only continuous variables, but combina-
tions involve only discrete variables
5.
The result of an event is called
(a) an experiment
(b) a trial
(c) an outcome
(d) a variable
6.
How many times as large is 1,000,000 factorial, compared with
999,999 factorial?
(a) 1,000,000 times as large.
(b) 999,999 times as large.
(c) A huge number that requires either a computer or else many
human-hours to calculate.
(d) There is not enough information given here to get any idea.
7.
The set of all possible outcomes during the course of an experiment
is called
(a) a dependent variable
(b) a random variable
CHAPTER 8
Taking Chances
185

(c) a discrete variable
(d) a sample space
8.
What is the mathematical probability that a coin, tossed 10 times in
a row, will come up ‘‘tails’’ on all 10 tosses?
(a) 1/10
(b) 1/64
(c) 1/1024
(d) 1/2048
9.
Two outcomes are mutually exclusive if and only if
(a) they are nondisjoint
(b) they have no elements in common
(c) they have at least one element in common
(d) they have identical sets of outcomes
10.
The probability, expressed as a percentage, of a particular occurrence
can never be
(a) less than 100
(b) less than 0
(c) greater than 1
(d) anything but a whole number
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
186

Test: Part 2
Do not refer to the text when taking this test. You may draw diagrams or use
a calculator if necessary. A good score is at least 30 correct. Answers are in
the back of the book. It’s best to have a friend check your score the ﬁrst time,
so you won’t memorize the answers if you want to take the test again.
1.
Consider the following pair of equations, in which the intent is to ﬁnd
a solution or solutions, if any, for x and y simultaneously:
y ¼ 3x þ 4
y ¼ 3x  2
How many real-number solutions are there in this case?
(a) None.
(b) One.
(c) More than one.
(d) Inﬁnitely many.
(e) More information is needed in order to answer this question.
2.
In the complex number 2 þ j3, the imaginary component consists of
(a) the number 2
187
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

(b) the number 3
(c) the number 2 multiplied by the square root of 1
(d) the number 3 multiplied by the square root of 1
(e) the product of 2 and 3, which is 6
3.
In a frequency distribution, frequency is portrayed as the
(a) cumulative variable
(b) discrete variable
(c) dependent variable
(d) random variable
(e) continuous variable
4.
What is the mathematical probability that a coin, tossed ﬁve times in
a row, will come up ‘‘heads’’ on all ﬁve tosses?
(a) 1
(b) 1/2
(c) 1/5
(d) 1/25
(e) 1/32
5.
Fill in the blank to make this sentence true: ‘‘A sample of a population
is —————— of that population.’’
(a) an expansion
(b) a subset
(c) a variance
(d) the average
(e) the median
6.
In Fig. Test 2-1, suppose H1 and H2 represent two diﬀerent sets of out-
comes in an experiment. The light-shaded region, labeled H1, represents
(a) the set of outcomes belonging to H1 but not to H2
(b) the set of outcomes belonging to neither H1 nor H2
Fig. Test 2-1.
Illustration for Part Two Test Questions 6 through 9.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
188

(c) the set of outcomes belonging to either H1 or H2, but not both
(d) the set of outcomes belonging to either H1 or H2, or both
(e) the set of outcomes belonging to H2 but not to H1
7.
In Fig. Test 2-1, the dark-shaded region, labeled H2 ¼ :H1, represents
(a) the set of outcomes common to both H1 and H2
(b) the set of outcomes belonging to neither H1 nor H2
(c) the set of outcomes belonging to either H1 or H2, but not both
(d) the set of outcomes belonging to either H1 or H2, or both
(e) the set of outcomes belonging to H2 but not to H1
8.
In Fig. Test 2-1, the entire portion that is shaded, either light or dark,
represents
(a) the set of outcomes common to both H1 and H2
(b) the set of outcomes belonging to neither H1 nor H2
(c) the set of outcomes belonging to either H1 or H2, but not both
(d) the empty set
(e) the set of outcomes belonging to H2 but not to H1
9.
The Venn diagram of Fig. Test 2-1 portrays
(a) complementary outcomes
(b) mutually exclusive outcomes
(c) independent outcomes
(d) coincident outcomes
(e) nondisjoint outcomes
10.
Which of the following is not an allowable maneuver to perform in
solving a single-variable equation?
(a) Adding a constant to each side.
(b) Subtracting a constant from each side.
(c) Dividing each side by a variable that may attain a value of 0.
(d) Multiplying each side by a variable that may attain a value of 0.
(e) All of the above (a), (b), (c), and (d) are allowable.
11.
What is the solution of the equation 3x þ 5 ¼ 2x  4?
(a) There isn’t any.
(b) More information is needed in order to ﬁnd out.
(c) 9
(d) 9
(e) 9 or 9
12.
What is the mathematical probability that an ‘‘unweighted’’ die, tossed
three times, will show the face with 2 dots on all three occasions?
(a) 1 in 6
Test: Part 2
189

(b) 1 in 36
(c) 1 in 64
(d) 1 in 216
(e) 1 in 46,656
13.
What is the solution set of the equation x2 þ 64 ¼ 0?
(a) The empty set.
(b) {8}
(c) {8, 8}
(d) { j8, j8}
(e) More information is needed to answer this.
14.
Fill in the blank to make the following sentence true: ‘‘If the number
of elements in a distribution is odd, then the ———————— is the
value such that the number of elements having values greater than
or equal to it is the same as the number of elements having values
less than or equal to it.’’
(a) mean
(b) deviation
(c) frequency
(d) mode
(e) median
15.
Let q represent a set of items or objects taken r at a time in a speciﬁc
order. The possible number of permutations in this situation is
symbolized qPr and can be calculated as follows:
qPr ¼ q!=ðq  rÞ!
Given this information, what is the possible number of permutations
of 8 objects taken 2 at a time?
(a) 40,320
(b) 720
(c) 56
(d) 28
(e) 24
16.
Let q represent a set of items or objects taken r at a time in no
particular order, where q  r, and where both q and r are positive
integers. The possible number of combinations in this situation is
symbolized qCr and can be calculated as follows:
qCr ¼ q!=½r!ðq  rÞ! 
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
190

Given this information, what is the possible number of combinations
of 8 objects taken 2 at a time?
(a) 40,320
(b) 720
(c) 56
(d) 28
(e) 24
17.
Fig. Test 2-2 shows the results of a hypothetical experiment with
eight possible outcomes, called A through H. This illustration is an
example of
(a) a vertical bar graph
(b) a point-to-point graph
(c) a horizontal bar graph
(d) a histogram
(e) linear interpolation
18.
In Fig. Test 2-2, the vertical, dashed line passes through a point
corresponding to
(a) the mean
(b) the median
(c) the mode
(d) the distribution factor
(e) the deviation
19.
What, if anything, is wrong with the graph of Fig. Test 2-2?
(a) If the frequency values of the points are added up, the sum should
be equal to 100, but it obviously isn’t.
Fig. Test 2-2.
Illustration for Part Two Test Questions 17 through 19.
Test: Part 2
191

(b) A set of events with outcomes like this cannot possibly occur.
(c) The highest frequency value should be in the middle, and the
values to either side should decrease steadily.
(d) The frequency values should increase steadily as you move
toward the right in the graph.
(e) There is nothing wrong with this graph.
20.
What is the solution to the equation 3x þ 4y ¼ 12?
(a) 3
(b) 4
(c) 3
(d) 4
(e) There is no unique solution to this equation.
21.
The equation 3x2 þ 5x þ 3 ¼ 0 is an example of
(a) a linear equation
(b) a quadratic equation
(c) a cubic equation
(d) a quartic equation
(e) a multivariable equation
22.
In statistics, a discrete variable
(a) can attain speciﬁc, deﬁned values
(b) can attain inﬁnitely many values within a deﬁned span
(c) can attain only positive-integer values
(d) can attain only non-negative integer values
(e) can never have a value greater than 1
23.
Fill in the blank to make the following sentence true: ‘‘In a statistical
distribution having discrete values for the independent variable,
the highest cumulative absolute frequency number should be equal
to the
———————— of all the individual absolute frequency
numbers.’’
(a) average
(b) sum
(c) factorial
(d) product
(e) largest
24.
In the equation 4x3 þ 8x2  17x  6 ¼ 0, the numbers 4, 8, 17, and
6 are called the
(a) factors
(b) solutions
(c) coeﬃcients
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
192

(d) complex numbers
(e) imaginary numbers
25.
If two outcomes H1 and H2 are complementary, then the probability,
expressed as a percentage, of one outcome is equal to
(a) the probability of the other outcome
(b) 100% plus the probability of the other outcome
(c) 100% minus the probability of the other outcome
(d) 100% times the probability of the other outcome
(e) 100% divided by the probability of the other outcome
26.
What can be said about the equation (x  3)(x þ 2)(x þ 6) ¼ 0?
(a) It is a linear equation.
(b) It is a quadratic equation.
(c) It is a cubic equation.
(d) It is a quartic equation.
(e) None of the above.
27.
Consider the equation (x  3)(x þ 2)(x þ 6) ¼ 0. By examining this, it
is apparent that
(a) there are no real-number solutions
(b) there exists exactly one real-number solution
(c) there exist exactly two diﬀerent real-number solutions
(d) there exist exactly three diﬀerent real-number solutions
(e) there exist inﬁnitely many diﬀerent real-number solutions
28.
Suppose the two lines graphed in Fig. Test 2-3 represent linear
equations. It appears that for the equation of line A, when y ¼ 0,
the value of x
(a) is not deﬁned
Fig. Test 2-3.
Illustration for Part Two Test Questions 28 through 31.
Test: Part 2
193

(b) is positive
(c) is negative
(d) can be any real number
(e) requires more information to be deﬁned
29.
Suppose the two lines graphed in Fig. Test 2-3 represent linear equa-
tions. It appears that for the equation of line A, when y is positive,
the value of x
(a) is not deﬁned
(b) is positive
(c) is negative
(d) can be any real number
(e) requires more information to be deﬁned
30.
Suppose the two lines graphed in Fig. Test 2-3 represent linear
equations. It appears that for the equation of line B, when x >  1,
the value of y
(a) is not deﬁned
(b) is positive
(c) is negative
(d) can be any real number
(e) requires more information to be deﬁned
31.
Suppose the two lines graphed in Fig. Test 2-3 represent linear
equations. It appears that the two equations, considered simulta-
neously:
(a) have no solutions
(b) have a single solution
(c) have two solutions
(d) have inﬁnitely many solutions
(e) requires more information to be deﬁned
32.
The term fuzzy truth is used to describe
(a) a theory in which there are degrees of truth that span a range
(b) standard deviation
(c) cumulative frequency
(d) the probability fallacy
(e) any continuous distribution
33.
What is the solution set of the equation x2  12x ¼ 35?
(a) {12, 35}
(b) {12, 35}
(c) {1, 12, 35}
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
194

(d) {1, 12, 35}
(e) None of the above.
34.
The mean for a discrete variable in a distribution is
(a) the mathematical average of the values
(b) the middle value
(c) half of the sum of the values
(d) the square root of the product of all the values
(e) the reciprocal of the sum of the values
35.
In statistics, the frequency of an outcome is
(a) the number of cycles per second during which the outcome occurs
(b) the likelihood that an outcome will occur more than once
(c) an outcome chosen at random
(d) the number of times the outcome occurs within a sample
(e) an undeﬁned term
36.
What is the solution set of the equation (x  4)2 ¼ 0?
(a) {4}
(b) {4}
(c) {4, 4}
(d) 1
(e) It is impossible to tell because this equation is not in standard or
factored form.
37.
Consider the following pair of equations, in which the intent is to
ﬁnd a solution or solutions, if any, for x and y simultaneously:
3x  4y ¼ 8
6x þ 2y ¼ 4
This is an example of a set of
(a) two-by-two linear equations
(b) two-by-two quadratic equations
(c) cubic equations
(d) nonlinear equations
(e) redundant equations
38.
In Fig. Test 2-4, suppose that curves A and B represent equations
for y versus x. How many solutions are there to both equations
considered simultaneously?
(a) None.
(b) One.
(c) More than one.
Test: Part 2
195

(d) Inﬁnitely many.
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
39.
In Fig. Test 2-4, suppose curve A represents the equation x þ y ¼ 0,
while curve B represents the equation x4  2y ¼ 0. Which of the
following ordered pairs, representing values (x,y), is a solution to
both of these equations considered simultaneously?
(a) (0,0)
(b) (1,1)
(c) (1,1)
(d) (2,4)
(e) None of the above.
40.
In Fig. Test 2-4, suppose that curves A and B represent equations for
y versus x. What can be said in general about these equations?
(a) Neither of them is linear.
(b) One of them is linear.
(c) Both of them are linear.
(d) Both of them are quadratic.
(e) Both of them are quartic.
Fig. Test 2-4.
Illustration for Part Two Test Questions 38 through 40.
PART 2
Finding Unknowns
196

PART THREE
Shapes and
Places
197
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER
9
Geometry on
the Flats
Geometry is widely used in science and engineering. The ancient Egyptians
and Greeks used geometry to calculate the diameter of the earth and the
distance to the moon, and scientists have been busy with it ever since. You
do not have to memorize all the formulas in this chapter, but it’s good to
be comfortable with this sort of stuﬀ. So roll up your sleeves and make
sure your brain is working.
Fundamental Rules
Here are some of the most important principles of plane geometry, which
involves the behavior of points, lines, and various ﬁgures conﬁned to a
199
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

ﬂat, two-dimensional (2D) surface. There are lots of illustrations to help you
envision how these rules and formulas work.
TWO POINT PRINCIPLE
Suppose that P and Q are two distinct geometric points. Then the following
statements are true, as shown in Fig. 9-1:
*
P and Q lie on a common straight line L.
*
L is the only straight line on which both points lie.
THREE POINT PRINCIPLE
Let P, Q, and R be three distinct points, not all of which lie on a straight line.
Then the following statements are true:
*
P, Q, and R all lie in a common Euclidean (ﬂat) plane S.
*
S is the only Euclidean plane in which all three points lie.
PRINCIPLE OF n POINTS
Let P1, P2, P3, . . . , Pn be n distinct points, not all of which lie in the same
Euclidean (that is, ‘‘non-warped’’) space of n  1 dimensions. Then the
following statements are true:
*
P1, P2, P3, . . . , Pn all lie in a common Euclidean space U of n
dimensions.
*
U is the only n-dimensional Euclidean space in which all n points lie.
DISTANCE NOTATION
The distance between any two distinct points P and Q, as measured from
P towards Q along the straight line connecting them, is symbolized by
writing PQ.
Fig. 9-1.
Two point principle.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
200

MIDPOINT PRINCIPLE
Suppose there is a straight line segment connecting two distinct points P and
R. Then there is one and only one point Q on the line segment, between P and
R, such that PQ ¼ QR. This is illustrated in Fig. 9-2.
ANGLE NOTATION
Imagine that P, Q, and R are three distinct points. Let L be the straight line
segment connecting P and Q; let M be the straight line segment connecting R
and Q. Then the angle between L and M, as measured at point Q in the
plane deﬁned by the three points, can be written as ﬀPQR or as ﬀRQP. If
the rotational sense of measurement is speciﬁed, then ﬀPQR indicates the
angle as measured from L to M, and ﬀRQP indicates the angle as measured
from M to L (Fig. 9-3). These notations can also stand for the measures of
angles, expressed either in degrees or in radians.
ANGLE BISECTION
Suppose there is an angle ﬀPQR measuring less than 1808 and deﬁned by
three distinct points P, Q, and R, as shown in Fig. 9-4. Then there is exactly
Fig. 9-2.
Midpoint principle.
Fig. 9-3.
Angle notation and measurement.
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
201

one straight ray M that bisects the angle ﬀPQR. If S is any point on M other
than the point Q, then ﬀPQS ¼ ﬀSQR. Every angle has one and only one ray
that divides the angle in half.
PERPENDICULARITY
Suppose that L is a straight line through two distinct points P and Q. Let R
be a point not on L. Then there is one and only one straight line M through
point R, intersecting line L at some point S, such that M is perpendicular
to L. This is shown in Fig. 9-5.
PERPENDICULAR BISECTOR
Suppose that L is a straight line segment connecting two distinct points P
and R. Then there is one and only one straight line M that intersects line
Fig. 9-4.
Angle bisection principle.
Fig. 9-5.
Perpendicular principle.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
202

segment L in a point Q, such that M is perpendicular to L and the distance
from P to Q is equal to the distance from Q to R. That is, every line segment
has exactly one perpendicular bisector. This is illustrated in Fig. 9-6.
DISTANCE ADDITION AND SUBTRACTION
Let P, Q, and R be distinct points on a straight line L, such that Q is between
P and R. Then the following equations hold concerning distances as
measured along L (Fig. 9-7):
PQ þ QR ¼ PR
PR  PQ ¼ QR
PR  QR ¼ PQ
ANGLE ADDITION AND SUBTRACTION
Let P, Q, R, and S be four distinct points that lie in a common Euclidean
plane. Let Q be the vertex of three angles ﬀPQR, ﬀPQS, and ﬀSQR, as
Fig. 9-6.
Perpendicular bisector principle.
Fig. 9-7.
Distance addition and subtraction.
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
203

shown in Fig. 9-8. Then the following equations hold concerning the angular
measures:
ﬀPQS þ ﬀSQR ¼ ﬀPQR
ﬀPQR  ﬀPQS ¼ ﬀSQR
ﬀPQR  ﬀSQR ¼ ﬀPQS
VERTICAL ANGLES
Suppose that L and M are two straight lines that intersect at a point P.
Opposing pairs of angles, denoted x and y in Fig. 9-9, are known as vertical
angles and always have equal measure.
Fig. 9-8.
Angular addition and subtraction.
Fig. 9-9.
Vertical angles have equal measure.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
204

ALTERNATE INTERIOR ANGLES
Suppose that L and M are parallel, straight lines. Let N be a straight
transversal line that intersects L and M at points P and Q, respectively. In
Fig. 9-10, angles labeled x are alternate interior angles; the same holds true
for angles labeled y. Alternate interior angles always have equal measure.
The transversal line N is perpendicular to lines L and M if and only if x ¼ y.
ALTERNATE EXTERIOR ANGLES
Suppose that L and M are parallel, straight lines. Let N be a straight
transversal line that intersects L and M at points P and Q, respectively.
In Fig. 9-11, angles labeled x are alternate exterior angles; the same
holds true for angles labeled y. Alternate exterior angles always have
Fig. 9-10.
Alternate interior angles have equal measure.
Fig. 9-11.
Alternate exterior angles have equal measure.
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
205

equal measure. The transversal line N is perpendicular to lines L and M if
and only if x ¼ y.
CORRESPONDING ANGLES
Let L and M be parallel, straight lines. Let N be a straight transversal line
that intersects L and M at points P and Q, respectively. In Fig. 9-12, angles
labeled w are corresponding angles; the same holds true for angles labeled x, y,
and z. Corresponding angles always have equal measure. The transversal
line N is perpendicular to lines L and M if and only if w ¼ x ¼ y ¼ z ¼ 908;
that is, if and only if all four angles are right angles.
PARALLEL PRINCIPLE
Suppose L is a straight line, and P is a point not on L. Then there exists one
and only one straight line M through P, such that line M is parallel to line L
(Fig. 9-13). This is one of the most important postulates in Euclidean
geometry. Its negation can take two forms: either there is no such straight
line M, or there exist two or more such straight lines M1, M2, M3, . . . .
Either form of the negation of this principle constitutes a cornerstone of
non-Euclidean geometry, which is important to physicists and astronomers
interested in the theories of general relativity and cosmology.
MUTUAL PERPENDICULARITY
Let L and M be straight lines that lie in the same plane. Suppose both L and
M intersect a third straight line N, and both L and M are perpendicular to N.
Then lines L and M are parallel to each other (Fig. 9-14).
Fig. 9-12.
Corresponding angles have equal measure.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
206

PROBLEM 9-1
Suppose a straight, ﬂat, two-lane highway crosses a straight set of railroad
tracks, such that the acute angles (angles measuring more than 08 but less
than 908) between the rails and the side lines of the highway measure 508.
What are the measures of the obtuse angles (angles measuring more than
908 but less than 1808) between the rails and the side lines of the highway?
SOLUTION 9-1
When a straight line is crossed by a straight transversal, the measures of
adjacent angles at the intersection point always add up to 1808. The rails
are straight, as are the side lines of the highway. Therefore, the obtuse angles
measure 1808  508, or 1308. You may wish to draw a picture of this situation
to make it easier to envision.
PROBLEM 9-2
In the situation of the previous problem, what are the measures of the acute
angles between the highway center line and the rails? What are the measures
of the obtuse angles between the highway center line and the rails?
Fig. 9-13.
The parallel principle.
Fig. 9-14.
Mutual perpendicularity.
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
207

SOLUTION 9-2
The highway center line is straight, and is parallel to both of the side lines.
Thus, the acute angles between the rails and the center line have the same
measures as the acute angles between the rails and the side lines, that is,
508. The measures of the obtuse angles between the rails and the center
line are the same as the measures of the obtuse angles between the rails
and the side lines, that is, 1808  508 ¼ 1308.
Triangles
If it’s been a while since you took a course in plane geometry, you probably
think of triangles when the subject is brought up. Maybe you recall having
to learn all kinds of theoretical proofs concerning triangles, using ‘‘steps/
reasons’’ tables if your teacher was rigid, and less formal methods if your
teacher was not so stodgy. You won’t have to go through the proofs again
here, but some of the more important facts about triangles are worth stating.
POINT–POINT–POINT
Let P, Q, and R be three distinct points, not all of which lie on the same
straight line. Then the following statements are true (Fig. 9-15):
*
P, Q, and R lie at the vertices of a triangle.
*
This is the only triangle having vertices P, Q, and R.
SIDE–SIDE–SIDE
Let S, T, and U be three distinct, straight line segments. Let s, t, and u be the
lengths of those three line segments, respectively. Suppose that S, T, and U
Fig. 9-15.
The three point principle; side–side–side triangles.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
208

are joined at their end points P, Q, and R (Fig. 9-15). Then the following
statements hold true:
*
Line segments S, T, and U determine a triangle.
*
This is the only triangle of its size and shape that has sides S, T, and U.
*
All triangles having sides of lengths s, t, and u are congruent (identical
in size and shape).
SIDE–ANGLE–SIDE
Let S and T be two distinct, straight line segments. Let P be a point that lies
at the ends of both of these line segments. Denote the lengths of S and T by
their lowercase counterparts s and t, respectively. Suppose S and T subtend
an angle x relative to each other at point P (Fig. 9-16). Then the following
statements are all true:
*
S, T, and x determine a triangle.
*
This is the only triangle having sides S and T that subtend an angle x
at point P.
*
All triangles containing two sides of lengths s and t that subtend
an angle x are congruent.
ANGLE–SIDE–ANGLE
Let S be a straight line segment having length s, and whose end points are P
and Q. Let x and y be the angles subtended relative to S by two straight
lines L and M that run through P and Q, respectively (Fig. 9-17). Then the
following statements are all true:
*
S, x, and y determine a triangle.
*
This is the only triangle determined by S, x, and y.
Fig. 9-16.
Side–angle–side triangles.
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
209

*
All triangles containing one side of length s, and whose other two
sides subtend angles of x and y relative to the side whose length is s,
are congruent.
ANGLE–ANGLE–ANGLE
Let L, M, and N be straight lines that lie in a common plane and intersect in
three distinct points, as illustrated in Fig. 9-18. Let the angles at these points
be x, y, and z. Then the following statements are true:
*
There are inﬁnitely many triangles with interior angles x, y, and z in the
sense shown.
*
All triangles with interior angles x, y, and z in the sense shown are simi-
lar (that is, they have the same shape, but not necessarily the same size).
SUM OF INTERIOR ANGLES OF PLANE TRIANGLE
Suppose we have a general plane triangle, with no special properties other
than the fact that it is deﬁned by three distinct vertex points. Let the measures
Fig. 9-17.
Angle–side–angle triangles.
Fig. 9-18.
Angle–angle–angle triangles.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
210

of the interior angles be x, y, and z. The following equation holds if the
angular measures are given in degrees:
x þ y þ z ¼ 180 
ISOSCELES TRIANGLE
Suppose we have a triangle with sides S, T, and U, having lengths s, t, and u.
Let x, y, and z be the angles opposite S, T, and U respectively (Fig. 9-19).
Suppose any of the following equations hold:
s ¼ t
t ¼ u
s ¼ u
x ¼ y
y ¼ z
x ¼ z
Then the triangle is an isosceles triangle, and the following logical statements
are true:
If s ¼ t then x ¼ y
If t ¼ u then y ¼ z
If s ¼ u then x ¼ z
If x ¼ y then s ¼ t
If y ¼ z then t ¼ u
If x ¼ z then s ¼ u
Fig. 9-19.
Isosceles and equilateral triangles.
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
211

EQUILATERAL TRIANGLE
Suppose we have a triangle with sides S, T, and U, having lengths s, t, and u.
Let x, y, and z be the angles opposite S, T, and U respectively (Fig. 9-19).
Suppose either of the following are true:
s ¼ t ¼ u
x ¼ y ¼ z
Then the triangle is said to be an equilateral triangle, and the following
logical statements are valid:
If s ¼ t ¼ u then x ¼ y ¼ z
If x ¼ y ¼ z then s ¼ t ¼ u
That is, all equilateral triangles have precisely the same shape; they are all
similar. They are not necessarily all the same size, however.
THEOREM OF PYTHAGORAS
Suppose we have a right triangle deﬁned by points P, Q, and R whose
sides are D, E, and F having lengths d, e, and f, respectively. Let f be the
side opposite the right angle (Fig. 9-20). Then the following equation is
always true:
d2 þ e2 ¼ f 2
The converse of this is also true: If there is a triangle whose sides have
lengths d, e, and f, and the above equation is true, then that triangle is a
right triangle.
The longest side of a right triangle is always the side opposite the right
angle, and is called the hypotenuse. The above formula can be stated verbally
as follows: ‘‘The square of the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle
Fig. 9-20.
The Theorem of Pythagoras.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
212

is equal to the sum of the squares of the lengths of the other two sides.’’ This
is called the Theorem of Pythagoras or the Pythagorean Theorem. It is
named after a Greek geometer, Pythagoras of Samos, who lived in the 4th
century B.C.
PERIMETER OF TRIANGLE
Suppose we have a triangle deﬁned by points P, Q, and R, and having sides S,
T, and U of lengths s, t, and u, as shown in Fig. 9-21. Let s be the base length,
h be the height, and x be the angle between the sides having length s and t.
Then the perimeter, B, of the triangle is given by the following formula:
B ¼ s þ t þ u
INTERIOR AREA OF TRIANGLE
Consider the same triangle as deﬁned above; refer again to Fig. 9-21.
The interior area, A, can be found with this formula:
A ¼ sh=2
PROBLEM 9-3
What is the interior area of a triangle whose base is 4 meters (m) long and
whose height is 2 m?
SOLUTION 9-3
In this case, the length s is 4 (in meters) and the height h is 2 (also in meters).
Therefore, the area (in square meters or m2) is:
A ¼ sh=2
¼ 4  2=2
¼ 4 m2
Fig. 9-21.
Perimeter and area of triangle.
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
213

PROBLEM 9-4
If the height and the base length of a triangle are both doubled, what happens
to the interior area?
SOLUTION 9-4
The interior area quadruples. Let’s prove this for the general case. Let
the initial base length be s1 and the initial height be h1. Let the ﬁnal base
length, s2, be 2s1 (twice the initial base length) and the ﬁnal height, h2, be
2h1 (twice the initial height):
s2 ¼ 2s1
h2 ¼ 2h1
Then the initial area, A1, is:
A1 ¼ s1h1=2
The ﬁnal area, A2, is:
A2 ¼ s2h2=2
¼ ð2s1Þð2h1Þ=2
¼ 4ðs1h1=2Þ
¼ 4A1
This shows that doubling both the base length and the height of a triangle
causes its interior area to increase by a factor of 4. Interestingly, this is
true even if the shape of the triangle changes in the process of the base-length
and height change. As long as the constraints are met (doubling of both the
base length and the height), it doesn’t matter if, or how much, the triangle
is ‘‘stretched horizontally’’; the interior area will increase by the same factor
regardless.
Quadrilaterals
A four-sided geometric ﬁgure that lies in a single plane is called a quadrilat-
eral. There are several classiﬁcations, and various formulas that apply to
each.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
214

PARALLELOGRAM DIAGONALS
Suppose we have a parallelogram deﬁned by four distinct points P, Q, R,
and S. Let D be a straight line segment connecting P and R as shown in
Fig. 9-22A. Then D is a minor diagonal of the parallelogram, and the triangles
deﬁned by D are congruent:
PQR ﬃRSP
Let E be a line segment connecting Q and S (Fig. 9-22B). Then E is a
major diagonal of the parallelogram, and the triangles deﬁned by E are
congruent:
QRS ﬃSPQ
Fig. 9-22.
Triangles deﬁned by the minor diagonal (A) or the major diagonal (B) of a
parallelogram are congruent.
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
215

BISECTION OF PARALLELOGRAM DIAGONALS
Suppose we have a parallelogram deﬁned by four distinct points P, Q, R, and
S. Let D be the straight diagonal connecting P and R; let E be the straight
diagonal connecting Q and S (Fig. 9-23). Then D and E bisect each other
at their intersection point T. In addition, the following pairs of triangles
are congruent:
PQT ﬃRST
QRT ﬃSPT
The converse of the foregoing is also true: if we have a plane quadrilat-
eral whose diagonals bisect each other, then that quadrilateral is a paralle-
logram.
RECTANGLE
Suppose we have a parallelogram deﬁned by four distinct points P, Q, R, and
S. Suppose any of the following statements is true:
ﬀPQR ¼ 90 
ﬀQRS ¼ 90 
ﬀRSP ¼ 90 
ﬀSPQ ¼ 90 
Then all four interior angles measure 908, and the parallelogram is a
rectangle: a four-sided plane polygon whose interior angles are all congruent
(Fig. 9-24). The converse of this is also true: if a quadrilateral is a rectangle,
then any given interior angle has a measure of 908.
Fig. 9-23.
The diagonals of a parallelogram bisect each other.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
216

RECTANGLE DIAGONALS
Imagine a parallelogram deﬁned by four distinct points P, Q, R, and S. Let D
be the straight diagonal connecting P and R; let E be the straight diagonal
connecting Q and S. Let the length of D be denoted by d; let the length
of E be denoted by e (Fig. 9-25). If d ¼ e, then the parallelogram is a
rectangle. The converse is also true: if a parallelogram is a rectangle, then
d ¼ e. A parallelogram is a rectangle if and only if its diagonals have equal
lengths.
RHOMBUS DIAGONALS
Imagine a parallelogram deﬁned by four distinct points P, Q, R, and S. Let D
be the straight diagonal connecting P and R; let E be the straight diagonal
connecting Q and S. If D is perpendicular to E, then the parallelogram is a
rhombus, which is a four-sided plane polygon whose sides are all equally
long (Fig. 9-26). The converse is also true: if a parallelogram is a rhombus,
then D is perpendicular to E. A parallelogram is a rhombus if and only if
its diagonals intersect at a right angle.
Fig. 9-24.
If a parallelogram has one right interior angle, then the parallelogram is
a rectangle.
Fig. 9-25.
The diagonals of a rectangle have equal length.
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
217

TRAPEZOID WITHIN TRIANGLE
Imagine a triangle deﬁned by three distinct points P, Q, and R. Let S be the
midpoint of side PR, and let T be the midpoint of side PQ. Then the straight
line segments ST and RQ are parallel, and the ﬁgure deﬁned by STQR
is a trapezoid: a four-sided plane polygon with one pair of parallel sides
(Fig. 9-27). In addition, the length of line segment ST is half the length of
line segment RQ.
MEDIAN OF A TRAPEZOID
Suppose we have a trapezoid deﬁned by four distinct points P, Q, R, and S.
Let T be the midpoint of side PS, and let U be the midpoint of side QR. Line
segment TU is called the median of trapezoid PQRS. Let M be the polygon
deﬁned by P, Q, U, and T; let N be the polygon deﬁned by T, U, R, and S.
These two polygons, M and N, are trapezoids, as shown in Fig. 9-28.
Fig. 9-26.
The diagonals of a rhombus are perpendicular.
Fig. 9-27.
A trapezoid within a triangle.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
218

In addition, the length of line segment TU is half the sum of the lengths of
line segments PQ and SR. That is, the length of TU is equal to the average
(arithmetic mean) of the lengths of PQ and SR.
SUM OF INTERIOR ANGLES OF PLANE QUADRILATERAL
Suppose we have a general plane quadrilateral, with no special properties
other than the fact that it is deﬁned by four distinct vertex points that all
lie in the same plane. Let the measures of the interior angles be w, x, y,
and z, as shown in Fig. 9-29. The following equation holds if the angular
measures are given in degrees:
w þ x þ y þ z ¼ 360 
PERIMETER OF PARALLELOGRAM
Suppose we have a parallelogram deﬁned by four distinct points P, Q, R, and
S, in which two adjacent sides have lengths d and e as shown in Fig. 9-30.
Fig. 9-28.
The median of a trapezoid.
Fig. 9-29.
Interior angles of a plane quadrilateral.
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
219

Let d be the base length and let h be the height. Then the perimeter, B, of
the parallelogram can be found using this formula:
B ¼ 2d þ 2e
INTERIOR AREA OF PARALLELOGRAM
Suppose we have a parallelogram as deﬁned above and in Fig. 9-30.
The interior area, A, of the parallelogram can be found using this formula:
A ¼ dh
PERIMETER OF RHOMBUS
Imagine a rhombus deﬁned by four distinct points P, Q, R, and S. All four
sides of a rhombus have equal lengths. Therefore, the rhombus is a
special case of the parallelogram (Fig. 9-30), in which d ¼ e. Suppose that
the lengths of all four sides are equal to d. The perimeter, B, of this rhombus
is given by the following formula:
B ¼ 4d
INTERIOR AREA OF RHOMBUS
Suppose we have a rhombus as deﬁned above and in Fig. 9-30. The interior
area, A, of the rhombus is given by:
A ¼ dh
Fig. 9-30.
Perimeter and area of a parallelogram. If d ¼ e, the ﬁgure is a rhombus.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
220

PERIMETER OF RECTANGLE
Suppose we have a rectangle deﬁned by four distinct points P, Q, R, and S, in
which two adjacent sides have lengths d and e as shown in Fig. 9-31. Let d
be the base length, and let e be the height. Then the perimeter, B, of the
rectangle is given by the following formula:
B ¼ 2d þ 2e
INTERIOR AREA OF RECTANGLE
Suppose we have a rectangle as deﬁned above and in Fig. 9-31. The interior
area, A, is given by:
A ¼ de
PERIMETER OF SQUARE
Suppose we have a square deﬁned by four distinct points P, Q, R, and S, and
having sides all of which have the same length. The square is a special case
of the rectangle (Fig. 9-31), in which d ¼ e. Suppose the lengths of all four
sides are equal to d. The perimeter, B, of this square is given by the following
formula:
B ¼ 4d
INTERIOR AREA OF SQUARE
Suppose we have a square as deﬁned above and in Fig. 9-31. The interior
area, A, is given by:
A ¼ d2
Fig. 9-31.
Perimeter and area of a rectangle. If d ¼ e, the ﬁgure is a square.
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
221

PERIMETER OF TRAPEZOID
Imagine a trapezoid deﬁned by four distinct points P, Q, R, and S, and
having sides of lengths d, e, f, and g as shown in Fig. 9-32. Let d be the
base length, let h be the height, let x be the measure of the angle between
the sides having length d and e, and let y be the measure of the angle between
the sides having length d and g. Suppose the sides having length d and f
(line segments RS and PQ) are parallel. Then the perimeter, B, of the
trapezoid is:
B ¼ d þ e þ f þ g
INTERIOR AREA OF TRAPEZOID
Suppose we have a trapezoid as deﬁned above and in Fig. 9-32. The interior
area, A, is equal to the product of the height and the average of the lengths
of the base and the top. Here is the formula:
A ¼ ðdh þ fhÞ=2
PROBLEM 9-5
Suppose a room has a north-facing wall that is rectangular, and that has
a rectangular window in the center. The room measures 5.00 m from east-
to-west, and the ceiling is 2.60 m high. The window, measured at its outer
frame, measures 1.45 m high by 1.00 m wide. What is the surface area of
the wall, not including the window?
SOLUTION 9-5
First, determine the area of the wall including the area of the window.
If we call this area Awall, then
Awall ¼ 5:00  2:60
¼ 13:00 m2
Fig. 9-32.
Perimeter and area of a trapezoid.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
222

The area of the window (call it Awin), measured at its outer frame, is:
Awin ¼ 1:45  1:00
¼ 1:45 m2
Let A be the area of the wall, not including the window. Then
A ¼ Awall  Awin
¼ 13:00  1:45
¼ 11:55 m2
PROBLEM 9-6
Suppose a plot of land is shaped like a parallelogram. Adjacent sides measure
500 m and 400 m. What is the perimeter of this plot of land? What is its inter-
ior area?
SOLUTION 9-6
The perimeter of the plot of land is equal to the sum of twice the lengths of
the adjacent sides. Suppose we call the lengths of the sides d and e, where
d ¼ 500 m and e ¼ 400 m. Then the perimeter B, in meters, is:
B ¼ 2d þ 2e
¼ 2  500 þ 2  400
¼ 1000 þ 800
¼ 1800 m
In order to calculate the area of the ﬁeld, we must know how wide it is.
For ﬁxed lengths of sides, the width of a parallelogram depends on
the angle between two adjacent sides (in this case, boundaries of the ﬁeld).
We aren’t given this information, so we can’t determine the area of the ﬁeld.
Circles and Ellipses
That’s enough of ﬁgures with straight lines. Let’s get into plane curves.
In some ways, the following formulas are easier for mathematicians to derive
than the ones for ﬁgures consisting of lines and angles.
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
223

PERIMETER OF CIRCLE
Suppose we have a circle having radius r as shown in Fig. 9-33. Then the
perimeter, B, also called the circumference, of the circle is given by the
following formula:
B ¼ 2pr
INTERIOR AREA OF CIRCLE
Suppose we have a circle as deﬁned above and in Fig. 9-33. The interior area,
A, of the circle can be found using this formula:
A ¼ pr2
INTERIOR AREA OF ELLIPSE
Suppose we have an ellipse whose major half-axis (the longer half-axis or
largest radius) measures r, and whose minor half-axis (the shorter half-axis
or smallest radius) measures s as shown in Fig. 9-34. The interior area, A,
of the ellipse is given by:
A ¼ prs
PROBLEM 9-7
What is the circumference of a circle whose radius is 10.0000 m? What is its
interior area?
Fig. 9-33.
Perimeter and area of a circle.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
224

SOLUTION 9-7
In this case, r ¼ 10.0000, expressed in meters. To calculate the circumference
B in meters, proceed as follows. Consider the value of p to be 3.14159.
B ¼ 2pr
¼ 2  3:14159  10:0000
¼ 62:8318 m
To calculate the interior area A in square meters, proceed as follows:
A ¼ pr2
¼ 3:14159  102
¼ 314:59 m2
PROBLEM 9-8
Consider an ellipse whose minor half-axis is 10.0000 m and whose major
half-axis can be varied at will. What must the major half-axis be in order
to get an interior area of 200.000 m2? Consider the value of p to be 3.14159.
SOLUTION 9-8
In this problem, A ¼ 200 and r ¼ 10. We seek to ﬁnd the value of s in this
formula:
A ¼ prs
Substituting the values in, the calculation goes like this:
200:000 ¼ 3:14159  10:0000  s
10:0000  s ¼ 200:000=3:14159
s ¼ 6:36620 m
Fig. 9-34.
Interior area of an ellipse.
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
225

Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
In an equilateral plane triangle, each interior angle
(a) has a measure less than 608
(b) has a measure greater than 608
(c) has a measure of 608
(d) has a measure diﬀerent from either of the other two angles
2.
Suppose a building is constructed in the shape of a parallelogram,
rather than in the usual rectangular shape, because of the strange
layout of streets in that part of town. The sides of the building run
east–west and more or less northeast–southwest. The length of the
building measured along the east–west walls is 30 m, and the distance
between the northerly east–west end and the southerly east–west end is
40 m. What is the area of the basement ﬂoor (including the area taken
up by interior and exterior walls)?
(a) 1500 m2
(b) 1200 m2
(c) 750 m2
(d) More information is needed to answer this question.
3.
Suppose a building is constructed in the shape of a parallelogram,
rather than in the usual rectangular shape, because of the strange
layout of streets in that part of town. The sides of the building run
east–west and more or less northeast–southwest. The length of the
building measured along the east–west walls is 30 m, and the length
measured along the northeast–southwest walls is 40 m. What is the
area of the basement ﬂoor (including the area taken up by interior
and exterior walls)?
(a) 1500 m2
(b) 1200 m2
(c) 750 m2
(d) More information is needed to answer this question.
4.
If the radius of a circle is quadrupled, what happens to its interior area?
(a) It becomes twice as great.
(b) It becomes four times as great.
(c) It becomes 16 times as great.
(d) More information is needed to answer this question.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
226

5.
If the length of the minor semi-axis of an ellipse is quadrupled while
the length of the major semi-axis is cut in half, what happens to the
interior area?
(a) It stays the same.
(b) It increases by a factor of the square root of 2.
(c) It increases by a factor of 2.
(d) It increases by a factor of 4.
6.
A right plane triangle cannot
(a) be an isosceles triangle
(b) have three sides all of diﬀerent lengths
(c) have three sides all of the same length
(d) have any interior angle measuring less than 908
7.
Suppose three towns, called Jimsville, Joesville, and Johnsville, all lie
along a perfectly straight, east–west stretch of highway called Route
999. As you drive from west to east, you encounter Jimsville ﬁrst,
then Joesville, and then Johnsville. Suppose the distance between
Jimsville and Joesville is 8 kilometers (km), and the distance between
Joesville and Johnsville is 6 km. What is the distance between Jimsville
and Johnsville as measured along Route 999?
(a) 8 km
(b) 10 km
(c) 14 km
(d) More information is needed to answer this question.
8.
Suppose Jimsville and Johnsville lie along a perfectly straight, east–
west stretch of highway called Route 999. Joesville lies north of
Route 999, and is in a position such that it is 8 km away from
Jimsville and 6 km away from Johnsville. Suppose a straight line
connecting Jimsville and Joesville is perpendicular to a straight line
connecting Johnsville and Joesville. What is the distance between
Jimsville and Johnsville as measured along Route 999?
(a) 8 km
(b) 10 km
(c) 14 km
(d) More information is needed to answer this question.
9.
Suppose Jimsville and Johnsville lie along a perfectly straight, east–
west stretch of highway called Route 999. Joesville lies south of
Route 999, and is in a position such that it is 8 km away from
Jimsville and 8 km away from Johnsville. All three towns lie at the
CHAPTER 9
Geometry on the Flats
227

vertices of an isosceles triangle. What is the distance between
Jimsville and Johnsville as measured along Route 999?
(a) 8 km
(b) 10 km
(c) 14 km
(d) More information is needed to answer this question.
10.
Suppose Jimsville and Johnsville lie along a perfectly straight, east–
west stretch of highway called Route 999. Joesville lies south of
Route 999, and is in a position such that it is 8 km away from
Jimsville and 8 km away from Johnsville. All three towns lie at the
vertices of an equilateral triangle. What is the distance between
Jimsville and Johnsville as measured along Route 999?
(a) 8 km
(b) 10 km
(c) 14 km
(d) More information is needed to answer this question.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
228

CHAPTER
10
Geometry in Space
Solid geometry involves points, lines, and planes. The diﬀerence between two-
dimensional (2D) geometry and three-dimensional (3D) geometry is the fact
that, well, there’s an extra dimension! This makes things more interesting,
and also more complicated.
Points, Lines, and Planes
A point can be envisioned as an inﬁnitely tiny sphere, having height, width,
and depth all equal to zero, but nevertheless possessing a speciﬁc location.
A point is zero-dimensional (0D). A line can be thought of as an inﬁnitely
thin, perfectly straight, inﬁnitely long thread or wire. It is one-dimensional
(1D). A plane can be imagined as an inﬁnitely thin, perfectly ﬂat surface
having an inﬁnite expanse. It is two-dimensional (2D). Space in the simplest
sense is the set of points representing all possible physical locations in the
universe at any speciﬁc instant in time. Space is three-dimensional (3D).
229
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

If time is included in a concept of space, we get four-dimensional (4D) space,
also known as hyperspace.
NAMING POINTS, LINES, AND PLANES
Points, lines, and planes in solid geometry are usually named using upper-
case, italicized letters of the alphabet, just as they are in plane geometry.
A common name for a point is P (for ‘‘point’’). A common name for a
line is L (for ‘‘line’’). When it comes to planes in 3D space, we must use
our imaginations. The letters X, Y, and Z are good choices. Sometimes lower-
case, non-italic letters are used, such as m and n.
When we have two or more points, the letters immediately following P
are used, for example Q, R, and S. If two or more lines exist, the letters
immediately following L are used, for example M and N. Alternatively,
numeric subscripts can be used. We might have points called P1, P2, P3, and
so forth, lines called L1, L2, L3, and so forth, and planes called X1, X2, X3,
and so forth.
THREE POINT PRINCIPLE
Suppose that P, Q, and R are three diﬀerent geometric points, no two
of which lie on the same line. Then these points deﬁne one and only one
(a unique or speciﬁc) plane X. The following two statements are always
true, as shown in Fig. 10-1:
*
P, Q, and R lie in a common plane X.
*
X is the only plane in which all three points lie.
In order to show that a surface extends inﬁnitely in 2D, we have to be
imaginative. It’s not as easy as showing that a line extends inﬁnitely in
1D, because there aren’t any good ways to draw arrows on the edges of
a plane region the way we can draw them on the ends of a line segment.
Fig 10-1.
Three points P, Q, and R, not all on the same line, deﬁne a speciﬁc plane X.
The plane extends inﬁnitely in 2D.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
230

It is customary to draw planes as rectangles in perspective; they appear
as rectangles, parallelograms, or trapezoids when rendered on a ﬂat page.
This is all right, as long as it is understood that the surface extends inﬁnitely
in 2D.
INTERSECTING LINE PRINCIPLE
Suppose that lines L and M intersect in a point P. Then the two lines deﬁne
a unique plane X. The following two statements are always true, as shown
in Fig. 10-2:
*
L and M lie in a common plane X.
*
X is the only plane in which both lines lie.
LINE AND POINT PRINCIPLE
Let L be a line and P be a point not on that line. Then line L and point P
deﬁne a unique plane X. The following two statements are always true:
*
L and P lie in a common plane X.
*
X is the only plane in which both L and P lie.
PLANE REGIONS
The 2D counterpart of the 1D line segment is the simple plane region. A
simple plane region consists of all the points inside a polygon or enclosed
curve. The polygon or curve itself might be included in the set of points
comprising the simple plane region, but this is not necessarily the case. If
the polygon or curve is included, the simple plane region is said to be closed.
Some examples are denoted in Fig. 10-3A; the boundaries are drawn so they
look continuous. If the polygon or curve is not included, the simple plane
Fig. 10-2.
Two lines L and M, intersecting at point P, deﬁne a speciﬁc plane X. The plane
extends inﬁnitely in 2D.
CHAPTER 10
Geometry in Space
231

region is said to be open. In Fig. 10-3B, several examples of open simple plane
regions are denoted; the boundaries are dashed.
The respective regions in Figs. 10-3A and B have identical shapes. They
also have identical perimeters and identical interior areas. The outer
boundaries do not add anything to the perimeter or the interior area.
These examples show specialized cases, in which the regions are con-
tiguous, or ‘‘all of a piece,’’ and the boundaries are either closed all the way
around or open all the way around. Some plane regions have boundaries that
are closed part of the way around, or in segments; it is also possible to have
plane regions composed of two or more non-contiguous subregions.
HALF PLANES
Sometimes, it is useful to talk about the portion of a geometric plane that lies
‘‘on one side’’ of a certain line. In Fig. 10-4, imagine the union of all possible
geometric rays that start at L, then pass through line M (which is parallel
to L), and extend onward past M ‘‘forever’’ in one direction. The region
thus deﬁned is known as a half plane.
The half plane deﬁned by L and M might include the end line L, in which
case it is closed-ended. In this case, line L is drawn as a solid line, as shown in
Fig. 10-4. But the end line might not comprise part of the half plane, in which
case the half plane is open-ended. Then line L is drawn as a dashed line.
Fig. 10-3.
Plane regions. At A, closed; at B, open.
Fig. 10-4.
A half plane X, deﬁned by two parallel lines, L and M. The half plane extends
inﬁnitely in 2D on the ‘‘M’’ side of L.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
232

INTERSECTING PLANES
Suppose that two diﬀerent planes X and Y intersect; that is, they have points
in common. Then the two planes intersect in a unique line L. The following
two statements are always true, as shown in Fig. 10-5:
*
Planes X and Y share a common line L.
*
L is the only line that planes X and Y have in common.
PARALLEL LINES IN 3D SPACE
By deﬁnition, two diﬀerent lines L and M in three-space are parallel lines
if and only if both of the following are true:
*
Lines L and M do not intersect.
*
Lines L and M lie in the same plane X.
If two lines are parallel and they lie in a given plane X, then X is the only
plane in which the two lines lie. Thus, two parallel lines deﬁne a unique
plane in Euclidean space.
SKEW LINES
By deﬁnition, two lines L and M in three-space are skew lines if and only if
both of the following are true:
*
Lines L and M do not intersect.
*
Lines L and M do not lie in the same plane.
Imagine an inﬁnitely long, straight, two-lane highway and an inﬁnitely long,
straight power line propped up on utility poles. Further imagine that the
Fig. 10-5.
The intersection of two planes X and Y determines a unique line L. The planes
extend inﬁnitely in 2D.
CHAPTER 10
Geometry in Space
233

power line and the highway center line are both inﬁnitely thin, and that the
power line doesn’t sag between the poles. Suppose the power line passes over
the highway somewhere. Then the center line of the highway and the power
line deﬁne skew lines.
PROBLEM 10-1
Find an example of a theoretical plane region with a ﬁnite, nonzero area but
an inﬁnite perimeter.
SOLUTION 10-1
Examine Fig. 10-6. Suppose the three lines PQ, RS, and TU (none of which
are part of the plane region X, but are shown only for reference) are mutually
parallel, and that the distances d1, d2, d3, . . . are such that d2 ¼ d1/2, d3 ¼ d2/2,
and in general, for any positive integer n, d(nþ1) ¼ dn/2. Also suppose that the
length of line segment PV is greater than the length of line segment PT. Then
plane region X has an inﬁnite number of sides, each of which has a length
greater than the length of line segment PT, so its perimeter is inﬁnite. But
the interior area of X is ﬁnite and nonzero, because it is obviously less
than the interior area of quadrilateral PQSR but greater than the area of
quadrilateral TUSR.
PROBLEM 10-2
How many planes can mutually intersect in a given line L?
SOLUTION 10-2
In theory, an inﬁnite number of planes can all intersect in a common line.
Think of the line as an inﬁnitely long hinge, and then imagine a plane that
can swing around this hinge. Each position of the swinging plane represents
a unique plane in space.
Fig. 10-6.
Illustration for Problem 10-1.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
234

Straight-Edged Objects
In Euclidean three-space, geometric solids with straight edges have ﬂat faces,
also called facets, each of which forms a plane polygon. An object of this sort
is known as a polyhedron.
THE TETRAHEDRON
A polyhedron in 3D must have at least four faces. A four-faced polyhedron
is called a tetrahedron. Each of the four faces of a tetrahedron is a triangle.
There are four vertices. Any four speciﬁc points, not all in a single plane,
form a unique tetrahedron.
SURFACE AREA OF TETRAHEDRON
Figure 10-7 shows a tetrahedron. The surface area is found by adding up
the interior areas of all four triangular faces. In the case of a regular tetra-
hedron, all six edges have the same length, and therefore all four faces are
equilateral triangles. If the length of each edge of a regular tetrahedron
is equal to s units, then the surface area, B, of the whole four-faced regular
tetrahedron is given by:
B ¼ 31=2s2
In this formula, 31/2 represents the square root of 3, or approximately 1.732.
Fig. 10-7.
A tetrahedron has four faces (including the base) and six edges.
CHAPTER 10
Geometry in Space
235

VOLUME OF TETRAHEDRON
Imagine a tetrahedron whose base is a triangle with area A, and whose height
is h as shown in Fig. 10-7. The volume, V, of the ﬁgure is given by:
V ¼ Ah=3
PYRAMID
Figure 10-8 illustrates a pyramid. This ﬁgure has a square or rectangular
base and four slanted faces. If the base is a square, and if the apex
(the top of the pyramid) lies directly above a point at the center of the
base, then the ﬁgure is a regular pyramid, and all of the slanted faces are
isosceles triangles.
SURFACE AREA OF PYRAMID
The surface area of a pyramid is found by adding up the areas of all ﬁve of
its faces (the four slanted faces plus the base). In the case of a regular pyra-
mid where the length of each slanted edge, called the slant height, is equal to
s units and the length of each edge of the base is equal to t units, the surface
area, B, is given by:
B ¼ t2 þ 2tðs2  t2=4Þ1=2
In the case of an irregular pyramid, the problem of ﬁnding the surface
area is more complicated, because it involves individually calculating the area
of the base and each slanted face, and then adding all the areas up.
Fig. 10-8.
A pyramid has ﬁve faces (including the base) and eight edges.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
236

VOLUME OF PYRAMID
Imagine a pyramid whose base is a square with area A, and whose height is
h as shown in Fig. 10-8. The volume, V, of the pyramid is given by:
V ¼ Ah=3
This is true whether the pyramid is regular or irregular.
THE CUBE
Figure 10-9 illustrates a cube. This is a regular hexahedron (six-sided poly-
hedron). It has 12 edges, each of which is of the same length, and eight
vertices. Each of the six faces is a square.
SURFACE AREA OF CUBE
Imagine a cube whose edges each have length s, as shown in Fig. 10-9. The
surface area, A, of the cube is given by:
A ¼ 6s2
VOLUME OF CUBE
Imagine a cube as deﬁned above and in Fig. 10-9. The volume, V, of the solid
enclosed by the cube is given by:
V ¼ s3
Fig. 10-9.
A cube has six square faces and 12 edges of identical length.
CHAPTER 10
Geometry in Space
237

THE RECTANGULAR PRISM
Figure 10-10 illustrates a rectangular prism. This is a hexahedron, each of
whose six faces is a rectangle. The ﬁgure has 12 edges and eight vertices.
SURFACE AREA OF RECTANGULAR PRISM
Imagine a rectangular prism whose edges have lengths s1, s2, and s3 as shown
in Fig. 10-10. The surface area, A, of the prism is given by:
A ¼ 2s1s2 þ 2s1s3 þ 2s2s3
VOLUME OF RECTANGULAR PRISM
Imagine a rectangular prism as deﬁned above and in Fig. 10-10. The volume,
V, of the enclosed solid is given by:
V ¼ s1s2s3
THE PARALLELEPIPED
A parallelepiped is a six-faced polyhedron in which each face is a parallelo-
gram, and opposite pairs of faces are congruent. The ﬁgure has 12 edges
and eight vertices. The acute angles between the pairs of edges are x, y,
and z, as shown in Fig. 10-11.
SURFACE AREA OF PARALLELEPIPED
Imagine a parallelepiped with faces of lengths s1, s2, and s3. Suppose
the angles between pairs of edges are x, y, and z as shown in Fig. 10-11.
Fig. 10-10.
A rectangular prism has six rectangular faces and 12 edges.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
238

The surface area, A, of the parallelepiped is given by:
A ¼ 2s1s2 sin x þ 2s1s3 sin y þ 2s2s3 sin z
where sin x represents the sine of angle x, sin y represents the sine of angle y,
and sin z represents the sine of angle z. Sines of angles can be found with any
scientiﬁc calculator, including the ones in most personal computers.
VOLUME OF PARALLELEPIPED
Imagine a parallelepiped whose faces have lengths s1, s2, and s3, and that has
angles between edges of x, y, and z as shown in Fig. 10-11. Suppose further
that the height of the parallelepiped, as measured along a line normal to
the base, is equal to h. The volume, V, of the enclosed solid is equal to the
product of the base area and the height:
V ¼ hs1s3 sin y
PROBLEM 10-3
Suppose you want to paint the interior walls of a room in a house. The room
is shaped like a rectangular prism. The ceiling is exactly 3.0 m above the ﬂoor.
The ﬂoor and the ceiling both measure exactly 4.2 m by 5.5 m. There are two
windows, the outer frames of which both measure 1.5 m high by 1.0 m wide.
There is one doorway, the outer frame of which measures 2.5 m high by 1.0 m
wide. With two coats of paint (which you intend to apply), one liter of paint
can be expected to cover exactly 20 m2 of wall area. How much paint, in
liters, will you need to completely do the job? Note that a liter is deﬁned
Fig. 10-11.
A parallelepiped has six faces, all of which are parallelograms, and 12 edges.
CHAPTER 10
Geometry in Space
239

as a cubic decimeter, or the volume of a cube measuring 0.1 meter on an edge.
This means that a liter is equal to 0.001 cubic meter (m3).
SOLUTION 10-3
It is necessary to ﬁnd the amount of wall area that this room has. Based on
the information given, we can conclude that the rectangular prism formed by
the edges between walls, ﬂoor, and ceiling measures 3.0 m high by 4.2 m wide
by 5.5 m deep. So we can let s1 ¼ 3.0, s2 ¼ 4.2, and s3 ¼ 5.5 (with all units
assumed to be in meters) to ﬁnd the surface area A of the rectangular
prism, in square meters, neglecting the area subtracted for the windows
and doorway. Using the formula:
A ¼ 2s1s2 þ 2s1s3 þ 2s2s3
¼ ð2  3:0  4:2Þ þ ð2  3:0  5:5Þ þ ð2  4:2  5:5Þ
¼ 25:2 þ 33:0 þ 46:2
¼ 104:4 m2
There are two windows measuring 1.5 m by 1.0 m. Each window takes away
1.5  1.0 ¼ 1.5 m2 of area. The doorway measures 2.5 m by 1.0 m, so it takes
away 2.5  1.0 ¼ 2.5 m2. Therefore, the windows and doorway combined take
away 1.5 þ 1.5 þ 2.5 ¼ 5.5 m2 of wall space. We must also take away the areas
of the ﬂoor and ceiling. This is the ﬁnal factor in the above equation,
2s2s3 ¼ 46.2. The wall area to be painted, call it Aw, is calculated this way:
Aw ¼ ð104:4  5:5Þ  46:2
¼ 52:7 m2
A liter of paint can be expected to cover 20 m2. So we will need 52.7/20,
or 2.635, liters of paint to do this job.
Cones, Cylinders, and Spheres
A cone has a circular or elliptical base and an apex point. The cone itself
consists of the union of the following sets of points:
*
The circle or ellipse.
*
All points inside the circle or ellipse and that lie in its plane.
*
All line segments connecting the circle or ellipse (not including its
interior) and the apex point.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
240

The interior of the cone consists of the set of all points within the cone. The
surface might or might not be included in the deﬁnition of the interior.
A cylinder has a circular or elliptical base, and a circular or elliptical top
that is congruent to the base and that lies in a plane parallel to the base. The
cylinder itself consists of the union of the following sets of points:
*
The base circle or ellipse.
*
All points inside the base circle or ellipse and that lie in its plane.
*
The top circle or ellipse.
*
All points inside the top circle or ellipse and that lie in its plane.
*
All line segments connecting corresponding points on the base circle
or ellipse and top circle or ellipse (not including their interiors).
The interior of the cylinder consists of the set of all points within the cylinder.
The surface might or might not be included in the deﬁnition of the interior.
These are general deﬁnitions, and they encompass a great variety of
objects! Here, we’ll look only at cones and cylinders whose bases are circles.
THE RIGHT CIRCULAR CONE
A right circular cone has a base that is a circle, and an apex point on a
line perpendicular to the base and passing through its center. This type
of cone, when the height is about twice the diameter of the base, has
a ‘‘dunce cap’’ shape. Dry sand, when poured into an enormous pile on a
ﬂat surface, acquires a shape that is roughly that of a right circular cone.
An example of this type of object is shown in Fig. 10-12.
Fig. 10-12.
A right circular cone.
CHAPTER 10
Geometry in Space
241

SURFACE AREA OF RIGHT CIRCULAR CONE
Imagine a right circular cone as shown in Fig. 10-12. Let P be the apex of
the cone, and let Q be the center of the base. Let r be the radius of the
base, let h be the height of the cone (the length of line segment PQ), and
let s be the slant height of the cone as measured from any point on the
edge of the base to the apex P. The surface area S1 of the cone, including
the base, is given by either of the following formulas:
S1 ¼ pr2 þ prs
S1 ¼ pr2 þ prðr2 þ h2Þ1=2
The surface area S2 of the cone, not including the base, is called the lateral
surface area and is given by either of the following:
S2 ¼ prs
S2 ¼ prðr2 þ h2Þ1=2
VOLUME OF RIGHT CIRCULAR CONE
Imagine a right circular cone as deﬁned above and in Fig. 10-12. The
volume, V, of the interior of the ﬁgure is given by:
V ¼ pr2h=3
THE SLANT CIRCULAR CONE
A slant circular cone has a base that is a circle, just as does the right circular
cone. But the apex is such that a line, perpendicular to the plane containing
the base and running from the apex through the plane containing the base,
does not pass through the center of the base. Such a cone has a ‘‘blown-
over’’ or ‘‘cantilevered’’ appearance (Fig. 10-13).
VOLUME OF SLANT CIRCULAR CONE
Imagine a cone whose base is a circle. Let P be the apex of the cone, and let Q
be a point in the plane X containing the base such that line segment PQ is
perpendicular to X (Fig. 10-13). Let h be the height of the cone (the length
PART 3
Shapes and Places
242

of line segment PQ). Let r be the radius of the base. Then the volume, V, of
the corresponding cone is given by:
V ¼ pr2h=3
This is the same as the formula for the volume of a right circular cone.
THE RIGHT CIRCULAR CYLINDER
A right circular cylinder has a circular base and a circular top. The base and
the top lie in parallel planes. The center of the base and the center of the top
lie along a line that is perpendicular to both the plane containing the base and
the plane containing the top. A general example is shown in Fig. 10-14.
SURFACE AREA OF RIGHT CIRCULAR CYLINDER
Imagine a right circular cylinder where P is the center of the top and Q is
the center of the base (Fig. 10-14). Let r be the radius of the cylinder, and
Fig. 10-13.
A slant circular cone.
Fig. 10-14.
A right circular cylinder.
CHAPTER 10
Geometry in Space
243

let h be the height (the length of line segment PQ). Then the surface area
S1 of the cylinder, including the base, is given by:
S1 ¼ 2prh þ 2pr2 ¼ 2prðh þ rÞ
The lateral surface area S2 of the cylinder (not including the base) is given by:
S2 ¼ 2prh
VOLUME OF RIGHT CIRCULAR CYLINDER
Imagine a right circular cylinder as deﬁned above and shown in Fig. 10-14.
The volume, V, of the cylinder is given by:
V ¼ pr2h
THE SLANT CIRCULAR CYLINDER
A slant circular cylinder has a circular base and a circular top. The base
and the top lie in parallel planes. The center of the base and the center of
the top lie along a line that is not perpendicular to the planes that contain
them (Fig. 10-15).
VOLUME OF SLANT CIRCULAR CYLINDER
Imagine a slant circular cylinder as deﬁned above and in Fig. 10-15. The
volume, V, of the corresponding solid is given by:
V ¼ pr2h
Fig. 10-15.
A slant circular cylinder.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
244

THE SPHERE
Consider a speciﬁc point P in 3D space. The surface of a sphere S consists
of the set of all points at a speciﬁc distance or radius r from point P. The
interior of sphere S, including the surface, consists of the set of all points
whose distance from point P is less than or equal to r. The interior of sphere
S, not including the surface, consists of the set of all points whose distance
from P is less than r.
SURFACE AREA OF SPHERE
Imagine a sphere S having radius r as shown in Fig. 10-16. The surface
area, A, of the sphere is given by:
A ¼ 4pr2
VOLUME OF SPHERE
Imagine a sphere S as deﬁned above and in Fig. 10-16. The volume, V, of the
solid enclosed by the sphere is given by:
V ¼ 4pr3=3
This volume applies to the interior of sphere S, either including the surface
or not including it, because the surface has zero volume.
Fig. 10-16.
A sphere.
CHAPTER 10
Geometry in Space
245

PROBLEM 10-4
A cylindrical water tower is exactly 30 m high and exactly 10 m in radius.
How many liters of water can it hold, assuming the entire interior can be
ﬁlled with water? Round the answer oﬀto the nearest liter.
SOLUTION 10-4
Use the formula for the volume of a right circular cylinder to ﬁnd the volume
in cubic meters:
V ¼ pr2h
Plug in the numbers. Let r ¼ 10, h ¼ 30, and p ¼ 3.14159:
V ¼ 3:14159  102  30
¼ 3:14159  100  30
¼ 9424:77 m3
There are 1000 liters per cubic meter. This means that the amount of water
the tower can hold, in liters, is equal to 9424.77  1000, or 9,424,770.
PROBLEM 10-5
A circus tent is shaped like a right circular cone. Its diameter is 50 m and the
height at the center is 20 m. How much canvas is in the tent? Express the
answer to the nearest square meter.
SOLUTION 10-5
Use the formula for the lateral surface area, S, of the right circular cone:
S ¼ prðr2 þ h2Þ1=2
We know that the diameter is 50 m, so the radius is 25 m. Therefore, r ¼ 25.
We also know that h ¼ 20. Let p ¼ 3.14159. Then:
S ¼ 3:14159  25  ð252 þ 202Þ1=2
¼ 3:14159  25  ð625 þ 400Þ1=2
¼ 3:14159  25  10251=2
¼ 3:14159  25  32:0156
¼ 2514:4972201 m2
There are 2514 m2 of canvas, rounded oﬀto the nearest square meter.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
246

PROBLEM 10-6
Suppose a football ﬁeld is to be covered by an inﬂatable dome that takes the
shape of a half-sphere. If the radius of the dome is 100 m, what is the volume
of air enclosed by the dome, in cubic meters? Find the result to the nearest
1000 m3.
SOLUTION 10-6
First, we must ﬁnd the volume V of a sphere whose radius is 100 m, and then
divide the result by 2. Let p ¼ 3.14159. Using the formula with r ¼ 100 gives
this result:
V ¼ ð4  3:14159  1003Þ=3
¼ ð4  3:14159  1000000Þ=3
¼ 4188786:667 m3
Thus V/2 ¼ 4,188,786.667/2 ¼ 2,094,393.333 m3. Rounding oﬀto the nearest
1000 m3, we obtain the ﬁgure of 2,094,000 m3 as the volume of air enclosed
by the dome.
Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
What is the approximate surface area of the sides (not including
the base or top) of a water tower that is shaped like a right circular
cylinder, that has a radius of exactly 5 meters, and that is exactly 20
meters tall?
(a) 1571 m2
(b) 628.3 m2
(c) 100 m2
(d) It cannot be determined without more information.
2.
If the height of a silo that is shaped like a right circular cylinder is cut
in half while its radius remains the same, what happens to its surface
area (not including the base or the top)?
(a) It decreases to 1/2 of its previous value.
(b) It decreases to 1/4 of its previous value.
(c) It decreases to 1/8 of its previous value.
(d) It decreases to 1/16 of its previous value.
CHAPTER 10
Geometry in Space
247

3.
If the height of a silo that is shaped like a right circular cylinder is
cut in half while its radius remains the same, what happens to its
volume?
(a) It decreases to 1/2 of its previous value.
(b) It decreases to 1/4 of its previous value.
(c) It decreases to 1/8 of its previous value.
(d) It decreases to 1/16 of its previous value.
4.
What is the approximate volume, in cubic centimeters (cm3), of a ball
that is exactly 20 cm in diameter? (Remember that the diameter of a
sphere is twice the radius.)
(a) 62.83 cm3
(b) 1257 cm3
(c) 4189 cm3
(d) It cannot be determined without more information.
5.
Which of the following statements is not true in Euclidean 3D space?
(a) If two straight lines are parallel, then they are skew.
(b) If two straight lines are parallel, then they lie in the same plane.
(c) If two straight lines are parallel, then they determine a unique
plane.
(d) If two straight lines are parallel, then they do not intersect.
6.
Which of the following statements is always true in Euclidean 3D
space?
(a) Four points determine a unique ﬂat plane.
(b) Three points can have more than one ﬂat plane in common.
(c) Two lines that do not intersect determine a unique ﬂat plane.
(d) None of the statements (a), (b), or (c) is always true in Euclidean
3D space.
7.
If the radius of a sphere increases by a factor of 10, the volume of the
sphere increases by a factor of
(a) 100
(b) (400/3)p
(c) 1000
(d) (4000/3)p
8.
The boundary of a closed plane region
(a) adds nothing to its area
(b) increases its volume
(c) reduces its perimeter
(d) is always a straight line
PART 3
Shapes and Places
248

9.
A cube is a special form of
(a) rhombus
(b) pyramid
(c) cone
(d) parallelepiped
10.
If the radius of a sphere increases by a factor of 9, the ratio of the
volume of the sphere to its surface area increases by a factor of
(a) 3
(b) 9
(c) 27
(d) 81
CHAPTER 10
Geometry in Space
249

CHAPTER
11
Graphing It
We’ve already done some work with simple two-dimensional (2D) graphs.
In this chapter, we’ll take a closer look at the two most common coordinate
systems on which 2D graphs are plotted. They are the Cartesian plane (named
after the French mathematician Rene´ Descartes who invented it in the 1600s)
and the polar coordinate plane.
The Cartesian Plane
The Cartesian plane, also called the rectangular coordinate plane or rectangu-
lar coordinates, is deﬁned by two number lines that intersect at a right angle.
Figure 11-1 illustrates a basic set of rectangular coordinates. Both number
lines have equal increments. This means that on either axis, points corre-
sponding to consecutive integers are the same distance apart, no matter
where on the axis we look. The two number lines intersect at their zero
points. The horizontal (right-and-left) axis is the x axis; the vertical
(up-and-down) axis is the y axis.
250
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

ORDERED PAIRS AS POINTS
Figure 11-2 shows two speciﬁc points P and Q on the Cartesian plane. Any
given point on the plane can be denoted as an ordered pair in the form (x,y),
determined by the numerical values at which perpendiculars from the point
intersect the x and y axes. The coordinates of point P are (–5,–4), and the
coordinates of point Q are (3,5). In Fig. 11-2, the perpendiculars are
Fig. 11-1.
The Cartesian plane is deﬁned by two number lines that intersect at right angles.
Fig. 11-2.
Two points P and Q, plotted in rectangular coordinates, and a third point R,
important in ﬁnding the distance d between P and Q.
CHAPTER 11
Graphing It
251

shown as horizontal and vertical dashed lines. When denoting an ordered
pair, it is customary to place the two numbers or variables together right
up against the comma; there is no space after the comma.
The word ‘‘ordered’’ means that the order in which the numbers are listed
is important. The ordered pair (7,2) is not the same as the ordered pair (2,7),
even though both pairs contain the same two numbers. In this respect,
ordered pairs are diﬀerent than mere sets of numbers. Think of a two-lane
highway with a northbound lane and a southbound lane. If there is never any
traﬃc on the highway, it doesn’t matter which lane (the one on the eastern
side or the one on the western side) is called ‘‘northbound’’ and which is
called ‘‘southbound.’’ But when there are vehicles on that road, it makes a
big diﬀerence! The untraveled road is like a set; the traveled road is like an
ordered pair.
ABSCISSA, ORDINATE, AND ORIGIN
In any graphing scheme, there is at least one independent variable and at
least one dependent variable. You learned about these types of variables in
Chapter 2. The independent-variable coordinate (usually x) of a point on
the Cartesian plane is called the abscissa, and the dependent-variable coordi-
nate (usually y) is called the ordinate. The point where the two axes intersect,
in this case (0,0), is called the origin. In the scenario shown by Fig. 11-2,
point P has an abscissa of –5 and an ordinate of –4, and point Q has an
abscissa of 3 and an ordinate of 5.
DISTANCE BETWEEN POINTS
Suppose there are two diﬀerent points P ¼ (x0,y0) and Q ¼ (x1,y1) on the
Cartesian plane. The distance d between these two points can be found by
determining the length of the hypotenuse, or longest side, of a right
triangle PQR, where point R is the intersection of a ‘‘horizontal’’ line through
P and a ‘‘vertical’’ line through Q. In this case, ‘‘horizontal’’ means ‘‘parallel
to the x axis,’’ and ‘‘vertical’’ means ‘‘parallel to the y axis.’’ An example
is shown in Fig. 11-2. Alternatively, we can use a ‘‘horizontal’’ line through
Q and a ‘‘vertical’’ line through P to get the point R. The resulting right
triangle in this case has the same hypotenuse, line segment PQ, as the triangle
determined the other way.
The Pythagorean theorem from plane geometry states that the square of
the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle is equal to the sum of the
squares of the other two sides. In the Cartesian plane, that means the
PART 3
Shapes and Places
252

following equation always holds true:
d2 ¼ ðx1  x0Þ2 þ ð y1  y0Þ2
and therefore:
d ¼ ½ðx1  x0Þ2 þ ð y1  y0Þ2 1=2
where the 1/2 power is the square root. In the situation shown in Fig. 11-2,
the distance d between points P ¼ (x0,y0) ¼ (–5,–4) and Q ¼ (x1,y1) ¼ (3,5),
rounded to two decimal places is:
d ¼ f½3  ð5Þ 2 þ ½5  ð4Þ 2g1=2
¼ ½ð3 þ 5Þ2 þ ð5 þ 4Þ2 1=2
¼ ð82 þ 92Þ1=2
¼ ð64 þ 81Þ1=2
¼ 1451=2
¼ 12:04
PROBLEM 11-1
Plot the following points on the Cartesian plane: (2,3), (3,1), (0,5), and
(3,3).
SOLUTION 11-1
These points are shown in Fig. 11-3. The dashed lines are perpendiculars,
dropped to the axes to show the x and y coordinates of each point.
(The dashed lines are not part of the coordinates themselves.)
PROBLEM 11-2
What is the distance between (0,5) and (3,3) in Fig. 11-3? Express the
answer to three decimal places.
SOLUTION 11-2
Use the distance formula. Let (x0,y0) ¼ (0,5) and (x1,y1) ¼ (3,3). Then:
d ¼ ½ðx1  x0Þ2 þ ð y1  y0Þ2 1=2
¼ ½ð3  0Þ2 þ ð3  5Þ2 1=2
¼ ½ð3Þ2 þ ð8Þ2 1=2
¼ ð9 þ 64Þ1=2
¼ 731=2
¼ 8:544
CHAPTER 11
Graphing It
253

Straight Lines in the Cartesian Plane
In Chapter 6, we saw what the graphs of quadratic equations look like in
the Cartesian plane; they appear as parabolas. Here, we’ll take a detailed
look at how straight lines are plotted on the basis of linear equations in
two variables. The standard form for this type of equation is as follows:
ax þ by þ c ¼ 0
where a, b, and c are real-number constants, and the variables are x and y.
SLOPE–INTERCEPT FORM
A linear equation in variables x and y can be manipulated so it is in a form
that is easy to plot on the Cartesian plane. Here is how a two-variable linear
equation in standard form can be converted to slope–intercept form:
ax þ by þ c ¼ 0
ax þ by ¼ c
by ¼ ax  c
y ¼ ða=bÞx  c=b
y ¼ ða=bÞx þ ðc=bÞ
Fig. 11-3.
Illustration for Problems 11-1 and 11-2.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
254

where a, b, and c are real-number constants (the coeﬃcients of the equation),
and b 6¼ 0. The quantity –a/b is called the slope of the line, an indicator of
how steeply and in what sense the line slants. The quantity –c/b represents
the y value of the point at which the line crosses the y axis; this is called
the y-intercept.
Let dx represent an arbitrarily small change in the value of x on such a
graph. Let dy represent the tiny change in the value of y that results from
this tiny change in x. The limit of the ratio dy/dx, as both dx and dy approach
0, is the slope of the line.
Suppose m is the slope of a line in Cartesian coordinates, and k is the
y-intercept. The linear equation of that line can be written in slope–intercept
form as:
y ¼ ða=bÞx þ ðc=bÞ
and therefore:
y ¼ mx þ k
To plot a graph of a linear equation in Cartesian coordinates using the
slope–intercept form, proceed as follows:
*
Convert the equation to slope–intercept form.
*
Plot the point x ¼ 0, y ¼ k.
*
Move to the right by n units on the graph.
*
If m is positive, move upward mn units.
*
If m is negative, move downward |m|n units, where |m| is the absolute
value of m.
*
If m ¼ 0, don’t move up or down at all.
*
Plot the resulting point x ¼ n, y ¼ mn þ k.
*
Connect the two points with a straight line.
Figures 11-4A and B illustrate the following linear equations as graphed
in slope–intercept form:
y ¼ 5x  3
y ¼ x þ 2
A positive slope indicates that the line ramps upward as you move from left
to right, and a negative slope indicates that the line ramps downward as you
move from left to right. A slope of 0 indicates a horizontal line. The slope of a
vertical line is undeﬁned because, in the form shown here, it requires that m
be deﬁned as a quotient in which the denominator is equal to 0.
CHAPTER 11
Graphing It
255

Fig. 11-4.
(A) Graph of the linear equation y ¼ 5x  3. (B) Graph of the linear
equation y ¼ –x þ 2.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
256

POINT–SLOPE FORM
It is diﬃcult to plot a graph of a line based on the y-intercept (the point at
which the line intersects the y axis) when the part of the graph of interest
is far from the y axis. In this sort of situation, the point–slope form of a linear
equation can be used. This form is based on the slope m of the line and
the coordinates of a known point (x0,y0):
y  y0 ¼ mðx  x0Þ
To plot a graph of a linear equation using the point–slope method, follow
these steps in order:
*
Convert the equation to point–slope form.
*
Determine a point (x0,y0) by ‘‘plugging in’’ values.
*
Plot (x0,y0) on the coordinate plane.
*
Move to the right by n units on the graph, where n is some number
that represents a reasonable distance on the graph.
*
If m is positive, move upward mn units.
*
If m is negative, move downward |m|n units, where |m| is the absolute
value of m.
*
If m ¼ 0, don’t move up or down at all.
*
Plot the resulting point (x1,y1).
*
Connect the points (x0,y0) and (x1,y1) with a straight line.
Figure 11-5A illustrates the following linear equation as graphed in
point–slope form:
y  104 ¼ 3ðx  72Þ
Figure 11-5B is a graph of another linear equation in point–slope form:
y þ 55 ¼ 2ðx þ 85Þ
FINDING A LINEAR EQUATION BASED ON TWO POINTS
Suppose we are working in the Cartesian plane, and we know the exact
coordinates of two points P and Q. These two points deﬁne a unique and
distinct straight line. Call the line L. Let’s give the coordinates of the points
these names:
P ¼ ðxp ypÞ
Q ¼ ðxq yqÞ
CHAPTER 11
Graphing It
257

The slope m of line L can be found using either of the following formulas:
m ¼ ð yq  ypÞ=ðxq  xpÞ
m ¼ ð yp  yqÞ=ðxp  xqÞ
These formulas work provided xp is not equal to xq. (If xp ¼ xq, the denomi-
nators are equal to 0.) The point–slope equation of the line L can be
determined based on the known coordinates of P or Q. Therefore, either
of the following formulas represent the line L:
y  yp ¼ mðx  xpÞ
y  yq ¼ mðx  xqÞ
Fig. 11-5.
(A) Graph of the linear equation y  104 ¼ 3(x  72). (B) Graph of the linear
equation y þ 55 ¼ –2(x þ 85).
PART 3
Shapes and Places
258

Reduced to standard form, these equations become:
mx  y þ ð yp  mxpÞ ¼ 0
mx  y þ ð yq  mxqÞ ¼ 0
That is, the coeﬃcients a, b, and c are:
a ¼ m
b ¼ 1
c ¼ yp  mxp ¼ yq  mxq
FINDING A LINEAR EQUATION BASED ON
y-INTERCEPT AND SLOPE
Suppose we are shown, on a graph, the coordinates of the point at which a
straight line L crosses the y axis, and also the slope of that line. This informa-
tion is suﬃcient to uniquely deﬁne the equation of L. Let’s say that the
y-intercept is equal to y0 and the slope of the line is equal to m. Then the
equation of the line is:
y  y0 ¼ mx
Reduced to standard form, this becomes:
mx  y þ y0 ¼ 0
That is, the coeﬃcients a, b, and c are:
a ¼ m
b ¼ 1
c ¼ y0
PROBLEM 11-3
Suppose you are shown Fig. 11-6. What is the equation of this line in
standard form?
SOLUTION 11-3
The slope of the line is equal to 2; we are told this in the graph. Therefore,
m ¼ 2. The y-intercept is 4, so y0 ¼ 4. This means the equation of the line is:
2x  y þ 4 ¼ 0
CHAPTER 11
Graphing It
259

The Polar Coordinate Plane
Two versions of the polar coordinate plane are shown in Figs. 11-7 and 11-8.
The independent variable is plotted as an angle  (THAY-tuh) relative to a
reference axis pointing to the right (or ‘‘east’’), and the dependent variable
is plotted as a distance (called the radius) r from the origin. (The origin
is the center of the graph where r ¼ 0.) A coordinate point is thus denoted
in the form of an ordered pair (, r). In some texts, the independent and
dependent variables are reversed, and the resulting ordered pairs are in the
form (r, ). But intuitively, it makes more sense to most people to plot
the radius as a function of the angle, and not to plot the angle as a function
of the radius. Here, we’ll use the form (, r).
THE RADIUS
In any polar plane, the radii are shown by concentric circles. The larger the
circle, the greater the value of r. In Figs. 11-7 and 11-8, the circles are not
labeled in units. You can do that for yourself. Imagine each concentric circle,
working outward, as increasing by any number of units you want. For exam-
ple, each radial division might represent one unit, or ﬁve units, or 10, or 100.
THE DIRECTION
In polar coordinates, the direction can be expressed in angular degrees
(symbolized 8, where a full circle represents 3608) or in units called radians.
Fig. 11-6.
Illustration for Problem 11-3.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
260

What is a radian, you ask? Imagine two rays emanating outward from the
center point of a circle. The rays each intersect the circle at a point. Call these
points P and Q. Suppose the distance between P and Q, as measured along
the arc of the circle, is equal to the radius of the circle. Then the measure of
the angle between the rays is one radian (1 rad). There are 2p rad in a full
circle, where p (the lowercase, non-italic Greek letter pi, pronounced ‘‘PIE’’)
stands for the ratio of a circle’s circumference to its diameter. This is a
constant, and it happens to be an irrational number. The value of p is
approximately 3.14159265359, often rounded oﬀto 3.14159 or 3.14.
The direction in a polar coordinate system is usually deﬁned counter-
clockwise from a reference axis pointing to the right or ‘‘east.’’ In Fig. 11-7,
the direction  is in degrees. Figure 11-8 shows the same polar plane, using
radians to express the direction. (The ‘‘rad’’ abbreviation is not used, because
it is obvious from the fact that the angles are multiples of p.) Regardless of
whether degrees or radians are used, the angle on the graph is directly
proportional to the value of .
NEGATIVE RADII
In polar coordinates, it is all right to have a negative radius. If some point is
speciﬁed with r<0, we multiply r by –1 so it becomes positive, and then add
or subtract 1808 (p rad) to or from the direction. That’s like saying, ‘‘Go 3
kilometers (km) southeast’’ instead of ‘‘Go –3 km northwest.’’ Negative
Fig. 11-7.
The polar coordinate plane. The angle  is in degrees, and the radius r is in
uniform increments.
CHAPTER 11
Graphing It
261

radii must be allowed in order to graph ﬁgures that represent functions whose
ranges can attain negative values.
NONSTANDARD DIRECTIONS
It’s okay to have nonstandard direction angles in polar coordinates. If the
value of  is 3608 (2p rad) or more, it represents more than one complete
counterclockwise revolution from the 08 (0 rad) reference axis. If the direc-
tion angle is less than 08 (0 rad), it represents clockwise revolution instead
of counterclockwise revolution. Nonstandard direction angles must be
allowed in order to graph ﬁgures that represent functions whose domains
go outside the standard angle range.
PROBLEM 11-4
Provide an example of a graphical object that can be represented as a
function in polar coordinates, but not in Cartesian coordinates.
SOLUTION 11-4
Recall the deﬁnitions of the terms relation and function. When we talk
about a function f, we can say that r ¼ f (). A simple function of  in
polar coordinates is a constant function such as this:
f ðÞ ¼ 3
Fig. 11-8.
Another form of the polar coordinate plane. The angle  is in radians, and the
radius r is in uniform increments.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
262

Because f () is just another way of denoting r, the radius, this function tells
us that r ¼ 3. This is a circle with a radius of 3 units.
In Cartesian coordinates, the equation of the circle with radius of 3 units
is more complicated. It looks like this:
x2 þ y2 ¼ 9
(Note that 9 ¼ 32, the square of the radius.) If we let y be the dependent
variable and x be the independent variable, we can rearrange the equation
of the circle to get:
y ¼  ð9  x2Þ1=2
If we say that y ¼ g(x) where g is a function of x in this case, we are mistaken.
There are values of x (the independent variable) that produce two values of y
(the dependent variable). For example, when x ¼ 0, y ¼  3. If we want to say
that g is a relation, that’s ﬁne, but we cannot call it a function.
Some Examples
In order to get a good idea of how the polar coordinate system works, let’s
look at the graphs of some familiar objects. Circles, ellipses, spirals, and
other ﬁgures whose equations are complicated in Cartesian coordinates can
often be expressed simply in polar coordinates. In general, the polar direction
 is expressed in radians. In the examples that follow, the ‘‘rad’’ abbreviation
is eliminated, because it is understood that all angles are in radians.
CIRCLE CENTERED AT ORIGIN
The equation of a circle centered at the origin in the polar plane is given
by the following formula:
r ¼ a
where a is a real-number constant greater than 0. This is illustrated in
Fig. 11-9.
CIRCLE PASSING THROUGH ORIGIN
The general form for the equation of a circle passing through the origin and
centered at the point (0, r0) in the polar plane (Fig. 11-10) is as follows:
r ¼ 2r0 cos ð  0Þ
CHAPTER 11
Graphing It
263

ELLIPSE CENTERED AT ORIGIN
The equation of an ellipse centered at the origin in the polar plane is given by
the following formula:
r ¼ ab=ða2 sin2  þ b2 cos2 Þ1=2
where a and b are real-number constants greater than 0.
Fig. 11-9.
Polar graph of a circle centered at the origin.
Fig. 11-10.
Polar graph of a circle passing through the origin.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
264

Here, ‘‘sin’’ represents the sine function and ‘‘cos’’ represents the cosine
function, both of which are available on any good scientiﬁc calculator. The
exponent 2 attached to these functions indicates that after the sine or cosine
has been found, the result should be squared.
In the ellipse, a represents the distance from the origin to the curve as
measured along the ‘‘horizontal’’ ray  ¼ 0, and b represents the distance
from the origin to the curve as measured along the ‘‘vertical’’ ray  ¼ p/2.
This is illustrated in Fig. 11-11. The values a and b represent the lengths of the
semi-axes of the ellipse; the greater value is the length of the major semi-axis,
and the lesser value is the length of the minor semi-axis.
HYPERBOLA CENTERED AT ORIGIN
The general form of the equation of a hyperbola centered at the origin in the
polar plane is given by the following formula:
r ¼ ab=ðb2 cos2   a2 sin2 Þ1=2
where a and b are real-number constants greater than 0.
Note how similar this is to the equation of the ellipse. But when we look
at Fig. 11-12, which shows a hyperbola, it becomes apparent that the
substitution of the minus sign for the plus sign in this equation makes a big
diﬀerence!
Let D represent a rectangle whose center is at the origin, whose vertical
edges are tangent to the hyperbola, and whose vertices (corners) lie on the
Fig. 11-11.
Polar graph of an ellipse centered at the origin.
CHAPTER 11
Graphing It
265

asymptotes of the hyperbola (the long, straight, dashed lines in Fig. 11-12).
Let a represent the distance from the origin to D as measured along the
‘‘horizontal’’ ray  ¼ 0, and let b represent the distance from the origin to D
as measured along the ‘‘vertical’’ ray  ¼ p/2. The values a and b represent
the lengths of the semi-axes of the hyperbola; the greater value is the length of
the major semi-axis, and the lesser value is the length of the minor semi-axis.
LEMNISCATE
The general form of the equation of a lemniscate centered at the origin in
the polar plane is given by the following formula:
r ¼ aðcos 2Þ1=2
where a is a real-number constant greater than 0. This is illustrated in
Fig. 11-13.
THREE-LEAFED ROSE
The general form of the equation of a three-leafed rose centered at the origin
in the polar plane is given by either of the following two formulas:
r ¼ a cos 3
r ¼ a sin 3
Fig. 11-12.
Polar graph of a hyperbola centered at the origin.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
266

where a is a real-number constant greater than 0. The cosine version
of the curve is illustrated in Fig. 11-14A. The sine version is illustrated in
Fig. 11-14B.
FOUR-LEAFED ROSE
The general form of the equation of a four-leafed rose centered at the origin
in the polar plane is given by either of the following two formulas:
r ¼ a cos 2
r ¼ a sin 2
where a is a real-number constant greater than 0. The cosine version is
illustrated in Fig. 11-15A. The sine version is illustrated in Fig. 11-15B.
SPIRAL
The general form of the equation of a spiral centered at the origin in the polar
plane is given by the following formula:
r ¼ a
where a is a real-number constant greater than 0. An example of this type of
spiral, called the spiral of Archimedes because of the uniform manner in
which its radius increases as the angle increases, is illustrated in Fig. 11-16.
Fig. 11-13.
Polar graph of a lemniscate centered at the origin.
CHAPTER 11
Graphing It
267

CARDIOID
The general form of the equation of a cardioid centered at the origin in the
polar plane is given by the following formula:
r ¼ 2að1 þ cos Þ
Fig. 11-14.
(A) Polar graph of a three-leafed rose with equation r ¼ a cos 3. (B) Polar graph
of a three-leafed rose with equation r ¼ a sin 3.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
268

where a is a real-number constant greater than 0. An example of this type of
curve is illustrated in Fig. 11-17.
PROBLEM 11-5
What is the value of the constant, a, in the spiral shown in Fig. 11-16?
What is the equation of this spiral? Assume that each radial division
represents 1 unit.
Fig. 11-15.
(A) Polar graph of a four-leafed rose with equation r ¼ a cos 2. (B) Polar graph
of a four-leafed rose with equation r ¼ a sin 2.
CHAPTER 11
Graphing It
269

SOLUTION 11-5
Note that if  ¼ p, then r ¼ 2. Therefore, we can solve for a by substituting
this number pair in the general equation for the spiral. We know that
(, r) ¼ (p, 2). Thus 2 ¼ ap. Solving for the constant, a, gives us a ¼ 2/p. The
equation of the spiral is:
r ¼ ð2=pÞ
Fig. 11-16.
Polar graph of a spiral; illustration for Problem 11-5.
Fig. 11-17.
Polar graph of a cardioid; illustration for Problem 11-6.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
270

or, rearranged to get rid of the need for parentheses:
r ¼ 2=p
PROBLEM 11-6
What is the value of the constant, a, in the cardioid shown in Fig. 11-17?
What is the equation of this cardioid? Assume that each radial division
represents 1 unit.
SOLUTION 11-6
Note that if  ¼ 0, then r ¼ 4. We can solve for a by substituting this number
pair in the general equation for the cardioid. We know that (, r) ¼ (0, 4).
Proceed like this:
r ¼ 2að1 þ cos Þ
4 ¼ 2að1 þ cos 0Þ
4 ¼ 2að1 þ 1Þ
4 ¼ 4a
a ¼ 1
This means that the equation of the cardioid is:
r ¼ 2ð1 þ cos Þ
or, rearranged to get rid of the need for parentheses:
r ¼ 2 þ 2 cos 
Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
What is the distance between the points (3,4) and (–3,4) in Cartesian
coordinates?
(a) 10
(b) 8
(c) 6
(d) 5
2.
Suppose a straight line in Cartesian coordinates is represented by the
following equation:
3x  6y þ 2 ¼ 0
CHAPTER 11
Graphing It
271

What is the slope of this line?
(a) 2
(b) 3/2
(c) 2/3
(d) 1/2
3.
What is the distance between the origin and the point (8, 8) in
Cartesian coordinates?
(a) 16
(b) 8
(c) 1281/2
(d) 81/2
4.
Suppose the equation of a line in Cartesian coordinates is speciﬁed as:
y  3 ¼ 7ðx þ 2Þ
From this equation, we know that the line passes through the point
(a) (2,0)
(b) (0, 3)
(c) (2, 3)
(d) none of the above
5.
What does the graph of  ¼ 0 look like in polar coordinates?
(a) A point.
(b) A straight line.
(c) A spiral.
(d) A circle.
6.
The term ordinate in Cartesian coordinates refers to
(a) the direction
(b) the value of the dependent variable
(c) the value of the independent variable
(d) the angle
7.
A radian is equivalent to approximately
(a) 114.68
(b) 908
(c) 57.38
(d) 28.78
8.
The direction of a point, relative to the origin, in conventional polar
coordinates is expressed as an angle going
(a) counterclockwise
from
the
axis
running
from
the
origin
upwards
PART 3
Shapes and Places
272

(b) counterclockwise from the axis running from the origin towards
the left
(c) counterclockwise
from
the
axis
running
from
the
origin
downwards
(d) counterclockwise from the axis running from the origin towards
the right
9.
What is the distance between the origin and (r, ) ¼ (4, 1358) in polar
coordinates?
(a) 0
(b) 4
(c) 3p/4
(d) It is impossible to determine this without more information.
10.
A straight line has a slope of –3 in Cartesian coordinates, and
runs through the point (0,2). The equation of this line is
(a) y ¼ –3x þ 2
(b) y ¼ 2x  3
(c) y  3 ¼ x þ 2
(d) impossible to determine without more information
CHAPTER 11
Graphing It
273

CHAPTER
12
A Taste of
Trigonometry
Trigonometry (or ‘‘trig’’) involves angles and distances. Trigonometry scares
some people because of the Greek symbology, but the rules are clear-cut.
Once you can get used to the idea of Greek letters representing angles, and
if you’re willing to draw diagrams and use a calculator, basic trigonometry
loses most of its fear-inspiring qualities. You might even ﬁnd yourself having
fun with it.
More about Circles
Circles are deﬁned by equations in which either x or y can be considered
the dependent variable. We’ve already looked at the graphs of some simple
circles in the xy-plane. Let’s look more closely at this special species of
geometric ﬁgure.
274
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

GENERAL EQUATION OF A CIRCLE
The equation in the xy-plane that represents a circle depends on two things:
the radius of the circle, and the location of its center point.
Suppose r is the radius of a circle, expressed in arbitrary units. Imagine
that the center point of the circle in Cartesian coordinates is located at
the point x ¼ a and y ¼ b, represented by the ordered pair (a, b). Then the
equation of that circle is:
ðx  aÞ2 þ ðy  bÞ2 ¼ r2
If the center of the circle happens to be at the origin, that is, at (0, 0) on the
coordinate plane, then the general equation is simpler:
x2 þ y2 ¼ r2
THE UNIT CIRCLE
Consider a circle in rectangular coordinates with the following equation:
x2 þ y2 ¼ 1
This is called the unit circle because its radius is 1 unit, and it is centered
at the origin (0, 0). This circle gives us a good way to deﬁne the common
trigonometric functions, which are sometimes called circular functions.
IT’S GREEK TO US
In trigonometry, mathematicians and scientists have acquired the habit of
using Greek letters to represent angles. The most common symbol for this
purpose is an italic, lowercase Greek theta (pronounced ‘‘THAY-tuh’’).
It looks like an italic numeral 0 with a horizontal line through it ().
When writing about two diﬀerent angles, a second Greek letter is used
along with . Most often, it is the italic, lowercase letter phi (pronounced
‘‘FIE’’ or ‘‘FEE’’). This character looks like an italic lowercase English
letter o with a forward slash through it ().
Sometimes the italic, lowercase Greek alpha (‘‘AL-fuh’’), beta (‘‘BAY-
tuh’’), and gamma (‘‘GAM-uh’’) are used to represent angles. These,
respectively, look like this: , , . When things get messy and there are a
lot of angles to talk about, numeric subscripts are sometimes used with
Greek letters, so don’t be surprised if you see text in which angles are denoted
1, 2, 3, and so on.
CHAPTER 12
A Taste of Trigonometry
275

ANGULAR UNITS
There are two main units by which the measures of angles in a ﬂat plane
can be speciﬁed: the radian and the degree. The radian was deﬁned in the
previous chapter. A quarter circle is p/2 rad, a half circle is p rad, and
three quarters of a circle is 3p/2 rad. Mathematicians prefer to use the radian
when working with trigonometric functions, and the abbreviation ‘‘rad’’ is
left out. So if you see something like 1 ¼ p/4, you know the angle 1 is
expressed in radians.
The angular degree (8), also called the degree of arc, is the unit of angular
measure most familiar to lay people. One degree (18) is 1/360 of a full circle.
An angle of 908 represents a quarter circle, 1808 represents a half circle, 2708
represents three quarters of a circle, and 3608 represents a full circle. A right
angle has a measure of 908, an acute angle has a measure of more than 08
but less than 908, and an obtuse angle has a measure of more than 908 but
less than 1808.
To denote the measures of tiny angles, or to precisely denote the measures
of angles in general, smaller units are used. One minute of arc or arc minute,
symbolized by an apostrophe or accent (0) or abbreviated as m or min, is 1/60
of a degree. One second of arc or arc second, symbolized by a closing
quotation mark (00) or abbreviated as s or sec, is 1/60 of an arc minute or
1/3600 of a degree. An example of an angle in this notation is 308 150 000,
which is read as ‘‘30 degrees, 15 minutes, 0 seconds.’’
Alternatively, fractions of a degree can be denoted in decimal form. You
might see, for example, 30.258. This is the same as 308 150 000. Decimal frac-
tions of degrees are easier to work with than the minute/second scheme when
angles must be added and subtracted, or when using a conventional calcu-
lator to work out trigonometry problems. Nevertheless, the minute/second
system, like the English system of measurements, remains in widespread use.
PROBLEM 12-1
A text discussion tells you that 1 ¼ p/4. What is the measure of 1 in degrees?
SOLUTION 12-1
There are 2p rad in a full circle of 3608. The value p/4 is equal to 1/8 of 2p.
Therefore, the angle 1 is 1/8 of a full circle, or 458.
PROBLEM 12-2
Suppose your town is listed in an almanac as being at 408 200 north latitude
and 938 480 west longitude. What are these values in decimal form? Express
your answers to two decimal places.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
276

SOLUTION 12-2
There are 60 minutes of arc in one degree. To calculate the latitude, note that
200 ¼ (20/60)8 ¼ 0.338; that means the latitude is 40.338 north. To calculate
the longitude, note that 480 ¼ (48/60)8 ¼ 0.808; that means the longitude is
93.808 west.
Primary Circular Functions
Consider a circle in the Cartesian xy-plane with the following equation:
x2 þ y2 ¼ 1
This equation, as deﬁned earlier in this chapter, represents the unit circle.
Let  be an angle whose apex is at the origin, and that is measured counter-
clockwise from the x axis, as shown in Fig. 12-1. Suppose this angle corre-
sponds to a ray that intersects the unit circle at some point P ¼ (x0, y0). We
can deﬁne the three basic circular functions, also called the primary
circular functions, of the angle  in an elegant way. But before we get into
this, let’s extend our notion of angles to cover negative values, and also to
cover values more than 3608 (2p rad).
OFFBEAT ANGLES
In trigonometry, any direction angle expressible as a real number, no matter
how extreme, can always be reduced to something that is at least 08 (0 rad)
Fig. 12-1.
The unit circle is the basis for the trigonometric functions.
CHAPTER 12
A Taste of Trigonometry
277

but less than 3608 (2p rad). If you look at Fig. 12-1, you should be able to
envision how this works. Even if the ray OP makes more than one complete
revolution counterclockwise from the x axis, or if it turns clockwise instead,
its direction can always be deﬁned by some counterclockwise angle of least 08
(0 rad) but less than 3608 (2p rad) relative to the x axis.
Any oﬀbeat direction angle such as 7308 or 9p/4 rad can be reduced
to a direction angle that measures at least 08 (0 rad) but less than 3608
(2p rad) by adding or subtracting some whole-number multiple of 3608
(2p rad). But you have to be careful about this. A direction angle speciﬁes
orientation only. The orientation of the ray OP is the same for an angle of
5408 (3p rad) as for an angle of 1808 (p rad), but the larger value carries
with it the insinuation that the ray (also called a vector) OP has revolved
1.5 times around, while the smaller angle implies that it has undergone
less than one complete revolution. Sometimes this doesn’t matter, but often
it does!
Negative angles are encountered in trigonometry, especially in graphs
of functions. Multiple revolutions of objects are important in physics
and engineering. So if you ever hear or read about an angle such as 908, p/
2 rad, 9008, or 5p rad, you can be conﬁdent that it has meaning. The negative
value indicates clockwise rotation. An angle that is said to measure more
than 3608 (2p rad) indicates more than one complete revolution counter-
clockwise. An angle that is said to measure less than 3608 (2p rad)
indicates more than one revolution clockwise.
THE SINE FUNCTION
In Fig. 12-1, imagine ray OP pointing along the x axis, and then starting
to rotate counterclockwise on its end point O, as if point O is a mechanical
bearing. The point P, represented by coordinates (x0, y0), thus revolves
around point O, following the perimeter of the unit circle.
Imagine what happens to the value of y0 (the ordinate of point P) during
one complete revolution of ray OP. The ordinate of P starts out at y0 ¼ 0,
then increases until it reaches y0 ¼ 1 after P has gone 908 or p/2 rad around
the circle ( ¼ 908 ¼ p/2). After that, y0 begins to decrease, getting back
to y0 ¼ 0 when P has gone 1808 or p rad around the circle ( ¼ 1808 ¼ p).
As P continues on its counterclockwise trek, y0 keeps decreasing until,
at  ¼ 2708 ¼ 3p/2, the value of y0 reaches its minimum of 1. After that, the
value of y0 rises again until, when P has gone completely around the circle,
it returns to y0 ¼ 0 for  ¼ 3608 ¼ 2p.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
278

The value of y0 is deﬁned as the sine of the angle . The sine function is
abbreviated sin, so we can state this simple equation:
sin  ¼ y0
CIRCULAR MOTION
Imagine that you attach a ‘‘glow-in-the-dark’’ ball to the end of a string, and
then swing the ball around and around at a rate of one revolution per second.
The ball describes a circle as viewed from high above, as shown in Fig. 12-2A.
Suppose you make the ball circle your head so the path of the ball lies in a
perfectly horizontal plane. Imagine that you are in the middle of a ﬂat,
open ﬁeld on a perfectly dark night. If a friend stands far away with his or
her eyes exactly in the plane of the ball’s orbit and looks at you and the
ball through a pair of binoculars, what does your friend see?
Your friend, watching from a great distance and from a viewpoint exactly
in the plane deﬁned by the ball’s orbit, sees a point of light that oscillates
back and forth, from right-to-left and left-to-right, along what appears to be
a straight-line path (Fig. 12-2B). Starting from its extreme right-most
apparent position, the glowing point moves toward the left for half a second,
speeding up and then slowing down; then it stops and reverses direction;
then it moves toward the right for half a second, speeding up and then
slowing down; then it stops and turns around again. This goes on and on for
as long as you care to swing the ball around your head. As seen by your
friend, the ball reaches its extreme right-most position at one-second intervals
because its orbital speed is one revolution per second.
Fig. 12-2.
Orbiting ball and string. At A, as seen from above; at B, as seen edge-on.
CHAPTER 12
A Taste of Trigonometry
279

THE SINE WAVE
If you graph the apparent position of the ball as seen by your friend with
respect to time, the result is a sine wave, which is a graphical plot of a sine
function. Some sine waves ‘‘rise higher and lower’’ (corresponding to a longer
string), some are ‘‘ﬂatter’’ (a shorter string), some are ‘‘stretched out’’
(a slower rate of revolution), and some are ‘‘squashed’’ (a faster rate of
revolution). But the characteristic shape of the wave, known as a sinusoid,
is the same in every case.
You can whirl the ball around faster or slower than one revolution per
second. The string can be made longer or shorter. These adjustments alter
the frequency and/or the amplitude of the sine wave. But any sinusoid can be
deﬁned as the path of a point that orbits a central point in a perfect circle,
with a certain radius, at a certain rate of revolution.
Circular motion in the Cartesian plane can be deﬁned in terms of a general
formula:
y ¼ a sin b
where a is a constant that depends on the radius of the circle, and b is a
constant that depends on the revolution rate. The angle  is expressed in a
counterclockwise direction from the positive x axis. Figure 12-3 illustrates
a graph of the basic sine function: a sine wave for which a ¼ 1 and b ¼ 1,
and for which the angle is expressed in radians.
Fig. 12-3.
Graph of the sine function for values of  between 3p rad and 3p rad.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
280

THE COSINE FUNCTION
Look again at Fig. 12-1. Imagine, once again, a ray from the origin outward
through point P on the circle, pointing at ﬁrst along the x axis, and then
rotating in a counterclockwise direction.
What happens to the value of x0 during one complete revolution of the
ray? It starts out at x0 ¼ 1, then decreases until it reaches x0 ¼ 0 when
 ¼ 908 ¼ p/2. After that, x0 continues to decrease, getting down to x0 ¼ 1
when  ¼ 1808 ¼ p. As P continues counterclockwise around the circle, x0
begins to increase again; at  ¼ 2708 ¼ 3p/2, the value gets back up to x0 ¼ 0.
After that, x0 increases further until, when P has gone completely around the
circle, it returns to x0 ¼ 1 for  ¼ 3608 ¼ 2p.
The value of x0 is deﬁned as the cosine of the angle . The cosine function
is abbreviated cos. So we can write this:
cos  ¼ x0
THE COSINE WAVE
Circular motion in the Cartesian plane can be deﬁned in terms of the cosine
function as well as the sine function:
y ¼ a cos b
where a is a constant that depends on the radius of the circle, and b is a
constant that depends on the revolution rate, just as is the case with the
sine function. The angle  is measured or deﬁned counterclockwise from
the positive x axis, also after the fashion of the sine function.
The shape of a cosine wave is exactly the same as the shape of a sine wave.
Both waves are sinusoids. But the cosine wave is shifted in phase by 1/4 cycle
(908 or p/2 rad) with respect to the sine wave. Figure 12-4 illustrates a graph
of the basic cosine function: a cosine wave for which a ¼ 1 and b ¼ 1, and for
which the angle is expressed in radians.
THE TANGENT FUNCTION
Once again, refer to Fig. 12-1. The tangent (abbreviated tan) of an angle  is
deﬁned using the same ray OP and the same point P ¼ (x0, y0) as is done with
the sine and cosine functions. The deﬁnition is:
tan  ¼ y0=x0
CHAPTER 12
A Taste of Trigonometry
281

We already know that sin  ¼ y0 and cos  ¼ x0, so we can express the tangent
function in terms of the sine and the cosine:
tan  ¼ sin = cos 
This function is interesting because, unlike the sine and cosine functions,
it ‘‘blows up’’ at certain values of . This is shown by the graph of the
tangent function (Fig. 12-5). Whenever x0 ¼ 0, the denominator of either
Fig. 12-4.
Graph of the cosine function for values of  between 3p rad and 3p rad.
Fig. 12-5.
Graph of the tangent function for values of  between 3p rad and 3p rad.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
282

quotient above becomes zero. Division by zero is not deﬁned, and that
means the tangent function is not deﬁned for any angle  such that
cos  ¼ 0. Such angles are all the positive and negative odd-integer multiples
of 908 (p/2 rad).
PROBLEM 12-3
What is tan 458? Do not perform any calculations. You should be able to
infer this without having to write down a single numeral.
SOLUTION 12-3
Draw a diagram of a unit circle, such as the one in Fig. 12-1, and place ray
OP such that it subtends an angle of 458 with respect to the x axis. That angle
is the angle for which we want to ﬁnd the tangent. Note that the ray OP also
subtends an angle of 458 with respect to the y axis, because the x and y axes
are perpendicular (they are oriented at 908 with respect to each other), and
458 is exactly half of 908. Every point on the ray OP is equally distant
from the x and y axes; this includes the point (x0, y0). It follows that
x0 ¼ y0, and neither of them is equal to zero. From this, we can conclude
that y0/x0 ¼ 1. According to the deﬁnition of the tangent function, therefore,
tan 458 ¼ 1.
Secondary Circular Functions
The three functions deﬁned above form the cornerstone for trigonometry.
But three more circular functions exist. Their values represent the reciprocals
of the values of the primary circular functions.
THE COSECANT FUNCTION
Imagine the ray OP in Fig. 12-1, at an angle  with respect to the x axis,
pointing outward from the origin, and intersecting the unit circle at the
point P ¼ (x0, y0). The reciprocal of the ordinate, that is, 1/y0, is deﬁned as
the cosecant of the angle . The cosecant function is abbreviated csc, so we
can say this in mathematical terms:
csc  ¼ 1=y0
The
cosecant
function
is
the
reciprocal
of
the
sine
function.
For
any angle , the following equation is always true as long as sin  is
CHAPTER 12
A Taste of Trigonometry
283

not equal to zero:
csc  ¼ 1= sin 
The cosecant function is not deﬁned for 08 (0 rad), or for any multiple of
1808 (p rad). This is because the sine of any such angle is equal to 0, which
would mean that the cosecant would have to be 1/0. We can’t do anything
with a quotient in which the denominator is 0.
Figure 12-6 is a graph of the cosecant function for values of  between 3p
and 3p. Note the angles at which the function ‘‘explodes.’’
THE SECANT FUNCTION
Now consider the reciprocal of the abscissa, that is, 1/x0, in Fig. 12-1. This is
the secant of the angle . The secant function is abbreviated sec, so we can
deﬁne it like this:
sec  ¼ 1=x0
The secant of any angle is the reciprocal of the cosine of that angle. As long
as cos  is not equal to zero, the following is true:
sec  ¼ 1= cos 
Fig. 12-6.
Graph of the cosecant function for values of  between 3p rad and 3p rad.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
284

The secant function is not deﬁned for 908 (p/2 rad), or for any positive or
negative odd multiple thereof. Figure 12-7 is a graph of the secant function
for values of  between 3p and 3p. Note the angles at which the function
‘‘blows up.’’
THE COTANGENT FUNCTION
There’s one more circular function. Consider the value of x0/y0 at the point P
where the ray OP crosses the unit circle. This quotient is called the cotangent
of the angle . The word ‘‘cotangent’’ is abbreviated as cot. For any ray
anchored at the origin and crossing the unit circle at an angle :
cot  ¼ x0=y0
Because we already know that sin  ¼ y0 and cos  ¼ x0, we can express the
cotangent function in terms of the sine and the cosine:
cot  ¼ cos = sin 
The cotangent function is also the reciprocal of the tangent function:
cot  ¼ 1= tan 
This function, like the tangent function, ‘‘explodes’’ at certain values of .
Whenever y0 ¼ 0, the denominator of either quotient above becomes zero,
and the cotangent function is not deﬁned. This occurs at all integer multiples
Fig. 12-7.
Graph of the secant function for values of  between 3p rad and 3p rad.
CHAPTER 12
A Taste of Trigonometry
285

of 1808 (p rad). Figure 12-8 is a graph of the cotangent function for values of
 between 3p and 3p.
VALUES OF CIRCULAR FUNCTIONS
Now that you know how the circular functions are deﬁned, you might
wonder how the values are calculated. The answer: with a calculator!
Most personal computers have a calculator program built into the operating
system. You might have to dig around in the folders to ﬁnd it, but once you
do, you can put a shortcut to it on your computer’s desktop. Put the calcu-
lator in the ‘‘scientiﬁc’’ mode.
The values of the sine and cosine function never get smaller than 1 or
larger than 1. The values of other functions can vary wildly. Put a few
numbers into your calculator and see what happens when you apply the
circular functions to them. Pay attention to whether you’re using degrees or
radians. When the value of a function ‘‘blows up’’ (the denominator in the
unit-circle equation deﬁning it becomes zero), you’ll get an error message on
the calculator.
PROBLEM 12-4
Use a portable scientiﬁc calculator, or the calculator program in a personal
computer, to ﬁnd the values of all six circular functions of 668. Round
your answers oﬀto three decimal places. If your calculator does not have
keys for the cosecant (csc), secant (sec), or cotangent (cot) functions, ﬁrst
Fig. 12-8.
Graph of the cotangent function for values of  between 3p rad and 3p rad.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
286

ﬁnd the sine (sin), cosine (cos), and tangent (tan) respectively, then ﬁnd the
reciprocal, and ﬁnally round oﬀyour answer to three decimal places.
SOLUTION 12-4
You should get the following results. Be sure your calculator is set to work
with degrees, not radians.
sin 66 ¼ 0:914
cos 66 ¼ 0:407
tan 66 ¼ 2:246
csc 66 ¼ 1=ðsin 66 Þ ¼ 1:095
sec 66 ¼ 1=ðcos 66 Þ ¼ 2:459
cot 66 ¼ 1=ðtan 66 Þ ¼ 0:445
The Right Triangle Model
We have just deﬁned the six circular functions – sine, cosine, tangent,
cosecant, secant, and cotangent – in terms of points on a circle. There is
another way to deﬁne these functions: the right-triangle model.
TRIANGLE AND ANGLE NOTATION
In
geometry,
it
is
customary
to
denote
triangles
by
writing
an
uppercase Greek letter delta () followed by the names of the three points
representing the corners, or vertices, of the triangle. For example, if P, Q,
and R are the names of three points, then PQR is the triangle formed
by connecting these points with straight line segments. We read this as
‘‘triangle PQR.’’
Angles are denoted by writing the symbol ﬀ(which resembles an extremely
italicized, uppercase English letter L without serifs) followed by the names of
three points that uniquely determine the angle. This scheme lets us specify the
extent and position of the angle, and also the rotational sense in which it is
expressed. For example, if there are three points P, Q, and R, then ﬀPQR
(read ‘‘angle PQR’’) has the same measure as ﬀRQP, but in the opposite
direction. The middle point, Q, is the vertex of the angle.
CHAPTER 12
A Taste of Trigonometry
287

The rotational sense in which an angle is measured can be signiﬁcant
in physics, astronomy, and engineering, and also when working in coordi-
nate systems. In the Cartesian plane, remember that angles measured
counterclockwise are considered positive, while angles measured clockwise
are considered negative. If we have ﬀPQR that measures 308 around a circle
in Cartesian coordinates, then ﬀRQP measures 308, whose direction is
equivalent to an angle of 3308. The cosines of these two angles happen to be
the same, but the sines diﬀer.
RATIOS OF SIDES
Consider a right triangle deﬁned by points P, Q, and R, as shown in Fig. 12-9.
Suppose that ﬀQPR is a right angle, so PQR is a right triangle. Let d be
the length of line segment QP, e be the length of line segment PR, and f be
the length of line segment QR. Let  be ﬀPQR, the angle measured counter-
clockwise between line segments QP and QR. The six circular trigonometric
functions can be deﬁned as ratios between the lengths of the sides, as follows:
sin  ¼ e=f
cos  ¼ d=f
tan  ¼ e=d
csc  ¼ f =e
sec  ¼ f =d
cot  ¼ d=e
The longest side of a right triangle is always opposite the 908 angle, and
is called the hypotenuse. In Fig. 12-9, this is the side QR whose length is f.
The other two sides are called adjacent sides because they are both adjacent
to the right angle.
Fig. 12-9.
The right-triangle model for deﬁning trigonometric functions. All right triangles
obey the theorem of Pythagoras. Illustration for Problems 12-5 and 12-6.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
288

SUM OF ANGLE MEASURES
The following fact can be useful in deducing the measures of angles in trigono-
metric calculations. It’s a simple theorem in geometry that you should remem-
ber. In any triangle, the sum of the measures of the interior angles is 1808
(p rad). This is true whether it is a right triangle or not, as long as all the angles
are measured in the plane deﬁned by the three vertices of the triangle.
RANGE OF ANGLES
In the right-triangle model, the values of the circular functions are deﬁned
only for angles between, but not including, 08 and 908 (0 rad and p/2 rad).
All angles outside this range are better dealt with using the unit-circle model.
Using the right-triangle scheme, a trigonometric function is undeﬁned
whenever the denominator in its ‘‘side ratio’’ (according to the formulas
above) is equal to zero. The length of the hypotenuse (side f ) is never zero,
but if a right triangle is ‘‘squashed’’ or ‘‘squeezed’’ ﬂat either horizontally or
vertically, then the length of one of the adjacent sides (d or e) can become
zero. Such objects aren’t triangles in the strict sense, because they have only
two vertices rather than three.
PROBLEM 12-5
Suppose there is a triangle whose sides are 3, 4, and 5 units, respectively.
What is the sine of the angle  opposite the side that measures 3 units?
Express your answer to three decimal places.
SOLUTION 12-5
If we are to use the right-triangle model to solve this problem, we must
ﬁrst be certain that a triangle with sides of 3, 4, and 5 units is a right
triangle. Otherwise, the scheme won’t work. We can test for this by seeing
if the Pythagorean theorem applies. If this triangle is a right triangle,
then the side measuring 5 units is the hypotenuse, and we should ﬁnd
that 32 þ 42 ¼ 52. Checking, we see that 32 ¼ 9 and 42 ¼ 16. Therefore,
32 þ 42 ¼ 9 þ 16 ¼ 25, which is equal to 52. It’s a right triangle, indeed!
It helps to draw a picture here, after the fashion of Fig. 12-9. Put the angle
, which we are analyzing, at lower left (corresponding to the vertex point Q).
Label the hypotenuse f ¼ 5. Now we must ﬁgure out which of the other sides
should be called d, and which should be called e. We want to ﬁnd the sine of
the angle opposite the side whose length is 3 units, and this angle, in Fig. 12-9,
is opposite side PR, whose length is equal to e. So we set e ¼ 3 . That leaves
us with no other choice for d than to set d ¼ 4.
CHAPTER 12
A Taste of Trigonometry
289

According to the formulas above, the sine of the angle in question is equal
to e/f. In this case, that means sin  ¼ 3/5 ¼ 0.600.
PROBLEM 12-6
What are the values of the other ﬁve circular functions for the angle  as
deﬁned in Problem 12-5? Express your answers to three decimal places.
SOLUTION 12-6
Plug numbers into the formulas given above, representing the ratios of the
lengths of sides in the right triangle:
cos  ¼ d=f ¼ 4=5 ¼ 0:800
tan  ¼ e=d ¼ 3=4 ¼ 0:750
csc  ¼ f =e ¼ 5=3 ¼ 1:667
sec  ¼ f =d ¼ 5=4 ¼ 1:250
cot  ¼ d=e ¼ 4=3 ¼ 1:333
Pythagorean Extras
The theorem of Pythagoras, which you learned earlier in this book, can be
extended to cover two important facts involving the circular trigonometric
functions. These are worth remembering.
PYTHAGOREAN THEOREM FOR SINE AND COSINE
The sum of the squares of the sine and cosine of an angle is always equal to 1.
In mathematical terms, we can write it like this:
ðsin Þ2 þ ðcos Þ2 ¼ 1
When the value of a trigonometric function is squared, the exponent 2 is
customarily placed after the abbreviation of the function, so the parentheses
can be eliminated from the expression. Therefore, the above equation is more
often written this way:
sin2  þ cos2  ¼ 1
PYTHAGOREAN THEOREM FOR SECANT AND TANGENT
The diﬀerence between the squares of the secant and tangent of an angle is
always equal to either 1 or 1. The following formulas apply for all angles
PART 3
Shapes and Places
290

except  ¼ 908 (p/2 rad) and  ¼ 2708 (3p/2 rad):
sec2   tan2  ¼ 1
tan2   sec2  ¼ 1
USE CRUTCHES!
Trigonometry is a branch of mathematics with extensive applications
in science, engineering, architecture – even in art. You should not be shy
about using a calculator and making sketches to help yourself solve prob-
lems. So what if they’re ‘‘crutches’’? As long as you get the correct answer,
you can use any help you need. (Just be sure you keep a fresh, spare battery
around for your calculator if it’s battery powered.)
PROBLEM 12-7
Use a drawing of the unit circle to help show why it is true that sin2  þ
cos2  ¼ 1 for angles  greater than 08 and less than 908. (Hint: a right triangle
is involved.)
SOLUTION 12-7
Figure 12-10 shows a drawing of the unit circle, with  deﬁned counterclock-
wise between the x axis and a ray emanating from the origin. When the angle
is greater than 08 but less than 908, a right triangle is formed, with a segment
of the ray as the hypotenuse. The length of this segment is equal to the
radius of the unit circle. This radius, by deﬁnition, is 1 unit. According to
the Pythagorean theorem for right triangles, the square of the length of the
hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the lengths of the other
Fig. 12-10.
Illustration for Problem 12-7.
CHAPTER 12
A Taste of Trigonometry
291

two sides. It is easy to see from Fig. 12-9 that the lengths of these other two
sides are sin  and cos . Therefore:
ðsin Þ2 þ ðsin Þ2 ¼ 12
which is the same as saying that sin2  þ cos2  ¼ 1.
PROBLEM 12-8
Use another drawing of the unit circle to help show why it is true
that sin2  þ cos2  ¼ 1 for angles  greater than 2708 and less than 3608.
(Hint: this range can be considered, in directional terms, as equivalent to
the range of angles greater than 908 and less than 08.)
SOLUTION 12-8
Figure 12-11 shows how this can be done. Draw a mirror image of Fig. 12-10,
with the angle  deﬁned clockwise instead of counterclockwise. Again we have
a right triangle. This triangle, like all right triangles, obeys the Pythagorean
theorem.
Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
Suppose you stand on a ﬂat, level surface on a sunny morning. Your
shadow is exactly four times as long as you are tall. What is the angle
Fig. 12-11.
Illustration for Problem 12-8.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
292

of the sun above the horizon, to the nearest degree?
(a) 148
(b) 458
(c) 768
(d) More information is needed to answer this question.
2.
Suppose you stand on a ﬂat, level surface on a sunny morning. The sun is
at an angle of 508 above the horizon. You are exactly 160 centimeters
(cm) tall. How long is your shadow, to the nearest centimeter?
(a) 122 cm
(b) 134 cm
(c) 190 cm
(d) More information is needed to answer this question.
3.
Imagine that you stand some distance away from a tall building with a
ﬂat roof. The earth in the vicinity of the building is ﬂat and level. The
angle between the horizon and the top of the building, as measured
from a point at your feet, is 70.008. The straight-line distance between
your feet and the nearest point at the top of the building is 200 meters
(m). How tall is the building, to the nearest meter?
(a) 115 m
(b) 188 m
(c) 213 m
(d) More information is needed to answer this question.
4.
One arc second is the equivalent of
(a) 1/60 of an arc minute
(b) 1/3600 of an arc minute
(c) 1/p of an arc minute
(d) 1/(2p) of an arc minute
5.
Approximately how many degrees are there in 1 rad?
(a) 32.78
(b) 458
(c) 57.38
(d) None of the above.
6.
Suppose an almanac lists the latitude of your town as 358 150 0000 N.
This is equivalent to
(a) 35.158 N
(b) 35.258 N
(c) 35.508 N
(d) None of the above.
CHAPTER 12
A Taste of Trigonometry
293

7.
What is the angle, in radians, representing revolution by 3/4 of a
circle in a clockwise direction?
(a) 3p/4
(b) 3p/4
(c) 3p/2
(d) 3p/2
8.
The circumference of the earth is approximately 40,000 kilometers
(km). What is the angular separation between two points 111 km
apart, measured over the shortest possible path on the surface?
Neglect irregularities in the terrain. Assume the earth is a perfect
sphere.
(a) 1 rad
(b) 57.38
(c) 1/360 rad
(d) 18
9.
Suppose you live in a remote area and decide to install an outdoor
antenna for receiving stereo FM broadcasts. You buy a support
tower that is 20.00 meters (m) high. The installation guide recom-
mends guying the tower from a point halfway up, and also from
the top. The guide also recommends that all guy wires be sloped at
angles no greater than 458 with respect to the horizontal. Suppose
you install two sets of guy wires, one set from a point halfway up
and the other set from the top. All guys are fastened to three anchors
at ground level. Each guy anchor is at just the right distance from the
base of the tower to make the top set of guy wires slant at precisely
45.008. At what angle, to the nearest tenth of a degree and relative to
the horizontal, does each of the lower-level guy wires slant? Assume
the ground in the vicinity of the tower is ﬂat and level.
(a) 22.58
(b) 26.68
(c) 30.08
(d) More information is needed to answer this question.
10.
What is the largest possible value for the tangent of an angle?
(a) 1
(b) 908
(c) p rad
(d) None of the above.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
294

Test: Part 3
Do not refer to the text when taking this test. You may draw diagrams or use
a calculator if necessary. A good score is at least 30 correct. Answers are in
the back of the book. It’s best to have a friend check your score the ﬁrst time,
so you won’t memorize the answers if you want to take the test again.
1.
Imagine that you are on a long, straight, level stretch of two-lane high-
way. A set of utility poles, all 20 m high, 40 m to the right of the center
line (as you see them while driving), and 70 m from each other, is
set up alongside the road. A perfectly taut, straight wire runs along
the tops of the poles. Which of the following statements (a), (b), (c),
or (d), if any, is true?
(a) The line of the wire is parallel to the highway center line.
(b) Theline ofthe wire is skewed with respect to the highwaycenter line.
(c) If the line of the wire and the highway center line were extended
indeﬁnitely, they would intersect at some point far in front of you.
(d) If the line of the wire and the highway center line were extended
indeﬁnitely, they would intersect at some point far behind you.
(e) None of the above statements (a), (b), (c), or (d) is true.
295
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

2.
In a right triangle, the hypotenuse
(a) is always opposite the smallest angle
(b) is always opposite the 308 angle
(c) is always opposite the 608 angle
(d) is always opposite the 1208 angle
(e) is always opposite the largest angle
3.
Suppose you are an ant on a ﬂat, level ﬁeld, and you are looking at
a broadcast tower. Your companion, another ant, looks up at the
tower and says, ‘‘We are only 0.001 m tall, and that building is
100,000 times as tall as we are.’’ To this you reply, ‘‘The top of that
tower is at an angle of about 458 with respect to the horizon.’’ Your
companion, not to be outwitted, correctly observes:
(a) ‘‘If that is true, then we are roughly 10 m from the bottom of the
tower.’’
(b) ‘‘If that is true, then we are roughly 71 m from the bottom of the
tower.’’
(c) ‘‘If that is true, then we are roughly 100 m from the bottom of the
tower.’’
(d) ‘‘If that is true, then we are roughly 710 m from the bottom of the
tower.’’
(e) ‘‘That tells us nothing about our distance from the tower.’’
4.
Imagine a city laid out in square blocks on a level expanse of prairie,
with ‘‘streets’’ running east–west and ‘‘avenues’’ running north–south.
The distances between adjacent intersections are all exactly 200 m.
You stop at Gas Station Alpha and fuel up the car, and then you
ask the attendant how to get to Junk Market Beta. The attendant
says, ‘‘Go 5 blocks north, then turn left and go 12 blocks west.’’
What is the straight-line distance between Gas Station Alpha and
Junk Market Beta?
(a) It is impossible to answer this without more information.
(b) 1.3 km
(c) 2.6 km
(d) 3.4 km
(e) 6.0 km
5.
An American style pro football ﬁeld is shaped like a rectangle, with
sidelines that are perpendicular to the goal lines. Imagine that the
two sidelines are extended indeﬁnitely in both directions. The resulting
pair of lines
(a) would intersect at a distant point
PART 3
Shapes and Places
296

(b) would intersect at two distant points
(c) would be skewed
(d) would be parallel
(e) would be perpendicular
6.
An American style pro football ﬁeld is shaped like a rectangle, with
yard lines that are all parallel to the goal lines. Fill in the blank to
make the following sentence true: ‘‘The yard lines on a football ﬁeld
are all ________________ with respect to each other.’’
(a) perpendicular
(b) skewed
(c) equidistant
(d) parallel
(e) orthogonal
7.
In the polar coordinate plane, the direction can be expressed in
(a) meters
(b) degrees
(c) square units
(d) cubic units
(e) linear units
8.
Refer to Fig. Test 3-1. Suppose lines L, M, and N are all straight, and
they all lie in the same plane. Suppose line M intersects line N at point
P, and line L intersects line N at point Q. Further suppose that lines L
and M are parallel. Let the angles of intersection, and their measures,
be denoted as p1 through p4 and q1 through q4, as shown. Which of the
following statements (a), (b), (c), or (d) is not necessarily true?
(a) p1 ¼ q1
(b) q2 ¼ q3
Fig. Test 3-1.
Illustration for Part Three Test Questions 8 through 11.
Test: Part 3
297

(c) q1 ¼ p4
(d) q1 ¼ q3
(e) All of the statements (a) through (d) are true.
9.
Refer to Fig. Test 3-1. Suppose lines L, M, and N are all straight, and
they all lie in the same plane. Suppose line M intersects line N at
point P, and line L intersects line N at point Q. Further suppose
that lines L and M are parallel. Let the angles of intersection, and
their measures, be denoted as p1 through p4 and q1 through q4, as
shown. Angles p3 and q3 are called
(a) alternate interior angles
(b) alternate exterior angles
(c) vertical angles
(d) horizontal angles
(e) corresponding angles
10.
Refer to Fig. Test 3-1. Suppose lines L, M, and N are all straight, and
they all lie in the same plane. Suppose line M intersects line N at
point P, and line L intersects line N at point Q. Further suppose
that lines L and M are parallel. Let the angles of intersection,
and their measures, be denoted as p1 through p4 and q1 through q4,
as shown. Angles p1 and p4 are called
(a) alternate interior angles
(b) alternate exterior angles
(c) vertical angles
(d) horizontal angles
(e) corresponding angles
11.
Refer to Fig. Test 3-1. Suppose lines L, M, and N are all straight, and
they all lie in the same plane. Suppose line M intersects line N at
point P, and line L intersects line N at point Q. Let the angles
of intersection, and their measures, be denoted as p1 through p4
and q1 through q4, as shown. Suppose that p1 ¼ q1. From this we
can surmise that
(a) lines L and M are skew
(b) lines L and M are perpendicular
(c) lines L and M are parallel
(d) lines L and M intersect to the left of points P and Q
(e) lines L and M intersect to the right of points P and Q
12.
Imagine a city laid out in square blocks on a level expanse of
prairie, with ‘‘streets’’ running east–west and ‘‘avenues’’ running
north–south. The distances between adjacent intersections are all
PART 3
Shapes and Places
298

exactly 200 m. You stop at Restaurant Gamma and have supper, and
on the way out you ask the cashier how to get to Motel Delta. The
cashier says, ‘‘Go 8 blocks east, then turn right and go 6 blocks
south.’’ What is the distance you must drive to get to the motel?
(a) It is impossible to answer this without more information.
(b) 1.0 km
(c) 1.4 km
(d) 2.0 km
(e) 2.8 km
13.
In Fig. Test 3-2, what is the distance between the labeled points
(3, 4) and (0, 0)?
(a) 3 units
(b) 4 units
(c) 5 units
(d) 7 units
(e) It is impossible to determine this without more information.
14.
In Fig. Test 3-2, what is the slope of the heavy, slanted line?
(a) 4/3
(b) 3/4
(c) 3/4
(d) 4/3
(e) It is impossible to determine this without more information.
15.
In Fig. Test 3-2, what is the equation of the heavy, slanted line?
(a) (4/3)x þ y ¼ 0
(b) (3/4)x þ y ¼ 0
Fig. Test 3-2.
Illustration for Part Three Test Questions 13 through 16.
Test: Part 3
299

(c) (3/4)x þ y ¼ 0
(d) (4/3)x þ y ¼ 0
(e) It is impossible to determine this without more information.
16.
In Fig. Test 3-2, suppose L is a line perpendicular to the heavy,
slanted line. What is the equation of L?
(a) (4/3)x þ y ¼ 0
(b) (3/4)x þ y ¼ 0
(c) (3/4)x þ y ¼ 0
(d) (4/3)x þ y ¼ 0
(e) It is impossible to determine this without more information.
17.
Suppose you live in a house that is shaped like a rectangular prism.
It is exactly 15 m long, 20 m wide, and 5 m high, with a ﬂat roof.
There are two stories and no basement. Neglecting the volume
taken up by the interior walls, ﬂoors, ceilings, furniture, and other
objects, how much living room, in terms of volume, do you have?
(a) 75 m3
(b) 100 m3
(c) 300 m3
(d) 600 m3
(e) 1500 m3
18.
Suppose you live in a house that is shaped like a rectangular prism. It
is exactly 15 m long, 20 m wide, and 5 m high, with a ﬂat roof. There
are two stories and no basement. Neglecting the space taken up by
the interior walls, furniture, and other objects, how much living
room, in terms of ﬂoor area, do you have?
(a) 75 m2
(b) 100 m2
(c) 300 m2
(d) 600 m2
(e) 1500 m2
19.
How many seconds of arc are there in a complete circle?
(a) 2p
(b) 360
(c) 21,600
(d) 1,296,000
(e) It is impossible to answer this without more information.
20.
Imagine a city laid out on a level expanse of prairie, with ‘‘streets’’
that are concentric circles spaced 200 m apart and ‘‘avenues’’
that go radially outward from the city center at angles that are all
PART 3
Shapes and Places
300

multiples of 108 and that are numbered according to their angle
counterclockwise from due east. You check out of Motel Delta
and ask the clerk how to get to State Complex Epsilon. The atten-
dant says, ‘‘Just follow this avenue outward 2 blocks, then turn
left and travel counterclockwise exactly 9 blocks.’’ How far must
you drive?
(a) It is impossible to answer this question without more infor-
mation.
(b) 0.9 km
(c) 1.1 km
(d) 1.8 km
(e) 2.2 km
21.
A major league baseball inﬁeld is built to speciﬁc dimensions. Home
plate, ﬁrst base, second base, and third base are all at the vertices of a
square that measures 90 feet (90 ft) on a side. The diagonal running
from home plate to second base is the same length as the diagonal
running from ﬁrst base to third base. Let P be the point where
these diagonals intersect. The pitcher’s rubber lies along the diagonal
from home plate to second base, and is 60.5 ft from home plate.
Which of the following statements is true?
(a) The pitcher’s rubber is closer to home plate than to second base.
(b) The pitcher’s rubber is closer to second base than to home plate.
(c) The pitcher’s rubber is equidistant from home plate and second
base.
(d) The pitcher’s rubber is centered at point P.
(e) None of the above.
22.
Suppose you see the shadow of a post cast by the sun on a ﬂat pave-
ment. The cosine of the sun’s angle above the horizon is equal to
(a) the height of the post, divided by the length of the post’s shadow
(b) the length of the post’s shadow, divided by the height of the post
(c) the height of the post, divided by the distance from the top of the
post to the tip of its shadow
(d) the distance from the top of the post to the tip of its shadow,
divided by the height of the post
(e) none of the above
23.
According to Fig. Test 3-3, point A suggests that
(a) sin 908 ¼ 1
(b) sin 1 ¼ 908
(c) sin 90 ¼ 18
Test: Part 3
301

(d) sin 908 ¼ 1
(e) the equation of the graph is linear
24.
Which of the following four statements (a), (b), (c), or (d), if any,
does Fig. Test 3-3 fail to suggest?
(a) sin 908 ¼ sin þ908
(b) sin þ908 ¼ sin 908
(c) sin 08 ¼ 0
(d) sin þ308 ¼ 0.5
(e) The ﬁgure suggests that (a), (b), (c), and (d) are all true.
25.
The extent of the domain of angles  shown in Fig. Test 3-3, in
radians, is
(a) –p/4    þ p/4
(b) –p/2    þ p/2
(c) –p    þ p
(d) 2p    þ 2p
(e) 4p    þ 4p
26.
The graph of Fig. Test 3-3 suggests that the range of the sine func-
tion, when the independent variable is restricted to angles between
and including 1808 and þ1808, is
(a) 1  sin   1
(b) 0  sin   1
(c) 1  sin   0
(d) 0  sin    1
(e) 1  sin    1
Fig. Test 3-3.
Illustration for Part Three Test Questions 23 through 28.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
302

27.
The curve shown in Fig. Test 3-3 is known as
(a) a sinusoid
(b) a circular wave
(c) a polar wave
(d) a radial wave
(e) a Cartesian wave
28.
The curve shown in Fig. Test 3-3 represents
(a) 1/4 of a wave cycle
(b) 1/2 of a wave cycle
(c) one full wave cycle
(d) two full wave cycles
(e) four full wave cycles
29.
Conventional time is measured according to the mean solar day
(MSD). For an observer in the northern hemisphere, the MSD is
the average length of time it takes for the sun to ‘‘revolve once
around’’ from a point directly in the south to a point directly in
the south on the following day. This is, by convention, divided
into 24 hours. This means that in 1 hour:
(a) the earth rotates 18 on its axis with respect to the sun
(b) the earth rotates 108 on its axis with respect to the sun
(c) the earth rotates 158 on its axis with respect to the sun
(d) the earth rotates 248 on its axis with respect to the sun
(e) the earth rotates 308 on its axis with respect to the sun
30.
Imagine a city laid out on a level expanse of prairie, with ‘‘streets’’
that are concentric circles spaced 200 m apart and ‘‘avenues’’
that go radially outward from the city center at angles that are all
multiples of 108 and that are numbered according to their angle
counterclockwise from due east. You have been telling your
senator at State Complex Epsilon how much you hate her economic
policy, and then you ask her how to get to Tera Mall Theta. She
says, ‘‘Just follow this avenue outward 6 blocks.’’ What is the
straight-line distance between State Complex Epsilon and Tera
Mall Theta?
(a) It is impossible to answer this question without more infor-
mation.
(b) 0.6 km
(c) 1.2 km
(d) 1.8 km
(e) 3.6 km
Test: Part 3
303

31.
The Cartesian plane is an example of a
(a) rectangular coordinate system
(b) polar coordinate system
(c) nonlinear coordinate system
(d) circular coordinate system
(e) spherical coordinate system
32.
In Fig. Test 3-4, suppose that each of the faces is a parallelogram,
and s1 ¼ s2 ¼ s3. In this case, we can be certain that the ﬁgure is a
(a) cube
(b) skew prism
(c) rectangular prism
(d) hexagonal prism
(e) parallelepiped
33.
In Fig. Test 3-4, suppose angles x, y, and z each measure 908. Also
suppose that each of the faces is a parallelogram. In this case, we
can be certain that the ﬁgure is a
(a) cube
(b) skew prism
(c) rectangular prism
(d) hexagonal prism
(e) rhombus
34.
In Fig. Test 3-4, suppose angles x, y, and z each measure 708. Also
suppose that each of the faces is a parallelogram. In this case, we
can be certain that the ﬁgure is a
(a) parallelepiped
(b) rhombus
(c) rectangular prism
Fig. Test 3-4.
Illustration for Part Three Test Questions 32 through 35.
PART 3
Shapes and Places
304

(d) hexagonal prism
(e) skew prism
35.
In Fig. Test 3-4, suppose h ¼ 5 m and the area of the base is 18 m2.
Also suppose that each of the faces is a parallelogram. What is the
volume of the ﬁgure?
(a) 23 m3
(b) 30 m3
(c) 45 m3
(d) 90 m3
(e) It is impossible to determine this without more information.
36.
Imagine that you have two spherical balls, called Ball A and Ball B.
Suppose Ball B has four times the surface area of Ball A. What can
we say about their relative diameters?
(a) The diameter of Ball B is twice the diameter of Ball A.
(b) The diameter of Ball B is four times the diameter of Ball A.
(c) The diameter of Ball B is eight times the diameter of Ball A.
(d) The diameter of Ball B is 16 times the diameter of Ball A.
(e) Nothing, without more information.
37.
Suppose you are in a perfectly cubical room measuring exactly 3 m
high by 3 m wide by 3 m deep. You draw a straight line L along
one wall (call it wall X) so that line L runs ‘‘kitty-corner’’ diagonally
across the square formed by wall X, dividing wall X into two
identical triangles. What is the length, in meters, of line L?
(a) The square root of 3.
(b) The square root of 6.
(c) The square root of 12.
(d) The square root of 18.
(e) The square root of 27.
38.
Suppose you are in a perfectly cubical room measuring exactly
3 m high by 3 m wide by 3 m deep. You draw a straight line L
along one wall (call it wall X) so that line L runs ‘‘kitty-corner’’
diagonally across the square formed by wall X, dividing wall X
into two identical triangles. What is the area of either one of these
triangles?
(a) It is impossible to determine this without more information.
(b) 4.5 m2
(c) 6 m2
(d) 9 m2
(e) 27 m2
Test: Part 3
305

39.
Suppose you are in a perfectly cubical room measuring exactly 3 m
high by 3 m wide by 3 m deep. You draw a straight line L along
one wall (call it wall X) so that line L is parallel to the ﬂoor, and
so that one point on line L is 2 m above the ﬂoor. From this, you
can be sure that line L
(a) intersects the ceiling along wall X, but not necessarily at a right
angle
(b) intersects the ceiling along some wall other than X, and not
necessarily at a right angle
(c) intersects the ceiling along wall X at a right angle
(d) intersects the ceiling along some wall other than X at a right
angle
(e) does not intersect the ceiling
40.
Suppose you are in a perfectly cubical room measuring exactly 3 m
high by 3 m wide by 3 m deep. You draw a straight line L along
one wall (call it wall X) so that line L intersects the ﬂoor at a right
angle. From this, you can be sure that line L
(a) intersects the ceiling along wall X, but not necessarily at a right
angle
(b) intersects the ceiling along some wall other than X, and not
necessarily at a right angle
(c) intersects the ceiling along wall X at a right angle
(d) intersects the ceiling along some wall other than X at a right
angle
(e) does not intersect the ceiling
PART 3
Shapes and Places
306

PART FOUR
Math in Science
307
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER
13
Vectors and 3D
Cartesian three-space, also called rectangular three-space or xyz-space, is
deﬁned by three number lines that intersect at a common origin point. At
the origin, each of the three number lines is perpendicular to the other
two. This makes it possible to pictorially relate one variable to another.
Most three-dimensional (3D) graphs look line lines, curves, or surfaces.
Renditions are enhanced by computer graphics programs.
You should know middle-school algebra to understand this chapter.
Vectors in the Cartesian Plane
A vector is a mathematical expression for a quantity with two independent
properties: magnitude and direction. The direction, also called orientation, is
deﬁned in the sense of a ray, so it ‘‘points’’ somewhere. Vectors are used
to represent physical variables such as distance, velocity, and acceleration.
Conventionally, vectors are denoted by boldface letters of the alphabet.
309
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

In the xy-plane, vectors a and b can be illustrated as rays from the origin (0,0)
to points (xa, ya) and (xb, yb) as shown in Fig. 13-1.
EQUIVALENT VECTORS
Occasionally, a vector is expressed in a form that begins at a point other than
the origin (0,0). In order for the following formulas to hold, such a vector
must be reduced to standard form, so it ‘‘begins’’ at the origin. This can be
accomplished by subtracting the coordinates (x0, y0) of the starting point
from the coordinates of the end point (x1, y1). For example, if a vector a*
starts at (3,2) and ends at (1,3), it reduces to an equivalent vector a in
standard form:
a ¼ fð1  3Þ, ½3  ð2Þ g
¼ ð2,  1Þ
Any vector a* that is parallel to a, and that has the same length and the
same direction (or orientation) as a, is equal to vector a. A vector is deﬁned
solely on the basis of its magnitude and its direction (or orientation). Neither
of these two properties depends on the location of the end point.
MAGNITUDE
The magnitude (also called the length, intensity, or absolute value) of vector a,
written |a| or a, can be found in the Cartesian plane by using a distance
Fig. 13-1.
Two vectors in the Cartesian plane. They are added using the
‘‘parallelogram method.’’
PART 4
Math in Science
310

formula resembling the Pythagorean theorem:
jaj ¼ ðx2
a þ y2
aÞ1=2
Remember that the 1/2 power is the same thing as the square root.
DIRECTION
The direction of vector a, written dir a, is the angle a at which vector a
points, as measured counterclockwise from the positive x axis:
dir a ¼ a
From basic trigonometry, notice that tan a ¼ ya/xa. Therefore, a is equal to
the inverse tangent, also called the arctangent (abbreviated arctan or tan–1) of
ya/xa. So:
dir a ¼ a ¼ arctanð ya=xaÞ ¼ tan1ð ya=xaÞ
By convention, the angle a is reduced to a value that is at least zero, but less
than one full counterclockwise revolution. That is, 08  a < 3608 (if the angle
is expressed in degrees), or 0 rad  a < 2p rad (if the angle is expressed in
radians).
SUM
The sum of two vectors a and b, where a ¼ (xa, ya) and b ¼ (xb, yb), can be
found by adding their x values and y values independently:
a þ b ¼ ½ðxa þ xbÞ, ð ya þ ybÞ 
This sum can be found geometrically by constructing a parallelogram with
a and b as adjacent sides. Then a þ b is the diagonal of this parallelogram
(Fig. 13-1).
MULTIPLICATION BY SCALAR
To multiply a vector by a scalar (an ordinary real number), the x and y
components of the vector are both multiplied by that scalar. If we have a
vector a ¼ (xa, ya) and a scalar k, then
ka ¼ ak ¼ ðkxa, kyaÞ
When a vector is multiplied by a scalar, the length of the vector changes.
If the scalar is positive, the direction of the product vector is the same as
CHAPTER 13
Vectors and 3D
311

that of the original vector. If the scalar is negative, the direction of the
product vector is opposite that of the original vector. If the scalar is 0,
the result is known as the zero vector. It can be denoted by the ordered
pair (0,0).
DOT PRODUCT
Let a ¼ (xa, ya) and b ¼ (xb, yb). The dot product, also known as the scalar pro-
duct and written a  b, of two vectors a and b is a number (that is, a scalar)
that can be found using this formula:
a  b ¼ xaxb þ yayb
PROBLEM 13-1
What is the sum of a ¼ (3,5) and b ¼ (2,6)?
SOLUTION 13-1
Add the x and y components together independently:
a þ b ¼ ½ð3 þ 2Þ, ð5 þ 6Þ 
¼ ð5, 1Þ
PROBLEM 13-2
What is the dot product of a ¼ (3,5) and b ¼ (2,6)?
SOLUTION 13-2
Use the formula given above for the dot product:
a  b ¼ ð3  2Þ þ ð5  6Þ
¼ 6 þ ð30Þ
¼ 24
PROBLEM 13-3
What happens if the order of the dot product is reversed? Does the value
change?
SOLUTION 13-3
No. The value of the dot product of two vectors does not depend on the
order in which the vectors are ‘‘dot-multiplied.’’ This can be proven easily
PART 4
Math in Science
312

from the formula above. Let a ¼ (xa, ya) and b ¼ (xb, yb). First consider the
dot product of a and b (pronounced ‘‘a dot b’’):
a  b ¼ xaxb þ ya yb
Now consider the dot product b  a:
b  a ¼ xb xa þ yb ya
Because ordinary multiplication is commutative – that is, the order in which
the factors are multiplied doesn’t matter – we can convert the above formula
to this:
b  a ¼ xaxb þ yayb
But xaxb þ yayb is just another way of writing a  b. So, for any two vectors a
and b, it is always true that a  b ¼ b  a.
Rectangular 3D Coordinates
Figure 13-2 illustrates the simplest possible set of rectangular 3D coordinates,
also called Cartesian three-space or xyz-space. All three number lines
Fig. 13-2.
Cartesian three-space, also called xyz-space.
CHAPTER 13
Vectors and 3D
313

have equal increments. (This is a perspective illustration, so the incre-
ments on the z axis appear distorted. A true 3D rendition would have the
positive z axis perpendicular to the page.) The three number lines all intersect
at a single point, the origin, which corresponds to the zero points on each
line.
The horizontal (right-and-left) axis is called the x axis; the vertical
(up-and-down) axis is called the y axis, and the page-perpendicular (in-and-
out) axis is called the z axis. In most renditions of rectangular 3D
coordinates, the positive x axis runs from the origin toward the viewer’s
right, and the negative x axis runs toward the left. The positive y axis runs
upward, and the negative y axis runs downward. The positive z axis ‘‘points
out of the page directly at you,’’ and the negative z axis ‘‘points behind the
page straight away from you.’’ Sometimes you will see graphs in which the y
and z axes are interchanged from the way they’re shown here, so the y axis is
perpendicular to the page while the z axis runs up and down.
ORDERED TRIPLES AS POINTS
Figure 13-3 shows two speciﬁc points, called P and Q, plotted in Cartesian
three-space. The coordinates of point P are (–5,–4,3), and the coordinates
Fig. 13-3.
Two points in Cartesian three-space.
PART 4
Math in Science
314

of point Q are (3,5,2). Points are denoted as ordered triples in the form
(x,y,z), where the ﬁrst number represents the value on the x axis, the second
number represents the value on the y axis, and the third number represents
the value on the z axis. The word ‘‘ordered’’ means that the order, or
sequence, in which the numbers are listed is important. The ordered triple
(1,2,3) is not the same as any of the ordered triples (1,3,2), (2,1,3), (2,3,1),
(3,1,2), or (3,2,1), even though all of the triples contain the same three
numbers.
In an ordered triple, there are no spaces after the commas, as there are in
the notation of a set or sequence.
VARIABLES AND ORIGIN
In Cartesian three-space, there are usually two independent-variable coordi-
nate axes and one dependent-variable axis. The x and y axes represent inde-
pendent variables; the z axis represents a dependent variable whose value is
aﬀected by both the x and the y values.
In some scenarios, two of the variables are dependent and only one is
independent. Most often, the independent variable in such cases is x. Rarely,
you’ll come across a situation in which none of the values depends on either
of the other two, or when a correlation, but not a true relation, exists among
the values of two or all three of the variables. Plots of this sort usually look
like ‘‘swarms of points,’’ representing the results of observations, or values
predicted by some scientiﬁc theory. These graphs are known as scatter plots,
and are common in statistics.
DISTANCE BETWEEN POINTS
Suppose there are two diﬀerent points P ¼ (x0,y0,z0) and Q ¼ (x1,y1,z1) in
Cartesian three-space. The distance d between these two points can be
found using this formula:
d ¼ ½ðx1  x0Þ2 þ ð y1  y0Þ2 þ ðz1  z0Þ2 1=2
PROBLEM 13-4
What is the distance between the points P ¼ (–5,–4,3) and Q ¼ (3,5,–2)
illustrated in Fig. 13-3? Express the answer rounded oﬀto three decimal
places.
CHAPTER 13
Vectors and 3D
315

SOLUTION 13-4
We can plug the coordinate values into the distance equation, where:
x0 ¼ 5
x1 ¼ 3
y0 ¼ 4
y1 ¼ 5
z0 ¼ 3
z1 ¼ 2
Therefore:
d ¼ f½3  ð5Þ 2 þ ½5  ð4Þ 2 þ ð2  3Þ2g1=2
¼ ½82 þ 92 þ ð5Þ2 1=2
¼ ð64 þ 81 þ 25Þ1=2
¼ 1701=2
¼ 13:038
Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
A vector in Cartesian three-space is the same as a vector in the Cartesian
plane, except that there is more ‘‘freedom’’ in terms of direction. This
makes the expression of direction in 3D more complicated than is the case
in 2D. It also makes vector arithmetic a lot more interesting!
EQUIVALENT VECTORS
In Cartesian three-space, vectors a and b can be denoted as arrow-tipped
line segments from the origin (0,0,0) to points (xa,ya,za) and (xb,yb,zb), as
shown in Fig. 13-4. This, like all three-space drawings in this chapter, is a
perspective illustration. Both vectors in this example point in directions on
the reader’s side of the plane containing the page. In a true 3D model,
both of them would ‘‘stick up out of the paper at an angle.’’
In Fig. 13-4, both vectors a and b have their end points at the origin.
This is the standard form of a vector in any coordinate system. In order for
the following formulas to hold, vectors must be expressed in standard form.
PART 4
Math in Science
316

If a given vector is not in standard form, it can be converted by subtracting
the coordinates (x0,y0,z0) of the starting point from the coordinates of the
end point (x1,y1,z1). For example, if a vector a* starts at (4,7,0) and ends
at (1,–3,5), it reduces to an equivalent vector a in standard form:
a ¼ ½ð1  4Þ, ð3  7Þ, ð5  0Þ 
¼ ð3,  10,5Þ
Any vector a*, which is parallel to a and has the same length as a, is equal
to vector a, because a* has the same magnitude and the same direction as a.
Similarly, any vector b*, which is parallel to b and has the same length as b, is
deﬁned as being equal to b. As in the 2D case, a vector is deﬁned solely on
the basis of its magnitude and its direction. Neither of these two properties
depends on the location of the end point.
DEFINING THE MAGNITUDE
When the end point of a vector a is at the origin, the magnitude of a, written
|a| or a, can be found by a three-dimensional extension of the Pythagorean
theorem for right triangles. The formula looks like this:
jaj ¼ ðx2
a þ y2
a þ z2
aÞ1=2
Fig. 13-4.
Vectors in xyz-space. This is a perspective drawing; both vectors point in
directions on your side of the plane containing the page.
CHAPTER 13
Vectors and 3D
317

The magnitude of any vector a in standard form is equal to the distance of
the end point from the origin. Note that the above formula is the distance
formula for two points, (0,0,0) and (xa,ya,za).
DIRECTION ANGLES AND COSINES
The direction of a vector a in standard form can be deﬁned by specifying
the angles x, y, and z that the vector a subtends relative to the positive
x, y, and z axes respectively (Fig. 13-5). These angles, expressed in radians
as an ordered triple (x,y,z), are the direction angles of a.
Sometimes the cosines of these angles are used to deﬁne the direction of a
vector a in 3D space. These are the direction cosines of a:
dir a ¼ ð, , Þ
 ¼ cos x
 ¼ cos y
 ¼ cos z
For any vector a in Cartesian three-space, the sum of the squares of the
direction cosines is always equal to 1. That is,
2 þ 2 þ 2 ¼ 1
Fig. 13-5.
Direction angles of a vector in xyz-space. This is another perspective drawing;
the vector points in a direction on your side of the plane containing the page.
PART 4
Math in Science
318

Another way of expressing this is:
cos2 x þ cos2 y þ cos2 z ¼ 1
where the expression cos2  means (cos )2.
SUM
The sum of vectors a ¼ (xa, ya, za) and b ¼ (xb, yb, zb) in standard form is given
by the following formula:
a þ b ¼ ½ðxa þ xbÞ, ð ya þ ybÞ, ðza þ zbÞ 
This sum can be found geometrically by constructing a parallelogram in 3D
space with a and b as adjacent sides. The sum a þ b is the diagonal of the par-
allelogram. This is shown in Fig. 13-6. (The parallelogram appears distorted
because of the perspective of the drawing.)
MULTIPLICATION BY SCALAR
In three-dimensional Cartesian coordinates, let vector a be deﬁned by
the coordinates (xa,ya,za) when reduced to standard form. Suppose a is
Fig. 13-6.
Vectors in xyz-space are added using the ‘‘parallelogram method.’’ This is
a perspective drawing, so the parallelogram appears distorted.
CHAPTER 13
Vectors and 3D
319

multiplied by a positive real-number scalar k. Then the following equation
holds:
ka ¼ kðxa,ya,zaÞ ¼ ðkxa,kya,kzaÞ
If a is multiplied by a negative real scalar –k, then:
ka ¼ kðxa,ya,zaÞ ¼ ðkxa, kya, kzaÞ
Suppose the direction angles of a are represented by the ordered triple
(xa, ya, za). Then the direction angles of ka are the same; they are also
(xa, ya, za). The direction angles of –ka are all changed by 1808 (p rad).
The direction angles of ka can be found by adding or subtracting 1808
(p rad) to or from each of the direction angles for ka, so that the resulting
angles all have measures of at least 08 (0 rad) but less than 3608 (2p rad).
DOT PRODUCT
The dot product, also known as the scalar product and written a  b, of two 3D
vectors a ¼ (xa, ya, za) and b ¼ (xb, yb, zb) in standard form is a real number
given by the formula:
a  b ¼ xaxb þ yayb þ zazb
The dot product can also be found from the magnitudes |a| and |b|, and the
angle  between vectors a and b as measured counterclockwise in the plane
containing them both:
a  b ¼ jajjbj cos 
CROSS PRODUCT
The cross product, also known as the vector product and written a  b, of
vectors a ¼ (xa, ya, za) and b ¼ (xb, yb, zb) in standard form is a vector perpen-
dicular to the plane containing both a and b. Let  be the angle between
vectors a and b as measured counterclockwise in the plane containing them
both, as shown in Fig. 13-7. The magnitude of a  b is given by the formula:
ja  bj ¼ jajjbj sin 
In the example shown, a  b points upward at a right angle to the plane
containing both vectors a and b. If 08<<1808 (0 rad<<p rad), you
can use the right-hand rule to ascertain the direction of a  b. Curl your
ﬁngers in the direction that , the angle from a to b, is deﬁned. Extend
your thumb. Then a  b points in the direction of your thumb.
PART 4
Math in Science
320

When 1808<<3608 (p rad<<2p rad), the cross-product vector reverses
direction. Theoretically, the cross-product vector’s direction angles do
not change; but its magnitude becomes negative. This is demonstrated
by the fact that, in the above formula, sin  is positive when 08<<1808
(0 rad<<p rad), but negative when 1808<<3608 (p rad<<2p rad).
UNIT VECTORS
Any vector a, reduced to standard form so its starting point is at the origin,
ends up at some point (xa,ya,za). This vector can be broken down into the
sum of three mutually perpendicular vectors, each of which lies along one
of the coordinate axes as shown in Fig. 13-8:
a ¼ ðxa,ya,zaÞ
¼ ðxa,0,0Þ þ ð0,ya,0Þ þ ð0,0,zaÞ
¼ xað1,0,0Þ þ yað0,1,0Þ þ zað0,0,1Þ
The vectors (1,0,0), (0,1,0), and (0,0,1) are called unit vectors because their
length is 1. It is customary to name these vectors i, j, and k, as follows:
ð1,0,0Þ ¼ i
ð0,1,0Þ ¼ j
ð0,0,1Þ ¼ k
Fig. 13-7.
The vector b  a has the same magnitude as vector a  b, but points in
the opposite direction. Both cross products are perpendicular to the plane containing
the two original vectors.
CHAPTER 13
Vectors and 3D
321

Therefore, the vector a shown in Fig. 13-8 breaks down this way:
a ¼ ðxa,ya,zaÞ ¼ xai þ yaj þ zak
PROBLEM 13-5
Break the vector b ¼ (–2,3,–7) down into a sum of multiples of the unit
vectors i, j, and k.
SOLUTION 13-5
This is a simple process, but envisioning it requires a keen ‘‘mind’s eye.’’
If you have any trouble seeing this in your imagination, think of i as ‘‘one
unit of width going to the right,’’ j as ‘‘one unit of height going up,’’ and k
as ‘‘one unit of depth coming towards you.’’ Here we go:
b ¼ ð2,3,  7Þ
¼ 2  ð1,0,0Þ þ 3  ð0,1,0Þ þ ½7  ð0,0,1Þ 
¼ 2i þ 3j þ ð7Þk
¼ 2i þ 3j  7k
Fig. 13-8.
Any vector in Cartesian three-space can be broken up into a sum of three
component vectors, each of which lies on one of the coordinate axes.
PART 4
Math in Science
322

Flat Planes in Space
The equation of a ﬂat geometric plane in Cartesian 3D coordinates is some-
what like the equation of a straight line in Cartesian 2D coordinates.
CRITERIA FOR UNIQUENESS
A ﬂat geometric plane in 3D space can be uniquely deﬁned according to any
of the following criteria:
*
Three points that do not all lie on the same straight line.
*
A point in the plane and a vector normal (perpendicular) to the plane.
*
Two intersecting straight lines.
*
Two parallel straight lines.
GENERAL EQUATION OF PLANE
The simplest equation for a plane is derived on the basis of the second
of the foregoing criteria: a point in the plane and a vector normal to the
plane. Figure 13-9 shows a plane W in Cartesian three-space, a point
Fig. 13-9.
A plane W can be uniquely deﬁned on the basis of a point P in the plane and
a vector (a,b,c) normal to the plane. Dashed portions of the coordinate axes are ‘‘behind’’
the plane.
CHAPTER 13
Vectors and 3D
323

P ¼ (x0, y0, z0) in plane W, and a normal vector (a,b,c) ¼ ai þ bj þ ck that is
perpendicular to plane W. The normal vector (a,b,c) in this illustration
is shown originating at point P (rather than at the origin), because this
particular plane W doesn’t pass through the origin (0,0,0). The values
x ¼ a, y ¼ b, and z ¼ c for the vector are nevertheless based on its standard
form.
When these things about a plane are known, we have enough information
to uniquely deﬁne it and write its equation as follows:
aðx  x0Þ þ bð y  y0Þ þ cðz  z0Þ ¼ 0
In this form of the equation for a plane, the constants a, b, and c are called
the coeﬃcients. The above equation can also be written in this form:
ax þ by þ cz þ d ¼ 0
Here, the value of d is:
d ¼ ðax0 þ by0 þ cz0Þ
¼ ax0  by0  cz0
PLOTTING A PLANE
In order to draw a graph of a plane based on its equation, it is good enough
to know the points where the plane crosses each of the three coordinate axes.
The plane can then be visualized, based on these points.
Not all planes cross all three of the axes in Cartesian xyz-space. If a plane
is parallel to one of the axes, it does not cross that axis. If a plane is parallel
to the plane formed by two of the three axes, then it crosses only the axis
to which it is not parallel. But any plane in Cartesian 3D space must cross
at least one of the coordinate axes at some point.
PROBLEM 13-6
Draw a graph of the plane W represented by the following equation:
2x  4y þ 3z  12 ¼ 0
SOLUTION 13-6
The x-intercept, or the point where the plane W intersects the x axis,
can be found by setting y ¼ 0 and z ¼ 0, and then solving for x. Call this
PART 4
Math in Science
324

point P:
2x  ð4  0Þ þ ð3  0Þ  12 ¼ 0
2x  12 ¼ 0
2x ¼ 12
x ¼ 12=ð2Þ ¼ 6
Therefore P ¼ ð6,0,0Þ
The y-intercept, or the point where the plane W intersects the y axis, can be
found by setting x ¼ 0 and z ¼ 0, and then solving for y. Call this point Q:
ð2  0Þ  4y þ ð3  0Þ  12 ¼ 0
4y  12 ¼ 0
4y ¼ 12
y ¼ 12=ð4Þ ¼ 3
Therefore Q ¼ ð0, 3,0Þ
The z-intercept, or the point where the plane W intersects the z axis, can be
found by setting x ¼ 0 and y ¼ 0, and then solving for z. Call this point R:
ð2  0Þ  ð4  0Þ þ 3z  12 ¼ 0
3z  12 ¼ 0
3z ¼ 12
z ¼ 12=3 ¼ 4
Therefore R ¼ ð0, 0, 4Þ
These three points are shown in the plot of Fig. 13-10. The plane can be
envisioned, based on this data.
Note that some parts of the coordinate axes in Fig. 13-10 appear as
dashed lines. This shows that these parts of the axes are ‘‘behind’’ the plane,
according to the point of view from which we see the situation.
PROBLEM 13-7
Suppose a plane contains the point (2,–7,0), and a normal vector to the plane
at this point is 3i þ 3j þ 2k. What is the equation of this plane?
SOLUTION 13-7
The vector 3i þ 3j þ 2k is equivalent to (a,b,c) ¼ (3,3,2). We have one point
(x0,y0,z0) ¼ (2,7,0). Plugging these values into the general formula for
CHAPTER 13
Vectors and 3D
325

the equation of a plane gives us the following:
aðx  x0Þ þ bð y  y0Þ þ cðz  z0Þ ¼ 0
3ðx  2Þ þ 3½ y  ð7Þ þ 2ðz  0Þ ¼ 0
3ðx  2Þ þ 3ð y þ 7Þ þ 2z ¼ 0
3x  6 þ 3y þ 21 þ 2z ¼ 0
3x þ 3y þ 2z þ 15 ¼ 0
Straight Lines in Space
Straight lines in Cartesian three-space present a more complicated picture
than straight lines in the Cartesian coordinate plane. This is because there
is an added dimension, making the expression of the direction more complex.
But all linear equations, no matter what the number of dimensions, have
one thing in common: they can be reduced to a form where no variable is
raised to any power other than 0 or 1.
Fig. 13-10.
Illustration for Problem 13-6. Dashed portions of the coordinate axes are
‘‘behind’’ the plane.
PART 4
Math in Science
326

SYMMETRIC-FORM EQUATION
A straight line in Cartesian three-space can be represented by a ‘‘three-way’’
equation in three variables. This equation is known as a symmetric-form
equation. It takes the following form, where x, y, and z are the variables,
(x0, y0, z0) represents the coordinates of a speciﬁc point on the line, and
a, b, and c are constants:
ðx  x0Þ=a ¼ ð y  y0Þ=b ¼ ðz  z0Þ=c
It’s important that none of the three constants a, b, or c be equal to zero.
If a ¼ 0 or b ¼ 0 or c ¼ 0, the result is a zero denominator in one of the expres-
sions, and division by zero is not deﬁned.
DIRECTION NUMBERS
In the symmetric-form equation of a straight line, the constants a, b, and c are
known as the direction numbers. If we consider a vector m with its end point
at the origin and its ‘‘arrowed end’’ at the point (x,y,z) ¼ (a,b,c), then the
vector m is parallel to the line denoted by the symmetric-form equation.
We have:
m ¼ ai þ bj þ ck
where m is the three-dimensional equivalent of the slope of a line in the
Cartesian plane. This is shown in Fig. 13-11 for a line L containing a point
P ¼ (x0,y0,z0).
PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS
There are inﬁnitely many vectors that can satisfy the requirement for m.
(Just imagine m being longer or shorter, but still pointing in the same
direction as it does in Fig. 13-11, or else in the exact opposite direction.
All such vectors are parallel to line L.) If t is any nonzero real number,
then tm ¼ (ta,tb,tc) ¼ tai þ tbj þ tck will work just as well as m for the
purpose of deﬁning the direction of a line L. This gives us an alternative
form for the equation of a line in Cartesian three-space:
x ¼ x0 þ at
y ¼ y0 þ bt
z ¼ z0 þ ct
CHAPTER 13
Vectors and 3D
327

The nonzero real number t is called a parameter, and the above set of
equations is known as a set of parametric equations for a straight line in
xyz-space. In order for a complete geometric line (straight, and inﬁnitely
long) to be deﬁned on this basis of parametric equations, the parameter t
must be allowed to range over the entire set of real numbers, including zero.
PROBLEM 13-8
Find the symmetric-form equation for the line L shown in Fig. 13-12.
SOLUTION 13-8
The line L passes through the point P ¼ (5,4,3) and is parallel to the
vector m ¼ 3i þ 5j  2k. The direction numbers of L are the coeﬃcients of
the vector m, that is:
a ¼ 3
b ¼ 5
c ¼ 2
We are given a point P on L such that:
x0 ¼ 5
y0 ¼ 4
z0 ¼ 3
Fig. 13-11.
A line L can be uniquely deﬁned on the basis of a point P on the line and a vector
m ¼ (a,b,c) that is parallel to the line.
PART 4
Math in Science
328

Plugging these values into the general symmetric-form equation for a line in
Cartesian three-space gives us this:
ðx  x0Þ=a ¼ ð y  y0Þ=b ¼ ðz  z0Þ=c
½x  ð5Þ =3 ¼ ½ y  ð4Þ =5 ¼ ðz  3Þ=ð2Þ
ðx þ 5Þ=3 ¼ ð y þ 4Þ=5 ¼ ðz  3Þ=ð2Þ
PROBLEM 13-9
Find a set of parametric equations for the line L shown in Fig. 13-12.
SOLUTION 13-9
This involves nothing more than rearranging the values of x0, y0, z0, a, b, and c
in the symmetric-form equation, and rewriting the data in the form of para-
metric equations. The results are:
x ¼ 5 þ 3t
y ¼ 4 þ 5t
z ¼ 3  2t
Fig. 13-12.
Illustration for Problems 13-8 and 13-9.
CHAPTER 13
Vectors and 3D
329

Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
The dot product (3,5,0)  (4,6,2) is equal to
(a) the scalar quantity 4
(b) the vector (12,30,0)
(c) the scalar quantity 42
(d) a vector perpendicular to the plane containing them both
2.
What does the graph of the equation y ¼ 3 look like in Cartesian
three-space?
(a) A plane perpendicular to the y axis.
(b) A plane parallel to the xy plane.
(c) A line parallel to the y axis.
(d) A line parallel to the xy plane.
3.
Suppose vector d in the Cartesian plane begins at exactly (1,1) and
ends at exactly (4,0). What is dir d, expressed to the nearest degree?
(a) 3428
(b) 188
(c) 08
(d) 908
4.
Suppose a line is represented by the equation (x  3)/2 ¼ ( y þ 4)/
5 ¼ z  1. Which of the following is a point on this line?
(a) (–3,4,1)
(b) (3,4,1)
(c) (2,5,1)
(d) There is no way to determine such a point without more
information.
5.
Suppose a vector m ¼ ai þ bj þ ck is parallel to a straight line L. What
do the constants a, b, and c constitute?
(a) Direction angles.
(b) Direction numbers.
(c) Direction cosines.
(d) Direction vectors.
6.
What can be said about the vectors a ¼ (1,1,1) and b ¼ (2,2,2)?
(a) Vector b is a real-number multiple of vector a.
(b) Vector b is oriented precisely opposite from vector a.
PART 4
Math in Science
330

(c) Vectors a and b lie along the same straight line.
(d) All of the above statements are true.
7.
What is the cross product (2i þ 0j þ 0k)  (0i þ 2j þ 0k)?
(a) 0i þ 0j þ 0k
(b) 2i þ 2j þ 0k
(c) 0i þ 0j þ 4k
(d) The scalar 0.
8.
What is the sum of the two vectors (3,5) and (5,3)?
(a) (0,0)
(b) (8,8)
(c) (2,2)
(d) (2,2)
9.
If a straight line in Cartesian three-space has direction deﬁned by
m ¼ 0i þ 0j þ 3k, we can surmise:
(a) that the line is parallel to the x axis
(b) that the line lies in the yz plane
(c) that the line lies in the xy plane
(d) none of the above
10.
Suppose a plane passes through the origin, and a vector normal to
the plane is represented by 4i  5j þ 8k. The equation of this plane is
(a) 4x  5y þ 8z ¼ 0
(b) 4x þ 5y  8z ¼ 7
(c) (x  4) ¼ ( y þ 5) ¼ (z  8)
(d) impossible to determine without more information
CHAPTER 13
Vectors and 3D
331

CHAPTER
14
Growth and Decay
Rates of change can sometimes be expressed in terms of mathematical
constants. In this chapter, we’ll examine a few of the ways this can happen.
Growth by Addition
The simplest changeable quantities can be written as lists of numbers whose
values repeatedly increase or decrease by a ﬁxed amount. Here are some
examples:
A ¼ 1 2 3 4 5 6
B ¼ 0  1  2  3  4  5
C ¼ 2 4 6 8
D ¼ 5  10  15  20
E ¼ 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 . . .
F ¼ 2 0  2  4  6  8  10 . . .
332
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

The ﬁrst four of these sequences are ﬁnite. The last two are inﬁnite, as
indicated by the three dots following the last term in each case.
ARITHMETIC PROGRESSION
In each of the six sequences shown above, the values either increase (A, C,
and E) or else they decrease (B, D, and F). In all six sequences, the ‘‘spacing’’
between numbers is constant throughout. Note:
*
The values in A always increase by 1.
*
The values in B always decrease by 1.
*
The values in C always increase by 2.
*
The values in D always decrease by 5.
*
The values in E always increase by 4.
*
The values in F always decrease by 2.
Each sequence has a starting point or ﬁrst number. After that, succeeding
numbers can be predicted by repeatedly adding a constant. If the added
constant is positive, the sequence increases. If the added constant is negative,
the sequence decreases.
Let s0 be the ﬁrst number in a sequence S, and let c be a constant. Imagine
that S can be written in this form:
S ¼ s0 ðs0 þ cÞ ðs0 þ 2cÞ ðs0 þ 3cÞ . . .
for as far as the sequence happens to go. Such a sequence is called an
arithmetic sequence or an arithmetic progression. In this context, the word
‘‘arithmetic’’ is pronounced ‘‘air-ith-MET-ick.’’
The numbers s0 and c can be whole numbers, but that is not a requirement.
They can be fractions such as 2/3 or 7/5. They can be irrational numbers
such as the square root of 2. As long as the separation between any two
adjacent terms in a sequence is the same, the sequence is an arithmetic
progression. In fact, even if s0 and c are both equal to 0, the resulting
sequence is an arithmetic progression.
ARITHMETIC SERIES
A series is, by deﬁnition, the sum of all the terms in a sequence. For any arith-
metic sequence, the corresponding arithmetic series can be deﬁned only if the
sequence is ﬁnite. That means it must have a ﬁnite number of terms. For the
above sequences A through F, let the corresponding series be called Aþ
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
333

through Fþ. Then:
Aþ ¼ 1 þ 2 þ 3 þ 4 þ 5 þ 6 ¼ 21
Bþ ¼ 0 þ ð1Þ þ ð2Þ þ ð3Þ þ ð4Þ þ ð5Þ ¼ 15
Cþ ¼ 2 þ 4 þ 6 þ 8 ¼ 20
Dþ ¼ ð5Þ þ ð10Þ þ ð15Þ þ ð20Þ ¼ 50
Eþ is not defined
Fþ is not defined
ARITHMETIC INTERPOLATION
When you see a long sequence of numbers, you should be able to tell
without much trouble whether or not it’s an arithmetic sequence. If it isn’t
immediately obvious, you can conduct a test: subtract each number from
the one after it. If all the diﬀerences are the same, then the sequence is an
arithmetic sequence.
Imagine that you see a long sequence of numbers, and some of the
intermediate values are missing. An example of such a situation is shown
in Table 14-1. It’s not too hard to ﬁgure out what the missing values are, once
you realize that this is an arithmetic sequence in which each term has a
value that is 3 larger than the term preceding it. The 4th term has a value of
14, and the 9th term has a value of 29. The process of ﬁlling in missing
intermediate values in a sequence is a form of interpolation. We might call the
process of ﬁlling in Table 14-1 arithmetic interpolation.
ARITHMETIC EXTRAPOLATION
It is possible to ‘‘predict’’ what the next numbers are, or would be if a series
were lengthened. Table 14-2 illustrates an example of this type of situation.
Table 14-1
A sequence with some intermediate values missing. They can be ﬁlled in
by interpolation.
Position:
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
Value:
5
8
11
?
17
20
23
26
?
32
35
PART 4
Math in Science
334

The values keep getting smaller by 2. The 7th number is 20. Therefore, the
8th number must be 18, the 9th number must be 16, the 10th number must
be 14, and the 11th number must be 12. This extension process constitutes
a form of extrapolation, so we can call the process of ﬁlling in Table 14-2
arithmetic extrapolation.
PLOTTING AN ARITHMETIC SEQUENCE
An arithmetic sequence looks like a set of points when plotted in Cartesian
(rectangular) coordinates. The term number or position in the sequence
is depicted on the horizontal axis, and it plays the role of the independent
variable. The term value is plotted against the vertical axis, and it plays
the role of the dependent variable.
Figure 14-1 shows examples of two arithmetic sequences as they appear
when graphed. (The dashed lines connect the dots, but they aren’t actually
parts of the sequences.) Note that the dashed lines are straight. One sequence
is increasing, and the dashed line connecting this set of points ramps upward
as you go toward the right. Because this sequence is ﬁnite, the dashed line
ends at the ﬁnal point (6,6). The other sequence is decreasing, and the dashed
line for it ramps downward as you go toward the right. This sequence is
inﬁnite, as shown by the three dots at the end of the string of numbers, and
also by the arrow at the right-hand end of the dashed line.
When any arithmetic sequence is graphed in this way, its points lie along a
straight line. The slope m of the line depends on whether the sequence
increases (positive slope) or decreases (negative slope). In fact, m is exactly
equal to the constant c.
BE CAREFUL!
When interpolating or extrapolating any sequence, you must be sure to check
out enough values to know that you’re looking at a true sequence, and not
just a string of numbers. If the string has only two or three values that
increase by the same amount, you don’t have enough information to be
Table 14-2
Extension of an arithmetic sequence can be done by extrapolation.
Position:
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
Value:
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
?
?
?
?
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
335

sure you’re observing an arithmetic sequence. You need at least four or ﬁve
values.
There’s another way to go wrong when attempting to interpolate a
sequence. If the missing values are alternate numbers, you can be deceived.
The examples in Tables 14-3A, B, and C provide a vivid illustration of how
far astray you can go if you jump to conclusions about ﬁlling in a sequence
with alternate terms missing! The plot in Fig. 14-2 illustrates this graphically.
PROBLEM 14-1
Consider again the general formula for an arithmetic sequence S:
S ¼ s0 ðs0 þ cÞ ðs0 þ 2cÞ ðs0 þ 3cÞ . . .
Suppose s0 ¼ 5 and c ¼ 3. List the ﬁrst 10 terms of an inﬁnite sequence that
follows this form and has these values.
Fig. 14-1.
When the values of the terms in an arithmetic sequence are plotted in rectangular
coordinates, the points always fall along straight lines.
PART 4
Math in Science
336

SOLUTION 14-1
The ﬁrst number is 5, and the numbers increase by 3 every time thereafter. So:
S ¼ 5 8 11 14 17 20 23 26 29 32 . . .
PROBLEM 14-2
Is the following sequence an arithmetic sequence? If so, what are the values s0
(the starting value) and c (the constant of change)?
S ¼ 2 4 8 16 32 64 . . .
SOLUTION 14-2
This is not an arithmetic sequence. The numbers do not increase at a steady
rate. There is a pattern, however: each number in the sequence is twice as
large as the number before it. We’ll look at this type of series shortly.
PROBLEM 14-3
Is the following sequence an arithmetic sequence? If so, what are the values s0
(the starting value) and c (the constant of change)?
S ¼ 100 135 170 205 240 275 310 . . .
Table 14-3
(A) Suppose you see a sequence with alternate values missing, like this:
Position:
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
Value:
1
2
3
4
5
6
(B) It’s tempting to think that it is an arithmetic sequence, and that the missing values
should be ﬁlled in to get this:
Position:
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
Value:
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
(C) But in reality, it is not an arithmetic sequence. Instead, it goes like this:
Position:
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
Value:
1
–1
2
–2
3
–3
4
–4
5
–5
6
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
337

SOLUTION 14-3
This is an arithmetic sequence, at least for the numbers shown (the ﬁrst seven
terms). In this case, s0 ¼ 100 and c ¼ 35.
Growth by Multiplication
Another type of progression has values that are repeatedly multiplied by
some constant. Here are a few examples:
G ¼ 1 2 4 8 16 32
H ¼ 1  1 1  1 1  1 . . .
I ¼ 1 10 100 1000
J ¼ 5  15  45  135  405
K ¼ 3 9 27 81 243 729 2187 . . .
L ¼ 1=2 1=4 1=8 1=16 1=32 . . .
Fig. 14-2.
Graphical portrayal of mistaken interpolation.
PART 4
Math in Science
338

Sequences G, I, and J are ﬁnite. Sequences H, K, and L are inﬁnite, as
indicated by the three dots following the last term in each sequence.
GEOMETRIC PROGRESSION
Examine the six sequences above. Upon casual observation, they appear to
be much diﬀerent from one another. But in all six sequences, each term is
a speciﬁc and constant multiple of the term before it. Note:
*
The values in G progress by a constant factor of 2.
*
The values in H progress by a constant factor of –1.
*
The values in I progress by a constant factor of 10.
*
The values in J progress by a constant factor of 3.
*
The values in K progress by a constant factor of 3.
*
The values in L progress by a constant factor of 1/2.
Each sequence has a starting point or ﬁrst number. After that, succeeding
numbers are generated by repeated multiplication by a constant. If the con-
stant is positive, the values in the sequence stay ‘‘on the same side of 0’’ (they
either remain positive or remain negative). If the constant is negative,
the values in the sequence ‘‘alternate to either side of 0’’ (if a given term is
positive, the next is negative, and if a given term is negative, the next is
positive).
Let t0 be the ﬁrst number in a sequence T, and let k be a constant. Imagine
that T can be written in this form:
T ¼ t0 t0k t0k2 t0k3 t0k4 . . .
for as long as the sequence goes. Such a sequence is called a geometric
sequence or a geometric progression.
If k happens to be equal to 1, the sequence consists of the same number,
listed over and over. If k ¼ 1, the sequence alternates between t0 and its
negative. If t0 is less than 1 or greater than 1, the values get farther and
farther from 0. If t0 is between (but not including) 1 and 1, the values get
closer and closer to 0. If t0 ¼ 1 or t0 ¼ 1, the values stay the same distance
from 0.
The numbers t0 and k can be whole numbers, but this is not a requirement.
As long as the multiplication factor between any two adjacent terms in a
sequence is the same, the sequence is a geometric progression. In the last
sequence, k ¼ 1/2. This is an especially interesting sequence, as we’ll see in a
moment.
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
339

GEOMETRIC SERIES
For a geometric sequence, the corresponding geometric series, which is
the sum of all the terms, can always be deﬁned if the sequence is ﬁnite.
Sometimes the sum of all the terms can be deﬁned even if the sequence is
inﬁnite.
For the above sequences G through L, let the corresponding series be
called Gþ through Lþ. Then:
Gþ ¼ 1 þ 2 þ 4 þ 8 þ 16 þ 32 ¼ 63
Hþ ¼ 1  1 þ 1  1 þ 1  1 þ . . . ¼ ?
Iþ ¼ 1 þ 10 þ 100 þ 1000 ¼ 1111
Jþ ¼ 5  15  45  135  405 ¼ 605
Kþ ¼ ‘‘blows up’’ and is not defined
Lþ ¼ 1=2 þ 1=4 þ 1=8 þ 1=16 þ 1=32 þ . . . ¼ ?
The ﬁnite series Gþ, Iþ, and Jþ are straightforward enough. The inﬁnite series
Hþ seems unable to settle on 0 or 1, repeatedly hitting both. It’s tempting to
say that Hþ is a number with two values at once, and a fascinating theory can
be built around the notion of multi-valued numbers. But in conventional
math, we have to say that Hþ is not deﬁnable as a number. The inﬁnite series
Kþ runs oﬀ‘‘out of control’’ and is an example of a divergent series, because
its values keep on getting farther and farther away from 0 without limit.
That leaves us with Lþ. What’s going on with this series?
PARTIAL SUMS
When we have an inﬁnite sequence and we start to add up its numbers, we get
another sequence of numbers representing the sums. These sums are called
partial sums. For the above sequences H, K, and L, the partial sums, which
we will denote using asterisk superscripts instead of plus-sign subscripts, go
like this:
H ¼ 1  1 1  1 1  1 . . .
H ¼ 1 0 1 0 1 0 . . .
K ¼ 3 9 27 81 243 729 2187 . . .
K ¼ 3 12 39 120 363 1092 3279 . . .
L ¼ 1=2 1=4 1=8 1=16 1=32 . . .
L ¼ 1=2 3=4 7=8 15=16 31=32 . . .
PART 4
Math in Science
340

The partial sums denoted by H* and K* don’t settle down on anything. But
the partial sums denoted by L* seem to approach 1. They aren’t skyrocketing
oﬀinto uncharted territory, and they aren’t alternating between or among
any multiple numbers. They are under control. The partial sums in L*
seem to have a clear destination that they could reach, if only they had an
inﬁnite amount of time to get there.
CONVERGENT SERIES
It turns out that Lþ, representing the sum of the inﬁnite string of numbers L,
adds up to exactly 1! We can demonstrate this by observing that the partial
sums ‘‘close in’’ on a value of 1. As the position in the sequence of partial
sums, L*, gets farther and farther along, the denominators keep doubling,
and the numerator is always 1 less than the denominator. In fact, if we
want to ﬁnd the nth number Ln in the sequence of partial sums L*, we can
calculate it by using the following formula:
Ln ¼ ð2n  1Þ=2n
As n becomes large, 2n becomes large much faster, and the proportional
diﬀerence between 2n  1 and 2n becomes smaller and smaller. When n is
extremely large, the quotient (2n  1) / 2n is almost exactly equal to 1. We can
make the quotient as close to 1 as we want by going out far enough in the
series of partial sums, but we can never make it bigger than 1. The series Lþ is
said to converge on the number 1, and as such it is an example of a convergent
series.
GEOMETRIC INTERPOLATION
When you see a long sequence of numbers, you can usually ﬁgure out, with-
out much eﬀort, whether or not it’s a geometric sequence. If it isn’t immedi-
ately obvious, you can conduct a test: divide each number by the one before
it. If all the quotients are the same, then the sequence is a geometric sequence.
Now imagine, as you did with the arithmetic sequences earlier in this
chapter, that you’re given a long string of numbers, but some of them are
missing. An example of such a situation is shown in Table 14-4. It’s easy to
determine the missing values, once you notice that this is a geometric
sequence in which each term is twice as big as the term preceding it. The 4th
term has a value of 8, and the 9th term has a value of 256. We can call the
process of ﬁlling in Table 14-4 an example of geometric interpolation.
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
341

GEOMETRIC EXTRAPOLATION
Just as a geometric sequence can be interpolated, it’s also possible to ‘‘predict’’
what the next numbers are, or would be if the series were lengthened. Table
14-5 illustrates an example of this type of situation. The values in this
sequence are repeatedly cut in half. The 7th number is 1/2. Therefore, the
8th number must be 1/4, the 9th number must be 1/8, the 10th number
must be 1/16, and the 11th number must be 1/32. We can call the process
of ﬁlling in Table 14-5 geometric extrapolation.
PLOTTING A GEOMETRIC SEQUENCE
A geometric sequence, like an arithmetic sequence, looks like a set of points
when plotted on a Cartesian plane. Figure 14-3 shows examples of two
geometric sequences as they appear when graphed. (The dashed curves
aren’t actually parts of the sequences.) Note that the dashed curves are not
straight, but they are smooth.
One of the sequences in Fig. 14-3 is increasing, and the dashed curve
connecting this set of points goes upward as you move to the right. Because
this sequence is ﬁnite, the dashed curve ends. The other sequence is
decreasing, and the dashed curve goes downward and approaches 0 as you
move to the right. This sequence is inﬁnite, as shown by the three dots at
the end of the string of numbers, and also by the arrow at the right-hand end
of the dashed curve.
If a geometric sequence has a negative factor, that is, if k<0, the plot
of the points alternates back and forth on either side of 0. In this case, the
points fall along two diﬀerent curves, one above the horizontal axis and
Table 14-4
Another example of a sequence with some intermediate values missing.
The missing values can be ﬁlled in by interpolation.
Position:
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
Value:
1
2
4
?
16
32
64
128
?
512
1024
Table 14-5
Extension of a geometric sequence can be done by extrapolation.
Position:
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
Value:
32
16
8
4
2
1
1/2
?
?
?
?
PART 4
Math in Science
342

the other below. If you want to see what happens in a case like this, try
plotting an example. Try setting t0 ¼ 64 and k ¼ 1/2, and plot the resulting
points.
PROBLEM 14-4
Suppose you get a certiﬁcate of deposit (CD) at your local bank for $1000.00,
and it earns interest at the annualized rate of exactly 5% per year. How much
will this CD be worth at the end of 6 years, assuming a constant interest rate?
Round all ﬁgures oﬀto the nearest cent at the end of every year.
SOLUTION 14-4
The CD will be worth $1340.10 after 6 years. To calculate this, multiply
$1000 by 1.05, then multiply this result by 1.05, and repeat this process a
total of six times. The resulting numbers are a geometric progression.
*
After 1 year: $1000.00  1.05 ¼ $1050.00
*
After 2 years: $1050.00  1.05 ¼ $1102.50
*
After 3 years: $1102.50  1.05 ¼ $1157.63
*
After 4 years: $1157.63  1.05 ¼ $1215.51
*
After 5 years: $1215.51  1.05 ¼ $1276.29
*
After 6 years: $1276.29  1.05 ¼ $1340.10
Fig. 14-3.
Plots of values of the terms in two diﬀerent geometric sequences.
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
343

PROBLEM 14-5
Is the following sequence a geometric sequence? If so, what are the values t0
(the starting value) and k (the factor of change)?
T ¼ 3  6 12  24 48  96 . . .
SOLUTION 14-5
This is a geometric sequence. The numbers change by a factor of 2. Each
number in the sequence is the product of 2 and the number before it. In
this case, t0 ¼ 3 and k ¼ 2.
PROBLEM 14-6
Is the following sequence a geometric sequence, an arithmetic sequence, or
neither? Is there any pattern to it? If so, what is the pattern?
T ¼ 10 13 17 22 28 35 43 . . .
SOLUTION 14-6
This is not a geometric sequence. It isn’t an arithmetic sequence either. But
there is a pattern. The diﬀerence between the ﬁrst and second numbers is
3, the diﬀerence between the second and third numbers is 4, the diﬀerence
between the third and fourth numbers is 5, and so on; the diﬀerence keeps
increasing by 1 for each succeeding pair of numbers. (Some sequences have
patterns that are subtle indeed. Computers can be helpful in analyzing
such sequences.)
PROBLEM 14-7
Suppose a particular species of cell undergoes mitosis (splits in two) without
fail every half hour, precisely on the half hour. We take our ﬁrst look at a
petri dish at 12:59 p.m., and ﬁnd 3 cells. At 1:00 p.m., mitosis occurs for all
the cells at the same time, and then there are 6 cells in the petri dish. At
1:30 p.m., mitosis occurs again, and then there are 12 cells. How many
cells are there in the petri dish at 4:01 p.m.?
SOLUTION 14-7
There are 3 hours and 2 minutes between 12:59 p.m. and 4:01 p.m. This
means that mitosis takes place 7 times: at 1:00, 1:30, 2:00, 2:30, 3:00, 3:30,
and 4:00. Table 14-6 illustrates the scenario. There are 384 cells at
4:01 p.m., just after the 7th mitosis event that occurs at 4:00.
PART 4
Math in Science
344

Exponential Functions
The idea of the geometric progression, in which a value is repeatedly
multiplied by some constant, can be extended into the general realm of
continuous-curve functions. In an exponential function, a constant is raised
to some variable power.
VARIABLE EXPONENTS
Until now, the notion of ‘‘raising something to a power’’ has been kept sim-
ple because we’ve dealt only with whole-number exponents. For example,
when a variable x is raised to the power of 5, we write it as x5. When
some constant k is raised to the power of 10, we write it as k10. But what
about exponents that are not whole numbers? What, for example, is meant
by the expression x1.5 or 72/3 or z8/5? What if an exponent is an irrational
number such as p, the ratio of a circle’s circumference to its diameter?
All scientiﬁc calculators, and even some ordinary ones, have a key marked
something like ‘‘xy’’ or ‘‘x^y.’’ This is literally read as, ‘‘x to the yth power.’’
To ﬁnd the value of, say, 31.5, you ﬁrst enter the number 3, then you hit the
‘‘xy’’ or ‘‘x^y’’ key, and ﬁnally you enter 1.5. This should give you a result of
5.19615. . . . To ﬁnd the value of 32.88, you ﬁrst enter the number 3, then you
hit the ‘‘xy’’ or ‘‘x^y’’ key, and ﬁnally you enter 2.88. This will give you
23.6651. . . . You can even ﬁnd the value of 3 raised to some power between 0
and 1, or less than 0 (that is, negative).
The general term exponential refers to the raising of a constant to some
power, where that power can be any sort of number. An exponential function
is the raising of a constant to a variable power. Suppose the following
relationship exists among three real numbers a, x, and y:
y ¼ ax
In this case, x is the independent variable and y is the dependent variable.
The constant a is called the base.
Table 14-6
Table for Problem 14-7.
Time:
12:59
1:01
1:31
2:01
2:31
3:01
3:31
4:01
Number of cells:
3
6
12
24
48
96
192
384
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
345

The two most common exponential-function bases are 10 and the natural
exponential base. The natural exponential base is symbolized by the lower-
case, italicized letter e, and is an irrational number. It is approximately equal
to 2.71828.
COMMON EXPONENTIALS
Base-10 exponentials are also known as common exponentials. For example:
103:000 ¼ 0:001
Figure 14-4 is an approximate graph of the function y ¼ 10x. The domain
of this function encompasses the entire set of real numbers. The range is lim-
ited to positive real numbers only.
NATURAL EXPONENTIALS
Base-e exponentials are also known as natural exponentials. For example:
e3:000  2:718283:000  0:04979
Fig. 14-4.
Approximate graph of the common exponential function.
PART 4
Math in Science
346

Figure 14-5 is an approximate graph of the function y ¼ ex. The domain
encompasses the entire set of real numbers. The range is limited to positive
real numbers only.
HOW DO WE FIND THEM?
Common and natural exponentials are easy to ﬁnd. All you have to do is get,
and use, a scientiﬁc calculator. The calculator can show us only the ﬁrst few
digits of the result, so the answer is usually not exact, but it’s a good enough
approximation for most purposes.
Rules for Exponentials
Exponential functions allow us to manipulate numbers in ways that can be
useful in the sorts of work you’re likely to encounter these days. Here are
some of the most common ‘‘laws’’ concerning exponentials. These laws,
like the basic rules of arithmetic, are worth memorizing. That idea is repul-
sive to some folks, but it’s the truth. It is good to know the following rules
by heart.
Fig. 14-5.
Approximate graph of the natural exponential function.
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
347

RECIPROCAL OF EXPONENTIAL
Suppose that x is a real number. The reciprocal of the common (base-10)
exponential of x is equal to the common exponential of the negative of x:
1=ð10xÞ ¼ 10x
The reciprocal of the natural (base-e) exponential of x is equal to the natural
exponential of the negative of x:
1=ðexÞ ¼ ex
PRODUCT OF EXPONENTIALS
Let x and y be real numbers. The product of the common exponentials of x
and y is equal to the common exponential of the sum of x and y. You might
recognize this rule from all the way back in Chapter 3, when we worked
with power-of-10 notation. When two numbers in scientiﬁc notation are
multiplied, the powers of 10 add:
ð10xÞð10 yÞ ¼ 10ðxþyÞ
The product of the natural exponentials of x and y is equal to the natural
exponential of the sum of x and y:
ðexÞðe yÞ ¼ eðxþyÞ
RATIO OF EXPONENTIALS
Let x and y be real numbers. The ratio (quotient) of the common exponen-
tials of x and y is equal to the common exponential of the diﬀerence between
x and y. This rule, too, appeared in Chapter 3. When two extreme numbers
are divided in scientiﬁc notation, their powers of 10 subtract:
10x=10y ¼ 10ðxyÞ
The ratio of the natural exponentials of x and y is equal to the natural
exponential of the diﬀerence between x and y:
ex=ey ¼ eðxyÞ
PART 4
Math in Science
348

EXPONENTIAL OF EXPONENTIAL
Let x and y be real numbers. The yth power of the quantity 10x is equal to the
common exponential of the product xy:
ð10xÞ y ¼ 10ðxyÞ
The yth power of the quantity ex is equal to the natural exponential of the
product xy:
ðexÞ y ¼ eðxyÞ
PROBLEM 14-8
Suppose a scientist, Professor P, has developed a theory to the eﬀect that the
world population increases exponentially with time. Imagine that the present
population of the world has been accurately determined, and we assign
this number (whatever it happens to be) the value 100%, or ‘‘exactly 1 popu-
lation unit.’’ Professor P then tells us that every 100 years, the population
increases by precisely a factor of 10, known as an order of magnitude.
Suppose the theory of Professor P is correct, and that the theory remains
valid for millennia to come. What will be the world’s ‘‘people count,’’ in
population units, 100 years from now? What will it be in 200 years? In 300
years?
SOLUTION 14-8
In 100 years (1 century from now), the world’s ‘‘people count’’ will be 101,
or 10, population units. In 200 years (2 centuries), it will be 102, or 100,
population units. In 300 years, it will be 103, or 1000, population units.
This means that in a century, the world will contain 10 times as many people
as it does now; in 2 centuries the world will have 100 times as many people
as it does now; in 3 centuries there will be 1000 times as many people on
the planet as there are today. Let’s hope that Professor P’s theory doesn’t
hold true that long!
PROBLEM 14-9
Write down an exponential equation showing the world population p, in
population units, as a function of time t, in centuries, according to the theory
of Professor P. Assume that t ¼ 0 right now.
SOLUTION 14-9
The equation looks like this:
p ¼ 10t
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
349

You can check this out by plugging in values for t. If t ¼ 0, then p ¼ 100 ¼ 1.
If t ¼ 1, then p ¼ 101 ¼ 10. If t ¼ 2, then p ¼ 102 ¼ 100. If t ¼ 3, then
p ¼ 103 ¼ 1000. These results agree with those obtained in Solution 14-8.
PROBLEM 14-10
According to the theory of Professor P, how many people, in population
units, will inhabit the world 150 years from now?
SOLUTION 14-10
To solve this problem, we use the equation from Solution 14-9, and plug
in the value t ¼ 1.5. This gives us a population p as follows:
p ¼ 101:5
How do we calculate the value of an expression like 101.5? It’s easy if
you have a scientiﬁc calculator that includes exponential functions. Use the
‘‘xy’’ or ‘‘x^y’’ key. Your calculator might also have a ‘‘10x’’ key. In any
event, you should obtain the value p ¼ 31.62, which we can round oﬀto
32. This means that in 150 years, according to the theory of Professor P,
the world population will be 32 times as great as it is right now.
Logarithms
A logarithm (sometimes called a log) is an exponent to which a constant is
raised to obtain a given number. Suppose the following relationship exists
among three real numbers a, x, and y:
a y ¼ x
Then y is the base-a logarithm of x. This expression is written
y ¼ loga x
The two most common logarithm bases are 10 and e, the same as the
exponential bases.
COMMON LOGARITHMS
Base-10 logarithms are also known as common logarithms or common logs.
In equations, common logarithms are denoted by writing ‘‘log’’ without a
subscript, or occasionally ‘‘log’’ with a subscript 10. For example:
log 100 ¼ log10 100 ¼ 2:00
PART 4
Math in Science
350

Figure 14-6 is an approximate graph of the function y ¼ log x. The domain
is limited to the positive real numbers. The range encompasses the entire
set of real numbers.
NATURAL LOGARITHMS
Base-e logarithms are also called natural logs or Napierian logs. In
equations, the natural-log function is usually denoted ‘‘ln’’ or ‘‘loge.’’ For
example:
ln 2:71828 ¼ loge 2:71828  1:00000
Figure 14-7 is an approximate graph of the function y ¼ ln x. The domain
is limited to the positive real numbers, just as in the case of the common
log function. The range of the natural log function, also like the common
log function, encompasses the entire set of real numbers.
HOW DO WE FIND THEM?
Common and natural logarithms can be easily and quickly found using a
scientiﬁc calculator. That’s all you have to know for practical purposes.
Fig. 14-6.
Approximate graph of the common logarithm function.
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
351

Once you have learned which keys to use (the instructions can help you with
this if it isn’t obvious), ﬁnding logarithms is painless.
Rules for Logarithms
Logarithmic functions, like their exponential-function counterparts, make it
possible to work with numbers in unique ways. And, as with exponentials,
logarithms have a way of coming up in work nowadays. Here are some
rules you should know about logarithmic functions.
LOGARITHM OF PRODUCT
If x and y are both positive real numbers, the common logarithm of the
product is equal to the sum of the common logarithms of the individual
numbers:
log xy ¼ log x þ log y
The natural logarithm of the product is equal to the sum of the natural
logarithms of the individual numbers:
ln xy ¼ ln x þ ln y
Fig. 14-7.
Approximate graph of the natural logarithm function.
PART 4
Math in Science
352

LOGARITHM OF RATIO
Let x and y be positive real numbers. The common logarithm of their ratio,
or quotient, is equal to the diﬀerence between the common logarithms of
the individual numbers:
logðx=yÞ ¼ log x  log y
The natural logarithm of their ratio, or quotient, is equal to the diﬀerence
between the natural logarithms of the individual numbers:
lnðx=yÞ ¼ ln x  ln y
LOGARITHM OF QUANTITY RAISED TO A POWER
Let y be a real number, and let x be a positive real number. The common
logarithm of x raised to the power y can be expressed as a product:
log xy ¼ y log x
The natural logarithm of x raised to the power y can be expressed as a
product:
ln xy ¼ y ln x
LOGARITHM OF RECIPROCAL
Let x be a positive real number. The common logarithm of the reciprocal of x
is equal to the negative of the common logarithm of x, as follows:
logð1=xÞ ¼  log x
The natural logarithm of the reciprocal of x is equal to the negative of the
natural logarithm of x, as follows:
lnð1=xÞ ¼  ln x
LOGARITHM OF THE ROOT OF A QUANTITY
Let x be a positive real number. Let y be any real number except 0. The
common logarithm of the yth root of x (also denoted as x to the 1/y
power) is given by:
log xð1=yÞ ¼ ðlog xÞ=y
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
353

The natural logarithm of the yth root of x (also denoted as x to the 1/yth
power) is given by:
ln xð1=yÞ ¼ ðln xÞ=y
PERCEIVED INTENSITY
If you have ever done serious work with high-ﬁdelity (hi-ﬁ) equipment,
you’ve heard about units called decibels, symbolized dB. The decibel is a
logarithmic unit. It is used to express the relative intensity of sound waves,
radio signals, and even visible light.
The concept of the decibel evolved because our senses perceive variable
eﬀects according to the logarithm of the intensity, not in direct proportion to
the intensity. This is a defense mechanism against the harshness of the world.
If we perceived phenomena such as sound and light in direct proportion
to their true levels, the variability would be overwhelming. We might not be
able to hear someone whispering a meter away, yet a trumpet blast from
across a room would knock us out. We might not be able to see the full moon
on a clear night, but we would be blinded by the light of a cloudy day.
Imagine two sounds having the same frequency and wave shape, such as
middle C played on a trombone. Call them ‘‘sound number 1’’ and ‘‘sound
number 2.’’ Imagine that a trombone plays note 1, pauses for a moment, and
then plays note 2. Notes 1 and 2 diﬀer in intensity by 1 dB if the change is just
barely enough so that a listener can tell the diﬀerence when the change is
expected. This turns out to be a diﬀerence in audio power of approximately
26%, or a ratio of 1.26:1. If the change is not expected, the smallest
detectable audio power diﬀerence is about 100%, or a ratio of 2:1 (believe it
or not).
If P1 is the power (in watts) contained in sound 1 and P2 is the power
(also in watts) contained in sound 2, their relationship in decibels, R, is given
by this formula:
R ¼ 10 logðP2=P1Þ
This formula also works for radio-signal power and light-brilliance power.
If we know the relationship R in decibels between phenomenon number 1
and phenomenon number 2, then the actual power ratio P2/P1 is a common
exponential function of R, as follows:
P2=P1 ¼ 10ðR=10Þ
PART 4
Math in Science
354

PROBLEM 14-11
Suppose two sounds diﬀer in volume by a power ratio of 2:1, which allegedly
is the smallest diﬀerence a listener can detect if the change is not anticipated.
What is the ratio in decibels?
SOLUTION 14-11
Use the formula above. Let P2 ¼ 2 and P1 ¼ 1. Then:
R ¼ 10 logðP2=P1Þ
¼ 10 logð2=1Þ
¼ 10 log 2
¼ 10  0:30103
¼ 3:0103 dB
We can round this oﬀto 3 dB.
PROBLEM 14-12
Suppose you are listening to a musical recording and the needles on your hi-ﬁ
ampliﬁer are peaking at a reading of 0 dB. You boost the volume until the
needles kick up to þ10 dB. By what factor have you increased the audio
power level?
SOLUTION 14-12
In the formula, set R ¼ 10 because the change in sound volume is þ10 dB.
From this, calculate the audio power ratio:
P2=P1 ¼ 10ðR=10Þ
¼ 10ð10=10Þ
¼ 101
¼ 10
This means you have increased the audio power by a factor of 10:1.
Graphs Based on Logarithms
Logarithms make it possible to graph certain functions that don’t lend them-
selves to clear portrayal on the rectangular (Cartesian) coordinate plane.
This is done by making the increments on one or both axes proportional
to the logarithm of the variable value, rather than directly proportional to
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
355

the variable value. A scale or axis in which the sizes of the increments are
in direct proportion to the variable value is called a linear scale or a linear
axis. A scale or axis in which the sizes of the increments are in proportion
to the logarithm of the variable value is called a logarithmic scale or a
logarithmic axis.
SEMILOG (x-LINEAR) COORDINATES
Figure 14-8 shows semilogarithmic (semilog) coordinates for deﬁning points in
a portion of the xy-plane. The independent-variable (x) axis is linear, and the
dependent-variable ( y) axis is logarithmic. In this example, functions can be
plotted with domains and ranges as follows:
1  x  1
0:1  y  10
The y axis in Fig. 14-8 spans two orders of magnitude (powers of 10).
The span could be larger or smaller than this, but in any case the y values
cannot extend all the way down to 0. This is because the logarithm of 0 is
undeﬁned.
Fig. 14-8.
Semilog xy-plane with linear x axis and logarithmic y axis.
PART 4
Math in Science
356

SEMILOG ( y-LINEAR) COORDINATES
Figure 14-9 shows a diﬀerent sort of semilog coordinate system for deﬁning
points in a portion of the xy-plane. Here, the independent-variable (x) axis
is logarithmic, and the dependent-variable ( y) axis is linear. In this example,
functions can be plotted with domains and ranges as follows:
0:1  x  10
1  y  1
The x axis in Fig. 14-9 spans two orders of magnitude. The span could be
larger or smaller, but in any case the x values cannot extend all the way
down to 0.
LOG–LOG COORDINATES
Figure 14-10 shows log–log coordinates for deﬁning points in a portion of
the xy-plane. Both axes are logarithmic. In this example, functions can be
plotted with domains and ranges as follows:
0:1  x  10
0:1  y  10
Fig. 14-9.
Semilog xy-plane with logarithmic x axis and linear y axis.
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
357

Fig. 14-10.
Log–log xy-plane. Both axes are logarithmic.
Fig. 14-11.
Illustration for Problem 14-13.
PART 4
Math in Science
358

The axes in Fig. 14-10 span two orders of magnitude. The span of either axis
could be larger or smaller, but in any case the values cannot extend all the
way down to 0.
PROBLEM 14-13
In semilog coordinates, graph the world population p, in population units,
as a function of time t, in centuries, according to the theory of Professor P.
Show the function over the domain from t ¼ 0 (right now) to t ¼ 2 (2
centuries, or 200 years, from now). Use a linear scale for the horizontal
axis and a logarithmic scale for the vertical axis.
SOLUTION 14-13
Refer to Fig. 14-11. Note that the graph is a straight line. One of the
major assets of semilogarithmic coordinates is the fact that they can
show exponential and logarithmic functions as straight lines, rather than as
curves.
Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
Imagine a frog that jumps halfway to a wall. After 10 seconds, it
jumps halfway to the wall again. After another 10 seconds, it jumps
halfway to the wall once again. It keeps repeating this process. In
theory, how long will it take to reach the wall after its ﬁrst jump?
(a) More information is needed to answer this question.
(b) 102, or 100, seconds.
(c) 210, or 1024, seconds.
(d) It will never reach the wall.
2.
Imagine a frog that jumps halfway to a wall. After 4 seconds, it jumps
halfway to the wall again. After 2 seconds, it jumps halfway to the
wall again. After 1 second, it jumps halfway to the wall again. The
frog keeps repeating this process, but the intervals between jumps
keep getting half as long: 1/2 second, then 1/4 second, and so on.
In theory, how long will it take to reach the wall, if we start timing
it the moment it ﬁnishes its ﬁrst jump?
(a) More information is needed to answer this question.
(b) 8 seconds.
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
359

(c) 42, or 16, seconds.
(d) 28, or 256, seconds.
3.
Consider this sum of numbers:
S ¼ 4  4 þ 4  4 þ 4  4 þ 4  4 þ :::
Which of the following statements is true?
(a) S is a convergent series.
(b) S is an arithmetic series.
(c) S is an inﬁnite series.
(d) S is not a series.
4.
What is the base-10 logarithm of 0.00001?
(a) e/10
(b) e/10
(c) 5
(d) 5
5.
Which of the following points cannot, in theory, be shown on a
log–log (x,y) coordinate system?
(a) The point corresponding to x ¼ 1 and y ¼ 1.
(b) The point corresponding to x ¼ 0 and y ¼ 1.
(c) The point corresponding to x ¼ 10 and y ¼ 10.
(d) The point corresponding to x ¼ 0.1 and y ¼ 0.1.
6.
What is the natural logarithm of e?
(a) 0
(b) 1
(c) e
(d) 1/e
7.
Suppose a sequence of numbers is such that each value is exactly 4 less
than the value before it. This is an example of
(a) a geometric progression
(b) an arithmetic progression
(c) a logarithmic progression
(d) a fractional progression
8.
Suppose you’re listening to a compact disc on your new high-powered
stereo sound system. The VU (volume unit) meter needles are kicking
up to the points marked 0 dB, exactly where the black lines end
and the red lines begin. If you increase the gain so the needles are
kicking up to þ6 dB in the red zone, the sound power coming from
PART 4
Math in Science
360

the speakers has approximately
(a) doubled
(b) quadrupled
(c) increased by a factor of 6
(d) increased by a factor of 26, or 64
9.
Suppose you take a 4-week temporary job with a 5-day work week.
The boss promises that you’ll be paid daily in US dollars ($): $1.00
at the end of the ﬁrst day, $2.00 at the end of the second day, and
doubling each day after that for the entire period. What should
this indicate to you?
(a) The boss is a liar or an unwise wealthy person.
(b) The payment is meager, and you should look for another job.
(c) Your accumulated pay, day by day, will represent a convergent
series.
(d) Nothing, without more information.
10.
Suppose a sequence of numbers is such that each value is exactly
25% of the value before it. This is an example of
(a) a geometric progression
(b) an arithmetic progression
(c) a logarithmic progression
(d) a fractional progression
CHAPTER 14
Growth and Decay
361

CHAPTER
15
How Things Move
What are you really doing when you drive a 2-ton vehicle down the Interstate
at high speed? Why does your suburban utility vehicle try to go oﬀthe road
if you take a curve too fast? Why should you never drive a pickup truck
full of loose, heavy bricks? In this chapter, we’ll take a close look at
the ‘‘why and wherefore’’ behind how things move, and what they can do
when they move.
Mass and Force
The term mass refers to sheer quantity of matter, in terms of its ability
to resist motion when acted upon by a force. A good synonym for mass
is heft. Every material object has a speciﬁc, deﬁnable mass. The sun has a
certain mass; earth has a much smaller mass. A lead shot has a far smaller
mass still. Even subatomic particles, such as protons and neutrons, have
mass.
362
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

MASS IS A SCALAR
The mass of an object or particle has magnitude (size or extent), but not
direction. The mass of any object can be quantiﬁed in units such as kilograms
(kg). Mass is customarily denoted by the lowercase italic letter m.
You might think that mass can have direction. When you stand some-
where, your body presses downward on the ﬂoor or the pavement or the
ground. If someone is more massive than you, his body presses downward
too, but harder. If you get in a car and accelerate, your body presses back-
ward in the seat as well as downward toward the center of the earth.
But this pressing-down or pressing-back is force, not mass. The force
you feel is caused in part by your mass, and in part by gravity or
acceleration. Mass itself has no direction. It’s like temperature or sound
intensity. Mass is a scalar quantity because it can be expressed by a plain,
ordinary number.
HOW MASS IS DETERMINED
The simplest way to determine the mass of an object is to measure it with
a scale. But this isn’t the best way. When you put something on a scale,
you are measuring that object’s weight in the gravitational ﬁeld of the
earth. This ﬁeld has about the same intensity, no matter where you go on
the planet. But it’s diﬀerent on the moon or on other planets. The mass of a
1-kg bag of dried peas is the same wherever you take it on earth. But it will
weigh less on the moon, because the moon’s gravitational ﬁeld is weaker.
Let’s conduct a little thought experiment. Suppose you are on an
interplanetary journey, coasting along on your way to Mars, and everything
in your space vessel is weightless. How can you measure the mass of an
object, such as a lead shot, under these conditions? It ﬂoats around in the
cabin along with your body, the pencils you write with, and everything
else that is not tied down. You are aware that the lead shot is more massive
than, say, a pea, but how can you measure it to be certain?
One way to measure mass, independently of gravity, involves using a pair
of springs set in a frame, with the object placed in the middle (Fig. 15-1).
If you put something between the springs and pull it to one side, the object
oscillates, or ‘‘see-saws.’’ You try this with a pea, and it ‘‘see-saws’’ rapidly.
You try it again with a lead shot, and the springs oscillate slowly. This mass
meter is anchored to a wall in the space ship’s cabin. (Anchoring the mass
meter keeps it from wagging back and forth in mid-air after you start an
object oscillating against the springs.)
CHAPTER 15
How Things Move
363

A scale of this type must be calibrated in advance before it can render
meaningful ﬁgures for masses of objects. The calibration can be shown as
a graph of the oscillation period (the time it takes for the object to complete
one cycle of ‘‘see-saw’’ motion) or oscillation frequency (the number of
complete ‘‘see-saw’’ cycles per second) as a function of the mass. Once this
calibration is done in a weightless environment and the graph has been
drawn, you can use the spring device and the graph to measure the mass
of anything within reason. The readings will be thrown oﬀif you try to use
the mass meter on earth, on the moon, or on Mars, because there is an
outside force – gravity – acting on the mass. The same problem will occur
if you try to use the scale when the space ship is accelerating, rather than
merely coasting or orbiting through space.
PROBLEM 15-1
Suppose you place an object in a mass meter similar to the one shown in
Fig. 15-1. Also suppose that the mass-versus-frequency calibration graph
looks like Fig. 15-2. The object ‘‘see-saws’’ at a rate of 5 oscillations per
second (that is, a frequency of 5 Hz). What is the approximate mass of this
object?
SOLUTION 15-1
Locate the frequency on the horizontal scale. Draw a vertical line (or place
a ruler) parallel to the vertical (mass) axis. Note where this straight line
intersects the curve. Draw a horizontal line from this intersection point
toward the left until it hits the mass scale. Read the mass oﬀthe scale. It is
approximately 0.8 kg, as shown in Fig. 15-3.
Fig. 15-1.
Mass can be measured by getting an object to ‘‘see-saw’’ between a pair of springs
in a weightless environment.
PART 4
Math in Science
364

PROBLEM 15-2
What will the mass meter described in Problem 15-1 do if a mass of only
10 grams (10 g) is placed in between the springs?
Fig. 15-2.
Graph of mass versus oscillation (‘‘see-sawing’’) frequency for a spring-type
mass meter.
Fig. 15-3.
Solution to Problem 15-1.
CHAPTER 15
How Things Move
365

SOLUTION 15-2
The scale will oscillate much faster. We don’t know exactly how fast, because
10 g is only 0.01 kg, which is too small to show up on the graph in Fig. 15-2.
PROBLEM 15-3
Wouldn’t it be easier, and more accurate in real life, to program the calibra-
tion curve for a mass meter into a computer, instead of using graphs like the
ones shown here? That way, we could simply input the ‘‘see-saw’’ frequency
into the computer, and read the mass on the display.
SOLUTION 15-3
Yes, that would be easier. In a real-life mass meter of the sort we’ve been
discussing here, that would be done. In fact, we should expect such a scale
to have a built-in microcomputer and display to tell us the mass directly.
BRICK VERSUS MARBLE
Imagine again that you are in a spacecraft, which is coasting along so every-
thing in the cabin is weightless. Two objects ﬂoat in front of you: a brick
and a marble. Either the brick or the marble can be made to move across
the cabin if you give it a push. But you know that the brick is more massive.
Suppose you ﬂick your ﬁnger against the marble. It ﬂies across the cabin
and bounces oﬀthe wall. Then you ﬂick your ﬁnger just as hard (no more, no
less) against the brick. The brick takes several minutes to ﬂoat across the
cabin and bump into the opposite wall. The ﬂicking of your ﬁnger imparts a
force to the marble or the brick for a moment. The force is the same in either
case, but it has a diﬀerent eﬀect on the brick than on the marble.
FORCE AS A VECTOR
Force is a vector quantity. It can have any magnitude, from the ﬂick of a ﬁn-
ger to a swift leg kick, the explosion of powder in a cannon, or the thrust of a
rocket engine. But in addition to magnitude, force has direction. Vectors are
symbolized using boldface letters of the alphabet. A force vector, for example,
can be denoted F.
Sometimes, the direction of a force is not important. In such instances,
we can speak of the magnitude of a force vector, and denote it as an italic
letter such as F. The standard international unit of force magnitude is the
newton (N), which is the equivalent of a kilogram-meter per second squared
(kg  m/s2). What does this mean? Here’s an example: suppose the brick in
PART 4
Math in Science
366

your spacecraft has a mass of 1 kg, and you push against it with a force of 1 N
for 1 s, and then let go. The brick will then be traveling at a speed of 1 m/s.
It will have gone from stationary (with respect to its surroundings) to a speed
of 1 m/s, which might seem rather slow unless it hits someone. If you hurl it
with a force of 2 N for 1 s, it will end up moving twice as fast, that is, 2 m/s.
HOW FORCE IS DETERMINED
Force can be measured by the eﬀect it has on an object with mass. It can also
be measured by the extent to which it stretches an elastic object such as a
spring. The spring type mass meter described above can be modiﬁed to
make a force meter if one half of it is taken away and a calibrated scale is
placed alongside (Fig. 15-4). This scale must be calibrated in a lab before
the force meter is used.
Displacement
Displacement is almost the same thing as distance, but not quite. Displace-
ment is deﬁned along a straight line in a certain direction. But distance can
be measured any which way. We might say that Minneapolis, Minnesota is
displaced 100 km from Rochester, Minnesota ‘‘as the crow ﬂies,’’ or along
a straight line. If you were to drive along US Route 52, however, the distance
is closer to 120 km, because that highway does not follow a straight path
from Rochester to Minneapolis.
DISPLACEMENT AS A VECTOR
Displacement is a vector quantity because it has magnitude and direction.
A displacement vector is denoted by a lowercase boldface letter such as d.
Fig. 15-4.
A device for measuring force.
CHAPTER 15
How Things Move
367

Displacement magnitude (distance) is denoted by a lowercase italic letter
such as d.
The displacement vector d of Minneapolis, expressed with respect to
Rochester, is about 100 km in a northwesterly direction ‘‘as the crow ﬂies.’’
Expressed as a compass bearing, the direction of d is around 3208, measured
clockwise from north. But if we speak about driving along Route 52, we can
only talk about distance, because the road is not straight or level all the way.
The distance of Minneapolis from Rochester, measured along Route 52, is a
scalar, and is equal to roughly d ¼ 120 km.
HOW DISPLACEMENT IS DETERMINED
Distance can be determined by mechanical measurement, or by inferring
it with observations and calculations. In the case of a car or truck driving
along Route 52, distance is measured with an odometer that counts the num-
ber of wheel rotations, and multiplies this by the circumference of the wheel.
In other real-world scenarios, distance can be measured with a meter stick, by
triangulation, or by more sophisticated means such as the use of the Global
Positioning System (GPS).
The direction component of a displacement vector is determined by
measuring one or more angles or coordinates relative to a reference axis.
In the case of a local region on the earth’s surface, direction can be found by
specifying the azimuth, which is the compass bearing (the angle around the
horizon clockwise relative to true north). That is the scheme used by hikers
and back-packers. In three-dimensional space, direction angles are used.
There are various ways in which these can be deﬁned, but we don’t need to
get into that here.
Speed and Velocity
Speed is an expression of the rate at which an object moves, as seen or meas-
ured by some stationary observer. But we have to be careful about this.
‘‘Stationary’’ is a relative term. People sitting in an airliner might consider
themselves to be ‘‘stationary,’’ but that is not true with respect to the
earth! If you stand on a street corner, you might think you are ‘‘stationary.’’
With respect to the earth, you are; with respect to the passengers on an
airliner ﬂying high above, you aren’t.
PART 4
Math in Science
368

SPEED IS A SCALAR
The standard unit of speed is the meter per second (m/s). A car driving along
Route 52 might have a cruise control that you can set at, say, 25 m/s. Then,
assuming the cruise control works properly, you will be traveling, relative
to the pavement, at a constant speed of 25 m/s. This will be true whether
you are on a level straightaway, rounding a curve, cresting a hill, or passing
the bottom of a valley. Speed can be expressed as a simple number, and the
direction is not important. Speed is a scalar quantity. In this discussion, let’s
symbolize speed by the lowercase italic letter v.
Speed can, and almost always does, change with time. If you hit the brakes
to avoid a deer crossing the road, your speed suddenly decreases. As you pass
the deer, relieved to see it bounding oﬀinto a ﬁeld unharmed, you pick up
speed again.
Speed can be considered as an average over time, or as an instantaneous
quantity. In the foregoing example, suppose you are driving at 25 m/s and
then see a deer, put on the brakes, slow down to a minimum of 10 m/s, watch
the deer run away, and then speed up to 25 m/s again, all in a time span of
one minute. Your average speed over that minute might be 17 m/s. But your
instantaneous speed varies from instant to instant, and is 17 m/s for only two
instants (one as you slow down, the other as you speed back up).
HOW SPEED IS DETERMINED
In an automobile or truck, speed is determined by the same odometer that
measures distance. But instead of simply counting up the number of wheel
rotations from a given starting point, a speedometer counts the number
of wheel rotations in a given period of time. When the tire circumference
is known, the number of wheel rotations in a certain time interval can be
translated directly into speed. (But you have to be sure the tires on your
car are the right size for the odometer. Otherwise the device will not show
the true speed.) In the USA, speed is measured in miles per hour. In the
International System it is expressed in kilometers per hour or in meters per
second.
Most car and truck speedometers respond almost immediately to a change
in speed. These instruments measure the rotation rate of a car or truck axle
by another method, similar to that used by the engine’s tachometer (a device
that measures revolutions per minute, or rpm). A real-life car or truck
speedometer measures instantaneous speed, not average speed. If you want
to know the average speed you have traveled during a certain period of time,
CHAPTER 15
How Things Move
369

you must measure the distance on the odometer, and then divide by the time
elapsed.
In a given period of time t, if an object travels over a distance d at an
average speed vavg, then the following formulas apply. These are all
arrangements of the same relationship among the three quantities:
d ¼ vavgt
vavg ¼ d=t
t ¼ d=vavg
PROBLEM 15-4
Look at the graph of Fig. 15-5. Curve A is a straight line. What is the
instantaneous speed vinst at t ¼ 5 seconds?
SOLUTION 15-4
The speed shown by curve A is constant. You can tell because the curve
is a straight line. The number of meters per second does not change.
In 10 seconds, the object travels 20 meters; that’s 20/10 ¼ 2.0 meters per
second. Therefore, the speed at t ¼ 5 seconds is vinst ¼ 2.0 meters per second.
PROBLEM 15-5
What is the average speed vavg of the object denoted by curve A in Fig. 15-5,
during the time span from t ¼ 3 seconds to t ¼ 7 seconds?
Fig. 15-5.
Illustration for Problems 15-4 through 15-8.
PART 4
Math in Science
370

SOLUTION 15-5
Because the curve is a straight line, the speed is constant; we already know
it is 2.0 meters per second. Therefore, vavg ¼ 2.0 meters per second between
any two points in time shown in the graph.
PROBLEM 15-6
Examine curve B in Fig. 15-5. What can be said about the instantaneous
speed of the object whose motion is described by this curve?
SOLUTION 15-6
The object starts out moving relatively fast, and the instantaneous speed
decreases with the passage of time.
PROBLEM 15-7
Use visual approximation in the graph of Fig. 15-5. At what time t is
the instantaneous speed vinst of the object described by curve B equal to
2.0 meters per second?
SOLUTION 15-7
Use a straight-edge to visualize a line tangent to curve B whose slope is the
same as that of curve A. That is, ﬁnd the straight line, parallel to line A, that
is tangent to curve B. Then locate the point on curve B where the line touches
curve B. Finally, draw a line straight down, parallel to the distance (d) axis,
until it intersects the time (t) axis. Read the value oﬀthe t axis. In this exam-
ple, it appears to be approximately t ¼ 3.2 seconds.
PROBLEM 15-8
Use visual approximation in the graph of Fig. 15-5. Consider the object
whose motion is described by curve B. At the point in time t where the instan-
taneous speed vinst is 2.0 meters per second, how far has the object traveled?
SOLUTION 15-8
Locate the same point that you found in Problem 15-7, corresponding to the
tangent point of curve B and the line parallel to curve A. Draw a horizontal
line to the left, until it intersects the distance (d) axis. Read the value oﬀthe
d axis. In this example, it looks like it’s about d ¼ 11 meters.
VELOCITY IS A VECTOR
Velocity has two components: speed and direction. Thus, it is a vector quan-
tity. You can’t express velocity without deﬁning both of these components.
In the earlier example of a car driving along a highway from one town to
CHAPTER 15
How Things Move
371

another, the car’s speed might be constant, but its velocity changes never-
theless. If you’re moving along at a constant speed of 25 meters per second
(25 m/s) and then you come to a bend in the road, your velocity changes
because your direction changes.
Vectors can be graphically illustrated as line segments with arrowheads.
The speed component of a velocity vector is denoted by the length of the
line segment, and the direction is denoted by the orientation of the arrow.
In Fig. 15-6, three velocity vectors are shown for a car traveling along a
curving road. In this case, imagine the car moving generally from left to right.
Three points are shown, called A, B, and C. The corresponding vectors are
a, b, and c. Both the speed and the direction of the car change with time.
HOW VELOCITY IS DETERMINED
Velocity can be measured by using a speedometer in combination with
some sort of device that indicates the instantaneous direction of travel.
In a car, this can be a magnetic compass. In high-end vehicles, GPS receiving
equipment can indicate the instantaneous direction in which motion occurs.
But in a strict sense, even a speedometer and a compass or GPS receiver
don’t tell the whole story unless you’re driving on a ﬂat plain or prairie.
In mid-state South Dakota, a speedometer and compass can deﬁne the
Fig. 15-6.
Velocity vectors a, b, and c for a car at three points (A, B, and C) along a road.
PART 4
Math in Science
372

instantaneous velocity of your car, but when you get into the Black Hills,
you’ll have to include a clinometer (a device for measuring the steepness
of the grade you’re ascending or descending) to get an absolutely perfect
indication of your velocity.
Two-dimensional direction components can be denoted either as compass
(azimuth) bearings, or as angles measured counterclockwise with respect
to the axis pointing ‘‘east.’’ The former system is preferred by hikers, navi-
gators, and most people in real-world situations. The latter scheme is
preferred by theoretical physicists and mathematicians. In Fig. 15-6, the
azimuth bearings of vectors a, b, and c are approximately 908, 1308, and 458,
respectively. These correspond to points of the compass called east (E),
east-southeast (ESE), and northeast (NE).
A three-dimensional velocity vector consists of a magnitude component
and two direction angles. One of the angles is the azimuth, and the other is
called elevation, measured in degrees above the horizontal (positive angles) or
below it (negative angles). The elevation angle can be as small as 908
(straight down) or as large as þ908 (straight up). The horizontal direction is
indicated by an elevation angle of 08. Elevation angle should not be confused
with elevation above or below sea level. That’s an entirely diﬀerent thing,
measured in meters.
Acceleration
Acceleration is an expression of the rate of change in the velocity of an object.
This can occur as a change in speed, a change in direction, or both.
Acceleration can be deﬁned in one dimension (along a straight line), in two
dimensions (within a ﬂat plane), or in three dimensions (in space), just as
can velocity. Acceleration sometimes takes place in the same direction as
an object’s velocity vector, but this is not necessarily the case.
ACCELERATION IS A VECTOR
Acceleration, like velocity, is a vector quantity. Sometimes the magnitude of
the acceleration vector is called ‘‘acceleration,’’ and is usually symbolized
by the lowercase italic letter a. But technically, the vector expression should
be used; it is normally symbolized by the lowercase bold letter a.
In our previous example of a car driving along a highway, suppose the
speed is constant at 25 m/s. The velocity changes when the car goes around
CHAPTER 15
How Things Move
373

curves, and also if the car crests a hilltop or bottoms-out in a ravine or valley
(although these can’t be shown in this two-dimensional drawing). If the car is
going along a straight path, and its speed is increasing, then the acceleration
vector points in the same direction that the car is traveling. If the car puts
on the brakes, still moving along a straight path, then the acceleration vector
points exactly opposite the direction of the car’s motion.
Acceleration vectors can be graphically illustrated as arrows. Figure 15-7
illustrates acceleration vectors for a car traveling along a level, but curving,
road at a constant speed of 25 m/s. Three points are shown, called X, Y, and
Z. The corresponding acceleration vectors are x, y, and z. Because the
speed is constant and the road is level, acceleration only takes place where
the car encounters a bend in the road. At point Y, the road is essentially
straight, so the acceleration is zero (y ¼ 0). The zero vector is shown as a
point at the origin of a vector graph.
HOW ACCELERATION IS DETERMINED
Acceleration magnitude is expressed in meters per second per second, also
called meters per second squared (m/s2). This seems esoteric at ﬁrst. What
does s2 mean? Is it a ‘‘square second’’? What in the world is that? Forget
about trying to imagine it in all its abstract perfection. Instead, think of it
Fig. 15-7.
Acceleration vectors x, y, and z for a car at three points (X, Y, and Z) along a
road. The magnitude of y is 0 because there is no acceleration at point Y.
PART 4
Math in Science
374

in terms of a concrete example. Suppose you have a car that can go from a
standstill to a speed of 26.8 m/s in 5 seconds. Suppose that the acceleration
rate is constant from the moment you ﬁrst hit the gas pedal until you have
attained a speed of 26.8 m/s on a level straightaway. Then you can calculate
the acceleration magnitude:
a ¼ ð26:8 m=sÞ=ð5 sÞ ¼ 5:36 m=s2
The expression s2 translates, in this context, to ‘‘second, every second.’’ The
speed in the above example increases by 5.36 meters per second, every second.
Acceleration magnitude can be measured in terms of force against mass.
This force, in turn, can be determined according to the amount of distortion
in a spring. The force meter shown in Fig. 15-4 can be adapted to make
an acceleration meter, more technically known as an accelerometer, for
measuring acceleration magnitude.
Here’s how a spring type accelerometer works. A functional diagram is
shown in Fig. 15-8. Before the accelerometer can be used, it is calibrated in a
lab. For the accelerometer to work, the direction of the acceleration vector
must be in line with the spring axis, and the acceleration vector must point
outward from the ﬁxed anchor toward the mass. This produces a force on
the mass. The force is a vector that points directly against the spring, exactly
opposite the acceleration vector.
A common weight scale can be used to indirectly measure acceleration.
When you stand on the scale, you compress a spring or balance a set of
masses on a lever. This measures the downward force that the mass of your
body exerts as a result of a phenomenon called the acceleration of gravity.
The eﬀect of gravitation on a mass is the same as that of an upward
Fig. 15-8.
An accelerometer. This measures the magnitude only, and must be properly
oriented to provide an accurate reading.
CHAPTER 15
How Things Move
375

acceleration of approximately 9.8 m/s2. Force, mass, and acceleration are
interrelated as follows:
F ¼ ma
That is, force is the product of mass and acceleration. This formula is
so important that it’s worth remembering, even if you aren’t a scientist. It
quantiﬁes and explains a lot of things in the real world, such as why it
takes a fully loaded semi truck so much longer to get up to highway
speed than the same truck when it’s empty, or why, if you drive around
a slippery curve too fast, you risk sliding oﬀthe road.
Suppose an object starts from a dead stop and accelerates at an average
magnitude of aavg in a straight line for a period of time t. Suppose after this
length of time, the distance from the starting point is d. Then this formula
applies:
d ¼ aavgt2=2
In the above example, suppose the acceleration magnitude is constant; call it
a. Let the instantaneous speed be called vinst at time t. Then the instantaneous
speed is related to the acceleration magnitude as follows:
vinst ¼ at
PROBLEM 15-9
Suppose two objects, denoted by curves A and B in Fig. 15-9, accelerate
along straight-line paths. What is the instantaneous acceleration ainst at
t ¼ 4 seconds for object A?
SOLUTION 15-9
The acceleration depicted by curve A is constant, because the speed increases
at a constant rate with time. (That’s why the graph is a straight line.) The
number of meters per second squared does not change throughout the time
span shown. In 10 seconds, the object accelerates from 0 m/s to 10 m/s;
that’s a rate of speed increase of one meter per second per second (1 m/s2).
Therefore, the acceleration at t ¼ 4 seconds is ainst ¼ 1 m/s2.
PROBLEM 15-10
What is the average acceleration aavg of the object denoted by curve A in
Fig. 15-9, during the time span from t ¼ 2 seconds to t ¼ 8 seconds?
SOLUTION 15-10
Because the curve is a straight line, the acceleration is constant; we already
know it is 1 m/s2. Therefore, aavg ¼ 1 m/s2 between any two points in time
shown in the graph, including the two points corresponding to t ¼ 2 seconds
and t ¼ 8 seconds.
PART 4
Math in Science
376

PROBLEM 15-11
Examine curve B in Fig. 15-9. What can be said about the instantaneous
acceleration of the object whose motion is described by this curve?
SOLUTION 15-11
The object starts out accelerating slowly, and as time passes, its instantaneous
rate of acceleration increases.
PROBLEM 15-12
Use visual approximation in the graph of Fig. 15-9. At what time t is the
instantaneous acceleration ainst of the object described by curve B equal to
1 m/s2?
SOLUTION 15-12
Use a straight-edge to visualize a line tangent to curve B whose slope is the
same as that of curve A. Then locate the point on curve B where the line
touches curve B. Finally, draw a line straight down, parallel to the speed
(v) axis, until it intersects the time (t) axis. Read the value oﬀthe t axis.
Here, it appears to be about t ¼ 6.3 seconds.
PROBLEM 15-13
Use visual approximation in the graph of Fig. 15-9. Consider the object
whose motion is described by curve B. At the point in time t where the
instantaneous acceleration ainst is 1 m/s, what is the instantaneous speed,
vinst, of the object?
Fig. 15-9.
Illustration for Problems 15-9 through 15-13.
CHAPTER 15
How Things Move
377

SOLUTION 15-13
Locate the same point that you found in Problem 15-12, corresponding to the
tangent point of curve B and the line parallel to curve A. Draw a horizontal
line to the left, until it intersects the speed (v) axis. Read the value oﬀthe
v axis. In this example, it looks like it’s about vinst ¼ 3.0 m/s.
Momentum
Momentum is an expression of ‘‘heft in motion,’’ the product of an object’s
mass and its velocity. Momentum, like velocity, is a vector quantity, and
its magnitude is expressed in kilogram meters per second (kg  m/s).
MOMENTUM AS A VECTOR
Suppose the speed of an object (in meters per second) is v, and the mass of the
object (in kilograms) is m. Then the magnitude of the momentum, p, is their
product:
p ¼ mv
This is not the whole story. To fully describe momentum, the direction, as
well as the magnitude, must be deﬁned. That means we must consider the
velocity of the mass in terms of its speed and direction. (A 2-kg brick ﬂying
through your east window is not the same as a 2-kg brick ﬂying through
your north window.) If we let v represent the velocity vector and p represent
the momentum vector, then we can say this:
p ¼ mv
IMPULSE
The momentum of a moving object can change in three diﬀerent ways:
*
A change in the mass of the object.
*
A change in the speed of the object.
*
A change in the direction of the object’s motion.
Let’s consider the second and third of these possibilities together; then this
constitutes a change in the velocity.
PART 4
Math in Science
378

Let’s put our everyday-world time clock into ‘‘future mode.’’ Imagine a
massive space ship, coasting along a straight-line path in interstellar space.
Consider a point of view, or reference frame, such that the velocity of the ship
can be expressed as a vector pointing in a certain direction. A force F can be
applied to the ship by ﬁring a rocket engine. Imagine that there are several
engines on the ship, one intended for driving it forward at increased speed,
and others capable of changing the vessel’s direction. If any engine is ﬁred for
t seconds with a force vector of F newtons (as shown by the three examples in
Fig. 15-10), then the product Ft is called the impulse. Impulse is a vector,
symbolized by the uppercase boldface letter I, and its magnitude is expressed
in kilogram meters per second (kg  m/s). Here’s the formula:
I ¼ Ft
Fig. 15-10.
Three ways in which an impulse can cause a space ship to accelerate. At A,
getting the ship to move straight ahead at higher speed. At B and C, getting the ship to turn.
CHAPTER 15
How Things Move
379

Impulse on an object always produces a change in the object’s velocity.
That’s a good thing; it is the purpose of the rocket engines in our space ship!
Recall the above formula concerning mass m, force F, and acceleration a:
F ¼ ma
Substitute ma for F in the equation for impulse. Then we get this:
I ¼ ðmaÞt
Now remember that acceleration is a change in velocity per unit time.
Suppose the velocity of the space ship is v1 before the rocket is ﬁred, and
v2 afterwards. Then, assuming the rocket engine produces a constant force
while it is ﬁred:
a ¼ ðv2  v1Þ=t
We can substitute in the previous equation to get
I ¼ mððv2  v1Þ=tÞt ¼ mv2  mv1
This means the impulse is equal to the change in momentum.
We have just derived an important law of real-world motion. Impulse is
expressed in kilogram-meters per second (kg  m/s), just as is momentum.
You might think of impulse as momentum in another form. When an object
is subjected to an impulse, the object’s momentum vector p changes. The
vector p can grow larger or smaller in magnitude, or it can change direction,
or both of these things can happen.
PROBLEM 15-14
Suppose a truck having a mass of 2000 kg moves at a constant speed of
20 m/s in a northerly direction. A braking impulse, acting in a southerly
direction, slows the truck down to 15 m/s, but it still moves in a northerly
direction. What is the impulse responsible for this change in speed?
SOLUTION 15-14
The original momentum, p1, is the product of the mass and the initial
velocity:
p1 ¼ 2000 kg  20 m=s ¼ 40000 kg  m=s
in a northerly direction
The ﬁnal momentum, p2, is the product of the mass and the ﬁnal velocity:
p2 ¼ 2000 kg  15 m=s ¼ 30000 kg  m=s
in a northerly direction
PART 4
Math in Science
380

Thus, the change in momentum is p2  p1:
p2  p1 ¼ 30000 kg  m=s  40000 kg  m=s ¼ 10000 kg  m=s
in a northerly direction
That is the same as 10,000 kg  m/s in a southerly direction. Because impulse
is the same thing as the change in momentum, the impulse is 10,000 kg  m/s
in a southerly direction.
Don’t let this result confuse you. A vector with a magnitude of x in a
certain direction is, in the real world, a vector with magnitude þx in the exact
opposite direction. Problems sometimes work out to yield vectors with
negative magnitude. When that happens, reverse the direction and change
the sign of the magnitude from minus to plus.
Quiz
Refer to the text in this chapter if necessary. A good score is eight correct.
Answers are in the back of the book.
1.
If you drive a 1000-kg vehicle down the road at 30 m/s, what is the
momentum?
(a) 33 kg  m/s
(b) 1030 kg  m/s
(c) 3000 kg  m/s
(d) 30,000 kg  m/s
2.
Why is it unwise to drive a pickup truck full of loose bricks?
(a) If you suddenly have to swerve, the bricks’ momentum could
cause some of them to suddenly ﬂy over the side onto the road
or into the ditch.
(b) If you suddenly have to stop, the bricks’ momentum could cause
some of them to sail through the back window and hit you.
(c) If you accelerate forward at too great a rate, the bricks’ momen-
tum could cause some of them to be dumped oﬀthe back of the
truck and onto the road.
(d) All of the above.
3.
If you drive a truck full of loose bricks down a straight, level stretch of
highway, the momentum vector of each brick points
(a) in the same direction as the truck travels
(b) in the opposite direction from that in which the truck travels
CHAPTER 15
How Things Move
381

(c) at a right angle to the direction in which the truck travels
(d) nowhere, because momentum is not a vector
4.
Imagine that a boat whose mass is 500 kg (with you and all your gear
in it) is traveling straight forward on a lake at 10 m/s. You cut the
engine and lift it out of the water, so you are coasting straight forward
at 10 m/s. What impulse vector will bring the boat to a stop? Assume
the boat moves along the water with no friction, and that there is no
wind or current.
(a) 50 kg  m/s, pointing forward.
(b) 50 kg  m/s, pointing backward.
(c) 5000 kg  m/s, pointing forward.
(d) 5000 kg  m/s, pointing backward.
5.
Suppose the town of Blissville is 5400 km from the town of Happyton,
as measured along the Interstate highways. You drive from Blissville
to Happyton over the course of several days, and you keep track of
your total driving time. You come to the conclusion that you were
traveling at an average speed of 15 m/s. How many hours were you
driving?
(a) 19
(b) 100
(c) 360
(d) It is impossible to answer this without more information.
6.
Imagine the space-ship scenario described in the text and illustrated in
Fig. 15-10. Suppose a rocket engine is to be installed in a position and
orientation such that, when it is ﬁred, it causes the ship to slow down
but continue in the same direction. Where should such a rocket be
placed, and in what direction should its exhaust come out?
(a) It should be placed on the nose of the ship, and its exhaust should
come out directly forward.
(b) It should be placed on the nose of the ship, and its exhaust should
come out directly backward.
(c) It should be placed on the back end of the ship, and its exhaust
should come out directly sideways.
(d) Any of the above.
7.
Suppose you buy a car and the manufacturer claims that it can accel-
erate from 0 to 30 m/s in 6 seconds. Suppose you take the car for a test
drive on a straight, level, dry stretch of roadway on a racetrack (with
the permission of the track owner and under the supervision of the
highway patrol, of course!). You discover that the manufacturer’s
PART 4
Math in Science
382

claim is true. What is the average acceleration rate during the
6-second period during which your car’s speed has increased from
a dead stop to 30 m/s?
(a) 5 m/s2
(b) 30 m/s2
(c) 180 m/s2
(d) It is impossible to answer this without more information.
8.
Suppose you have a mass of 60 kg on the earth’s surface. The moon
has a gravitational ﬁeld that is 1/6 as strong, at the surface, as the
earth’s gravitational ﬁeld. If you travel to the moon, what will be
your mass there?
(a) 10 kg
(b) 60 kg
(c) 360 kg
(d) It is impossible to know without more information.
9.
If you stand on the surface of the earth, your mass vector points
(a) straight down
(b) straight up
(c) horizontally
(d) nowhere, because mass is not a vector
10.
Suppose you get a new set of tires for your truck, and they are
larger in diameter than the tires you have been using. You know
that your odometer was accurate with your old tires. If you drive
100 km with the new tires, your odometer, which measures distance
according to the number of axle rotations, will tell you that you
have traveled
(a) less than 100 km
(b) exactly 100 km
(c) more than 100 km
(d) too fast
CHAPTER 15
How Things Move
383

Test: Part 4
Do not refer to the text when taking this test. You may draw diagrams or use
a calculator if necessary. A good score is at least 30 correct. Answers are in
the back of the book. It’s best to have a friend check your score the ﬁrst time,
so you won’t memorize the answers if you want to take the test again.
1.
Which of the following represents an arithmetic sequence?
(a) 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32
(b) 2, 5, 8, 11, 14, 17, 20
(c) 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1
(d) 1, 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, 1/5, 1/6, 1/7
(e) 1, 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, 1/32, 1/64
2.
A car is advertised as being capable of going from 0 to 60 miles per
hour in 5 seconds. What is the average acceleration, in miles per
hour per second (mi/hr/s) that this ﬁgure represents?
(a) 5 mi/hr/s
(b) 10 mi/hr/s
(c) 12 mi/hr/s
384
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

(d) 300 mi/hr/s
(e) More information is necessary to calculate it.
3.
Suppose that when you ‘‘ﬂoor’’ the gas pedal in your car, it produces
a certain constant forward force. This results in a certain forward
acceleration when you’re all alone in the car. If you ﬁll up the car
with passengers so its mass increases by 25% compared to its mass
when you are alone in it, and then you ‘‘ﬂoor’’ the gas pedal, what
happens to the forward acceleration? Ignore any possible eﬀects of
friction. Remember that force is the product of mass and acceleration.
(a) The acceleration becomes 1.25 times as great as it is with only you
in the car.
(b) The acceleration stays the same as it is with only you in the car.
(c) The acceleration becomes 4/5 times as great as it is with only
you in the car.
(d) The acceleration becomes 3/4 as great as it is with only you
in the car.
(e) The acceleration becomes half as great as it is with only you in
the car.
4.
Suppose that when you ‘‘ﬂoor’’ the gas pedal in your car, it produces
a certain constant forward force. This results in a certain forward
acceleration when you’re all alone in the car. If you put high-
performance fuel in the tank, producing a 25% increase in the force
produced when you ‘‘ﬂoor’’ the gas pedal, what happens to the
forward acceleration when you are alone in the car and you ‘‘ﬂoor’’
the gas pedal? Ignore any possible eﬀects of friction. Remember
that force is the product of mass and acceleration.
(a) The acceleration stays the same as it is with the ordinary fuel.
(b) The acceleration becomes 1.25 times as great as it is with the
ordinary fuel.
(c) The acceleration becomes 1.563 times as great as it is with the
ordinary fuel.
(d) The acceleration becomes twice as great as it is with the ordinary
fuel.
(e) The acceleration becomes four times as great as it is with the
ordinary fuel.
5.
A quantity that has magnitude and direction is known as
(a) a variable
(b) a constant
Test: Part 4
385

(c) a scalar
(d) a vector
(e) a logarithm
6.
Imagine that you’ve purchased a new hi-ﬁaudio ampliﬁer for
your car. It contains volume (or gain) control knobs, one for each
channel, calibrated in numbers from 0 to 10. The speciﬁcation
sheet in the instruction manual for your new ampliﬁer contains a
graph that looks like Fig. Test 4-1. From this graph, it is apparent that
(a) the output volume, in watts, is directly proportional to the volume
control setting in either channel
(b) the output volume, in decibels, is directly proportional to the
volume control setting in either channel
(c) the output volume, in watts, is inversely proportional to the
volume control setting in either channel
(d) the output volume, in decibels, is inversely proportional to the
volume control setting in either channel
(e) the output volume increases according to the square of the volume
control setting in either channel
Fig. Test 4-1.
Illustration for Part Four Test Questions 6 through 8.
PART 4
Math in Science
386

7.
Suppose you’re listening to music using the ampliﬁer whose speci-
ﬁcations include a graph such as that shown in Fig. Test 4-1. If
you increase the volume control setting by 2 units, the peak output
power, in watts, increases by
(a) 0.2 watts
(b) 0.4 watts
(c) 2 watts
(d) 4 watts
(e) an amount that depends on the initial setting.
8.
Suppose you’re listening to music using the ampliﬁer whose speci-
ﬁcations include a graph such as that shown in Fig. Test 4-1. If
you increase the volume control setting by 2 units, the peak output
power, in decibels, increases by
(a) 0.2 decibels
(b) 0.4 decibels
(c) 2 decibels
(d) 4 decibels
(e) an amount that depends on the initial setting
9.
The sum of all the terms in a sequence is called
(a) a partial sum
(b) a series
(c) an arithmetic sequence
(d) a geometric sequence
(e) a linear sequence
10.
Which of the following is always a scalar quantity?
(a) The velocity of a train.
(b) The acceleration of a car.
(c) The impulse produced by a rocket engine.
(d) The mass of a truckload of bricks.
(e) The force produced by the wind against a wall.
11.
Suppose you’re driving a motorboat across a river. The bow of the
boat is pointing straight south, and your water speed is 7 knots.
There is a steady current in the water moving from east to west at
a speed of 7 knots. What is your direction (heading) relative to land?
(a) South.
(b) Southeast.
(c) Southwest.
(d) East.
(e) West.
Test: Part 4
387

12.
Suppose you’re driving a motorboat across a river. The bow of the
boat is pointing straight north, and your water speed is 12 knots.
There is a steady current in the water moving from west to east at
a speed of 9 knots. What is your speed relative to land?
(a) 3 knots.
(b) 9 knots.
(c) 12 knots.
(d) 15 knots.
(e) It is impossible to tell without more information.
13.
Suppose you buy a house for $200,000. You are conﬁdent that its
value will increase by exactly 10% per year for the next 10 years.
According to this formula, what should the house be worth after
3 years?
(a) $230,000
(b) $242,000
(c) $260,000
(d) $266,200
(e) More information is necessary to answer this question.
14.
Suppose you buy a house for $200,000, and its value falls by exactly
10% per year for 3 years. What is the house worth at the end of the
3 years?
(a) $170,000
(b) $162,000
(c) $145,800
(d) $140,000
(e) More information is necessary to answer this question.
15.
Which of the following can be expressed as a vector quantity?
(a) The mass of a bag of apples.
(b) The brightness of a source of light.
(c) The loudness of a sound.
(d) The acceleration of a car.
(e) The volume of water in a swimming pool.
16.
In Fig. Test 4-2, which of the vectors in the lower diagrams best
represents the velocity vector for the car shown in the top diagram?
Imagine the car moving generally from left to right along the road as
shown. Assume each division represents 5 meters per second.
(a) a
(b) b
(c) c
PART 4
Math in Science
388

(d) d
(e) e
17.
In Fig. Test 4-2, which of the vectors in the lower diagrams best
represents the acceleration vector for the car shown in the top
diagram? Imagine the car moving generally from left to right along
the road as shown. Assume each division represents 5 meters per
second squared.
(a) a
(b) b
(c) c
(d) d
(e) e
18.
Imagine the car reversing direction as shown in the diagram of
Fig. Test 4-2, so it moves generally from right to left at a constant
speed of 15 meters per second. Which of the vectors in the lower
Fig. Test 4-2.
Illustration for Part Four Test Questions 16 through 18.
Test: Part 4
389

diagrams best represents the acceleration vector in this case? Assume
each division represents 5 meters per second squared.
(a) a
(b) b
(c) c
(d) d
(e) e
19.
Suppose Jimsville is 60 miles from Joesville. You need to get from
one town to the other in 90 minutes or less. Your minimum average
speed
(a) must be 30 miles per hour
(b) must be 40 miles per hour
(c) must be 45 miles per hour
(d) must be 60 miles per hour
(e) cannot be determined from this information
20.
Suppose Jimsburg is 80 kilometers from Joesburg. You make a trip
from one town to the other in exactly 80 minutes. Your instanta-
neous acceleration
(a) must be at least 1 meter per second squared
(b) must be at least 60 meters per second squared
(c) must be at least 16.17 millimeters per second squared
(d) must be at least 16.67 meters per second squared
(e) cannot be determined from this information
21.
Suppose you deposit exactly $65,536.00 into an account on the ﬁrst
day of the month. On the second day of the month, you deposit
exactly half this amount. On the third day, you deposit half the
amount that you deposited on the second day. You repeat this
process until you can no longer cut the deposits in half while still
making them in whole cents (that is, without ‘‘breaking up a
penny’’). What will be the amount you have in the bank at that time?
(a) $131,071.75
(b) $131,071.00
(c) $131,072.75
(d) $131,072.00
(e) That time will never be reached; the account balance will con-
tinue to increase without limit.
22.
Speed can be expressed in terms of
(a) distance multiplied by time
(b) distance per unit time
PART 4
Math in Science
390

(c) time per unit distance
(d) acceleration per unit time
(e) velocity multiplied by time
23.
Any radioactive material has a speciﬁc period of time known as its
half-life, over which its radioactivity drops by 50%. Suppose the
half-life of element X is 100 years. Right now the radiation intensity
from a sample of element X is at a certain level. In 100 years, the
element X will be 50% as radioactive as it is right now. After another
100 years, the radioactivity of the element X will drop by another
50%. This process will repeat, century after century, eon after
eon. The radiation-intensity levels of any given sample of element
X, measured in constant ‘‘radiation units (RU)’’ at intervals of 100
years:
(a) increase without limit
(b) alternate between positive and negative
(c) comprise a geometric progression
(d) add up to zero
(e) converge toward 1
24.
Suppose you want to check the ﬂoor in a room to see if it is perfectly
horizontal. You know the ﬂoor is perfectly ﬂat throughout the room.
You have a carpenter’s level with which you can check to see if any
particular line along the ﬂoor is horizontal. What is the minimum
number of readings you must make with the level in order to know
whether or not the ﬂoor is perfectly horizontal?
(a) 1
(b) 2
(c) 3
(d) 4
(e) 5
25.
Which of the following can be a unit of acceleration magnitude?
(a) Meters per second.
(b) Seconds per meter.
(c) Meters per second squared.
(d) Seconds per meter squared.
(e) Degrees per meter squared.
26.
Imagine a room whose ﬂoor and ceiling are perfectly square, and
whose four walls are all perfect rectangles. Imagine one corner of
this room, where two walls intersect the ﬂoor. There are three line
segments that come together at this corner: the line segment where
Test: Part 4
391

the two walls intersect, the line segment where one wall intersects
the ﬂoor, and the line segment where the other wall intersects the
ﬂoor. At the corner where they all come together, these three line
segments are
(a) mutually parallel
(b) mutually perpendicular
(c) mutually skewed
(d) mutually equilateral
(e) none of the above
27.
A ﬂat geometric plane in 3D space can be uniquely deﬁned by
(a) a point in the plane and a vector perpendicular to the plane
(b) three points that do not all lie on the same straight line
(c) two parallel straight lines
(d) two intersecting straight lines
(e) any of the above
28.
Suppose you have a jar in which you keep change that accumulates
in the course of your shopping adventures. Every day, you put 76
cents into the jar. The amount of money in the jar increases day
by day, according to
(a) an arithmetic progression
(b) a geometric progression
(c) a logarithmic progression
(d) an exponential progression
(e) a convergent progression
29.
Any radioactive material has a speciﬁc period of time known as its
half-life, over which its radioactivity drops by 50%. Suppose the half-
life of element Y is 80,000 years, someone has just handed you a sam-
ple of it, and the radiation level from it is 128 ‘‘radiation units (RU).’’
In 80,000 years, the sample will be half as radioactive as it is today.
After another 80,000 years, the radioactivity will go down by half,
again. This decay process will go on essentially forever. Suppose
the maximum safe level for human exposure to any radioactive sub-
stance is 16 RU. How long will it be before it’s no longer dangerous
to hang around the piece of element Y you’ve just been given?
(a) 240,000 years.
(b) 160,000 years.
(c) 80,000 years.
(d) 40,000 years.
(e) 20,000 years.
PART 4
Math in Science
392

30.
What would Fig. Test 4-3 most likely represent?
(a) The frequency setting of a hi-ﬁstereo radio receiver.
(b) The direction in which a car or truck drives down a level street.
(c) The direction in which a broadband satellite Internet dish is
pointed.
(d) The compass bearing of a hiker in the wilderness.
(e) The acceleration of a speedboat on a lake.
31.
In Fig. Test 4-3, what do x, y, and z represent?
(a) Direction cosines.
(b) Direction angles.
(c) Compass bearings.
(d) Elevation angles.
(e) Azimuth bearings.
32.
In Fig. Test 4-3, what is represented by the lowercase, boldface letter a?
(a) A ray of light.
(b) An exponent.
(c) A logarithm.
(d) A scalar.
(e) A vector.
33.
What is another thing that Fig. Test 4-3 might depict?
(a) The velocity at which a missile is ﬁred.
(b) Sunlight shining down on the surface of the earth.
Fig. Test 4-3.
Illustration for Part Four Test Questions 30 through 34.
Test: Part 4
393

(c) The motion of a train along a level track.
(d) The speed of the wind in a hurricane.
(e) The time and temperature in a certain place.
34.
The diagram in Fig. Test 4-3 portrays?
(a) 1 spatial dimension.
(b) 2 spatial dimensions.
(c) 3 spatial dimensions.
(d) 4 spatial dimensions.
(e) 5 spatial dimensions.
35.
The human ear and brain perceive the loudness of a sound
(a) in proportion to the square of the sound power
(b) in proportion to the base-10 exponential of the sound power
(c) in proportion to the base-e exponential of the sound power
(d) in proportion to the logarithm of the sound power
(e) in inverse proportion to the sound power
36.
Suppose we are told the following sequence S is an arithmetic
sequence:
S ¼ 80 75 x y z 55 50
What is the diﬀerence between x and z?
(a) 5
(b) 10
(c) 15
(d) 20
(e) It cannot be determined without more information.
37.
Suppose you are told that the intensity of some eﬀect Y varies
according to the 3/2 power of the strength of some other eﬀect X.
If the strength of eﬀect X doubles, by what factor does the intensity
of eﬀect Y increase?
(a) It does not change.
(b) It doubles.
(c) It quadruples.
(d) It increases by a factor of the square root of 8.
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
38.
Suppose you are building a coﬀee table. Your friend wants it to have
four legs attached to the table at the corners of a square. But you
want it to have only three legs, attached to the table at the vertices
of an equilateral triangle. You know that a three-legged table
PART 4
Math in Science
394

won’t wobble, even if the ﬂoor is irregular or if the legs don’t all turn
out to be exactly the same length. On what geometric principle is this
fact based?
(a) A vector normal to a ﬂat plane cannot lie in that plane.
(b) Two intersecting, straight lines uniquely deﬁne a ﬂat plane.
(c) Three points, not all on the same line, uniquely deﬁne a ﬂat
plane.
(d) Four points can lie in the same plane, but this is not always true.
(e) Four points can lie at the corners of a square, but this is not
always true.
39.
Suppose your computer receives (unknown to you) an e-mail worm
that causes it to automatically send the same message to 100 other
computers. Ninety percent (90%) of the computers that receive this
e-mail block it out, but the other 10% get it and execute its nefarious
instructions. This process continues indeﬁnitely, with one iteration
taking place every minute. The number of these useless, unethical,
illegal e-mail messages clogging up the Internet increases, per unit
minute, according to
(a) an arithmetic progression
(b) a logarithmic progression
(c) a geometric progression
(d) a quadratic progression
(e) a cubic progression
40.
Suppose you step on the ‘‘gas pedal’’ of a high-performance car while
you take a banked curve on a race track. The magnitude and direc-
tion of the acceleration of the car at a particular instant in time can
be fully deﬁned as
(a) a vector
(b) a logarithm
(c) a constant
(d) a trigonometric function
(e) an exponent
Test: Part 4
395

Final Exam
Do not refer to the text when taking this test. You may draw diagrams or
use a calculator if necessary. A good score is at least 75 correct. Answers
are in the back of the book. It’s best to have a friend check your score the
ﬁrst time, so you won’t memorize the answers if you want to take the test
again.
1.
Which of the following statements is false?
(a) A dependent variable can change in value, but its value is aﬀected
by at least one other factor.
(b) An independent variable can change in value, but its value is not
inﬂuenced by anything else in a given scenario.
(c) A mathematical function is always a mathematical relation.
(d) A mathematical relation is always a mathematical function.
(e) A function always has at least one dependent variable.
2.
What is the product of 2/3 and 4/5?
(a) 6/15
(b) 8/15
(c) 3/4
396
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

(d) 1
(e) 22/15
3.
What is the equation shown by the straight line in Fig. Exam-1?
(a) 3x þ 2y ¼ 0
(b) 2x þ 3y ¼ 0
(c) 2x  3y ¼ 0
(d) 4x  6y ¼ 0
(e) 6x þ 3y ¼ 0
4.
Consider the following equation:
ð y2  2y þ 1Þð y þ 4Þð y þ 5Þð y þ 6Þ ¼ 0
How many real-number solutions are there to this equation?
(a) 1
(b) 2
(c) 3
(d) 4
(e) 5
5.
It is known that 1 foot is equal to approximately 30.5 centimeters, and
that 1 inch is exactly 1/12 of a foot. Based on these facts, how many
centimeters are there in 1 inch?
(a) 0.305
(b) 0.393
(c) 2.54
(d) 3.28
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
Fig. Exam-1.
Illustration for Final Exam Question 3.
Final Exam
397

6.
Suppose you ﬂip an unbiased coin, and it comes up ‘‘heads’’ 4 times
in a row. If you ﬂip it a ﬁfth time, what is the probability that it will
come up ‘‘heads’’ again?
(a) 50%
(b) 25%
(c) 12.5%
(d) 6.25%
(e) 3.125%
7.
A nomograph
(a) consists of two graduated axes that intersect at a right angle
(b) consists of three graduated axes that intersect at right angles
(c) consists of two graduated scales lined up directly with each other
(d) cannot be used to compare variables such as temperatures in
diﬀerent scales
(e) consists of points in a coordinate plane, connected by straight lines
8.
If the rectangular-coordinate graph of an equation is a parabola
opening downward, the equation is
(a) linear
(b) circular
(c) quadratic
(d) cubic
(e) quartic
9.
Dionysus is thinking of a real number. If he adds 7 to this number, he
gets the same result as if the number is doubled. What is the number?
(a) 7
(b) 2
(c) 7/2
(d) 2/7
(e) There is no such real number.
10.
Imagine the set W of days in a week. Tuesday is
(a) a subset of W
(b) a proper subset of W
(c) an element of W
(d) a fraction of W
(e) a point of W
11.
Which of the following (a), (b), (c), or (d) is not a real number?
(a) 41/2
(b) 41/3
(c) 41/4
Final Exam
398

(d) 41/5
(e) All of the above are real numbers.
12.
In probability, the set of all possible outcomes in the course of an
experiment is called
(a) the dependent variable
(b) the independent variable
(c) the sample space
(d) the population
(e) the event
13.
Suppose your history teacher tells you that there is no good evidence
that the ancient Roman emperor Nero played a musical instrument
while the town burned. The teacher says, ‘‘It is nothing but a wild
tale. The probability is only 10% that Nero actually played a
musical instrument while Rome was on ﬁre.’’ This last statement is
an example of
(a) a sample space that is too small
(b) conﬂicting data
(c) the ‘‘probability fallacy’’
(d) mistaking a dependent variable for an independent variable
(e) mistaking a permutation for a combination
14.
Imagine a quantity x. Suppose you add 7 to x, and get the same
result as if you subtract 5 from x. What is the real-number value
of x?
(a) 7
(b) 5
(c) 7/5
(d) 5/7
(e) The quantity x is not a real number.
15.
Suppose two corporations want to advertise on a billboard. The
billboard has a trapezoidal shape, as shown in Fig. Exam-2. The
corporations decide that the most equitable way to divide up
the space is to divide it horizontally across the middle, so the top por-
tion (light shading) and bottom portion (dark shading) are of equal
height. The dimensions are as shown. Assume they are exact to the
nearest millimeter. How long is the central, horizontal line that
divides the light and dark shaded regions?
(a) More information is necessary to answer this.
(b) 11.750 meters.
(c) 11.833 meters.
Final Exam
399

(d) 12.000 meters.
(e) 12.250 meters.
16.
In the situation shown by Fig. Exam-2, the area of the top portion
(light shading) of the billboard represents
(a) 28.57% of the total billboard area
(b) 33.33% of the total billboard area
(c) 40.00% of the total billboard area
(d) 45.83% of the total billboard area
(e) less than half of the total billboard area, but more information is
necessary to calculate the exact percentage
17.
Suppose you have a standard 52-card deck. The deck is complete,
and there is exactly one of each card (4 suits with 13 cards in each
suit, and no jokers). You draw a card from this deck, then put the
card back, shuﬄe the deck several times, and then draw another
card. What is the probability that you’ll get the same card twice?
(a) 1/140,608
(b) 1/2704
(c) 1/52
(d) 1/13
(e) 1/4
18.
What is the value of 3 þ 5  15  7?
(a) The expression is ambiguous without parentheses telling us in
what order we should perform the operations.
(b) 56
(c) 56
(d) 3
(e) 1
Fig. Exam-2.
Illustration for Final Exam Questions 15 and 16.
Final Exam
400

19.
Suppose a straight, ﬂat, two-lane highway crosses a straight set of
railroad tracks, such that the acute angle between the rails and
the center line of the highway measures 608. What is the measure
of the obtuse angle between the rails and the center line of the
highway?
(a) 1508
(b) 1208
(c) 908
(d) 608
(e) 308
20.
Nikolai is thinking of a positive whole number. If the number is
squared and then 10 is subtracted from the result, the diﬀerence is
equal to 6. What is the number?
(a) 2
(b) 4
(c) 6
(d) 10
(e) 100
21.
Imagine the set F of the days in February. The set of all Sundays in
February is
(a) a subset of F
(b) a superset of F
(c) an element of F
(d) a fraction of F
(e) a point of F
22.
Suppose your house has 2700 square feet of ﬂoor space, and the
ceilings are all exactly 8 feet high. How many cubic feet are in
your house?
(a) 2700
(b) 5400
(c) 10,800
(d) 21,600
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
23.
Suppose your house has 2700 square feet of ﬂoor space, and the
ceilings are all exactly 8 feet high. How many cubic yards are in
your house? (A linear yard is exactly 3 linear feet.)
(a) 800
(b) 2400
(c) 7200
Final Exam
401

(d) 14,400
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
24.
In statistics, a variable that can only attain certain speciﬁc values is
called
(a) a constant variable
(b) an independent variable
(c) a dependent variable
(d) a discrete variable
(e) a continuous variable
25.
Not too long ago, a computer was considered fast if its processor
worked at 1 MHz (1,000,000 cycles per second). A few years later,
processor speeds had increased to 1 GHz (1,000,000,000 cycles per
second). This represented a processor-speed increase of
(a) 1 order of magnitude
(b) 2 orders of magnitude
(c) 3 orders of magnitude
(d) 6 orders of magnitude
(e) 9 orders of magnitude
26.
A text discussion talks about an angle , and then asks you to assume
that  ¼ p/2. What is the equivalent measure of  in angular degrees?
(a) 458
(b) 908
(c) 1358
(d) 1808
(e) 2708
27.
Fig. Exam-3 shows points plotted in
(a) polar coordinates
(b) rectangular coordinates
(c) conical coordinates
(d) navigator’s coordinates
(e) Einstein coordinates
28.
What are the coordinates of point R in Fig. Exam-3?
(a) (3, 4)
(b) (3, 5)
(c) (3, 4)
(d) (3, 5)
(e) (4, 5)
Final Exam
402

29.
What is the slope of the line connecting points Q and R (not points Q
and P!) in Fig. Exam-3?
(a) 0
(b) 8/9
(c) 9/8
(d) It is not deﬁned.
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
30.
The year 2003 contained precisely 365 solar days. One solar day is
exactly 24 hours long. How many seconds were there in the year
2003?
(a) 5.256  105
(b) 5.256  105
(c) 3.1536  107
(d) 3.1536  107
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
31.
In the expression w þ xy2, which operation should be performed last
when the values of w, x, and y are known?
(a) The addition.
(b) The multiplication.
(c) The squaring (raising to the power of 2).
Fig. Exam-3.
Illustration for Final Exam Questions 27 through 29.
Final Exam
403

(d) It doesn’t matter.
(e) There is no way to know, unless parentheses are included that tell
us the order in which we should do the operations.
32.
The mean for a discrete variable in a statistical distribution is
(a) the smallest value
(b) the largest value
(c) the mathematical average of all the values
(d) the value in the exact middle
(e) the value that occurs most often
33.
Suppose you are exactly 6 feet tall. Your doctor tells you not to go
out in the sun unless your shadow is at least 10 feet long on level
ground. This means the sun must be below a certain angle relative
to the horizon. What is this angle? Round the answer oﬀto the
nearest angular degree.
(a) 318
(b) 378
(c) 538
(d) 598
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
34.
Hypatia loves green apples. Every time her big sister, Katyusha, goes
to the grocery store, Hypatia reminds her to get plenty of green
apples. One day Katyusha comes back from the store and says,
‘‘Today they would sell me only a certain amount of green apples.
They said if I weighed them, the kilograms and pounds scales had
to say the same thing.’’ Hypatia, sensing the truth immediately, says:
(a) ‘‘How will we ever be able to eat all those apples before they
spoil?’’
(b) ‘‘Oh, so they didn’t have any green apples this week!’’
(c) ‘‘That’s not saying anything. The pounds and kilograms scales
always agree, no matter what you put on them.’’
(d) ‘‘That will be enough so we can each have one apple a day for
the next week.’’
(e) ‘‘That’s ridiculous. You can’t use a kilograms scale to weigh
anything.’’
35.
Imagine a city in which streets run east–west, and avenues run north–
south. Each street is numbered north and south from Center Street,
and each avenue is numbered east and west from Broadway.
Consecutively numbered streets and avenues are exactly 100 meters
apart, so each city block measures 100 meters square. There are no
Final Exam
404

diagonal routes, and no routes are blocked oﬀ. You are at the
intersection of 8th Street North and 6th Avenue East. What is the
minimum distance you must drive, along the streets and avenues,
to get to the intersection of 4th Street South and 3rd Avenue West?
(a) 1.1 kilometers.
(b) 1.2 kilometers.
(c) 1.5 kilometers.
(d) 2.0 kilometers.
(e) 2.1 kilometers.
36.
In the above-mentioned city (Question 35), what is the straight-line
distance that an unimpeded ray of light would travel to get from
the intersection of 8th Street North and 6th Avenue East to the
intersection of 4th Street South and 3rd Avenue West?
(a) 1.1 kilometers.
(b) 1.2 kilometers.
(c) 1.5 kilometers.
(d) 2.0 kilometers.
(e) 2.1 kilometers.
37.
There is a well-known formula for converting degrees Fahrenheit to
degrees Celsius. The formula is as follows:
C ¼ ð5=9ÞðF  32Þ
where C represents the temperature in degrees Celsius (8C), and F
represents the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit (8F). Normal
human body temperature is considered to be 98.68F. What is this
on the Celsius scale?
(a) 22.88C
(b) 37.08C
(c) 2098C
(d) 2358C
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
38.
Suppose the economy of a country undergoes slow but steady inﬂa-
tion, at the rate of 2% per year. If an item costs exactly $1.00 in US
dollars (or 100¢ in US cents) today in that country, how much will it
cost in 10 years, assuming the rate of inﬂation remains constant and
the price of that item rises in accordance with the rate of inﬂation?
Round the answer oﬀto the nearest cent.
(a) $1.10
(b) $1.22
Final Exam
405

(c) 90¢
(d) 82¢
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
39.
Suppose the economy of a country undergoes slow but steady inﬂa-
tion, at the rate of 2% per year. If $1.00 in US dollars (that is, 100
US cents) will buy 1 kilogram of cranberries today in that country,
how many kilograms of cranberries will $1.00 buy in 10 years, assum-
ing the rate of inﬂation remains constant and the price of cranberries
rises in accordance with the rate of inﬂation? Round the answer oﬀto
the nearest 10 grams.
(a) 1.10 kilograms.
(b) 1.22 kilograms.
(c) 0.90 kilograms.
(d) 0.82 kilograms.
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
40.
Which of the following unit pairs can most reasonably represent the
variables in a polar coordinate system?
(a) Radians and angular degrees.
(b) Angular degrees and meters.
(c) Meters and centimeters.
(d) Kilometers and feet.
(e) Sines and cosines.
41.
You’re watching a major-league baseball game on television. At the
top of the screen is a line of data numbers, including the score, the
ball-strike count, and the speed of every pitch in miles per hour.
You know there are 5280 feet in a mile and 3600 seconds in an
hour. How many feet per second is a 90-mile-per-hour pitch?
(a) More information is needed to answer this question.
(b) 56 feet per second.
(c) 61 feet per second.
(d) 132 feet per second.
(e) 145 feet per second.
42.
If you drive a 2000-kg vehicle down the road at 20 m/s, what is the
momentum?
(a) 40 kg  m/s
(b) 100 kg  m/s
(c) 2020 kg  m/s
(d) 40,000 kg  m/s
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
Final Exam
406

43.
Suppose you have a large sheet of paper that measures exactly 1
meter square, so its surface area is 1 square meter on either side.
If you fold this piece of paper in half twice, what is the
surface area, in millimeters, of one face of the resulting 4-ply folded
sheet?
(a) 1,000,000 square millimeters.
(b) 250,000 square millimeters.
(c) 125,000 square millimeters.
(d) 62,500 square millimeters.
(e) 31,250 square millimeters.
44.
Suppose you are building a stairway from the ground ﬂoor to the
second ﬂoor hallway in a house. The base of the stairwell is to be
5.245 meters from the base of the door at the top of the stairway.
The base of this door is 3.105 meters above the level of the ﬁrst
ﬂoor. At what angle, relative to the vertical wall (not the ﬂoor),
will the banisters on the stairway slant? Assume the banisters are
exactly parallel to the line representing the slant of the stairwell.
Assume the ﬂoors are all ﬂat and level. Round the answer oﬀto
the nearest tenth of a degree.
(a) 30.68
(b) 36.38
(c) 53.78
(d) 59.48
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
45.
Suppose you are building a stairway from the back yard to the
second ﬂoor living room in a house. The base of the stairwell is to
be 5.245 meters from the base of the door at the top of the stairway.
The base of this door is 3.105 meters above the level of the ground.
At what angle, relative to the vertical wall (not the ﬂoor), will the
banisters on the stairway slant? Assume the banisters are exactly
parallel to the line representing the slant of the stairwell. Assume
that the ground is not ﬂat and level near the house, but instead,
slopes downhill away from the house. Round the answer oﬀto the
nearest tenth of a degree.
(a) 30.68
(b) 36.38
(c) 53.78
(d) 59.48
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
Final Exam
407

46.
In a vertical bar graph, the value of a function’s dependent variable,
for a given value of the independent variable, is proportional to
(a) the height of a rectangle or strip
(b) the sharpness of a curve
(c) the width of a straight line
(d) the area of a pizza-slice-shaped wedge
(e) the area of a triangle
47.
Let P1 be the visible-light power (in watts) emitted by lamp number
1. Let P2 be the visible-light power (also in watts) emitted by lamp
number 2. Their perceived intensity relationship R, in decibels
(dB), is given by this formula:
R ¼ 10 log ðP2=P1Þ
Suppose lamp no. 1 emits 10 watts of visible light, while lamp no. 2
emits 40 watts of visible light. How many decibels brighter is lamp
no. 2 than lamp no. 1?
(a) 3 dB
(b) 4 dB
(c) 6 dB
(d) 30 dB
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
48.
Suppose a car is traveling northwest at 15 meters per second. If this
is expressed as a vector quantity, then ‘‘15 meters per second’’
describes the
(a) orientation of the vector
(b) velocity of the vector
(c) acceleration of the vector
(d) magnitude of the vector
(e) scalar of the vector
49.
The set of points equidistant from the origin of a polar coordinate
system is
(a) a straight line
(b) a parabola
(c) a hyperbola
(d) a circle
(e) a square
50.
The set of points equidistant from the origin of a rectangular coordi-
nate system is
(a) a straight line
Final Exam
408

(b) a parabola
(c) a hyperbola
(d) a circle
(e) a square
51.
The mode for a discrete variable in a statistical distribution is
(a) the smallest value
(b) the largest value
(c) the mathematical average of all the values
(d) the value in the exact middle
(e) the value that occurs most often
52.
Suppose you are driving a car north on a back road at 15 meters per
second. You see a squirrel in the road and, because there is no one
driving behind you, you slam on the brakes. In exactly 3 seconds,
you come to a complete stop, and the squirrel, paralyzed with fear
in the middle of the road, is spared. Your change in speed can be con-
sidered acceleration in a southerly direction (that is, contrary to the
direction in which you are driving), at an average rate of
(a) 45 meters per second per second
(b) 18 meters per second per second
(c) 12 meters per second per second
(d) 5 meters per second per second
(e) 3 meters per second per second
53.
Which of the following functions looks like a sinusoid when graphed?
(a) Cosine.
(b) Cosecant.
(c) Tangent.
(d) Cotangent.
(e) Secant.
54.
Which of the following (a), (b), (c), or (d) is a legitimate way to
manipulate an equation in which the variable is z?
(a) Subtract 1 from the quantities on both sides of the equals sign.
(b) Divide the quantities on both sides of the equals sign by 2.
(c) Multiply the quantities on both sides of the equals sign by 10.
(d) Add z to the quantities on both sides of the equals sign.
(e) All of the above are legitimate ways to manipulate an equation in
which the variable is z.
55.
The square root of a negative integer is
(a) a rational number
(b) a real number
Final Exam
409

(c) an irrational number
(d) an imaginary number
(e) an undeﬁned quantity
56.
Suppose Happyton and Blissville are 240 miles apart on Route X-99.
What is the average speed you must drive if you want to get from
Happyton to Blissville in 8 hours?
(a) 30 meters per second.
(b) 30 feet per second
(c) 30 miles per hour
(d) 30 kilometers per hour.
(e) None of the above.
57.
Suppose you pay a certain amount per month for your medical insur-
ance right now. If the premiums increase by exactly 15% annually
for the next 20 years, how many times as large will your monthly
premium be in 20 years, as compared with what it is today?
(a) 3 times as large.
(b) 4 times as large.
(c) 11.5 times as large.
(d) 16.4 times as large.
(e) 23 times as large.
58.
Suppose you want to paint the ﬂoor with two coats in a room that
measures exactly 10 by 10 feet. One liquid quart of paint is advertised
to cover 55 square feet. There are four liquid quarts in a liquid
gallon. How much paint should you buy, in order to ensure that
you can completely cover the ﬂoor with two coats, but while also
ensuring that you waste the smallest possible amount of paint?
(a) 1 quart.
(b) 2 quarts.
(c) 3 quarts.
(d) 1 gallon.
(e) 1 gallon and 1 quart.
59.
The force F (in newtons) required to accelerate an object of mass m
(in kilograms) in a straight line at a rate of a (in meters per second
squared) is given by the well-known equation:
F ¼ ma
Imagine you are driving a truck whose mass is 5 metric tons.
(A metric ton is 1000 kilograms.) The truck is accelerating forward
on a level, ﬂat, straight road at exactly 200 centimeters per second
Final Exam
410

per second. What is the forward force causing this acceleration?
Neglect the eﬀects of friction, and assume there is no wind.
(a) 1000 newtons.
(b) 10,000 newtons.
(c) 100,000 newtons.
(d) 1,000,000 newtons.
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
60.
Suppose you graph two diﬀerent equations in two variables.
Both of the equations have graphs that look like parallel, straight
lines. How many common solutions are there to this pair of equa-
tions?
(a) There are no solutions.
(b) There is one solution.
(c) There is more than one solution.
(d) There are inﬁnitely many solutions.
(e) More information is needed to answer this.
61.
Which of the following numbers is expressed in binary form?
(a) 2E5F
(b) 722
(c) 989880
(d) 10101
(e) 123210
62.
Suppose you’re sailing a motorboat from south to north across
a river that runs exactly east–west. If there were no current in the
river, your boat would travel at 12 knots with respect to the
riverbank. (A knot is a nautical mile per hour, and a nautical mile
is 6080.20 feet.) But there is a current in the river, and it ﬂows at
a steady 5 knots from west to east. What is the speed of your boat
relative to the riverbank?
(a) 7 knots.
(b) 12 knots.
(c) 13 knots.
(d) 17 knots.
(e) More information is necessary to answer this question.
63.
Suppose you have a standard 52-card deck. The deck is complete,
and there is exactly one of each card (4 suits with 13 cards in each
suit, and no jokers). You draw a card from this deck, then put the
card back, shuﬄe the deck several times, and then draw another
card. Then you put the card back, reshuﬄe the deck again several
Final Exam
411

times, and draw a third card. What is the probability that you’ll get
three cards of the same suit?
(a) 1/128
(b) 1/64
(c) 1/32
(d) 1/16
(e) 1/8
64.
The quotient of two negative real numbers is
(a) always negative
(b) negative if the denominator is greater than 1, and positive if the
denominator is less than 1
(c) negative if the denominator is less than 1, and positive if the
denominator is greater than 1
(d) always positive
(e) equal to 0
65.
Which, if any, of the following (a), (b), (c), or (d) cannot be deﬁned
as a scalar quantity?
(a) The mass of an apple.
(b) The temperature of the water in a swimming pool.
(c) The speed of the wind.
(d) The brightness of a light bulb.
(e) All of the above (a), (b), (c), and (d) can be deﬁned as scalar
quantities.
66.
Suppose you are standing exactly 500 feet away from the base of a
vertical communications tower. Your eyes are exactly 5 feet above
the ground, which is ﬂat and level in the vicinity of the tower.
There is a ﬂashing light on the top of the tower, and this light is
exactly 400 feet above the ground. You look up at the light. At
what elevation angle is your line of sight, relative to the horizon?
Round the answer oﬀto the nearest tenth of a degree.
(a) 38.38
(b) 38.78
(c) 51.38
(d) 51.78
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
67.
Suppose the communications tower in the scenario of Question 66
is blown out of vertical alignment by a high wind. You stand
the same distance away from the base as before, that is, 500 feet.
Your eyes are still exactly 5 feet above the ground. If you look at
Final Exam
412

the ﬂashing light now, what is the angle of your line of sight relative
to the horizon?
(a) 38.38
(b) 38.78
(c) 51.38
(d) 51.78
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
68.
What is the value of the quotient (6  105)/(2  102)?
(a) There is no way to know because the expression is ambiguous.
(b) 3  1010
(c) 3  103
(d) 12  103
(e) 3  107
69.
In Fig. Exam-4, the independent variable is
(a) time
(b) temperature
(c) location
Fig. Exam-4.
Illustration for Final Exam Questions 69 and 70.
Final Exam
413

(d) the absolute frequency
(e) the cumulative absolute frequency
70.
In Fig. Exam-4, the dependent variable is
(a) time
(b) temperature
(c) location
(d) the absolute frequency
(e) the cumulative absolute frequency
71.
In the hexadecimal number system:
(a) the set of possible digits is {0, 1}
(b) the set of possible digits is {0, 1, 2, 3}
(c) the set of possible digits is {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}
(d) the set of possible digits is {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}
(e) the set of possible digits is {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F}
72.
What is 150% of 20?
(a) 10
(b) 20
(c) 30
(d) 40
(e) It is meaningless; percentages can never be greater than 100%.
73.
Let S be the sequence of all the positive whole numbers divisible by 7,
considered in ascending order. That is:
S ¼ 7 14 21 28 35 . . .
This is an example of
(a) a ﬁnite arithmetic sequence
(b) an inﬁnite arithmetic sequence
(c) a ﬁnite geometric sequence
(d) an inﬁnite geometric sequence
(e) none of the above
74.
What is wrong with Fig. Exam-5?
(a) The curve should represent a function, but it does not.
(b) The curve should be a straight line, but it is not.
(c) The horizontal axis does not portray a reasonable independent
variable.
(d) The vertical axis does not portray a reasonable dependent
variable.
(e) Nothing is wrong with Fig. Exam-5.
Final Exam
414

75.
Which of the following is not a circular function?
(a) Sine.
(b) Cosine.
(c) Logarithm.
(d) Tangent.
(e) Cosecant.
76.
Consider a point (x,y,z) in 3D rectangular coordinates. The distance
d of this point from the origin can be found using this formula:
d ¼ ðx2 þ y2 þ z2Þ1=2
Imagine the origin of a 3D rectangular coordinate system as the
point where two walls intersect the ceiling in a room whose walls
run north–south and east–west. A spider has built a web in the
northwestern corner of this room, near the ceiling. The spider sits
in its web, waiting for a ﬂy to get caught. As the spider lurks, it is
at a point 30 centimeters below the ceiling, 20 centimeters to the
south of the north wall, and 40 centimeters to the east of the west
wall. How far, in a straight line, is the spider from the origin?
Round the answer oﬀto the nearest centimeter.
(a) 9 centimeters.
(b) 29 centimeters.
(c) 30 centimeters.
(d) 54 centimeters.
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
77.
Suppose, in the scenario described in Question 76, a ﬂy gets caught in
the web, 10 centimeters away from the spider. How far, measured in
Fig. Exam-5.
Illustration for Final Exam Question 74.
Final Exam
415

a straight line, is the ﬂy from the origin? Round the answer oﬀto
the nearest centimeter.
(a) 9 centimeters.
(b) 29 centimeters.
(c) 30 centimeters.
(d) 54 centimeters.
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
78.
If you want to design a stool so it won’t wobble, even if the ﬂoor is
not ﬂat, how many legs should the stool have?
(a) 3
(b) 4
(c) 5
(d) 6
(e) 8
79.
Suppose you are standing 200 yards away from a communica-
tions tower that is 150 yards high. The ground between you and
the tower is ﬂat and level. You draw this situation and get
Fig. Exam-6, where d represents the distance of your shoes
from the tower, e represents the height of the tower, and f represents
the distance of your shoes from the top of the tower. According to
the Theorem of Pythagoras, you know this:
d2 þ e2 ¼ f 2
You also know that there are exactly 3 feet in a yard. How far are
your shoes from the top of the tower? Express the answer to the
nearest 10 feet.
(a) 450 feet.
(b) 600 feet.
(c) 750 feet.
Fig. Exam-6.
Illustration for Final Exam Questions 79 and 80.
Final Exam
416

(d) 900 feet.
(e) More information is necessary to answer this question.
80.
Suppose, in the situation shown by Fig. Exam-6, and described by
Question 79, you move twice as far away from the tower as you
were before. How far are your shoes from the top of the tower
now? Express the answer to the nearest 10 feet.
(a) 1170 feet.
(b) 1220 feet.
(c) 1280 feet.
(d) 1440 feet.
(e) More information is necessary to answer this question.
81.
Suppose you are grocery shopping and you come across apples on
sale for $0.50 (50¢) a pound. The scale for weighing them, however,
shows kilograms (kg). You place apples on the scale until it reads
3.50 kg. What is the price of this mass of apples?
(a) 80¢
(b) $1.59
(c) $3.85
(d) $7.70
(e) It cannot be determined without more information.
82.
A continuous variable
(a) can attain only certain values over a speciﬁed range
(b) can attain inﬁnitely many values over a speciﬁed range
(c) can always be portrayed as a straight line
(d) can only be portrayed as a series of points
(e) is a bell-shaped curve
83.
Suppose a truck weighs 8459 kilograms (kg). How many grams (g) is
this, written in scientiﬁc notation?
(a) 8459 g
(b) 8.459 g
(c) 8.459  103 g
(d) 8.459  106 g
(e) 8.459  109 g
84.
Let q represent a set of items or objects taken r at a time in a speciﬁc
order. The possible number of combinations in this situation is
symbolized qCr and can be calculated as follows:
qCr ¼ q!=½r!ðq  rÞ! 
Final Exam
417

Now suppose you have a pair of standard 6-faced dice. If you toss
both dice at once, how many diﬀerent combinations of numbers is
it possible to get?
(a) 15
(b) 30
(c) 360
(d) 720
(e) More information is necessary to answer this question.
85.
Suppose you build a canvas teepee. The ﬂoor is circular with a radius
of 3 meters, as shown in Fig. Exam-7. The teepee is a right circular
cone supported by a central pole 4 meters high (pole not shown).
The slant height is 5 meters. The surface area of a right circular
cone, not including the base, is equal to p times the radius of
the base, times the slant height. How much canvas will you need
to construct this teepee? Neglect the small area of the exhaust
fan hole at the top. Assume that the door will be a ﬂap of canvas,
that there will be no windows, and that the ﬂoor will be dirt.
Let p ¼ 3.14.
(a) 15 square meters.
(b) 28.26 square meters.
(c) 47.1 square meters.
(d) 37.68 cubic meters.
(e) 60 cubic meters.
86.
The volume of a right circular cone is equal to p times the square of
the radius of the base, times the height, divided by 3. How much air is
Fig. Exam-7.
Illustration for Final Exam Questions 85 through 87.
Final Exam
418

enclosed by the teepee shown in Fig. Exam-7? Neglect the small
volume taken up by the supporting pole. Let p ¼ 3.14.
(a) 15 square meters.
(b) 28.26 square meters.
(c) 47.1 square meters.
(d) 37.68 cubic meters.
(e) 60 cubic meters.
87.
The area of a circle is equal to the product of p and the square of its
radius. How much ﬂoor area does the teepee shown in Fig. Exam-7
have? Neglect the small area taken up by the base of the supporting
pole. Consider the value of p to be 3.14.
(a) 15 square meters.
(b) 28.26 square meters.
(c) 47.1 square meters.
(d) 37.68 cubic meters.
(e) 60 cubic meters.
88.
Suppose you graph two diﬀerent equations in two variables. Both of
the equations have graphs that look like circles. How many common
solutions are there to this pair of equations?
(a) There are no solutions.
(b) There is one solution.
(c) There is more than one solution.
(d) There are inﬁnitely many solutions.
(e) More information is needed to answer this.
89.
Imagine that you are a dedicated lap swimmer, and you are used
to swimming 3000 meters every day, which is 30 round-trip laps
(a lap is two one-way lengths) in your local 50-meter pool. You
are in a strange town and you go to their local pool, and discover
that it is 25 yards long. You happen to remember that there are
approximately 39.37 inches in 1 meter, and that 1 yard is exactly
36 inches. Based on this information, how many round-trip laps of
the 25-yard pool should you swim in order to be sure you get your
3000-meter workout, but without swimming any more laps than
necessary?
(a) More information is necessary in order to answer this question.
(b) 28
(c) 33
(d) 55
(e) 66
Final Exam
419

90.
The median for a discrete variable in a statistical distribution is
(a) the smallest value
(b) the largest value
(c) the mathematical average of all the values
(d) the value in the exact middle
(e) the value that occurs most often
91.
In the octal number system:
(a) the set of possible digits is {0, 1}
(b) the set of possible digits is {0, 1, 2, 3}
(c) the set of possible digits is {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}
(d) the set of possible digits is {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}
(e) the set of possible digits is {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F}
92.
In a major-league baseball diamond, the distance between home
plate and ﬁrst base is 90 feet. The same is true of the distance between
ﬁrst base and second base, between second base and third base, and
between third base and home plate. The pitcher’s rubber is 60.5 feet
from home plate. Suppose a triangle is laid out with straight ropes
between home plate, ﬁrst base, and the pitcher’s rubber. What is
the sum of the measures of the interior angles of this triangle?
(a) 1728
(b) 176.58
(c) 1808
(d) 183.58
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
93.
Suppose that major-league baseball oﬃcials decide to change the
dimensions of a standard baseball diamond. The motivation is to
make it more diﬃcult for pitchers, causing higher-scoring games.
According to the new regulations, the pitcher’s rubber will be 70
feet, rather than 60.5 feet, away from home plate. Further imagine
that the distances between the bases will be left the same, at 90
feet. Suppose a triangle is laid out with straight ropes between
home plate, ﬁrst base, and the pitcher’s rubber in a diamond with
the new oﬃcial dimensions. What is the sum of the measures of
the interior angles of this triangle?
(a) 1728
(b) 176.58
(c) 1808
(d) 183.58
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
Final Exam
420

94.
What is the sum of 2/3 and 4/5?
(a) 6/15
(b) 8/15
(c) 3/4
(d) 1
(e) 22/15
95.
Consider the following equation:
ðx  7Þðx þ 2Þ ¼ 0
What is the real-number solution set for this equation?
(a) 1 (The empty set.)
(b) {7}
(c) {2}
(d) {7, 2}
(e) {7, 2}
96.
A kilogram (kg) represents 1000 grams, and a microgram (mg) repre-
sents 0.000001 grams. Suppose a sand grain has a mass of 2 mg while
a bag of potatoes has a mass of 2 kg. How many orders of magnitude
more massive is the bag of potatoes than the sand grain?
(a) More information is needed to answer this.
(b) 2
(c) 3
(d) 9
(e) 1,000,000,000
97.
Suppose you buy stock in Corporation X on December 31 of a cer-
tain year and then forget all about it. One day in the middle of
January you get a report from the company saying that your stock
has increased in value by $5 a share each year for the past 10
years. Every December 31, the stock has been worth $5 a share
more than it was on December 31 of the previous year. If you
graph the stock price per share based on 11 points (the initial
price, and the price on December 31 for each of the 10 years follow-
ing) and then connect the points with a smooth curve, what will the
curve look like? Assume the horizontal graph scale shows time, and
the vertical scale shows the stock price per share, and both of the
scales are linear.
(a) The curve will be a parabola.
(b) The curve will be a circle.
(c) The curve will be a straight line.
Final Exam
421

(d) You won’t be able to connect the points with a smooth curve,
because they’ll be scattered all over the place.
(e) More information is necessary to answer this.
98.
Let q represent a set of items or objects taken r at a time in a speciﬁc
order. The possible number of permutations in this situation is
symbolized qPr and can be calculated as follows:
qPr ¼ q!=ðq  rÞ!
Now suppose you have a pair of standard 6-faced dice. If you toss
both dice at once, how many diﬀerent permutations of numbers is
it possible to get?
(a) 15
(b) 30
(c) 360
(d) 720
(e) More information is necessary to answer this question.
99.
Figure Exam-8 represents
(a) vector addition in 2 dimensions
(b) vector addition in 3 dimensions
(c) scalar addition in 2 dimensions
(d) scalar addition in 3 dimensions
(e) none of the above
Fig. Exam-8.
Illustration for Final Exam Questions 99 and 100.
Final Exam
422

100.
In Fig. Exam-8, let each horizontal division represent 10 units, and
let each vertical division represent 5 units. Suppose a ¼ (28,7) and
a þ b ¼ (13,30). What is a+(a þ b)?
(a) 574
(b) 78
(c) (58,20)
(d) (41,37)
(e) More information is needed to answer this question.
Final Exam
423

Answers to Quiz,
Test, and Exam
Questions
Chapter 1
1. c
2. a
3. c
4. c
5. b
6. a
7. b
8. d
9. a
10. b
Chapter 2
1. d
2. d
3. a
4. a
5. c
6. d
7. a
8. b
9. b
10. c
Chapter 3
1. d
2. a
3. c
4. b
5. d
6. a
7. c
8. c
9. d
10. b
424
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Chapter 4
1. d
2. b
3. b
4. d
5. d
6. c
7. a
8. c
9. d
10. b
Test: Part 1
1. d
2. b
3. a
4. b
5. c
6. e
7. a
8. b
9. b
10. c
11. b
12. d
13. a
14. e
15. d
16. a
17. b
18. a
19. b
20. c
21. c
22. a
23. c
24. a
25. c
26. a
27. e
28. e
29. a
30. e
31. e
32. c
33. d
34. c
35. e
36. a
37. b
38. b
39. d
40. e
Chapter 5
1. b
2. a
3. c
4. a
5. c
6. d
7. a
8. b
9. a
10. d
Chapter 6
1. a
2. a
3. d
4. d
5. d
6. c
7. c
8. d
9. c
10. b
Chapter 7
1. c
2. a
3. c
4. a
5. b
6. b
7. d
8. a
9. a
10. b
Chapter 8
1. a
2. c
3. d
4. a
5. c
6. a
7. d
8. c
9. b
10. b
Test: Part 2
1. a
2. d
3. c
4. e
5. b
6. a
7. e
8. c
9. b
10. c
11. d
12. d
13. d
14. e
15. c
16. d
17. b
18. c
19. e
20. e
21. b
22. a
23. b
24. c
25. c
26. c
27. d
28. c
29. c
30. b
31. b
32. a
33. e
34. a
35. d
36. a
37. a
38. c
39. a
40. b
Chapter 9
1. c
2. b
3. d
4. c
5. c
6. c
7. c
8. b
9. d
10. a
Answers
425

Chapter 10
1. b
2. a
3. a
4. c
5. a
6. d
7. c
8. a
9. d
10. b
Chapter 11
1. c
2. d
3. c
4. d
5. b
6. b
7. c
8. d
9. b
10. a
Chapter 12
1. a
2. b
3. b
4. a
5. c
6. b
7. d
8. d
9. b
10. d
Test: Part 3
1. a
2. e
3. c
4. c
5. d
6. d
7. b
8. d
9. e
10. c
11. c
12. e
13. c
14. a
15. d
16. e
17. e
18. d
19. d
20. a
21. a
22. e
23. d
24. e
25. c
26. a
27. a
28. c
29. c
30. c
31. a
32. e
33. c
34. a
35. d
36. a
37. d
38. b
39. e
40. c
Chapter 13
1. c
2. a
3. a
4. b
5. b
6. d
7. c
8. d
9. d
10. a
Chapter 14
1. d
2. b
3. c
4. d
5. b
6. b
7. b
8. b
9. a
10. a
Chapter 15
1. d
2. d
3. a
4. d
5. b
6. a
7. a
8. b
9. d
10. a
Test: Part 4
1. b
2. c
3. c
4. b
5. d
6. b
7. e
8. d
9. b
10. d
11. c
12. d
13. d
14. c
15. d
16. c
17. d
18. d
19. b
20. e
21. a
22. b
23. c
24. b
25. c
26. b
27. e
28. a
29. a
30. c
31. b
32. e
33. a
34. c
35. d
36. b
37. d
38. c
39. c
40. a
Answers
426

Final Exam
1. d
2. b
3. a
4. d
5. c
6. a
7. c
8. c
9. a
10. c
11. e
12. c
13. c
14. e
15. d
16. d
17. b
18. e
19. b
20. b
21. a
22. d
23. a
24. d
25. c
26. b
27. b
28. a
29. d
30. c
31. a
32. c
33. a
34. b
35. e
36. c
37. b
38. b
39. d
40. b
41. d
42. d
43. d
44. c
45. e
46. a
47. c
48. d
49. d
50. d
51. e
52. d
53. a
54. e
55. d
56. c
57. d
58. d
59. b
60. a
61. d
62. c
63. b
64. d
65. e
66. a
67. e
68. e
69. a
70. b
71. e
72. c
73. b
74. a
75. c
76. d
77. e
78. a
79. c
80. c
81. c
82. b
83. d
84. a
85. c
86. d
87. b
88. e
89. e
90. d
91. c
92. c
93. c
94. e
95. e
96. d
97. c
98. b
99. a
100. d
Answers
427

Suggested Additional
References
Books
Gibilisco, Stan, Geometry Demystiﬁed. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 2003.
Gibilisco, Stan, Statistics Demystiﬁed. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 2004.
Gibilisco,
Stan,
Trigonometry
Demystiﬁed.
McGraw-Hill,
New
York,
NY, 2003.
Huettenmueller, Rhonda, Algebra Demystiﬁed. McGraw-Hill, New York,
NY, 2003.
Krantz, Steven, Calculus Demystiﬁed. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 2003.
Prindle, Anthony and Katie, Math the Easy Way – 3rd Edition. Barron’s
Educational Series, Hauppauge, NY, 1996.
Webber, John, Math for Business and Life – 2nd Edition. Olympus Publishing
Company, Salt Lake City, UT, 2003.
428
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Web Sites
Encyclopedia Britannica Online, www.britannica.com
Eric Weisstein’s World of Mathematics, www.mathworld.wolfram.com
Suggested Additional References
429

This page intentionally left blank 

INDEX
abscissa, 252
absolute zero, 79
acceleration, 373–8
acceleration meter, 375
acceleration of gravity, 375–6
accelerometer, 375
acute angles, 207–8
additive identity element, 19
additive inverses, 20
adjacent sides, 288
aleph-one, 17
aleph-nought, 17
aleph-null, 17
alternate exterior angles, 205–6
alternate interior angles, 205
amount of matter, 75
ampere, 75, 79
amplitude of sine wave, 280
angle-angle-angle, 210
angle bisection, 201–2
angle-side-angle, 209–10
angles
acute, 207–8
addition of, 203–4
alternate exterior, 205–6
alternate interior, 205
corresponding, 206
obtuse, 207–8
notation for, 201
subtraction of, 203–4
vertical, 204
angular degree, 83–4, 276
angular measure
plane, 83–4
solid, 84
apex, 235–6
arc minute, 276
arc second, 276
arctangent, 311
arithmetic, 24
arithmetic extrapolation, 334–8
arithmetic interpolation, 334–8
arithmetic progression, 333, 335–6
arithmetic sequence, 333, 335–6
arithmetic series, 333–4
associative law
for addition, 21
for multiplication, 21
average speed, 369
Avogadro’s number, 80
azimuth, 368, 373
base 2, 8, 9, 345–6
bar graph
horizontal, 39–40, 42–3
vertical, 39
base units, 75–83
bimodal distribution, 160
binary number system, 9
blackbody, 80
brightness of light, 75
candela, 75, 80
candlepower, 80
431
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Cantor, Georg, 17
cardinals, transﬁnite, 17
cardioid, 268–70
Cartesian plane, 250–60, 309–13
Cartesian three-space, 309, 313–29
census, 147
centimeter, 75
centimeter/gram/second system, 75
circle, 224, 263–4, 274–7
circular functions
primary, 277–83
secondary, 283–7
circular motion, 279
circumference, 224
clinometer, 373
coeﬃcients, 119
combinations, 183–4
common exponential, 346
commutative law
for addition, 20
for multiplication, 20–1
compass, points of, 373
complementary outcomes, 175–6
complex numbers, 129–32
cone, 240–3
constant function, 48
continuous variable, 145–6
Continuum Hypothesis, 16
convergent series, 341
conversions, 87–91
coordinate plane
Cartesian, 250–60
log-log, 357–8
Polar, 260–71
rectangular, 250–60
semilog, 356–7
correlation, 47–8
corresponding angles, 206
cosecant, 283
cosecant function, 283–4
cosine, 264–5, 281
cosine function, 281–2
cosine wave, 281–2
cotangent, 285
cotangent function, 285–6
coulomb, 85–6
counting numbers, 8
cross multiplication, 25
cross product, 320–1
cube, 237
cubic equation, 133–5
cubic formula, 133
cumulative absolute frequency, 154–5
cumulative relative frequency, 155–6
curve ﬁtting, 44–5
cycle, 86–7
cycle per second, 86–7
cylinder, 241, 243–4
decibel, 354–5
decimal number system, 8
decimal
nonterminating, nonrepeating, 16
nonterminating, repeating, 15
terminating, 14
decimal point, 54
degree, angular, 83–4, 276
degree Celsius, 75
degree Fahrenheit, 75
degree of arc, 276
dependent variable, 34, 252, 315
derived units, 83
diﬀerence, 11
dimension, 88
dimensionless unit, 80
direction of vector, 309, 311
direction angle, 277–8, 318–20, 368
direction cosine, 318–319
direction numbers, 327
discrete values, 38
discrete variable, 144–5
displacement, 75, 76, 367–8
distance
addition of, 203
between points, 252–3, 315–16
subtraction of, 203
notation for, 200
versus displacement, 367
distribution, 39–40, 149–54, 160
distributive laws, 21
divergent series, 340
dot product, 312–13, 320
electric charge quantity, 85
electric current, 75, 79
INDEX
432

electric potential, 86
electrical resistance, 86
electromotive force, 86
element, 146
elevation, 373
ellipse, 224–5, 264–5
empirical evidence, 170
empirical probability, 170–2
energy, 85
English system, 75
equilateral triangle, 212
equation
cubic, 133–5
linear, single-variable, 105–10
linear, two-by-two, 110–18
one-variable, nth-order, 138–140
one-variable, higher-order, 133–40
one-variable, second-order, 119–29
quadratic, 119–29
quartic, 135–6
quintic, 136–8
equivalent vectors, 310, 316–17
error
instrument, 146
observation, 146
Euclidean geometry, 206
event, 147, 167
experiment, 143–4
exponential function, 345–50
exponentials
common, 346
exponential of, 349
natural, 346–7
product of, 348
ratio of, 348
reciprocal of, 348
exponential function, 345–50
exponents, plain text, 55–6
extrapolation
arithmetic, 334–8
geometric, 342
linear, 44–6
extreme numbers, 52–73
facets, 235
factored form of quadratic equation,
120–1
factorial, 181–3
foot, 75
foot/pound/second system, 75
force, 362–7, 376
force meter, 367
four-leafed rose, 267, 269
frequency
absolute, 148
cumulative absolute, 154–5
cumulative relative, 155–6
of oscillation, 364
of signal wave, 86–7
of sine wave, 280
relative, 148
frequency distribution, 151–4
grouped, 153–4
ungrouped, 152
function
constant, 48, 262–3
cosecant, 283–4
cosine, 281–2
cotangent, 285–6
deﬁnition of, 36–7, 262–3
exponential, 345–50
logarithmic, 352–9
nondecreasing, 47
nonincreasing, 46–7
secant, 284–5
sine, 278–80
tangent, 281–3
trending downward, 47
trending upward, 47
Fundamental Theorem of
Arithmetic, 13
fuzzy truth, 166
gamma function, 181
geometric interpolation, 341–2
geometric progression, 339, 342–5
geometric sequence, 339, 342–5
geometric series, 340–1
geometry
Euclidean, 206
non-Euclidean, 206
plane, 199–228
solid, 229–49
gigahertz, 87
Global Positioning System, 368
gram, 75
INDEX
433

graphs, 38–43
histogram, 39–40
horizontal bar, 39–40, 42–3
nomograph, 40–1
point-to-point, 41–2
resolution of, 42
scales in, 42
vertical bar, 39
half plane, 232
hertz, 86–7
hexadecimal numbers, 9
histogram, 39–40
horizontal bar graph, 39–40, 42–3
hundredths digit, 8
hyperbola, 265–6
hyperspace, 230
hypotenuse, 212, 252, 288
identity element
additive, 19
multiplicative, 19–20
imaginary number, 129–30
imaginary number line, 129–30
impulse, 378–81
increment, 144
independent outcomes, 173
independent variable, 34, 252, 315
inﬂection point, 135, 138
instantaneous speed, 369
integer roots, 27
integers
addition of, 11
deﬁnition of, 10
division of, 11–12
exponentiation with, 12
multiplication of, 11
interior angles
of plane quadrilateral, 219
of triangle, 210–11
interior area
of circle, 224
of parallelogram, 220
of rectangle, 221
of rhombus, 220
of square, 221
of trapezoid, 222
of triangle, 213–14
International System, 75, 80–1
interpolation
arithmetic, 334–8
geometric, 341–2
linear, 43–4, 48–9
intersecting line principle, 231
intersecting planes, 233
inverse tangent, 311
inverses
additive, 20
multiplicative, 20
irrational numbers, 16
irregular pyramid, 236
isosceles triangle, 211
joule, 85
Kelvin, 75, 79
kilogram, 75, 77
kilohertz, 87
kilohm, 86
kilometer, 77
kilometers per hour, 369
kilomole, 80
kilovolt, 86
kilowatt, 85
large numbers, law of, 172–3
lateral surface area, 242, 244
law of large numbers, 172–3
lemniscate, 266–7
light-second, 78
line
deﬁnition of, 229–30
direction numbers, 327
in three-space, 326–9
parametric equations for, 327–8
point-slope form of, 257–8
slope-intercept form of, 254–6
symmetric-form equation for, 327
line and point principle, 231
linear axis, 356
linear equations
addition method for solving, 112–13
basic, in one variable, 106
graphical method for solving, 113–16
illustrating the solution of, 107–10
single-variable, 105–18
standard form, one variable, 106–7
INDEX
434

substitution method for solving, 111
two-by-two, 110–16
linear extrapolation, 44–6
linear interpolation, 43–4, 48–9
linear scale, 356
liter, 239–40
logarithmic axis, 356
logarithmic function, 352–9
logarithmic scale, 356
logarithms
common, 350–1
graphs based on, 355–9
Napierian, 351–2
natural, 351–2
of product, 352
of quantity raised to a power, 353
of ratio, 353
of reciprocal, 353
of root, 353–4
log-log coordinates, 357–8
luminous intensity, 80
magnitude of vector, 309–11, 317–18
major diagonal, 214
major half-axis, 224
major semi-axis, 265
mass, 75, 77, 362–7, 376
mass meter, 363–6
material quantity, 80
mathematical probability, 169–70
mean
arithmetic, 24
in statistics, 156–8
mean solar day, 78
mechanical force, 84
median
in statistics and probability, 159–60
of trapezoid, 218–19
megahertz, 87
megavolt, 86
megawatt, 85
megohm, 86
meter, 75, 76
meter stick, 368
meter/kilogram/second system, 75
meters per second, 369
meters per second per second, 374–5
meters per second squared, 374–5
metric system, 75
metric ton, 77
microampere, 79
microgram, 77
micrometer, 76–7
micron, 77
microsecond, 79
microvolt, 86
microwatt, 85
midpoint principle, 201
miles per hour, 369
milliampere, 79
milligram, 77
millimeter, 76
millimole, 80
millisecond, 79
millivolt, 86
milliwatt, 85
minor diagonal, 214
minor half-axis, 224
minor semi-axis, 265
minute of arc, 276
mitosis, 344
mode, 160–1
mole, 75, 80
momentum, 378–81
multiple outcomes, 178–81
multiplication by zero, 24
multiplicative identity element, 19–20
multiplicative inverses, 20
mutual perpendicularity, 206–7
mutually exclusive outcomes, 174–5
nanoampere, 79
nanogram, 77
nanometer, 77
nanosecond, 79
nanowatt, 85
natural exponential, 346–7
natural logarithm base, 181
natural numbers, 8
negative radius, 261–2
newton, 79, 84–5, 366–7
nomograph, 40–1
nondecreasing function, 47
nondisjoint outcomes, 176–8
non-Euclidean geometry, 206
nonincreasing function, 46–7
INDEX
435

nonstandard directions, 262
nonterminating, nonrepeating decimal, 16
nonterminating, repeating decimal, 15
normal vector, 324
nth-order equation, 138–40
numbering systems, 8–10
numbers
binary, 9
decimal, 8
counting, 8
extreme, 52–73
hexadecimal, 9
irrational, 16
natural, 8
octal, 9
operations with, 19–23
prime, 12–13
rational, 14–16
real, 16–17
whole, 8
numerals, 8
obtuse angles, 207–8
octal numbers, 9
odometer, 368
ohm, 86
ones digit, 8
one-variable, higher-order equation, 133–40
one-variable, second-order equation,
119–29
ordered pair, 251–2
ordered triple, 314–15
order of magnitude, 56–8, 349, 356–9
ordinate, 252
orientation of vector, 309
origin, 11, 252, 314
oscillation period, 364
oscillation frequency, 364
outcomes
complementary, 175–6
deﬁnition of, 167
independent, 173
multiple, 178–81
mutually exclusive, 174–5
nondisjoint, 176–8
parabola, 124–9
parallel lines, 233
parallel principle, 206–7
parallelepiped, 238–9
parallelogram, 215–16, 219–20
parameter
of population, 148
of straight line, 328
parametric equations, 327–8
partial sums, 340–1
perimeter
of circle, 224
of parallelogram, 219–20
of rectangle, 221
of square, 221
of trapezoid, 222
of triangle, 213
period, of oscillation, 364
permutations, 183
perpendicular bisector, 202–3
perpendicularity, 202, 206–7
pi, 17
plain-text exponents, 55–6
plane
angular measure, 83
equation of, in three-space, 323–4
geometry, 199–228
in space, 323–6
plotting, in three-space, 324–6
region, 231–2
point, 229–30
point-point-point, 208
point-slope form, 257–8
point-to-point graph, 41–2
points of the compass, 373
polar coordinate plane, 260–71
polyhedron, 235
population, 146–9
population mean, 156
potential diﬀerence, 86
pound, 75
power, 85
power-of-10 notation, 54–67
addition in, 60–1
division in, 62–3
exponentiation in, 62–3
in calculators, 183
multiplication in, 61–2
subtraction in, 61
taking roots in, 64
INDEX
436

powers
deﬁnition of, 12
diﬀerence of, 28
negative, 28
of diﬀerence, 29
of reciprocal, 29
of signs, 25
of sum, 29
product of, 28
quotient of, 28
rational-number, 27
sum of, 28
precedence of operations, 22, 66–7
preﬁx multipliers, 58–9
primary circular functions, 277–83
prime factors, 13
prime numbers, 12–13
principle of n points, 200
prism, rectangular, 238
probability, 165–86
empirical, 170–2
mathematical, 169–70
probability fallacy, 165–7
product
deﬁnition of, 11
of quotients, 26
of signs, 24
of sums, 25
progression
arithmetic, 333, 335–6
geometric, 339, 342–5
proportion, 12
pyramid, 236–7
Pythagorean Theorem, 212–13, 252–3,
288–92, 311
quadratic equation, 119–29
standard form of, 119
factored form of, 120–1
quadratic formula, 123–4
quadrilaterals, 214–23
interior angles of, 219
quantum mechanics, 166
quartic equation, 135–6
quintic equation, 136–8
quotient
deﬁnition of, 11–12
of products, 26
of quotients, 26
of signs, 24
radian, 83, 260–1
radius, 260–2
radix 10, 8
radix point, 8, 54
random sample, 147
random variable, 147
relation, 35–6, 262–3
ratio, 12, 14
rational numbers, 14–16
real numbers, 16–17
reciprocal
of product, 25
of quotient, 26
of reciprocal, 25
rectangle, 216–17, 221
rectangular 3D coordinates, 313–29
rectangular coordinate plane, 250–60
rectangular prism, 238
rectangular three-space, 309
reference frame, 379
regular hexahedron, 237
regular pyramid, 236
regular tetrahedron, 235
rhombus, 217–18, 220
right circular cone, 241–2
right circular cylinder, 243–4
right-hand rule, 320
right triangle model, 287–90
rounding, 67
sample, 146–9
sample mean, 156
sample space, 167–9
scalar product, 312, 320
scalar quantity, 363,369
scatter plots, 315
scientiﬁc notation, 54–67
addition in, 60–1
division in, 62–3
exponentiation in, 62–3
in calculators, 183
multiplication in, 61–2
subtraction in, 61
taking roots in, 64
secant, 284
INDEX
437

secant function, 284–5
second, 75, 78–9
second of arc, 276
secondary circular functions, 283–7
semi-axes, 265
semilog coordinates, 356–7
sequence
arithmetic, 333, 335–6
geometric, 339, 342–5
series
arithmetic, 333–4
convergent, 341
divergent, 340
geometric, 340–1
partial sums in, 340–1
sets
coincident, 7
disjoint, 7
intersection, 6
union, 6
proper, 7
subsets, 7
side-angle-side, 209
side-side-side, 209
signiﬁcant digits, 68
signiﬁcant ﬁgures, 68–71
simple plane region, 231–2
sine, 239, 264–5, 278–9
sine function, 278–80
sine wave, 280
sinusoid, 280
skew lines, 233–4
slant circular cone, 242–3
slant circular cylinder, 244
slant height, 236
slope, 255, 259–60
slope-intercept form, 254–6
solar day, 78
solid angular measure, 84
solid geometry, 229–249
space, 229–30
speed, 368–71
speedometer, 369
sphere, 245
spiral, 267, 270
spiral of Archimedes, 267
square, 221
statistic of sample, 148–9
statistics, 143–64
steradian, 80, 84
subscripts, 52–3
superscripts, 52–3
sum
deﬁnition of, 11
of quotients, 27
surface area
of cube, 237
of parallelepiped, 239
of pyramid, 236
of rectangular prism, 238
of regular tetrahedron, 235
of right circular cone, 241–2
of right circular cylinder, 243–4
of sphere, 245
symbology, 81
symmetric-form equation, 327
systems of units, 75
tachometer, 369
tangent, 281
tangent function, 281–3
temperature, 75, 79
tens digit, 8
tenths digit, 9
terahertz, 87
terminating decimal, 14
tetrahedron, 235–6
Theorem of Pythagoras, 212–13, 252–3,
288–92
three-leafed rose, 166–8
three point principle, 200, 230–1
time, 75, 78–9
‘‘times sign,’’ 55
transﬁnite cardinals, 17
trapezoid, 218–19, 222
trending downward, 47
trending upward, 47
triangles, 208–214
congruent, 209
equilateral, 212
interior area of, 213–14
isosceles, 211
perimeter of, 213
similar, 210
triangulation, 368
trigonometry, 274–94
INDEX
438

trimodal distribution, 160
triple point, 79
truncation, 66
two point principle, 200
unit circle, 275, 277
unit imaginary number, 129
unit vectors, 321–2
units, 74–92
unknown, 144
variable
continuous, 145–6
in algebra, 33–51
dependent, 34, 252
discrete, 144–5
in Cartesian three-space, 15
in statistics, 144–6
independent, 34, 252
random, 147
reversing, 37
vectors
acceleration, 373–8
cross product of, 320–1
deﬁnition of, 309
direction of, 309, 311, 318–20
displacement, 367–8
dot product of, 312–13, 320
equivalent, 310, 316–17
force, 366
impulse, 378–81
in Cartesian plane, 309–13
in Cartesian three-space, 316–22
in trigonometry, 278
magnitude of, 309–11, 317–18
momentum, 378–81
multiplication by scalar, 311–12, 319–20
normal, 324
orientation of, 309
scalar product, 312
standard form of, 310, 316–17
sum of, 311, 319
unit, 321–2
velocity, 371–3
zero, 312
velocity, 371–3
vertex of angle, 287
vertical angles, 204
vertical bar graph, 39
vertices of triangle, 287
volt, 86
volume
of cube, 237
of parallelepiped, 239
of pyramid, 236–7
of rectangular prism, 238
of regular tetrahedron, 236
of right circular cone, 241–2
of right circular cylinder, 243–4
of slant circular cone, 242–3
of slant circular cylinder, 244
of sphere, 245
watt, 85
weight, 77, 363
whole numbers, 8
x axis, 250–1, 314
xyz-space, 309, 313–29
y axis, 250–1, 314
y-intercept, 255, 259–60
z axis, 314
zero denominator, 23
zero numerator, 23
zero vector, 312
zeroth power, 24
INDEX
439

This page intentionally left blank 

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Stan Gibilisco is one of McGraw-Hill’s most proliﬁc and popular authors.
His clear, reader-friendly writing style makes his electronics books accessible
to a wide audience, and his background in mathematics and research makes
him an ideal editor for professional handbooks. He is the author of the TAB
Encyclopedia of Electronics for Technicians and Hobbyists, Teach Yourself
Electricity and Electronics, and The Illustrated Dictionary of Electronics.
Booklist named his McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Personal Computing a
‘‘Best Reference’’ of 1996.
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

