
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EVERYDAY LINGUISTICS 
This innovative introduction to linguistics connects language structure to everyday use, culture, 
and context, making the technicalities of language structure accessible, vivid, and engaging. 
The first text to take a socially realistic linguistics approach, this exciting new textbook sit-
uates discussions about the building blocks of language like phonetics, syntax, and pragmatics 
within a social justice framework that recognizes that all language is shaped by sociocultural 
forces and reveals and reinforces ideologies. Uniquely, this text also introduces ecolinguistics, 
a new field that examines the relationship between language and its environment, again dem-
onstrating how widely held views about language can have real-world consequences. Key 
features include: 
• “Linguistics in your world” sections to connect concepts discussed with specific social 
issues 
• “L1 acquisition in focus” sections to relate key concepts to first language acquisition 
• “Explorations” sections at the end of each chapter to encourage students to test their 
knowledge, discuss in groups, and apply what they have learned to their own experiences 
• End-of-chapter summaries and key term lists to conclude the main lessons and highlights 
of each chapter 
• Recommendations for further reading 
Everyday Linguistics: An Introduction to the Study of Language is an ideal starting point for 
students that are new to the study of language and those not majoring in language study. 
Joanne Cavallaro is a professor emerita of English at St. Catherine University, Minnesota, 
U.S.A., where she has taught linguistics for 30 years. 


 
Everyday Linguistics 
An Introduction to the Study 
of Language 
Joanne Cavallaro 

 
 
Designed cover image: © Getty Images | Jasmina007 
First published 2024 
by Routledge 
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158 
and by Routledge 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
© 2024 Joanne Cavallaro 
The right of Joanne Cavallaro to be identified as author of this work has been asserted 
in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in 
any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trade-
marks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 
ISBN: 978-0-367-21959-8 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-0-367-21963-5 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-0-429-26905-9 (ebk) 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059 
Typeset in Times New Roman 
by Apex CoVantage, LLP 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
Acknowledgments 
xi 
1 Introduction 
1 
Diverse language experiences 1 
Why study linguistics—and what is it anyway? 2 
How we’ll study language 3 
A socially realistic linguistics 3 
Prescriptive and descriptive perspectives on language 5 
Prescriptive perspective 5 
Descriptive perspective 5 
Navigating your way through this book 6 
2 A language is a language, right? 
8 
Introduction 8 
What is language? 9 
Dialects, varieties, and languages 10 
Design features of human language 10 
Semanticity 11 
Arbitrariness 11 
Cultural transmission and innateness 12 
Displacement 12 
Discreteness and duality 13 
Productivity 13 
Do animals have language? 14 
Other characteristics of human language 15 
Linguistic modes of communication 15 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vi 
CONTENTS 
All languages change over time 16 
All children learn their first language in similar ways 17 
All languages are structured and rule governed 19 
Variation is a natural part of all languages 20 
3 Morphology: Word histories and structure 
28 
Introduction 28 
Lexical categories 29 
Nouns 29 
Verbs 30 
Adjectives 30 
Adverbs 30 
Words and their histories 31 
Word formation processes 31 
Borrowing or theft? 31 
Modifying existing words 32 
Glamour words? 35 
Words and their structure 36 
Types of morphemes 37 
Derivational and inflectional morphemes 38 
Grammatical meaning 41 
Linguistics in your world: He, she, and/or they 43 
Morphology in languages other than English 44 
Hierarchical structure in words 45 
L1 acquisition in focus: She comed, those mouses 46 
4 Phonetics: The sounds of English 
52 
Introduction 52 
International Phonetic Alphabet 53 
Classifying language sounds 54 
Consonants and vowels 54 
Voice 55 
Consonants 55 
Places of articulation 55 
Manner of articulation 58 
Vowels 60 
Natural classes 63 
Accents 63 
Prosody 64 
Phonetics in your world: What’s in a name? 65 
Phonetics in your world: Local acts of identity 66 
Sign language phonetics 66 
Phonetics in other languages 66 
L1 acquisition in focus: Acquiring language sounds and signs 67 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
vii 
5 Phonology: Why do we say it like that? 
73 
Introduction 73 
Systematic structuring of sounds 74 
Phonemes and allophones 74 
Allophonic variation: Complementary distribution and 
free variation 77 
Articulatory processes: Changing sounds 80 
Assimilation 80 
Dissimilation 81 
Deletion 81 
Epenthesis 82 
Metathesis 82 
Phonology in your world: Ask vs aks revisited 83 
Morphophonology 83 
L1 acquisition in focus: Learning phonemes and  
more 85 
6 Syntax: Ordering words, making sentences 
91 
Introduction 91 
Syntax and grammar 91 
Constituents of a sentence 93 
Phrase structure rules 93 
Noun phrases 94 
Prepositional phrases 96 
Verb phrases 96 
Tree diagrams 98 
Recursion 101 
Structural ambiguity 102 
Structural relationships among sentences 103 
Syntactic operations 103 
Structural synonymity 104 
Movement operations 104 
Embedded sentences 107 
Using syntax in writing 110 
Universal grammar 110 
L1 acquisition in focus: Acquiring syntax 110 
Syntax in your (natural) world: Do birds have syntax? 111 
Syntax in other languages 111 
A note about theory 112 
7 Semantics: Relationships among words 
116 
Introduction 116 
Meaning and meanings 116 
Semantic relations: Is salt the opposite of pepper? 117 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
viii 
CONTENTS 
Synonyms 118 
Antonyms 119 
Hyponymy and part/whole relationships 120 
Homonymy and polysemy 121 
Figurative language 121 
Metaphors 121 
Metonymy 122 
Idioms 123 
Semantic fields 123 
Semantic roles and sentence meaning 123 
Corpus linguistics 124 
8 Language in everyday interaction 
129 
Introduction 129 
Discourse 130 
Conversation patterns and organization 130 
Opening and closing sequences 130 
Turn-taking 132 
Silence 133 
Pragmatics 133 
Speech acts 134 
Cooperative principle and maxims of conversation 136 
Indirectness 137 
Language and social meaning: Context and identity 140 
Politeness 142 
Positive face and positive politeness 143 
Negative face and negative politeness 143 
Appropriateness 144 
9 Language variation and society 
149 
Introduction 149 
A note about terminology 150 
Structured variation 151 
Regional variation 151 
Social variation: Sociolects 154 
Social variation: Ethnolects 154 
Variation in sign languages 158 
Standards and standardization 158 
Policing standards 161 
Standard language ideology 161 
Competing ideologies about language 162 
Critical sociolinguistics 163 
Language and local identity 163 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
ix 
10 African American Language 
168 
Introduction 168 
Overview 169 
History of AAL 170 
Structure of AAL 171 
Morphological structure 171 
Phonological structure 173 
Variation within AAL 174 
AAL in the courtroom 175 
Micro-aggressions 175 
Language, race, and identity 176 
AAL and education 177 
11 Genders, identities, and linguistic performance 
182 
Introduction 182 
Early studies of language and gender 183 
Do women and men speak differently? 183 
How do languages encode gender? 186 
Multiple identities: Black Masculine Language 188 
Gender as performance 188 
Linguistics in your world: The heterosexual marketplace 189 
The gender binary revisited 190 
12 Multilingualism 
194 
Introduction 194 
What is multilingualism? 195 
Social meaning 196 
Language planning 197 
Language contact 197 
New languages: Pidgins and creoles 198 
Language shift 199 
Superdiversity 200 
Hip Hop as a multilingual phenomenon 200 
Linguistic relativity 201 
Learning to be multilingual 202 
Linguistic factors in L2 acquisition 203 
Affective factors in L2 acquisition 203 
Social factors in L2 acquisition 204 
Multilingualism in education 204 
Monolingual mindset 206 
Bilingual education in the United States 206 
Spanish in the United States 207 
Sign language education 208 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
x 
CONTENTS 
13 Language birth and death 
214 
Introduction 214 
Origins of language 215 
Language spread and language families 216 
Indo-European language family 216 
Language families around the world 218 
A very brief history of English 219 
Old English 220 
Middle English 221 
Modern English 222 
Continued change and global spread 223 
Origins of American Sign Language 224 
Language loss and endangerment 225 
Why should we care? 226 
Causes of language loss 228 
Stemming the loss 229 
14 Ecolinguistics: Language and the environment 
234 
Introduction 234 
Language and its natural environment 235 
Metaphors for the natural world 235 
Eco-critical linguistics 236 
Anthropocentrism 237 
Index 
242 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgments 
I’d like to thank the many teachers and students I have had the pleasure of working with. 
I am especially indebted to John Gumperz, my undergraduate advisor at Berkeley, who first 
started me on this path. And I’m indebted to all of the students I have taught over the last 
30 years. Through their insistence on understanding what they were reading, they taught 
me to explain concepts in terms they could understand and relate to. Several students helped 
me think about this book in more detail, and I’d like to thank them specifically: Elizabeth 
Gadbois, Carly Fischback, and Sydney Robbins. 
My editor, Amy Laurens, helped me through the publication process; I am grateful for her 
guidance, encouragement, and willingness to answer my endless questions. 
I’d also like to thank my colleagues who read and responded to multiple drafts. My writing 
group, the Feministas—Lynne, Jane, Cindy, Ceil—deserve special thanks for their encour-
agement over numerous cups of coffee, glasses of wine, and various types of food. Cecilia 
Konchar Farr was an unflagging cheerleader, keeping me going through all the rough spots 
with her unwavering encouragement, even when I was not sure I could ever do this. 
Special and deep-felt thanks to my partner, Toma Mulligan, without whose help, encour-
agement, support, and love this book would never have been finished. Merci, mon amour. 


 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 
Introduction 
First glance 
Diverse language experiences 
Why study linguistics? 
How we’ll study linguistics 
Socially realistic linguistics 
Prescriptive and descriptive perspectives 
Navigating through this book 
DIVERSE LANGUAGE EXPERIENCES 
Language both unites and divides us as humans. We are united by its importance to us as individ-
uals, as members of communities, and as a species. Unless there is some unusual circumstance 
that prevents it, all human children learn a language. In fact, infants seem so hardwired to do so, 
it’s hard to prevent it. Language use is part of everyday life for nearly all of us. It is difficult to 
imagine getting through a day without using language, if only by speaking to oneself. For us as 
members of human societies and cultures, language connects us and helps make us who we are. 
The lived language experience is different for each of us. Some of us grew up and live in 
fairly homogeneous communities with little linguistic variation. Some grew up and live in 
diverse, even super diverse, communities, being exposed to multiple languages and multiple 
varieties of any one language. Some of us may be bilingual or multilingual ourselves; we may 
speak what is usually called proper English, or a variety of English not considered “proper,” 
or one or more languages in addition to English. 
Some people decry this linguistic diversity, claiming we’d be better off if we all spoke the 
same. Perhaps, but I don’t think so. Diversity of experience and perspective is important in 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-1 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
INTRODUCTION 
any attempt to understand our world; if we all thought the same, we’d all likely make the same 
mistakes. Diversity in language is an equally crucial resource for all of us, one that can divide 
us but need not, a point we will come back to throughout this book. 
This diversity in language experiences is also an important resource that I hope you will 
bring to your study of linguistics. Sharing your own experiences and learning about those of 
others can bring with it new perspectives, allowing us to learn from one another. I have an 
expertise in linguistics that I hope to share with you; you each have expertise in your own 
lived language experience that I hope you can share with one another; for no matter what it is, 
your experience is a valid example of how language works. 
And how language works is exactly the focus of the field of linguistics and of this book. 
WHY STUDY LINGUISTICS—AND WHAT IS IT ANYWAY? 
When I tell strangers that I teach linguistics, they often look at me with a rather blank stare 
and ask—What exactly is linguistics, anyway? Even though language is so important to us in 
most of what we do, few of us have studied it in any meaningful way. Linguistics, the scien-
tific study of language, is the field that studies language in all of its aspects: social, cognitive, 
cultural, ecological. Linguists examine the following, among other, aspects of language: 
· 
How language is put together and how it is used 
· 
How human language differs from animal communication 
· 
What all languages have in common and how they differ 
· 
How different varieties of the same language vary and how that variation carries social 
meaning 
· 
How language originated and how languages have spread and changed over time 
· 
How language is a cognitive phenomenon (how it functions in the brain) and a social/ 
cultural one (how it functions in society). 
These questions are standard ones addressed in the study of language. Here we will address not 
only those questions but also some additional ones, questions having to do with language and 
social justice, such as the following: 
· 
How are linguistic structure and use connected to contemporary social issues? 
· 
What are the real-world consequences resulting from common myths about language? 
· 
How do attitudes toward grammatical correctness and linguistic variation contribute to 
social inequalities? 
· 
How are gender, race, age, ethnicity, social status, power, privilege, and marginalization 
all integral to an understanding of language? 
· 
How do beliefs about language serve to privilege some groups and disadvantage others? 
· 
How is our language use related to how we treat the environment? 
As you may guess from this list, linguistics is, in essence, interdisciplinary and related to many 
other fields. Linguistic insights are used in sociology, psychology, computer science, artificial 
intelligence, communication studies, history, paleontology, and criminology to name a few 
fields. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
3 
INTRODUCTION 
Insights from those fields help linguists understand language. Each of those disciplines 
is connected to one or more subfields of linguistics, of which there are many: psycholin-
guistics, historical linguistics, sociolinguistics, pragmatics, first language acquisition, second 
language acquisition, discourse analysis, phonology, syntax, morphology, semantics, conver-
sational analysis, forensic linguistics, critical discourse analysis, ecolinguistics, and others. 
You’ll learn more about most of these as you make your way through this book, so don’t worry 
if you’re not sure what they are now. 
HOW WE’LL STUDY LANGUAGE 
Since humans and their societies are so complex, one would expect the main tool of human 
communication to be similarly complex. And, indeed, language is amazingly complex, adapt-
able, variable, and productive. As we approach its study, we’ll be doing various kinds of 
linguistic analysis, ranging from analyzing small details of pronunciation to examining less 
tangible concepts such as social identity and power. In each case, we’ll be looking for patterns 
that can help us understand how language works. Each area of linguistics may require differ-
ent types of analysis, but in each case, we’ll be asking—how do we account for the linguistic 
phenomena we see around us? 
I have titled this book Everyday Linguistics because I believe it is important to connect 
what you are learning to everyday life, both your own and that of others. The seemingly eso-
teric linguistic concepts presented here are related to what we do every day. They can help 
us understand not only everyday interactions but also the larger social contexts within which 
those interactions occur and the inequalities that are often part of those contexts. This book, 
then, asks you to notice language use around you—your friends, neighborhood, school, fam-
ily, media—and to apply the linguistic concepts you learn to what you see. 
My perspective here insists that the study of language needs to integrate what linguists 
often divide into subdivisions. That is, structural analysis should be connected to sociocul-
tural analysis and the whole should be connected to social justice. Such connections can help 
us unmask social and linguistic prejudice and oppression. In our study here, we will connect 
our understanding of structure to attitudes and myths about language that support such preju-
dices. In doing so, we will explore the ethical dimension of linguistic study. 
A SOCIALLY REALISTIC LINGUISTICS 
What does it mean to explore the ethical dimension of linguistic study? First, it means as lin-
guists we need to examine language not only as a system of rules, although that is an impor-
tant aspect of any study of language. It means we also need to see language as a tool of social 
interaction and badge of social identity. And we need to take note of the fact that, as Winford 
(2003) notes, languages 
are shaped by sociocultural forces, and our perception of them is conditioned by social 
practice, social relationships, and attendant ideologies. Linguistic prejudice, as we all 
know, is simply race or class prejudice in a subtle guise. A socially realistic linguistics 
simply recognizes that fact. 
(p. 35) 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
INTRODUCTION 
This book presents a socially realistic linguistics, one that recognizes the intricate and complex ways 
that attitudes toward language structure, use, and variation are ethical as well as linguistic issues. 
As a socially realistic linguist, it is important that I share some of my own language experi-
ences to let you know who I am and where I come from, not as an expert, someone who has 
been teaching about language for 30 years, but as a person who has been both fascinated by 
language and perplexed by people’s attitudes toward it since long before she became a profes-
sor. The following stories give you some idea of what propelled me into the study of linguistics, 
a fascination not only with the structure, the rules, and regularities but also with linguistic 
differences and a growing awareness of how much variation there is in what we normally call 
one language. So here are a few memories of that fascination, a brief language autobiography. 
When I was a child, every summer I would visit my grandparents, neither of whom 
spoke much English although they had lived in the United States for nearly 40 years. 
They had emigrated from Sicily as adults, and when I visited them, they lived in an 
Italian neighborhood in Rochester, New York. I would often accompany my grand-
mother as she visited the neighborhood stores. All the shop keepers spoke to her in 
Italian; then, they would turn to me and speak English. Such easy control of both 
languages amazed me. And it was not only the adults who were bilingual. All the 
neighborhood children I played with spoke both English and Italian fluently, an ability 
that they took for granted and that I envied. 
When I was slightly older, my family moved to Puerto Rico, and I found myself in 
school with children who also took bilingualism for granted. Classes were taught in 
English, but out in the playground, everything took place in Spanish, a language I knew 
nothing of when I arrived. With no instruction, I began picking up words and phrases. 
My efforts to do more were stymied, however, by the fact that everyone wanted to talk 
to me in English. Since English was a key to success in school, practice with me (a 
native speaker, though I did not know that term then) was something they all wanted. 
I remember feeling slightly uneasy in the classroom because I was seen as a star, not 
because I was necessarily the smartest but because I knew English. Today I would say 
that my knowledge of English privileged me unfairly; then I merely felt uneasy about 
something I could not put into words. 
Years later, after graduating from college, I found myself in a small town in Northern 
Wales, trying to talk to a few locals. There was one very attractive young man who 
obviously wanted to talk to me. We had one big problem, however. We could not under-
stand each other without the help of my companion, who ended up translating for us. 
She would repeat what I said to him; he would respond, looking at me inquiringly, 
whereupon she would repeat his words for me. He could not understand me; I could not 
understand him; she could understand us both and we could both understand her. You 
might assume that my companion spoke Welsh and English, but she didn’t. She spoke 
only English. In fact, all three of us were speaking only English, just different types of 
English, what linguists call different dialects or varieties. 
I had been living in London for several months when that trip took place. During 
that time, I used to shop at Portobello Market to buy fresh fruits and vegetables. At one 
vegetable stall, which had some of the best produce in the market, the owner used to 
regularly refuse to understand me when I asked for tomatoes in my American accent. 
Not until I said, a pound of tomahtoes, please, using the British pronunciation, would 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
INTRODUCTION 
he “hear” me. At first, I thought it cute, an effort to help me acculturate. After a few 
months, however, I began to resent it, feeling as if I were being forced to give up a 
piece of who I was. I remember thinking, I’m American, and as much as I love living 
in London, I’m not a Brit and never will be, and I don’t really want to sound like one. 
These early experiences helped create my interest in language and led me to the study of 
language as my life’s work. Your experiences may be similar to, or very different from, mine. 
Regardless, for each of us, our early interactions with the language or languages used around 
us gave us some of our first knowledge about language and how it is used. This book is meant 
to enlarge that pool of knowledge. 
PRESCRIPTIVE AND DESCRIPTIVE PERSPECTIVES ON LANGUAGE 
Linguistics takes a descriptive perspective on language, so it is important to differentiate 
descriptive and prescriptive perspectives. 
Prescriptive perspective 
A prescriptive perspective on language is probably the one you were exposed to in school. It is 
full of rules about what you should and should not do: never end a sentence with a preposition; 
don’t use double negatives; don’t split infinitives; never start a sentence with but; avoid using 
ain’t; use I with linking verbs (It is I rather than It is me). These and other prescriptive rules 
are usually applied to written language, though people often try to prescribe them for spoken 
language as well. The purpose of prescriptive rules is to tell you how you should speak or sign 
or write, like rules of etiquette or politeness that delineate how we should behave, speak, or 
dress when we are on our best behavior or in formal situations. They are, therefore, better seen 
as rules for appropriateness rather than rules for grammatical correctness. The reasons behind 
these rules are a matter of debate, but linguists agree that they are arbitrary. In other words, 
there is no linguistic or logical reason why we should consider I didn’t do anything more cor-
rect than I didn’t do nothing. 
You may think that if these rules are not followed, then it’s just bad grammar. And that, in 
some ways, is the point of prescriptive rules. They set up expectations about what good behav-
ior is supposed to be, always according to some group, of course. As we will see throughout 
this book, such linguistic expectations vary across groups, are based on false linguistic prem-
ises, and serve to unfairly privilege some groups and marginalize others. 
Descriptive perspective 
The perspective we will take here is not prescriptive but descriptive. That is, our focus will be 
on how language is actually used, and our purpose is to describe how people actually speak or 
sign. Using this descriptive approach, we will look for the regularities or rules that constitute 
how we produce and understand language. More on this in Chapter 2. 
A prescriptive approach would ask of a particular utterance: Is it correct or incorrect? 
A descriptive one would ask: Is it a possible utterance in English (or any other language)? If 
so, it is grammatically correct. The socially realistic perspective we use here would go on to 
ask who gets to say whether or not it’s correct. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
INTRODUCTION 
NAVIGATING YOUR WAY THROUGH THIS BOOK 
This book is divided into four sections, each covering an aspect of language, introducing 
basic theory, and giving you a chance to apply that theory to the language you hear or see 
around you. 
· 
Chapter 2 introduces some basic concepts in the field of linguistics, discussing key 
aspects of the nature of language. It lays the foundation for further discussion of the 
intersection of language and social issues, asking why, for example, some variation in 
language use is seen just as variation while other variation is seen as wrong. 
· 
Chapters 3–7 begin our exploration of linguistic structure: how languages are put 
together: the units that make them up and how those units are combined to form mean-
ingful utterances. We’ll look at the lexical system (words, their origins, and structure), 
the sound system (sounds, their variants, and how sounds are structured within words), 
the syntax system (how sentences are structured), and a first foray into meaning (seman-
tics). Along the way, we’ll connect aspects of that system to social issues. 
· 
Chapters 8–12 examine language use in its social context. After an examination of 
language use in everyday interaction, our focus will shift to variation, a key concept 
in linguistics, one that highlights the obvious fact that not all speakers of any one lan-
guage speak or sign the same. We will investigate linguistic variation in North American 
English across region, class, gender, and ethnicity, including the social meanings of such 
variation. We’ll examine real-world consequences of common beliefs and attitudes about 
language, connecting linguistic theory to our lives, the lives of others, and social issues 
that affect us all. 
· 
Chapters 13 and 14 move us out in time and space, as they examine the origins and spread 
of language, language contact, endangered languages, and the ways that language and the 
environment are interrelated. 
I’ve included several features designed to help you make your way through the book. The 
examples I’ve used, mostly from North American English, are ones that I hope will make 
sense to beginners in linguistics, which I assume you all are. My hope is that you’ll be able 
to make connections as you read through the theory and the examples and notice if any of the 
concepts discussed connect to or illuminate any of your experiences. I’ve also tried to use a 
personal voice throughout, though I do have to use some technical terminology and abstract 
concepts to explain things. I share my own experiences at times and hope you will have a 
chance to share yours as well. 
So that you know what to expect, here’s a list of what each chapter includes. 
· 
A chapter preview, “First glance,” at the beginning, and a summary and a list of key 
terms at the end of every chapter 
· 
Bolding of key terms when introduced 
· 
Interspersed throughout each chapter, “Linguistics in your world” sections that relate 
concepts from each chapter to contemporary social issues 
· 
Exploration activities at the end of each chapter that give you an opportunity to review 
and practice what you’ve learned or to apply new concepts to the language use you see 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
INTRODUCTION 
around you. These include activities that ask you to observe language you hear or see, 
not as a member of the grammar police nor as a possible victim of such police but as an 
interested observer. 
I hope you enjoy reading this book as much as I have enjoyed writing it. 
EXPLORATIONS 
Exploration 1: Language autobiography 
What is your language story? Perhaps you grew up in a place where those around you all 
spoke the same language in much the same way. Or you may have had experience with a 
great deal of language diversity. In either case, you have a rich tapestry of language experi-
ences to draw upon. The fact that your experiences are not the same as your classmates will 
only enrich any discussion. 
The questions below can help you recall and elaborate upon your experiences and atti-
tudes, both now and as you were growing up. 
1. 
What language(s) did you speak at home while growing up? 
2. 
What language(s) were spoken in your community? 
3. 
How about now—what language(s) do you speak or sign? If more than one, can you 
identify which one(s) you use in which circumstances? 
4. 
What language(s) do people around you use – in your family, your community, your 
school, your workplace? Are home and school languages different for you, for example? 
5. 
When did you first realize that not everyone speaks the same as you and your family? 
How did you come to this realization? 
6. 
Have you lived in or visited different places where people spoke differently from you, 
a different version of English or a different language? What were your reactions to 
these differences? 
7. 
Have you noticed any times when someone’s way of speaking left a good or a bad 
impression on you, even before you really knew them? What left that impression? 
8. 
Have you ever experienced what you perceived as prejudice or discrimination because 
of the language or the dialect you spoke? When? 
There are no right or wrong answers here. Your story is always your story and you are the 
one who should tell it. 
Class discussion: Bring your notes into class and compare them with those of your class-
mates. What differences do you see? What similarities? 
Writing assignment: Write a two-page reflection on your language history and current 
situation, touching on the questions above as relevant. 
REFERENCE 
Winford, D. (2003). Ideologies of language and socially realistic linguistics. In S. Makoni, G. 
Smitherman, A. Ball, & A. Spears (Eds.), Black linguistics: Language, society and politics in 
Africa and the Americas (pp. 21–39). Routledge. 

  
  
 
  
  
 
 
CHAPTER 2 
A language is a language, right? 
First glance 
What is language? 
Dialects, varieties, and languages 
Design features of language 
Do animals have language? 
Speaking, signing, writing 
Characteristics of language: 
· 
All languages change over time 
· 
All children acquire language in 
similar ways 
· 
All languages are rule governed 
· 
Variation is an intrinsic aspect of 
all languages 
INTRODUCTION 
Let me start our discussion with a seemingly simple but actually quite complex question. In 
British English the word schedule is pronounced shed-yule, not sked-yule as it is in most parts 
of North America. Speakers of both North American English and British English often notice 
this but don’t make a big deal about it. They talk their way; we talk ours. Both are okay. In 
African American English, to use a different example, the word ask is not pronounced ask, 
as it is in most parts of North America, but axe. Many people notice this too, but unlike their 
reactions to schedule, they do make a big deal of axe. The question I want to ask is, Why 
do we make a big deal about a minor pronunciation difference between African American 
English and Standard English yet accept a similarly minor pronunciation difference between 
British English and American English? 
The answer to that question concerns much more than those two words. It concerns what 
we consider a language, of course, but also issues of privilege, power, difference, and ways 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-2 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
of thinking about and reacting to variation in language. To answer our question, we’ll need 
to examine some basic concepts about language and perhaps adjust our ideas about what lan-
guage is. We’ll come back to our question about schedule and ask after this discussion. 
WHAT IS LANGUAGE? 
We can start by noting the distinction between language and a language. When we talk about 
a language, we are talking about a specific communication system used by a particular group 
or groups of people. English and Italian, Burmese and Tibetan, Swahili and Xhosa, Quechan 
and Navajo, American Sign Language and Chinese Sign Language are all easily recognized as 
separate languages. Even here, however, in trying to create a list of languages, problems arise. 
How do we know if two different communication systems are two different languages or just 
variations of the same language? Is Sicilian, for example, a different language from Italian or 
a dialect of Italian? 
One way of distinguishing is to ask if they are mutually intelligible, that is, users of 
one can understand, and be understood by, users of the other. If they cannot understand one 
another, then their speech is not mutually intelligible, and we might assume they are speaking 
or signing different languages. 
Mutual intelligibility doesn’t always work to distinguish languages, however. Speakers 
of what is considered the same language can have difficulties understanding one another, 
as my story in Chapter 1 of trying to speak to people in Wales illustrates; we were speaking 
mutually unintelligible varieties of English. Similarly, speakers of different dialects of what 
we usually call Chinese are totally unintelligible to one another, yet we call it all Chinese. 
On the other hand, educated speakers of Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish can usually under-
stand one another, yet we call them different languages. In fact, until Norway separated from 
Denmark and became an independent nation, what we today call Norwegian and Danish were 
seen as the same language, with Norwegian considered a dialect of Danish. Other languages 
too used to be considered dialects of the same language. Serbian and Croatian used to be seen 
as different dialects of one language, called Serbo-Croatian. After the break-up of Yugoslavia 
(a nation that contained Serbia and Croatia) and the Serbs and Croats established their own 
separate nations, both groups began calling their “dialects” separate languages, and the rest 
of the world followed suit. The languages themselves did not change much; what we call them 
changed because the social and political realities of their speakers changed. 
Those political and social factors play an important role in what gets recognized as a language 
and what gets called a dialect or variety. (More on dialects and varieties later.) There is a saying 
among linguists, in fact, that a language is just a dialect with an army and a navy, in other words, 
a nation. We often conflate languages and nationalities: the French speak French, the Japanese 
speak Japanese, the Russians speak Russian. We tend to think that one nation means one lan-
guage. It’s a bit more complicated than that in real life, however. Many French people who live in 
Breton speak Breton, not French, as their native language. And many Sicilians believe that what 
they speak is not a dialect of Italian, but a separate language altogether. Even nations where most 
people speak the same language consist of populations that speak different languages. If we 
move beyond the confines of Europe, it gets even more complicated. India, though one country, 
has speakers of hundreds of different languages as citizens. In fact, most countries in the world 
are multilingual; that is, their citizens speak many different dialects and languages. 

 
  
 
10 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
Dialects, varieties, and languages 
I’ve used the terms standard language, dialect, and variety several times already without 
defining them, so let me do so here. The standard language (or the standard) is the variety 
used in schools, the government, and the media, especially the print media. It may be the one 
spoken by most people in a country, but that is not always the case. It is what most people 
think of as the language, devoid of dialect features and with no discernable accent and what 
most people think of as correct and proper language. That perspective misrepresents what we 
know about language, as we will see later. We’ll return to standards and how they develop in 
Chapter 13. 
A dialect is defined as a variety of a language shared by a group of speakers that is dis-
tinguished from other varieties of that language by differences in vocabulary, pronunciation, 
grammar, and more intangible aspects like politeness. 
Now many of us are used to thinking of dialects as something other people speak. For 
English speakers, we talk about British, Irish, American, and Australian English, among oth-
ers. Each of these is itself made up of dialects. In the United States, we distinguish among 
the New York, Boston, Appalachian, and various Southern dialects. In the United Kingdom, 
they distinguish among many regional dialects. In England, we find West Country dialects, 
Midlands dialects, and Southern and Northern dialects. In Wales, there are various forms 
of Welsh English (not the same as Welsh itself); in Scotland, there is Scottish English, and 
in Northern Ireland, there is Ulster English. In other parts of the world, we find Singapore 
English and Nigerian English, to name a few. These and other varieties around the world can 
differ greatly, but they are all English. 
So how can we distinguish a dialect from a language? From a purely linguistic perspec-
tive, we might say that trying to distinguish a language from a dialect is a waste of time. In 
fact, there are only dialects, some of which resemble one another enough to get clumped into 
a single language, if, and only if, the cultural and political conditions favor such clumping 
as well. English, like all languages, only exists as a constellation of various dialects such as 
those mentioned earlier. 
We all speak a dialect, even if we speak what is considered the standard language. We don’t 
usually think of Standard English as a dialect, but it is. It is merely one variety of English 
among many, as we will see. 
Dialect is a term that for many people denotes something less than a real language, some-
thing spoken by uneducated or rural people. We know that’s not true, but the term dialect is 
still used that way by the media and many others. For that reason, linguists often use the term 
variety. The two terms mean the same thing; the latter just comes with less baggage and fewer 
judgments. I’ll use both here. 
DESIGN FEATURES OF HUMAN LANGUAGE 
When we talk about language as a human phenomenon, we are acknowledging that there are 
some underlying similarities among them all. Linguists examined these similarities and have 
determined there are several characteristics that all languages and all varieties of all lan-
guages share, what are called design features. Linguists continue to debate how many design 
features there are, but most agree on the following. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
11 
Semanticity 
Perhaps the most basic characteristic is semanticity: we use language to convey meaning. 
We manipulate sounds or signs, words, and the form and order of those words, according to 
a system of rules to create meaning. That is, we manipulate the three major components that 
comprise all languages: a system of sounds or gestures, a lexicon or vocabulary, and a gram-
matical system. 
Arbitrariness 
In all languages, the relationship between a word and the object or concept that word refers 
to is arbitrary. In other words, there is no inherent or logical relationship between words and 
their meanings. This lack of any inherent relationship is referred to as arbitrariness, a design 
feature shared by all languages. 
For example, take the English word for the object upon which we put our dinner: table. As 
English speakers, we have an arbitrary set of sounds that make up the meaning of our word 
table. Spanish speakers use a different set of arbitrary sounds for the same object, mesa, and 
Italian speakers use still another arbitrary set of sounds, tavolo. And users of sign languages 
do not have a spoken word at all, but rather a sign that indicates what we mean by table. None 
of these words is any more inherently connected to the meaning of table or more able to 
embody the essence of tableness; they are all equally arbitrary. 
Arbitrariness is sometimes contrasted with onomatopoeia, the characteristic of a word 
sounding like what it means. Words like buzz, meow, or oink are onomatopoetic. In some 
ways, these words are non-arbitrary as there is a relationship between sound and meaning. 
Even with sounds such as these, however, there is some arbitrariness present, for not all lan-
guages use the same linguistic sounds to indicate the same natural sounds. In English, for 
example, roosters crowing at the break of dawn say cock-a-doodle-doo. In Russian the same 
rooster would say kikiririki. 
It’s not just words that are arbitrary; other parts of language are as well, including grammar. 
For example, English speakers use articles to distinguish a specific or known object (the book) 
from an unknown object or general idea (a book). In many other languages, such as Russian, 
there are no articles at all, no equivalent to the word the. Our use of articles is an arbitrary 
convention; Russian has other arbitrary conventions. English speakers also generally place 
adjectives before nouns; Spanish speakers put them after nouns. Both systems are arbitrary. 
As another example of the arbitrariness of grammar, let’s look at plurals. How a language 
marks a word as plural, or even if it does so at all, is arbitrary. In English, we mark nouns by 
adding an {s} at the end to indicate they are plural. Some languages do not mark nouns at all 
to indicate plurality; the context or a number word indicates plurality without any other mark-
ing, the equivalent of three book. Some languages mark nouns as either singular or plural; 
some mark them as singular, dual, or plural. All are equally arbitrary and equally logical. 
Linguistics in your world: But that’s wrong, isn’t it? 
How about grammar rules? Aren’t they based on logic and therefore non-arbitrary? 
Grammar, despite what you might have been told, is not based on logic. In fact, grammar 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
rules are arbitrary too. Take double negatives. You’ve probably been told that double nega-
tives are incorrect because they are illogical. Not so. In some languages, making an asser-
tion negative requires at least two negative elements. To say I never saw her in French, for 
example, one needs both a ne and a jamais (both negativizers): Je ne l’ai jamais vue, liter-
ally I did not see her never. The French use of what we might call double negatives is not 
illogical; it’s just the way they say it. The same goes for some varieties of English that use 
two negative elements. We will discuss double negatives in more detail later; for now, it is 
important to realize that both ways of making a sentence negative are arbitrary; neither is 
more logical. 
What is grammar? 
A useful question here might be, What is grammar? The term grammar has many meanings. 
We talk about good grammar and bad grammar; we’ve all probably sat through grammar 
lessons in school; we may have had our grammar corrected by teachers or even by friends. 
When we talk about correct or incorrect grammar, we’re using the prescriptive perspective 
described in Chapter 1, a perspective that assumes there is one and only one correct way to 
sign, say, or write something. 
You’ll remember from Chapter 1 that linguistics uses not a prescriptive but a descriptive 
approach. As a result, a radically different definition of grammar prevails. In linguistics, 
grammar refers to a system of rules that governs how we put sounds together to form words, 
put words together to form phrases, and put phrases together to form sentences. Sign language 
users put together what are called primes rather than sounds to form words using their gram-
mar to do so. It is our knowledge of this system, our grammatical competence mentioned in 
Chapter 1, that allows us to speak or sign. Linguistics as a field seeks to describe this system 
of rules and its phonological, morphological, and syntactic components. 
Cultural transmission and innateness 
The ability to learn a language is innate in humans; we’re born with this ability. Which lan-
guage we learn, however, depends on which language we are exposed to as children. Children 
learn what they hear or see around them; the design feature known as cultural transmission. 
Which language a child learns depends not on what language her ancestors spoke, but on what 
language she hears around her as she is acquiring language. If a child of Norwegian parents is 
raised hearing only Chinese, she will learn Chinese as her native language. Unless she is also 
exposed to it as a child, Norwegian will be just as hard for her to learn as it is for any other 
speaker of Chinese. We’ll discuss how children learn language in more detail later. 
Displacement 
All languages allow their speakers to refer to the past and the future; to refer to people, 
things, or events that are not present; and to refer to things that do not exist. That is, all human 
languages have a design feature known as displacement. Languages display this character-
istic whenever their speakers communicate about events from the past, predictions about the 
future, or imaginary objects. We are, in our language use, not confined to the here and now. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
13 
We can talk about holodecks and intergalactic travel, about unicorns and sea serpents, or 
about what we had for breakfast yesterday and what we hope to have tomorrow. 
Discreteness and duality 
Discreteness refers to the quality of being composed of discrete units. When we learn a lan-
guage, we learn to perceive it as made up of discrete units. Take language sounds, for example. 
When we think about the [o] sound and the [u] sound in English, we tend to think of them as 
discrete, separate sounds. And when we hear them, we generally hear either one or the other, 
not something in-between. If we looked at the acoustic realities of these sounds, however, 
we’d find that there is a continuum of sound from [o] to [u] and no one clear spot in which the 
[o] becomes the [u] or vice versa. Our minds, because we have learned that these are separate 
sounds in our language, do not hear the continuum but rather two separate discrete entities. 
This concept is perhaps easier to grasp with words. Think about the phrase, an orange, for 
example. We would expect to hear it pronounced with a pause between an and orange. If we 
listen carefully, however, we notice that it sounds more like a norange. Because we know the 
words an and orange as discrete units in English, however, we hear an orange. 
Related to the design feature of discreteness is the design feature duality. All languages 
are structured such that discrete smaller units can be combined into larger units, so for spo-
ken languages, sounds combine to form words, words combine to form phrases, and phrases 
combine to form sentences. In sign languages, primes combine to form words, words combine 
to form phrases, and phrases combine to form sentences. Discrete words and phrases can be 
recombined in different ways to form different meanings. 
Duality and discreteness form the basis for what linguists call grammar—that is, the 
ability mentioned earlier to combine discrete units into larger units to create meaning. The 
smallest of these units tends to be meaningless. Take the [t] sound, for example. By itself, 
it has no meaning. But if we combine it with another meaningless sound [o], we create an 
utterance with meaning, the word toe. It’s actually quite an amazing feat all languages do: 
they take these small discrete meaningless units and, by combining them with other units, 
create meaning. 
Productivity 
Discreteness and duality are key to productivity as well. The design feature of productivity 
refers to the ability of speakers of any language to produce an infinite number of sentences 
and to produce novel sentences, sentences they have never uttered nor heard before, an ability 
enabled by the ability to combine the same discrete units in different ways to create differ-
ent meanings. This ability allows for the creativity all language users are capable of. As an 
example of a novel sentence, take the following: Get that silly pink hippo off my tutu at once. 
Chances are you’ve never heard that sentence before. Yet you have no problem understanding 
it. In similar fashion, you can produce sentences you’ve never heard or produced before. There 
are, in fact, an infinite number of sentences or utterances possible in any language. Although 
the number of words is obviously limited (very large, but not limitless) and the number of 
rules for combining them is similarly limited, in theory the number of sentences or utterances 
we can produce is infinite. 

 
  
 
 
14 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
DO ANIMALS HAVE LANGUAGE? 
Productivity is, perhaps, the property that most clearly sets human language apart from ani-
mal communication, for no animal forms of communication allow their users to produce an 
infinite number of utterances. There are some forms of animal communication, however, that 
share some characteristics of human language. Bird song, for example, at least for some spe-
cies, seems to be culturally transmitted, as human languages are. Some birds won’t learn to 
sing at all if not exposed to the song of their species, while other birds will learn the song of 
whatever species they are exposed to, much like human infants will learn whatever language 
they are exposed to. 
Although some animal modes of communication share certain characteristics with human 
language, none shares all of them, so they are not language as we have defined it. The 
European honeybee, for example, does an intricate tail-wagging dance to communicate to its 
mates the location of a good source of nectar. It can communicate direction, distance, and the 
richness of a source that is up to 7 miles away. It does so by wagging its tail in both a circular 
and a straight-line manner, using the angle of its line to indicate direction and the excitability 
of its wiggling to indicate the richness of the food source. Certainly, this is a complicated 
communication system that serves the honeybees well. It is not, however, human language. 
If I say that non-human animals do not have language, I am not implying that they are 
somehow less than we are. Like humans, many other animal species have developed complex 
systems of communication that serve their purposes well. Those forms of communication are 
not part of our makeup, either genetic or social. They are not the forms of communication that 
have evolved as humans have evolved. We can study animal modes of communication and 
write learned treatises on them, but as for being able to wiggle our rear ends to indicate how 
far and in what direction the flowers with the best nectar lie, we as humans can probably never 
manage that. The various skills and types of intelligence needed in non-human animal worlds 
are different from those needed in our human world. As such, they have led to the develop-
ment of their systems of communication, which are different from human language. 
Many people, linguists included, have tried to teach human language to various non-human 
animals, usually chimpanzees. The results have been mixed, and linguists disagree about 
whether it is possible. One problem in the early attempts was that chimps’ vocal apparatuses 
are not able to produce the kinds of sounds that humans use for language. The solution was to 
try to teach them a sign language, often American Sign Language (ASL). The most successful 
attempt seems to have been Washoe, a chimpanzee raised in the 1960s by Allen and Beatrix 
Gardner, who raised her like a human child as much as possible, using ASL to communicate 
with her. Washoe learned to use around 200 signs and seemed to understand many more. Even 
more telling, the Gardners claimed that she could produce new combinations of signs, ones 
not seen by her before, a key characteristic of language use. 
A decade later, Herb Terrace tried to teach another chimp, Nim Chinsky, language signs 
but eventually concluded that the signs Nim produced were merely repetitions of signs used 
by his trainers and that Nim had not really acquired language. In the 1990s, Sue Savage-
Rumbaugh and Dwayne Rumbaugh claimed some success with a bonobo chimpanzee named 
Kanzi that they had socialized much like a human child. They showed that he could under-
stand a complex sentence such as Get the ball which is outside. That sentence required him 
to understand the relative clause (which is outside) and its relation to the ball, while ignoring 

   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
15 
the ball that was inside, which he did. The debate about whether chimps, or any non-human 
animal, can acquire human language continues. 
OTHER CHARACTERISTICS OF HUMAN LANGUAGE 
In addition to the design features discussed thus far, there are a few other characteristics of 
language: 
· 
Spoken, signed and written language are different modes of communication. 
· 
All languages change over time. 
· 
Children everywhere learn their first language in very similar ways. 
· 
All languages are highly structured and rule governed. 
· 
Variation is a natural part of all languages. 
We’ll touch on each of these here and discuss them in more detail in later chapters. 
Linguistic modes of communication 
When we examine language, especially in an educational setting, many people first think of 
the written language. However, language exists independent of any writing system. Writing 
is only one mode used in language; speaking and signing are the other two. Historically 
for all languages, the written form derived from the spoken form. Both as a species and as 
individuals, we spoke before we wrote. Indeed, many languages throughout the world today 
do not have a written form. People in developed, highly literate societies often consider oral 
societies as somehow more primitive than literate ones. Not so! There are, in fact, no primitive 
languages. Like all languages, both oral and signed languages meet the needs of their users. 
Indeed, as Burgess (1993) notes, “We forget that language is primarily sounds [or signs], and 
that sounds existed long before visual signs were invented. The illiterates of the . . . world are 
not dumb” (p. 173). 
Speaking is the most common mode of linguistic communication. Spoken language is 
different from written language in important ways. It is learned as a child, before going to 
school. We can speak to others without seeing them, in the dark, for instance, and since it does 
not require the use of hands, we can use our hands for other things as we speak. Because the 
human voice can easily vary its pitch, speed, and rhythm, speaking can indicate emotions as 
well as content. Speaking usually occurs in a shared social and temporal context, one in which 
confusion and ambiguity can be resolved directly by those involved. More so than writing, 
spoken language is inherently and inevitably variable. It varies at all levels of language: pro-
nunciation, vocabulary, grammar, and more. This variation allows it to signal more informa-
tion than is apparent on the surface, such as social roles and identities, for example. It is not 
just poets who mean much more than they say; we all do it every day. We’ll come back to this 
idea of variation later in this chapter. 
Writing, unlike speaking, is a skill usually learned in school, after children have already 
acquired the basics of their language. It is derivative of speech: while a spoken word directly 
represents objects in the world, writing represents the spoken word, so it is an indirect rep-
resentation of those objects. If I say dog, you probably think of the animal. If you read d-o-g, 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
you think of the word dog, which then leads you to think of the animal. Because of the dif-
ferent functions it serves, writing tends to contain less variation than spoken language. It 
functions to impart information across time and space, to record things we cannot remember, 
to express our creativity, and more. Unlike speaking or signing, writing is designed to work 
outside of the context in which it is produced. I’m writing this now at a coffee shop in St. Paul, 
Minnesota; you are reading it at some other time and in some other place. Writing needs to 
have a certain level of consistency for that to happen. 
Signing is the use of hand movements and facial gestures to communicate meaning. Sign 
languages are just as much language as spoken ones; they show all the design features dis-
cussed earlier. Instead of using a system of grammatical rules to combine sounds into words 
and then phrases and sentences, however, sign languages use a system of grammatical rules 
to combine hand shape and orientation, hand location, and hand movement to create words 
that then are combined into phrases and sentences to create meaning. A word in a sign lan-
guage can differ from another word by the shape of the hand (fingers opened or closed; palm 
facing outward or inward) just as a spoken word can differ from another word by one sound 
(cat—bat—mat). 
A discussion of the differences between written, spoken, and sign language could fill an 
entire book; here I’ve just touched on a few basics. As we discuss language throughout the 
rest of this book, remember that speaking or signing, not writing, is the primary mode of com-
munication of language users. 
All languages change over time 
Language change is not only natural and normal; it is also inevitable. English, like all lan-
guages, has gone through substantial changes throughout its history. If we try to read Beowulf, 
for example, as it was originally written over a thousand years ago, we’d have a hard time 
comprehending it, even though it is written in English, what we now call Old English. Even 
reading Chaucer is difficult, and he wrote only 700 years ago. (We discuss the history of 
English in Chapter 13.) 
What is it that changes over time to make it so hard to understand our language from cen-
turies ago? Obviously, words do; old words disappear, new words appear. You can probably 
identify words that were once common but are no longer used: davenport, floppy disk, rotary 
phone, for example, or words that have entered the language in the last 30 years or so: cell 
phone, Twitter. The meanings of words change too, of course. The word way used to be strictly 
a noun; now it is often used as an adjective meaning very—as in way uncool. Pronunciations 
change too; name, for example, used to be pronounced nah-muh in Old English and gradu-
ally changed to how we pronounce it today. Pronunciation changes are not just things of the 
past; they go on all the time, even if we don’t notice them. Currently, in the United States we 
are experiencing what is known as the cot/caught merger. Younger people tend not to make a 
distinction between the vowel sound in caught and the one in cot. Say them aloud and listen 
to how you pronounce them. I make a distinction; that is, I pronounce those two words quite 
differently. You may not. Which way is right? Both are! 
Our ideas of what is grammatically correct change too, though less quickly than vocabu-
lary. One change I’ve noticed recently can serve as an example. For me, the preposition used 
with base is on, not off of (based on your opinion not based off of your opinion). The latter 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
17 
sounds decidedly odd to my ears, and I’d be tempted to correct it in an essay. To my students, 
however, it sounds perfectly normal and correct. I’ve had to change my ears, if you will, and 
accept that based off of and based on are both grammatically correct; it’s just an example of 
normal language change. 
That change seemed to just happen. Sometimes, however, language changes as the result of 
social changes. All languages will change as the needs of their speakers change. In Germany, 
for example, the use of two common terms of address for women, Frau and Fraulein, has 
been changing. Frau was used with older or married women, Fraulein for young or unmar-
ried ones. There was, of course, no such distinction made for men; Herr referred to both mar-
ried and unmarried men. As the result of changes in women’s roles since the 1970s, Fraulein 
is gradually falling out of use and being replaced by Frau for all women. 
People often think that there is only one correct way to pronounce a word or only one cor-
rect way to say something. As we’ll see in more detail later, that’s not true. If we see new ways 
of pronouncing a word as wrong, then we’d need to say that how we now pronounce name is 
wrong too. It’s not wrong, just different from the way it used to be pronounced—the result of 
natural language change. In the case of how caught and cot are pronounced, the change from 
making a distinction to not making one doesn’t indicate a decline in the English language. 
Like all language change, it is not decay or corruption at work, just simple change. 
All children learn their first language in similar ways 
Most adults find learning a new language a daunting task, yet children everywhere accom-
plish this task with little or no overt instruction from adults. All children, if they are exposed 
to a language and if there are no physiological or mental disabilities that prevent it, will learn, 
or more precisely acquire, a language, mostly without conscious effort or awareness. Linguists 
make a distinction between learning a language, a conscious effort that usually requires prac-
tice and instruction, and acquiring a language, an unconscious process that does not require 
overt instruction. They call this process first language acquisition or L1 acquisition for 
short. We’ll discuss some general principles of how children acquire their first language here; 
in subsequent chapters, we’ll discuss how children acquire specific aspects of language. 
Despite common misconceptions about language acquisition, children don’t learn their 
first language by adults teaching them, nor do they learn it mainly through imitation. No tests, 
no homework, no drills, yet by the age of five, before they go to school, they have mastered a 
complex system of grammar, the ability to combine discrete units into larger units to create 
meaning. They have mastered the sound system (or primes for sign languages), a great deal of 
vocabulary, and a complex syntax system. To accomplish all that so quickly, they must have 
some predisposition for language learning. The exact nature of that predisposition is debated, 
but linguists generally agree we are hardwired to acquire language, no matter the language. 
Many linguists point to what is called Universal Grammar, or UG, a set of core gram-
mar principles that all languages adhere to, as an important part of that hard wiring. Many 
linguists posit that UG is part of our biological endowment, a sort of genetic blueprint for all 
languages. Since children already have this blueprint, they don’t need to figure everything 
out, just how the universal principles apply in their language. Evidence for this view includes 
the universal nature of language acquisition, the uniformity of the acquisition process, and the 
ease and rapidity with which children acquire language. 

 
  
 
 
 
18 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
Other linguists contend that we are not born with knowledge of these principles; rather, 
we are born with certain cognitive strategies that allow us to quickly deduce the underlying 
principles or system of language. They note that even with advances in brain scans, no one 
has yet found any evidence for any innate blueprints. 
Both sides agree that children learn very quickly from what is called a poverty of data. 
That is, the language they hear (or see in the case of sign languages) around them is full of 
stops and starts, incomplete sentences, non-language noises, slips of the tongue or hand, 
and other features that make it hard to figure out the underlying rules. Yet children every-
where do it. 
They appear to go through similar stages as they do so, whether their language is oral or 
signed. These stages and their timing are general patterns, so not all children move through 
them at exactly the same time. Nor do they move from one to the other in one day. It’s a 
gradual process, but one that shows remarkable similarity in children learning languages as 
different as Chinese and Swahili. What follows is a summary of these stages: 
·  
A prelinguistic stage where children learning a spoken language learn to distinguish 
speech sounds from other noises in the environment. They also learn to recognize the 
intonation patterns of their native language and can reproduce those patterns well before 
they produce any recognizable words. 
·  
A babbling stage (4 to 8 months of age): At around 6 months, children learning a spoken 
language begin to master the sounds of their language and practice producing them, often 
repeating the same syllable over and over: dadadada. Early babbling seems to be similar 
across languages, with children producing much the same sounds. Interestingly, children 
even babble when they are alone. Children learning a sign language also babble, except 
with their hands instead of their mouths. 
·  
A one-word stage (9 to 18 months): Here children start producing identifiable words, 
usually referring to familiar people, actions, or objects: mama, doggie, up, milk. They 
soon start producing around 50 or so common words, though the production is often not 
quite adult-like, sometimes to the point that only family members can understand them. 
During this stage, children’s use of a single word can function much like a complete adult 
sentence;  milk, for example, can mean I want milk or There’s the milk. 
·  
A two-word stage (18 to 24 months): At about 18 months, children begin using two-word 
combinations to mean what would be expressed in adult language with a complete sen-
tence. These combinations are usually made up of nouns, verbs, and adjectives: Mommy  
shoe could mean, for example, That’s Mommy’s shoe or Give me Mommy’s shoe. At this 
stage, children learning different languages seem to express similar things as they learn 
to express content more efficiently. 
·  
A multiword stage (24 to 48 months and older): During this time, children begin using 
more and more words as they also begin to acquire more complex syntactic rules. This 
acquisition proceeds rapidly, with children learning to produce more complex sentences, 
including questions and negatives. At about 3 y ears of age, for example, they start using 
multiple clauses, first joining clauses coordinately with and then using subordination 
in utterances like Don’t see where Sally is. These utterances show that they are begin-
ning to understand and apply the rules of grammar, though these are not yet fully adult 
utterances. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
19 
By the age of five or so, children have mastered the basics of their language, adult-like 
phonology, morphology, and syntax, though there may still be many overgeneralizations. 
Obviously, they continue to learn more as they age. The growth in vocabulary is especially 
noticeable after five. It is estimated that on average, 6-year-old children know about 8,000 
words. By the time they have reached the age of eight, that number will have expanded to 
around 17,000. And of course, they will continue to learn more complex syntactic structures 
as they mature. 
Children, then, become competent users of their native language or languages in a few 
short years. What does it mean to say they are competent? In linguistics, that word has a 
specific meaning slightly different from the one used in everyday speech. Linguistic com-
petence refers to the unconscious knowledge all speakers of a language have, knowledge that 
allows them to produce and understand their language. By definition, all native speakers/ 
signers of a language are equally competent. 
If we start to judge some people as better users of language, we are then referring to lin-
guistic performance, not competence. Linguistic performance refers to what is produced 
using one’s linguistic competence, what we say, sign, or write. Obviously, some of us are bet-
ter orators than others, some of us are better writers than others. That judgment is about our 
performance, not our competence. 
All languages are structured and rule governed 
As we saw earlier, all languages are made up of discrete units and rules for putting those units 
together into meaningful and well-formed utterances; that is, all languages are structured 
and rule governed. In linguistics, the term structure refers to all levels of language: sounds, 
words, phrases, and sentences. When we examine the units of sound in a language, for exam-
ple, and how those units are put together to form words, we’re examining the structure of 
language. We can examine the structure not just of sounds, but of words (yes, words have a 
structure too), phrases, sentences, and units of language beyond the sentence, what is called 
discourse. The next few chapters examine that structure; here I’d like to discuss the term rule 
governed as it is a key concept in linguistics. 
When we talk about rules in this context, we do not mean the ones you may have learned 
in school, such as rules for spelling and writing. Nor do we mean those prescriptive rules 
mentioned in Chapter 1 that tell us how we should talk or write. Instead, we are talking about 
the unconscious rules we use to produce and understand language as we speak or sign it every 
day. What linguists do is try to describe those rules. 
Some examples might help here. In school, you were probably taught that to make a noun 
plural in English, we add an s, with a few exceptions such as children. This is true to some 
extent. But if we listen carefully to how we talk rather than how we write, we discover that 
the rule is a bit more complex than that. Try making cat plural: cats. What sound do you hear 
at the end of the word? That sound seems to clearly be an [s] sound. So far, the school rule 
works. Now try making dog plural: dogs. What sound do you hear at the end of that word? 
Although we spell that sound with the letter s, we don’t pronounce it that way. In fact, we 
make dog plural by adding not the [s] sound, but the [z] sound. (Those brackets are a conven-
tion in linguistics to indicate we are talking about sounds, not letters.) What rule is operative 
here? Certainly not the one we learned in school. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
There is a rule here, and we know this because children as young as two, who most likely 
have not yet been to school, also use [s] with cat and [z] with dog. In fact, young children 
will add [s] to some words they have never heard before and [z] to other novel words. They 
are using a rule when they do so, for their answers are all the same; [s] is added to one set of 
words, and [z] to a different set; those sets are the same for all children. (We will investigate 
the exact nature of this rule in Chapter 5.) 
As another example, take the following words and put them in an order that sounds like 
English to you: French, four, girls, young, the. Chances are you put them in the following 
order: the four young French girls rather than the French young four girls or young four 
the girls French. Why? You might say, “It just sounds better.” But that raises the question: 
Why does it sound better? Surely, it’s not by accident or just a matter of personal taste. If 
it were, some would prefer the French young four girls, and others would prefer the four 
young French girls. But all English speakers will come up with the latter not the former. If 
we all do the same thing, then there must be some underlying rule or pattern that we follow. 
You may not know that rule consciously, but you do know it. And as speakers of English, 
you use it. 
Here’s one more example: Say the word fin aloud. Listen carefully to the [n] sound. Now 
say the word finger. Again, listen carefully to the [n] sound. What happened? Is it the same 
[n] sound? Probably not. Why not? You might guess here that the fact that the [g] sound fol-
lows the [n] sound influences how we pronounce it. And you’d be right. But what is it about 
the [g] sound that has this influence? In other words, why did we all adapt the [n] sound in 
the same way when it preceded the [g] sound? You might say, “That’s just how the word is 
pronounced.” True enough. But if given a made-up word, say langel, one they do not already 
know how to pronounce, English speakers will again adapt the [n] sound to be like the one in 
finger, not like the one in fin. 
The rules that we follow to make that adaptation are among the type of rules we are refer-
ring to when we say that all language is rule governed. And the rules we follow when choos-
ing [s] or [z] with plurals and when ordering adjectives before nouns are similarly examples of 
the rule-governed nature of language. 
Two important points to remember here: 1) these mostly unconscious rules are the ones we 
draw upon whenever we speak or sign or write, and 2) all language is rule governed, even if 
it does not sound correct or proper to you. If all language is rule governed, then whenever we 
speak or sign or write any language, we are always following the rules of our language. There 
is no other way to do it. We’ll come back to these points later in this chapter. 
Variation is a natural part of all languages 
Variation, like structure and change, is intrinsic to language, both variation among languages 
and variation within any one language. Most of us are used to accepting variation among 
different languages. It is estimated that there are around 7,000 languages in the world, all 
of which do things differently. Perhaps we’re not so used to accepting variation within one 
language. All languages spoken by a substantial number of people, however, are made up 
of different varieties. These varieties are connected to our social identities—regional, class, 
ethnic, gender, and racial identities. That is, people from a particular region tend to speak a 
similar if not identical variety of a language if they also share a similar class, ethnic, racial, 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
21 
or gender identity. It is this patterned variation that allows our language use to serve as a 
badge of social identity, an important function of language. We show others who we are by 
how we talk. 
This function of variation seems to be important in some other species’ communication 
too. Recent studies of bird songs have found that swamp sparrows, for example, have what 
we can call dialects. That is, birds in different locations have slightly different songs. What’s 
interesting here is that the birds seem to use these differences to identify other swamp spar-
rows that belong to their own or to a different group. Thus, this variation serves a social 
purpose similar to variation in human language; it marks speakers’ (or in the bird example, 
singers’) social identity and allows them to identify the social identity of others. 
For the swamp sparrows, we probably would not ask which variation of the species’ song 
is correct, but for human languages, we often do ask that question. Can two different varie-
ties of a language both be correct? If variation is an intrinsic part of human languages, then 
the answer must be yes. Earlier we saw that some English speakers pronounce caught and cot 
with the same vowel sound, while others use different vowel sounds. And we noted that both 
are correct. Just as there is no one correct way to pronounce a word, so there is no one correct 
way to speak any language. There are many correct ways of pronouncing a word and many 
grammatically correct ways of speaking. 
There are different ways because there are different language varieties. What is key here 
is that each variety is correct in its own terms; such variation is natural, normal, and inevi-
table. Variation—different ways of pronouncing a word or constructing a sentence—is thus 
not something to be condemned; indeed, all languages, and all varieties of all languages, are 
equally correct, rule governed, and valid forms of communication. 
Variation in accent—differences in how different groups pronounce words—tends to be 
acceptable. Variation in grammar, however, is often seen as bad grammar. If all language is 
rule governed, however, then there is no such thing as bad grammar. That statement may be a 
bit hard to swallow at first, so let me explain. As we’ve seen, linguists have established that all 
language use is rule governed; it is impossible to speak or sign without using the constitutive 
rules of the variety you are speaking or signing. Does all this mean that there is no such thing 
as a grammatical mistake? The answer is—yes and no. People do make mistakes when they 
speak: slips of the tongue (fed rish for red fish); mispronunciations of words they come across 
for the first time (how would you pronounce desuetude, for example?); or getting lost in a long 
sentence and forgetting where it started. These can be caused by tiredness or inattention or 
other non-linguistic factors. 
What most people call mistakes, however, are not slips of the tongue or mispronunciations 
of novel words. Utterances such as ain’t; he be tired; they don’t need nothing; you shouldn’t 
oughta had done that; or I seen it, for example, are often cited as grammatical errors. Those 
utterances are not grammatical errors; they are rule-governed constructions common in cer-
tain varieties of English but not common in Standard English. 
It ain’t necessarily so 
Ain’t can serve as an illustrative example here. Most of us have probably been told that there’s 
no such word as ain’t. All of us have also probably heard people use that word and understood 
it. In fact, it’s been in use for hundreds of years. If that’s not a word, what is? 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
Ain’t began its life in the early 1600s, a time when many contractions entered the English 
language: isn’t, aren’t, can’t, won’t, etc. It seems to have originally served as a contraction of 
am not and was written as amn’t. In English, two nasal sounds ([m] and [n] are both nasals) 
next to one another are often disfavored; that is, they can sound a bit odd and be a bit hard to 
pronounce. As a result of this phonological aspect of the word, it came to be written (and we 
assume pronounced) as an’t, then as ain’t. 
Surprising to many people today, throughout that time, ain’t was considered a perfectly 
acceptable word. It’s not clear exactly why it became unacceptable in Standard English. One 
theory is that it fell out of favor in the mid to late 19th century, beginning in the United States 
when it became associated with new immigrants. Because these new immigrants were seen 
as less desirable by the dominant group, that word also came to be seen as less desirable and 
then as ungrammatical. 
Let’s look at what happens because we no longer use ain’t. There is a construction in 
English known as a tag question. It functions a bit like the n’est-ce pas in French: It comes at 
the end of a sentence and adds a little question to it. For example, we can say, “She’s invited 
to the party.” To add a tag question to that sentence, we’d add, isn’t she? Thus, you get the 
following: 
· 
She’s invited to the party, isn’t she? 
· 
They’re invited to the party, aren’t they? 
· 
We’re invited to the party, aren’t we? 
· 
You’re invited to the party, aren’t you? 
· 
He’s invited to the party, isn’t he? 
Now, what happens when you want to add a tag question to the sentence “I’m invited to the 
party”? Most people end up saying, “I’m invited to the party, aren’t I?” Doesn’t that strike your 
ears as rather odd—aren’t I? If we had a contraction for am not analogous to isn’t and aren’t 
(which the much-maligned ain’t is), we could use a form that makes more sense as part of the 
English verb system. Instead, we are stuck with aren’t I—or am I not—a construction that 
definitely changes the tone of the entire sentence. 
I am not saying by all this that you should go out and use ain’t in your next essay or job 
interview. You know as well as I do that there are consequences to doing so. I am saying that 
we should realize that there is nothing inherently wrong with ain’t and similar stigmatized 
forms except for the fact that they are stigmatized. And it is their stigmatization that is the 
problem, not forms like ain’t per se. 
Other so-called grammatical errors 
If we examine some other examples of stigmatized so-called grammatical mistakes such as 
those mentioned earlier (he be tired; they don’t need nothing; you shouldn’t oughta had done 
that; I seen it), we would see that most of what people call bad grammar are not mistakes at all. 
Instead, they are the normal, rule-governed usages of a particular group or groups of speak-
ers, in other words, of a particular variety of English. 
To return to an example mentioned earlier, double negatives are often cited as obvious gram-
matical mistakes. Two negatives, we are told, make a positive. Well, in math that is true, but 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
23 
only in certain circumstances. When multiplying negative numbers, that’s true; you do get a 
positive. It is not true, however, when adding two negative numbers; there you get a larger nega-
tive. It’s not true in language, either. Many languages use two negative units to indicate nega-
tion, as we saw with French. And English used to do so as well. Even in Modern English, if we 
hear, I didn’t see nothing, we most likely do not think the speaker is admitting to seeing some-
thing. We know that sentence is not a positive, no matter what the grammar police might say. 
Why are ain’t, he be tired; they don’t need nothing; you shouldn’t oughta had done that; and 
I seen it considered bad grammar? The answer is that they have come to be seen as errors not 
because of anything inherently wrong in them but because of the speakers these varieties are 
associated with. Basically, it can be boiled down to this: if a group of people is considered less 
desirable by the dominant group, then their language variety will be seen as wrong. The varie-
ties of groups who face social discrimination also face linguistic discrimination. That helps 
explain the question I started this chapter with: why is it considered okay to pronounce schedule 
the way many British do, but not okay to pronounce ask the way many African Americans do? 
Does all this mean that if someone says, I seen it, and someone else says, I saw it, they are 
both correct? Yes, that’s exactly what it means. We need to recognize that all speakers follow 
the rules of their variety of English; it’s just that different varieties have different rules. 
But isn’t there one dialect of English (or any language) that is most correct, one that is the 
best? As uncomfortable as it may be to believe, the answer is no. Most people think that there 
is one correct way of speaking English, variously termed Proper English or Standard English 
or Broadcast English—the English generally described in grammar handbooks and taught in 
school. This English is usually seen as the only correct form of the language; variations of it 
are termed dialects and viewed as aberrations of the standard. The truth is, however, that if 
this variety of English exists (and most sociolinguists would insist it does not), it is still only 
one dialect among many, all of which are equally correct. 
To reiterate: All dialects—all of them—are rule governed. Thus, if a person says I seen it 
on a regular basis as part of her normal speech, she is not speaking bad English. It is not that 
she does not know the rules of English; it is merely that the rules of her dialect are different 
than the rules of the dialect of someone who says I saw it. 
Not only are all varieties equal linguistically, but from a linguistic perspective, there are 
only dialects. Each of us speaks a particular dialect of our language. Some of us may speak two; 
we may have grown up bi-dialectical. And since dialects include accent (in linguistics, accent 
refers specifically to pronunciation), all of us necessarily speak with an accent. We may not hear 
it ourselves, but if we travel far enough away from our region of origin, we usually notice that 
we don’t sound exactly like others in this new area, even if we speak the same language. We 
may hear them as having an accent; they, in turn, hear our speech as accented. The truth is both 
are right, for no one speaks without what others would consider an accent. Sometimes this is to 
a speaker’s advantage; in the United States, for example, British accents are often considered 
sophisticated. Sometimes, though, it is not so advantageous; Southern U.S. accents in the United 
States are often seen as ignorant and backward by those living in other regions of the country. 
Neither judgment is true, but these are strong stereotypes that can be hard to dispel. 
Judgments about language varieties and accents are more than merely judgments about 
correct or incorrect grammar or pronunciation. They are, in essence, judgments about the peo-
ple who speak those dialects. Linguistic stigmatization, then, has to do with who speaks the 
varieties in question and what associations the dominant culture has about that group and their 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
language. It is not the case that a certain variety is grammatically incorrect and then society 
looks down on those who speak it. The real situation is that when a certain group is looked 
down on, their language becomes stigmatized, and then the stigma about their language is 
used to further stigmatize and oppress that group. It starts with the speakers, not the speech. 
The flip side is also true. If a group has power and prestige, if they are somehow dominant, 
their speech comes to be seen as correct and proper, as standard. Their use of that speech is 
then seen as further evidence that they deserve the power and prestige they enjoy. Again, such 
perceptions are not true, though they do form a powerful myth. 
Speaking Standard English brings with it certain privileges, not the least of which is the fact 
that the educational system is conducted in, and asks participants to use, that variety. Think 
about standardized tests common in the United States that many students take to get into uni-
versity. Using I seen on such tests, even if such usage is a normal part of your variety, merits 
punishment in terms of points; using I saw merits rewards. Standard English is the preferred 
dialect not only in the educational system, but in business, government, law, and the media 
as well. As such, it is accorded a special status that other dialects are not. Most educators and 
politicians and many others continue to believe that those who speak what are sometimes 
called nonstandard dialects are speaking a substandard form of the language. Despite the fact 
that linguists have established beyond any reasonable doubt that no dialects are substandard 
and that all dialects are equally rule governed and equally valid, useful, and well-structured 
systems, society continues to privilege some dialects and thus some speakers over others. 
We will discuss linguistic prejudice in more detail later in several chapters. For now, when 
we are tempted to disparage other people’s ways of speaking, we should perhaps take Einer 
Haugen’s (1973) admonition to heart: “Any scorn for the language of others is scorn for those 
who use it, and as such is a form of social discrimination” (p. 52). 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
· 
Mutual intelligibility is not necessarily a reliable way to distinguish languages because 
political and social factors often play a more important role than do linguistic factors. 
· 
All languages, oral, signed, or written, share certain design features: semanticity, arbi-
trariness, cultural transmission, displacement, duality, discreteness, and productivity. No 
animal communication system is thought to contain all of these features. 
· 
In linguistics, grammar refers to a system of rules that governs how we speak or sign, 
that is, how we put sounds or signs together to form words, put words together to form 
phrases, and put phrases together to form sentences. 
· 
All children, if exposed to language, will acquire it without conscious instruction or 
effort, going through similar stages as they do so. 
· 
All languages, and all varieties of all languages, are able to express meanings needed by 
those who speak them. 
· 
Spoken and written language differ in important ways. Those who speak a language 
without a written form do not speak a primitive language. 
· 
All languages are structured, rule governed, constantly changing systems that are made 
up of dialects or varieties, which are equally rule governed, structured, constantly chang-
ing systems. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
25 
· 
Language change is natural, normal, and inevitable. 
· 
Since all languages are made up of varieties, we all speak one of these varieties. 
· 
All varieties of all languages are correct, even if society privileges certain ones over others. 
· 
Prejudice against linguistic varieties are prejudices against those who speak those varieties. 
KEY TERMS 
mutual intelligibility 
standard language 
dialect 
variety 
design features 
semanticity 
arbitrariness 
cultural transmission 
innateness 
displacement 
discreteness 
duality 
productivity 
onomatopoeia 
variation 
rule governed 
L1 acquisition 
Universal Grammar 
linguistic competence 
linguistic performance 
EXPLORATIONS 
Exploration 1: Discussion prompt 
I’ve provided some examples of animal communication. Determine if the communication sys-
tems described here share any of the design features of human languages. If there is not enough 
information to decide, determine what more information you would need. Share your conclu-
sions with your small group. 
·  
Vervet monkeys have an interesting set of alarm calls they use to warn of danger: one  
call means the danger is from a snake, a different one from a leopard, and a still different  
one from an eagle. These calls always refer to the here and now, and as far as we can tell,  
monkeys don’t take parts of one call and add it to another or manipulate it in any way. 
·  
Prairie dogs also have a complex system for communicating about predators, using 
alarm calls that can let others know not only the type of predator but also its size and 
shape. These calls seem to communicate even when the predator is not present. Current 
research evidence indicates that they can create new calls for new types of predators 
and that they can put together different vocalizations to create what we might call 
words that are then combined to create structures analogous to sentences. 
·  
Dogs can communicate their emotions to other dogs by the way they position their lips,  
ears, and tails. They can communicate threat, fear, defensiveness, submission, confidence,  
depression, and lack of tension. They can solicit play from other dogs through their body  
language; they can express curiosity by cocking their head, holding their ears forward,  
and showing alertness by skin creases around the eyes; they can communicate threat and  

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
antagonism by vocalizing, growls, or snarls, for example. The meanings of these posi-
tions and vocalizations are generally consistent across canines, no matter the breed. 
· 
My cat communicates with me in what seems to me a direct manner. Although this is 
not a communication system per se, we can examine it for design features. When he is 
hungry, he scratches at the cupboard where I keep his food. Let’s assume he means to 
tell me to feed him now, not in 2 hours. He does the same thing each time, never vary-
ing it nor using parts of the scratch in other ways. 
Exploration 2: Arbitrariness 
Our number system (1, 2, 3, etc.), like our language, is mostly arbitrary. We use symbols to 
mean quantities that have no inherent connection to the symbols themselves. It is not totally 
arbitrary, however. Which of our numbers is not arbitrary? 
Contrast our number system with the Roman system (I, II, III, IV, V, etc.). Is this system 
arbitrary? Are there parts that are arbitrary and parts that are not? 
Share your conclusions with your small group. 
Exploration 3: Onomatopoeia—oink, oink 
Different languages use different words to represent animal noises. Find as many words for ani-
mal noises in different languages as you can. Share them with your small group without telling 
them the English translation. See if they can guess what the analogous word would be in English. 
Exploration 4: Language myths 
In this chapter, we discussed several characteristics about language that may have contra-
dicted what you have been taught previously. You may have been taught, for example, that 
some language used by some people is bad grammar or that those who are illiterate are dumb. 
Choose one of the characteristics that contradicted what you had been previously taught and 
decide how you would rebut that teaching now, given what you have learned here. 
Small group discussion: In small groups, discuss what you would say. 
Writing assignment: Write a one-page rebuttal of your previous ideas. 
Exploration 5: Linguistic pet peeves 
For all of us, there are probably certain ways of speaking (accents, certain pronunciations 
or words, or phrasings) that drive us crazy. (One that drives me nuts is saying expresso for 
espresso, I think because I’m a bit of a food snob!) Identify those that drive you nuts; see 
if you can determine why those particular ones bother you. What might you say to yourself 
after reading this chapter? Discuss these in your small group. 
Exploration 6: Accents 
As noted in the chapter, we all speak or sign with an accent, even if we don’t usually notice it 
ourselves. Have you even been made aware of your accent? What happened? Have you noticed 
other people’s accents? What was most noticeable for you? What was your reaction? Discuss 
these in your small group. 

   
 
 
 
A LANGUAGE IS A LANGUAGE, RIGHT? 
27 
FURTHER READING 
Napoli, D. (2003). Language matters: A guide to everyday thinking about language. Oxford 
University Press. 
The Human language series—a series of videos from PBS that engagingly discuss various topics 
about language. http://thehumanlanguage.com/. You can watch these on YouTube. 
The website of the Linguistic Society of America, The Domain of Linguistics, has short 
introductory units on various topics: www.lasdc.org/info/lings-fields.cfm. 
REFERENCES 
Burgess, A. (1993). A mouthful of air: Language and languages, especially English. William 
Morrow & Co. 
Haugen, E. (1973). The curse of Babel. Daedalus, 102(3), 47–57. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
CHAPTER 3 
Morphology 
Word histories and structure 
First glance 
How do we put words together? 
Word formation processes: 
· 
When is borrowing theft? 
Word structure: Morphemes 
· 
Derivational and inflectional morphemes 
· 
Grammatical meaning 
Morphology in other languages 
Hierarchical structure of words 
Acquiring words 
INTRODUCTION 
Most people probably think of words as the basic, most important part of a language. When 
we learn a foreign language in school, aren’t we asked to memorize all those words at the 
end of each chapter? If we do memorize them, we’re often not much further along in learn-
ing to speak the language, though, because every language consists not only of a lexicon—a 
vocabulary—but also a phonological system, a morphological system, a syntactic system, and 
a grammar for putting them all together. Each system has a structure that we’ll examine in the 
following chapters. Here we’ll start with those words by examining morphology, the study 
of words and their structure. 
What is it we know when we know a word? We know its meaning or meanings, its pronun-
ciation or sign, how it’s used in a sentence, and how to use it appropriately. We know that, even 
within the same language, the word for something in one area may be totally different in another 
area. A submarine sandwich (or sub) in Minnesota, for example, is a hoagie in Philadelphia and 
a hero in San Francisco. We know that words vary across time as well as space; that is, they 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-3 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MORPHOLOGY 
29 
come and go. How many of you still speak of an ice box, a davenport, or consumption (refrig-
erator, sofa, and tuberculosis, respectively) or use slang terms like groovy or phat or rad? 
We know, even if we’re not aware of it consciously, that words are made up of separate 
parts that have meaning. Doors, for example, is made up of two parts, door and an {s} that 
means it is plural. We also know that each word is a particular part of speech (a noun or a verb, 
for example), what linguists call lexical categories. 
We begin our discussion of words first by examining those lexical categories. We then 
move on to how new words enter a language and how the parts of words are put together. 
LEXICAL CATEGORIES 
Most of us were taught about lexical categories in school, though they were most likely called 
parts of speech then. All of us knew these categories even before we went to school, as they 
are part of our internal grammar—the system of rules we use every day to speak or sign. That 
knowledge is mostly unconscious, however, and it is sometimes hard to bring into conscious 
awareness. Here we’ll examine lexical categories to help you make that knowledge conscious 
so you can use that knowledge in the morphological and syntactic analysis we’ll be doing later. 
We can classify words in general into two broad categories: open classes and closed 
classes. Open classes consist of the lexical categories of nouns, verbs, adjectives, and 
adverbs. They are called open because, unlike closed classes, they regularly admit new mem-
bers (new words). As a result, they are a much larger class; in fact, most of the words in a lexi-
con belong to the open classes. They provide lexical content in sentences. Closed classes, as 
their name implies, tend not to admit new members, and in English they have remained fairly 
constant for centuries. Determiners, pronouns, auxiliaries, prepositions, and conjunctions are 
closed classes; their function is to signal grammatical relationships within sentences. They 
are much smaller classes, numbering only in the hundreds. 
We’ll start with how to distinguish nouns, verbs, adverbs, and adjectives, using meaning, 
form, and function to do so. 
Nouns 
In school, we’re taught that a noun refers to a person, place, or thing. That’s a meaning defini-
tion, which is sometimes useful and sometimes not. A definition that relies on form is more 
helpful, for each open lexical category has a set of inflectional endings that distinguishes it 
from other open lexical categories. For nouns, we know that they can be made plural and/or 
possessive by using those endings: chair can become plural chairs by adding that {s} ending; 
sister can become possessive sister’s (my sister’s book) by adding that apostrophe {s} ending. 
That’s one good way to tell that a word is a noun: it can be made plural or possessive. Granted it 
gets a bit complicated because both of those endings are {s}, but even if we’re not sure whether 
to use an apostrophe when we write, we know the difference between plural sisters (My sisters 
all live in California.) and possessive sister’s (My sister’s book is on the table.). 
Nouns are usually, though not always, preceded by a determiner, a small words that sig-
nals a noun: the, a/an; that, this, these, those; my, your, his, etc. We can say the vase, for 
example, but not the pretty. We can, of course, say the pretty vase; nouns are often preceded 
by adjectives as well as determiners. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
MORPHOLOGY 
Verbs 
Verbs, unlike nouns, refer to actions or states of being, at least according to my fifth grade 
teacher. Again, that’s a meaning definition and only sometimes useful. A more useful way to 
distinguish verbs is to use a function definition and note that verbs are words that can show 
tense: present or past. And most of them can take a specific set of inflectional endings, such 
as {s}, {ed}, or {ing}: walk, walks, walked, walking. There are many irregular verbs that do 
not take these endings; instead, they indicate past tense, for example, without adding {ed} 
(drive/drove; eat/ate; stand/stood) or use {en} in their past participle form (eat/eaten). These 
are exceptions to the inflectional endings but not to the general rule that verbs show tense, one 
of their functions. 
Adjectives 
Adjectives are often defined by their function: they modify nouns. We can use that idea by 
trying out what words might fit in the following slot: The 
 cat sat on the mat. The 
words that fit in that slot are pretty sure to be adjectives: tired, hungry, fluffy, angry, indig-
nant. We can also define adjectives by the endings that can attach to them: {er} and {est}: 
pretty–prettier–prettiest; large–larger–largest. Not all adjectives indicate comparative and 
superlative this way; if they consist of more than one syllable and don’t end in -y, we use more 
and most instead of {er} and {est}: more fragile, most fragile; more intelligent, most intel-
ligent. Adjectives can also be directly preceded by very or too; nouns and verbs cannot: very 
smart, too hot, very spicy, too long but not too book or very sit. 
Adverbs 
Adverbs are in many ways the trickiest lexical category to figure out. They often, but not 
always, end in -ly: quickly, suddenly, happily. To complicate things, not all words that 
end in -ly are adverbs; lovely, chilly, lonely, for example, are adjectives. One good way to 
identify adverbs is through their meaning; they tell us when, where, why, how, and how 
often. We can also identify them through their function: they are modifiers. In fact, they 
modify several parts of a sentence: verbs, adjectives or other adverbs, and even entire sen-
tences. In Unfortunately, it’s raining really hard, there are three adverbs: unfortunately, 
modifying the entire sentence; hard, modifying the verb rain; and really, modifying the 
adverb hard. One other characteristic of adverbs can help distinguish them from adjec-
tives; many adverbs, especially those that modify sentences or verbs, can move around in 
the sentence. In the previous example, we can move unfortunately from the beginning to 
the end of the sentence. 
To sum up, we’ve seen that nouns are words that can be made plural or possessive and are 
usually preceded by a determiner and sometimes an adjective; verbs are words that indicate 
tense and can take {s}, {ed}, and {ing} as endings; and adjectives and adverbs are both modi-
fiers, modifying different parts of the sentence. Adjectives can be made comparative ({er} or 
more) and superlative ({est} or most). Adverbs are often movable in the sentence and tell us 
when, where, why, how, and how often. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
MORPHOLOGY 
31 
WORDS AND THEIR HISTORIES 
If we look at the history of words, we are approaching them from a diachronic perspective, 
one that examines how language changes over time. One of the places where language change 
is most evident is in the lexicon (the words in a language), and the study of the origin and his-
tory of words, known as etymology, has long been a part of linguistics. Words are constantly 
added to and disappear from languages. Some words change their meaning so much so that 
their current meaning seems completely unrelated to their earlier one and they seem like new 
words. (Does the word tweet conjure up a bird’s sound or a post on Twitter?) New words enter 
the language all the time; most, however, never catch on. It is not always the cleverness of 
the new word that determines its fate. That determination usually has more to do with social 
factors: the word meets a need in society. When any new word catches on, we say that it has 
become lexicalized. 
Word formation processes 
The processes by which new words enter a language’s lexicon are collectively known as word 
formation processes. Some languages make use of some processes more than others, but the 
processes discussed here are common in languages around the world. 
Eponyms are words created from names of people or places. The Earl of Sandwich, for 
example, gave us the word sandwich. Denim comes from the French phrase de Nimes, in 
English from Nimes, a city in France that produced heavy-duty material. Diesel was the name 
of the man who invented the diesel engine, and cardigan comes from the Isle of Cardigan, 
whose inhabitants often wore what we now call cardigans. 
Coining, also known as neologism, is simply inventing new words. It is not very common 
in English, though it is often used by clever marketing departments: Teflon, aspirin, zipper, 
and xerox are all coined names of products. Sometimes these nouns shift to become verbs; 
we can now xerox papers, not just use a Xerox machine. Recently, technology has led to an 
explosion of new terms: quark and google being two examples. Many new words are coined 
using other word formation processes, as described further. 
Borrowing, a common process in English, occurs when one language borrows a word from 
another. English has borrowed from dozens of languages around the world. Alcohol, boss, 
influenza, tycoon, yogurt, and klutz were borrowed from Arabic, Dutch, Italian, Japanese, 
Turkish, and Yiddish, respectively. Some words take a circuitous route into English: algebra, 
for example, is an Arabic word that came into English via Spanish. English has borrowed so 
many terms that, according to some experts, over half of the 20,000 most commonly used 
words are borrowed. 
Borrowing or theft? 
Some of these word formation processes are neutral, not socially contested. Sometimes, how-
ever, seemingly innocuous word formation processes are fraught with social complexities. 
This is especially true with what are called borrowed words, a neutral term that can hide 
a far from benign past. What makes borrowing so socially and ethically fraught? For one 

 
  
 
 
 
32 
MORPHOLOGY 
thing, many terms in English were “borrowed” from peoples who were colonized by English 
speakers. To those colonized peoples, such borrowing may well feel more like theft. Certain 
borrowing is now recognized as a sort of theft, what we call linguistic appropriation. A form 
of cultural appropriation, linguistic appropriation occurs when a dominant language group 
adopts linguistic resources (words, in this case) from a minoritized or subordinate group 
while also denigrating that group and its language. 
We find examples of this across the United States. The use of Native American terms as 
place names is common in housing subdivisions, cities, and some states, and it almost always 
occurs without any acknowledgment that these lands once belonged to Native Americans. 
Words from Spanish and from African American English (AAE) are common in the everyday 
language of many people. In and of itself, such borrowing is not a problem. The problem is 
that it coexists with both overt and subtle attacks on those languages and varieties and the 
people who speak them. Thus, the widespread use of Spanish words (manana, cojones, hasta 
la vista) coexists with efforts to pass laws prohibiting Spanish in public spaces. A similar 
situation exists with borrowed African American terms. Such words often convey a sense of 
being cool, itself a word borrowed from AAE, and are used simultaneously with attacks on 
AAE as lazy, vulgar, ungrammatical speech, which we know it is not. 
Flattening, a common phenomenon in linguistic appropriation, refers to eviscerating the 
meaning of a term. Cool, for example, when first used in African American speech, referred 
to the ability to survive, even when threatened by lynch mobs and police brutality. It has 
now been flattened in White speech to a general term of approval (Cool shoes!) or to refer 
to a sense of self that is stylish and confident. In Spanish, perfectly normal terms such as el 
presidente or generalissimo are often used mockingly in English to portray Spanish-speaking 
leaders as foolish. Similarly, macho in Spanish simply means manly, not overly manly or 
patriarchal. In English it is often used as a synonym for chauvinist males who try to prove 
their manliness through a degrading attitude toward women. 
Modifying existing words 
Most new words are not brought into the lexicon by borrowing or being created through coin-
ing; instead, they are formed by modifying existing words, as in the processes explained in 
this section. 
Acronyms are shortenings in which the initial letters of each word in a phrase are com-
bined into a new word that is then pronounced normally, like any other word, not as a collec-
tion of its initial letters. For example, WASP (White Anglo-Saxon Protestant) is pronounced 
the same as the flying insect that stings, not as a collection of its letters W-A-S-P. Laser (light 
amplification by simulated emission of radiation), RAM (random access memory), and ROM 
(read-only memory) are other common acronyms. 
Abbreviations differ from acronyms in that each individual letter is pronounced. NATO 
is pronounced as a word, so it is an acronym. The UN is an abbreviation, as each letter is 
pronounced separately. Similarly, HIV is an abbreviation; AIDS is an acronym. ATM is an 
abbreviation; PIN is an acronym. 
Compounding, whereby two words are combined to form a new word, is extremely com-
mon in Germanic languages such as German, English, or Dutch. We see it in our everyday 
language: bluebird, underfed, outlaw, coatroom, strawberry, rowboat, overeat, afterbirth, 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MORPHOLOGY 
33 
snowstorm, breakfast, and weekend are just a few examples. Terms for new technology are 
often created through compounding: screensaver, flash drive, cyberspace, swapspace, to 
name but a few. Pandemonium is a good example of creative compounding from which a new 
word emerged. It was created by John Milton by combining the prefix pan, meaning all or 
everywhere, with the root demon. 
Blending is similar to compounding but here it is parts of words, not entire words, that 
are joined. Gasohol (gasoline and alcohol), infomercial (information and commercial), and 
brunch (breakfast and lunch) are all examples of blends, as is mansplaining, a fairly new word 
to describe the lecturing discourse style of some men. Blending appears to be a less com-
monly used process than compounding in most languages. 
Clipping is a process that produces new words by shortening old words or phrases. Clipped 
words are formed by shortening an existing multi-syllabic word, the new word retaining the 
same meaning as the original. Bus, flu, condo, narc, and bra are all examples of clipping 
(from omnibus, influenza, narcotics agent, and brassiere, respectively). Similarly, dis, bike, 
and installs were formed by clipping disrespect, bicycle, and installations. 
Backformation is another process whereby a new word enters the language through short-
ening, in this case by dropping off an ending. The verb edit was backformed from editor, that 
is, the -or ending was dropped from the original noun, editor, to form a verb describing what 
an editor does. Compute was backformed from computer, opt from option, televise from tel-
evision, and donate from donation. Backformation differs from clipping in that a word with a 
new meaning and new lexical category is created, whereas in clipping, the word is shortened 
but the meaning and the lexical category stay the same. 
Reduplication, although not common in English, is common in many languages of the 
world. Reduplication forms new words by doubling an entire word or a part of it. In Italian, 
piano means softly; piano piano means very softly. Some languages use reduplication to make 
nouns plural: in Malay, for example, rumah is house, rumah-rumah is houses; in Indonesian, 
ibu is mother, ibuibu is mothers. In English we can see reduplication in such words as bye-
bye, boo-boo, or night night. We also see rhyming reduplication: hanky panky, itsy bitsy, eeny 
meeny, or flim flam. 
Derivation, adding affixes to existing words to derive new ones, is among the most pro-
ductive processes by which new words are created in English. Affixes in English are either 
suffixes (added to the ends of words) or prefixes (added to the beginning). Productive refers 
to the relative freedom with which affixes can attach to existing words to derive new ones. 
Derivational affixes are used to change the lexical category of a word or give it a new mean-
ing: girl becomes girlish, affection becomes affectionate, happy becomes unhappy, annual 
becomes bi-annual, health becomes healthy, conform becomes conformist, or theory becomes 
theorize. Suffixes often change a lexical category. Nouns become adjectives through the addi-
tion of suffixes like -ish, -ful (girl–girlish; health–healthful) or become verbs through the 
addition of other suffixes like -ize (theory–theorize). Verbs can become nouns with such suf-
fixes as -ist (conform–conformist). Some suffixes derive new words without changing the 
lexical category: music can become musician, vicar can become vicarage, and dump can 
become dumpster, all of which are nouns. 
While derivational suffixes often change the lexical category of a word, prefixes often 
derive new words that can have opposite or very different meanings: likely/unlikely; partner/ 
ex-partner; print/reprint; standard/substandard. Prefixes are very productive in English. 

 
  
 
 
 
34 
MORPHOLOGY 
TABLE 3.1 Derivational affixes in English 
Affixes that change lexical category 
Noun to adjective 
Noun to verb 
passion + ate 
priority + ize 
joy + ous 
vaccine + ate 
mirth + ful 
im + power 
Roman + esque 
length + en 
girl + ish 
Shakespeare + an 
athlete + ic 
Adjective to noun 
Adjective to verb 
Adjective to adverb 
happy + ness 
valid + ate 
quick + ly 
pure + ity 
legal + ize 
free + dom 
pure + ify 
en + large 
Verb to noun 
Verb to adjective 
teach + er 
manipulate + ive 
migrate + ion 
accept + able 
contain + ment 
attend + ance 
rebut + al 
alarm + ist 
validate + ation 
Affixes that change meaning 
Affixes attaching to nouns 
Affixes attaching to verbs 
Affixes attaching to 
adjectives 
mono + theist 
re + print 
un + attractive 
ex + partner 
dis + cover 
a + theoretical 
auto + biography 
un + pack 
in + operative 
music + ian 
auto + correct 
dis + enchanted 
de + regulate 
sub + standard 
brown + ish 
Table 3.1 lists some common derivational affixes in English. Note that each affix attaches 
to a particular lexical category, some changing that lexical category (a noun to an adjective, 
for example) and others changing the meaning in some substantial way, with the new word 
remaining the same lexical category as the original word. 
Many of the most productive derivational morphemes common in English come from 
Latin or Greek: prefixes such as {neo} neo-liberal; {pan} pansexual; {mega} megastore; {e} 
e-commerce, e-trade, e-file, email, eBay; or {tele} telecommute, telemarketing, telemedicine. 
With some word formation processes, it is not so much that new words are created, but 
rather that old words take on new meanings or new grammatical functions while retaining 
the same form. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MORPHOLOGY 
35 
In functional shift, also known as conversion, the meaning of a word shifts to add a dif-
ferent lexical category (a new grammatical function) to its meaning. For example, until the 
beginning of the 20th century, test was used exclusively as a noun: The test is tomorrow. Over 
time, it shifted in function so that now we can also use it as a verb: They tested us on our 
knowledge of anatomy. A similar shift happened to impact. It was originally a noun, with the 
verb sense of the word being expressed through the phrase to have an impact on. Now it is 
common to hear people say That impacted me a lot, so the word has shifted functionally to 
become a verb as well as a noun. Recently, the adjective bad has taken on the additional func-
tion of a noun, so we can apologize by saying Sorry, my bad. 
Semantic shift is a slightly different way for words to shift meaning. In this case, over time a 
word will shift its meaning so that the old meaning is lost and only the new one remains. Words 
can broaden their meanings, narrow them, or change them altogether. Lust, for example, used 
to mean pleasure, lewd used to mean wicked, and nice used to mean ignorant. Our word junk 
has broadened in meaning over time; in Middle English jonk meant an old cable or rope used on 
ships. It shifted semantically through the term junk shop, a store where old materials from ships 
were sold, and came to mean any old and useless material. The meaning of ketchup, on the other 
hand, has narrowed. It came from the Malay term for fish sauce, kechap, which was brought to 
Europe by sailors. In the 17th and 18th centuries, it meant any sauce made with vinegar; only 
later did it narrow its meaning to a specific type of condiment made from tomatoes. 
Glamour words? 
When we examine the etymology of words, some interesting things come up. Take the words 
glamour and grammar, for example. We might think these two words are mutually exclusive— 
grammarians are not often thought of as glamourous. It turns out, however, that glamour and 
grammar are related words. Glamour was a variant form of grammar in Scottish. So how did 
we get from grammar to glamour? Grammar referred to scholarship or learning, which was 
then often associated with occult practices. Glamour contained this sense of occult learning 
or magic and came to mean a magic spell, something that could bewitch a person. In the mid-
19th century, it came into the English language with a related meaning: a charm that could 
enchant through illusion or deceit. Only later did glamour come to its current meaning related 
to charm or physical allure. 
If you’re a Harry Potter fan, as I am, it might interest you to examine the etymology of 
the words J.K. Rowling uses in her books. Not all were coined by her; some have a long his-
tory in English. Muggles, non-wizard people in the Harry Potter world, is an old word dating 
back to the Middle Ages, probably deriving from mug, a term for face. In the 18th century, a 
bumblebee was sometimes known as a dumbledore, the name of Hogwarts’ headmaster in the 
novels. And howlers, those flying, screeching telegrams of parental displeasure in the novels, 
once denoted people hired to wail loudly at funerals. 
The idea that the earlier meaning of a word is somehow more correct is known as the etymo-
logical fallacy, for it is, indeed, a fallacy. As the world we live in changes, our words will change 
too, taking on new meanings or new grammatical functions. Change in word meaning or usage 
is, like all language change, natural, normal, and inevitable. Adding new words to a language’s 
lexicon or shifting the meaning of old words is not a mark of corruption or decay. It is just change. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
36 
MORPHOLOGY 
WORDS AND THEIR STRUCTURE 
We’ve seen that words can enter a language in different ways; they are also structured in 
different ways. To understand how words are structured, we need to approach them from a 
synchronic perspective, one that examines language as it is used at a particular point in time. 
Using this perspective, we might ask how words are put together, the subject of morphology. 
We’ve been talking about words as if they are unitary entities. A quick look reveals that’s 
not true, that words are made up of smaller units. From a phonological perspective, words are 
made up of sounds in spoken languages and of primes in sign languages. Sounds or primes 
are combined to form words, which are then combined to form sentences. But there’s a step 
between the sound unit and the word unit, what we might call the meaning unit. This meaning 
unit cannot be a sound because individual sounds don’t have meaning by themselves. What 
does the sound “b” mean, for example? The smallest unit of meaning is not a word either, since 
as we’ve seen, some parts of words have meaning on their own; preview, predate, and predawn 
suggest that “pre” has a meaning of its own that stays the same even in different words. 
Words, then, are made up of smaller units that have meaning, units we call morphemes. 
Technically, morphemes are the smallest unit of meaning in a language. In spoken languages, 
each individual morpheme has both a particular pronunciation (sound) and a particular 
meaning. 
Some examples might help here. That [b] mentioned earlier has no meaning. But {bi} 
does. (Those squiggly brackets enclosing {bi} are a convention in linguistics to indicate we 
are talking about morphemes, not words or sounds.) That {bi}, therefore, is a morpheme, 
used in such words as bilateral, bipolar, biennial, and bisexual, which is sometimes clipped 
to become bi. All words have at least one morpheme; many have several. If a word cannot be 
divided into smaller units of meaning, it is comprised of only one morpheme and is called 
monomorphemic: glass, list, love, they, pen, bottle, walk, token, friend, chalk, to name but 
a few. Words comprising more than one morpheme can be divided into smaller units that 
contain meaning in themselves. Preview, for example, contains two morphemes: pre, which 
means before, and view. 
We can analyze words into their constituent morphemes, for example: 
preview 
pre–view 
impersonal 
im–person–al 
singing 
sing–ing 
girlish 
girl–ish 
unhelpful 
un–help–ful 
befriend 
be–friend 
glass 
glass 
toes 
toe–s 
chalky 
chalk–y 
friendship 
friend–ship 
You might be wondering right about now, what’s the difference between a syllable and a mor-
pheme? A syllable, usually defined as a phonological unit consisting of one or more sounds, 
refers to sound, to the grouping of sounds in how a word is pronounced; a morpheme refers to 
a unit of sound that carries meaning. A morpheme may contain one, two, or more syllables yet 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MORPHOLOGY 
37 
still be only one morpheme. Take the word elephant, for example. It contains three syllables 
but only one morpheme; it cannot be divided into any smaller units of meaning. What about 
{ant}? Doesn’t it mean that small creature that invades picnics? Ant does indeed have that 
meaning on its own, but to determine if it is a separate morpheme in the word elephant, we 
need to ask if the meaning of “small black insect” is the meaning in elephant. No, even though 
it is pronounced the same, its meaning is different. Ant, then, is not a separate morpheme in 
this particular word. 
Types of morphemes 
Not all morphemes function in the same way. Linguists classify morphemes into different 
types in several different ways. 
Free and bound morphemes 
Free morphemes are those that can stand on their own as words and be combined with other 
morphemes. Help, for example, is a free morpheme that can be a word on its own or be com-
bined with other morphemes, like {er}, {un}, or {ful}, in words such as helper and unhelpful. 
Free morphemes can be quite short (play, run, table) or long (elephant, syllable). 
Some morphemes, however, cannot stand on their own, like {er} and {ful}. They are bound 
morphemes: {re}, {ness}, {un}, {er}, {ly}, and {dis} are all bound morphemes, unable to stand 
as a word on their own but still containing meaning. Free morphemes can be attached to other 
morphemes; bound morphemes must be attached to another morpheme. 
Roots, affixes, and stems 
The distinction between roots and affixes is related, but not identical, to the free or bound 
distinction. Roots carry the central meaning of words without any other morphemes. They 
are the form to which other morphemes can be attached. Affixes are bound morphemes that 
attach to a root. If we analyze the word untimely into its constituent morphemes, for example, 
we see that time is the root and {un} and {ly} are affixes, bound morphemes attached to the 
root: {un} is a prefix, {ly} a suffix, and time the root. 
In English, affixes are almost always prefixes or suffixes. In other languages, however, we 
find different types. Circumfixes are affixes containing two parts, one occurring before the 
root, the other occurring after it. In Dutch, the past participle consists of a root and a circum-
fix (ge- and -d), as in gewandeld (wandel is a form of the verb wandelen, meaning walk; ge-
and -d comprise the circumfix, which indicates a part participle; the whole thing, gewandeld, 
means walked as used in the sentence, I’ve walked four miles today). 
Some languages have what is even stranger to English speakers’ ears, infixes, morphemes 
inserted into a root rather than at the beginning or end. Bontoc, a language spoken in the 
Philippines, uses infixes to change nouns into verbs. For example, fikas means strong; adding 
an {um} in the middle of the word as an infix changes fikas to fumikas ( f-um-ikas), which 
means to be strong. Although English does not make use of this type of affix as a rule, we 
do sometimes make use of the principle of infixing, generally in colloquial usage or slang. 
Awholenother results from inserting whole into another to give us a-whole-nother. This type 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
MORPHOLOGY 
of affixation is often used in English with obscenities, so we can say, absofuckinlutely (abso-
fuckin-lutely), using fucking as an infix. 
Generally, it’s easy to tell the difference between free and bound morphemes; if the mor-
pheme in question is not a word, it’s a bound morpheme. There are some morphemes, however, 
that do not seem to fit easily into these categories. Take huckleberry, for example. Analyzing 
that word, we’d probably divide it into two morphemes: huckle and berry. Berry is clearly a 
free morpheme, but what is huckle-? It is bound, but it seems to have no clear meaning. Such 
morphemes are called bound roots. They convey meaning only when they are attached to 
other morphemes and cannot stand on their own. Linguists disagree about how to analyze such 
anomalies, which often occur in English words borrowed from Latin or Greek: kempt as in 
unkempt, ept as in inept, chalant as in nonchalant, and gainly as in ungainly are all bound roots. 
Stems, like roots, are forms to which other morphemes can attach, but they differ from 
roots in that a stem is formed when an affix is combined with a root morpheme. Thus, help is 
a root to which the affix {ful} may be added. The resulting word, helpful, can then serve as a 
stem to which other morphemes may be added: unhelpful; helpfulness. Help remains the root; 
for unhelpful and helpfulness, helpful is the stem to which un or ness are added. 
Derivational and inflectional morphemes 
When we classify bound morphemes into suffixes and prefixes, we are doing so based on 
their placement in a word. We can also classify bound, but not free, morphemes according to 
their function: derivational morphemes or inflectional morphemes. 
Derivational morphemes 
The word formation process known as derivation (explained earlier in the chapter) derives 
new words by adding derivational affixes to a root or stem. As noted earlier, derivational 
morphemes change the meaning of an existing word in one of two ways: changing its mean-
ing in some substantial way or changing its lexical category. To illustrate, let’s look at an 
earlier example again, untimely: the affixes, {un} and {ly}, are both derivational morphemes. 
The suffix {ly} changes time from a noun to an adjective (time becomes timely), so it changes 
the lexical category. The prefix {un} changes the basic meaning of timely into its opposite, 
and the new word remains an adjective. 
Let’s take another example: dehumidifier, a device very useful in the hot, humid summers 
where I live. We can analyze it into the following morphemes: 
· 
humid (root) 
· 
{ify} (bound suffix, derivational morpheme changing lexical category, adjective to verb) 
· 
{er} (bound suffix, derivational morpheme changing lexical category, verb to noun) 
· 
{de} (bound prefix, changing meaning) 
Such multi-morphemic words are very common in English. 
It is important to remember that derivational morphemes are not attached randomly; they 
attach to specific lexical categories: some to nouns, some to verbs, and others to adjectives, 
as the list of derivational morphemes in Table 3.1 shows. The suffix {able} attaches to verbs, 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MORPHOLOGY 
39 
FIGURE 3.1 It’s unraining! 
turning the verb into an adjective (accept, a verb, becomes an adjective acceptable). The 
suffixes {ful} and {ous} attach to nouns and make them adjectives (glee, a noun, becomes 
an adjective, gleeful, with the addition of {ful}; monster, a noun, becomes an adjective, mon-
strous, with the addition of {ous}). Many nouns can be made into verbs by adding suffixes 
such as {ize} or {ate} (priority, a noun, becomes a verb, prioritize, with the addition of {ize}; 
vaccine, a noun, becomes a verb, vaccinate, with the addition of {ate}), but one cannot add 
those suffixes to adjectives to make them verbs. One cannot, for instance, say, prettyize or 
prettiate. English does not allow it. 
Derivational morphemes that change meaning but do not change lexical category also gen-
erally attach to one lexical category. {Ex}, for example, attaches to nouns or verbs but not 
adjectives. We can have an ex-roommate and we can exfoliate, but we cannot be ex-happy. 
{Re} and {de} attach to verbs, and the new words remain verbs (refinance, deregulate); {a}, 
{sub}, and {in} attach to adjectives; and the new words remain adjectives (amoral, substand-
ard, inhospitable). 
Inflectional morphemes 
The concept of inflectional morphemes is sometimes hard for speakers of English to see as 
a distinct category because the English language has so few of them, only eight to be exact. 
They are, however, very common in other languages. Inflectional morphemes do not change 
the basic meaning of a word, nor do they change a word’s lexical category. Instead, they indi-
cate grammatical meanings like past tense or plural. An example might be the best way to 
understand this. I can say, I walk to school every day. But if I want to say that I did it yesterday, 
I have to add an inflectional morpheme, in this case {ed}, to indicate past tense: I walked to 
school yesterday. That {ed} does not change the meaning of walk, nor does it change its lexi-
cal category; walk and walked are both verbs. It occurs only because the grammatical rules of 
Standard English require it to express the meaning of past. 
If it’s my sister walking, I’d add a different inflectional morpheme, {s}: She walks to school 
every day. Again, the {s} is necessary because she is the subject, as it would be if the subject 
were he or it or my grandmother or my dog. It would not be necessary if the subject were my 
dogs or my sisters (They walk to school every day). And it would not be needed if the verb 
were future (She will walk to school) or past. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
40 
MORPHOLOGY 
TABLE 3.2 English inflectional morphemes 
Morpheme 
Example 
Grammatical meaning 
Attach to verbs 
-s 
She walks to school every day. 
3rd person, singular, present tense 
-ed 
She walked to school yesterday. 
Past tense 
-ing 
They are looking for it now. 
Progressive or continuous 
-en or ed 
I’ve eaten too much already. 
Past participle 
I’ve walked home every day this 
week. 
Attach to nouns 
-s 
These books are way overdue. 
Plural 
-s 
Mary’s elephant is named Sue. 
Possessive 
Attach to adjectives 
-er 
She is faster than I am. 
Comparative 
-est 
She is the fastest runner I know. 
Superlative 
Table 3.2 lists the eight inflection morphemes used in Modern English. You’ll notice that 
some inflectional morphemes attach to verbs {ed, ing, en, s}, some to nouns {s, and s}, and 
some to adjectives {er, est}. In English, inflectional morphemes always occur as the final 
morpheme in a word. 
You may have noticed that {s} appears three times in this list. That’s because there are 
three separate morphemes with three different meanings, all of which happen to be pro-
nounced the same and indicated by {s}. The {s} we add to the end of verbs is a different mor-
pheme than the one we add to the end of nouns; they just sound the same. And the {s} we add 
as a suffix to a noun to mean plural is a different morpheme from the one we add to a noun to 
mean possessive, even though they sound the same. Note that the apostrophe is not indicated 
when we list the possessive morpheme because it is not part of spoken language, merely a 
convention in writing. 
Many morphemes, and not just inflectional ones, have allomorphs, variant pronuncia-
tions. That {s}, for example, has three allomorphs: it’s either [s] as in cuffs, [z] as in clowns, 
or [Iz] as in busses. We’ll discuss these variants again in Chapter 5 when we examine the 
phonological bases for them. 
The English spoken a thousand years ago used many more inflectional morphemes to 
indicate grammatical meanings, but these gradually dropped out of the language, leaving only 
those eight. Modern English, thus, has a much-reduced set of inflectional morphemes. Some 
varieties of Modern English have an even more reduced set, omitting the {ed} or the {s} mor-
pheme in certain situations. African American English does not require that {ed} nor the {s} 
plural morpheme in all situations; she pass all the test yesterday is grammatically correct in 
that variety, despite what many people think. In this way, AAE is similar to many languages, 
Mandarin Chinese, for example, in which the equivalent of {ed} is not needed; a time word or 
the context would suffice. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MORPHOLOGY 
41 
Grammatical meaning 
One key principle in morphology is that all languages need to have a way of indicating rela-
tionships among words in a sentence. They need to be able to indicate, for instance, which 
word is the subject of a sentence, which noun a particular adjective refers to, when the action 
is taking place, what belongs to whom, things like that. Different languages express these 
grammatical meanings in different ways. Many languages use inflectional morphemes, 
which attach to nouns to indicate number, case, and gender, as described as follows. 
Number 
In English, we don’t mark nouns for case, except for possessive, and nouns in English do 
not have a grammatical gender. We do, however, mark most nouns for number, that is, we 
add the inflectional morpheme suffix {s} to indicate plural, with a few exceptions like 
mouse/mice. We have no inflectional morpheme to indicate singular. Other languages, 
however, do. In Zulu, for example, an {um} is added to the beginning of nouns to indicate 
singular; a different prefix, {aba}, is added to indicate plural: umfani means boy; abafani 
means boys. Some languages have ways of marking not just singular and plural, but dual 
as well. Inuktitut, a language spoken in Northern Canada, has such a system: iglu means 
one house; igluk means two houses; and iglut means three or more houses. Some languages 
do not indicate number at all. Indonesian is one such language; harimau can mean tiger 
or tigers. 
Case 
More complex are the various systems for inflecting nouns for case; that is, for ways of indi-
cating whether a noun is the subject, an object, or possessive. In English, we know whether a 
noun is the subject or the object in a sentence by the word order. Although it is sometimes a 
bit more complicated than this, the noun before the verb is usually the subject; the noun after 
the verb is usually an object. Many languages, including many closely related to English, use 
inflectional morphemes instead of word order to indicate case. Russian, for example, uses 
inflectional suffixes to indicate whether a noun is the subject of the sentence (nominative case), 
direct object (accusative case), indirect object (dative case), or possessive (genitive case) or if 
it has to do with location (locative case) or use (instrumental case). Each of the words in the 
list that follows means house: 
Nominative  (subject)      dom 
Genitive (possessive)       doma 
Accusative (direct object)   dom 
Dative (indirect object)        domu 
Locative (place)         dome 
Instrumental (how) 
     domom 
If we want to use the word house in Russia as the subject of a sentence, we say dom. In the 
sentence That house belongs to Mary, the word house is dom. If we want to use it as a posses-
sive, we say doma, not dom; in the sentence The house’s trim needs painting, the word house 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
MORPHOLOGY 
is doma. This all sounds very complicated to speakers of English, but many languages have a 
similar system (Finnish has 14 cases, not six cases like Russian), and their speakers get along 
just fine. 
Grammatical gender 
Some languages also inflect for grammatical gender; in French, Italian, and Spanish, all 
nouns are either masculine or feminine; in German, they are masculine, feminine, or neuter. 
Many of these languages inflect the article (a or the) to indicate that the noun is feminine or 
masculine or neuter. In Italian, both articles and adjectives must agree with the gender of the 
noun: la machina rossa (the red car) but il piatto rosso (the red plate). La is used with femi-
nine nouns, il with masculine ones; both mean the. Rossa means red for feminine nouns like 
machina; rosso means red for masculine nouns like piatto. (In Italian, adjectives generally 
follow the noun.) 
This concept of gender is not necessarily tied to the idea of male and female. For example, 
although moon is feminine in French (la lune), it is masculine in German (der Mond). Sun, 
which is masculine in French (le soleil), is feminine in German (die Sonne). And the German 
word for girl, das Mädchen, is actually neuter! 
German inflects articles to mark case, gender, and number. The word the in German has 
six different forms, each indicating a different case, gender, and number of the noun as shown 
in Table 3.3. 
TABLE 3.3 German articles 
Masculine 
Feminine 
Neuter 
Nominative singular 
der 
die 
das 
Accusative singular 
den 
die 
das 
Genitive singular 
des 
der 
des 
Dative singular 
dem 
der 
dem 
In its plural form, the is die no matter the case or gender of the noun. 
The boy saw the dog in German is Der Knabe sah den Hund. If you changed the word order 
of this sentence in English, you’d get a different meaning: The dog saw the boy. In German, 
however, you can change the word order and it means the same thing: Den Hund saw der 
Knabe also means the boy saw the dog. This more flexible word order is possible because the 
inflected articles, der and den, tell us which word is the subject and which word is the object 
no matter where in the sentence they occur. Languages with elaborate inflectional systems 
for nouns or articles like German and Russian allow a more flexible word order than English. 
In Modern English, the only area where we have kept this type of inflection is in our pro-
noun system. I, me, and my all refer to the same thing; they differ in form to indicate differ-
ences in grammatical meaning: I indicates the subject, my indicates possessive, me indicates 
object (either direct or indirect). That is, English pronouns, except you, are inflected for case, 
just like house is in Russian. And although in English we do not inflect first or second person 
for gender, we do indicate gender in the third person: he, she, or it. Table 3.4 summarizes our 
pronoun system. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MORPHOLOGY 
43 
TABLE 3.4 English pronoun system 
First person 
Third person 
Masc 
Fem 
Neuter 
Singular 
Subject 
I 
he 
she 
it 
Possessive 
my 
his 
her 
its 
Object 
me 
him 
her 
it 
Plural 
Subject 
we 
they 
Possessive 
our 
their 
Object 
us 
them 
Linguistics in your world: He, she, and/or they 
Pronouns have become a political issue in recent years, especially the lack of a non-gendered 
third-person singular pronoun. Other languages have one: Mandarin Chinese, Farsi, and 
Finish all use the same pronoun to refer to a man or a woman. Increasingly, English speakers 
have recognized the need for a third-person singular personal pronoun that does not assume 
there are only two genders and that allows individuals to identify as gender nonbinary or 
gender fluid. 
Various solutions to this problem have been offered over the years, some centuries old: ze, 
s/he, thon, ve, heer, e, and ey, to name a few. Until recently, none has caught on. Today, they 
is used by many individuals, institutions, and media to respect those with nonbinary gender 
identities who wish not to be designated as either male or female. The New York Times now 
uses they for those who do not wish to be a he or she, without editorial comment or explana-
tion; many people now regularly introduce themselves with not only their name but their 
pronoun of choice; you may have been asked for your pronoun of choice when introducing 
yourself at the beginning of a class. 
Using they to refer to an individual is not new; English speakers have long used it 
when the gender of an individual is not known or is not relevant, even if the antecedent 
is singular. Everyone is technically singular, even though it has a plural meaning, so 
according to grammar books, it should take a singular pronoun, which again, according 
to those books, should be he or he or she. In everyday usage, though, speakers have long 
used they: Everyone should wear their best clothes. And if we don’t know the gender of 
a person, we would use they: Someone called but they didn’t leave their name. What is 
new now is its use for specific, known individuals. Everyone has their secrets has long 
been common, their referring to a plural sense of everyone. What is new is using their 
in sentences like the following: Jan has their secrets, where their refers to a known indi-
vidual, Jan. 
This use of they has met resistance. Sticklers complain that if we use they for both multiple 
people and one person, it will be confusing. Perhaps, but there are lots of possibly confusing 
things in English and every language (Does bank mean a financial institution or the edge of a 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
MORPHOLOGY 
river?) and people somehow figure it out. Others object to this use by claiming it is not gram-
matically or biologically correct; both arguments are bogus. Biologists tell us that there are 
individuals who exhibit both male and female sexual characteristics, and linguists tell us that 
what is considered grammatically correct changes over time. 
English is not the only language changing in this way. Swedish and Hebrew are both going 
through changes. Swedish has a gendered pronoun system like that of English: for an indi-
vidual, han (he) or hon (she) are used, den or det for it. In the last 20 years, it has become com-
mon to use a new word, hen, borrowed from Finnish, to refer to a person without indicating 
any gender. Hen, then, takes the place of both han (he) and hon (she). Although still a matter 
of debate (the Swedish Parliament ruled it should not be used in official documents but can be 
used by individual members of Parliament), hen seems to be catching on, becoming increas-
ingly common in newspapers, journals, and on the street. In Hebrew, there are similar efforts 
to change the pronoun system. Because there are no gender-neutral pronouns in Hebrew, the 
masculine plural form is used when referring to a mixed gender group. Many want to change 
that and use both the masculine and feminine forms. Such a change is not as simple as it might 
seem; it would require changes to adjectives and verbs as well as to pronouns and might even 
require new Hebrew letters. 
MORPHOLOGY IN LANGUAGES OTHER THAN ENGLISH 
Other languages often do morphology quite differently from English. It might seem natural 
to English speakers that plural and past tense morphemes, for example, come at the end of 
the word, or that prepositions come before a noun. To speakers of other languages, such rules 
would not seem natural at all, but decidedly odd. 
Turkish illustrates how languages differ in their morphology. Like English, Turkish indi-
cates plurality in nouns through suffixes, not with an {s} but with {lar} or {ler}, two allo-
morphs whose distribution is dependent on the vowel in the root. Mum (candle) becomes 
mumlar in the plural, and ip (thread) becomes ipler in the plural. Other languages indicate 
plural not with a suffix but a prefix: Isthmus Zapotec, spoken in Mexico, uses the prefix {ka} 
to do so. 
In English, location is often indicated with prepositions: in the house, to the house, at the 
house. In Turkish, the same meanings are indicated with suffixes attached to the noun, as 
shown in the following list: 
house   
   ev 
in the house  
   evde 
from the house    evden 
to the house  
   eve 
Reduplication, a process uncommon in English, is used in Turkish to intensify adverbs: iji is 
well; iji iji is very well; gyzel is beautifully; gyzel gyzel is very beautifully. And Turkish has 
no need for some words we find necessary in English. Turkish, like Russian, has no articles: 
no a, an, or the. 
In sign languages, although words have no sound, they are made up of the same types of 
morphemes as are spoken languages: roots, stems, bound morphemes, affixes, and derivational 
and inflectional morphemes. Instead of being sounds or combination of sounds added to a root, 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
unworthy (adjective) 
un (prefx) + worthy (adjective, stem) 
worth (noun, root) + y (suffx) 
 
MORPHOLOGY 
45 
affixes in sign languages are particular gestures that precede or follow a root morpheme gesture, 
for example, particular movements of the hands toward or away from the signer. 
HIERARCHICAL STRUCTURE IN WORDS 
When we distinguish prefixes from suffixes, we are analyzing the linear structure of a word, 
the types of morphemes and the sequence in which they occur in a word—which comes first, 
second, etc. Root morphemes can occur anywhere in a word, but affixes cannot. The mor-
phemes in a word like disagreeable cannot be put in a different linear order: agree + dis + 
able does not work. The linear structure rules of English do not allow it. 
Words also have a hierarchical structure. That is, some units contain other units. We can 
see this hierarchical structure by analyzing the structure of unworthy. If we analyze its linear 
structure, we see that unworthy is made up of the prefix {un}, followed by a root morpheme, 
the noun worth, and the suffix {y}. To do a hierarchical structural analysis, we’d need to 
ask if we can identify units within units here. Is unworthy composed of unworth + y or of un 
+ worthy? 
A hierarchical structural analysis might go something like this. The root of unworthy is 
worth, a noun, which is the root to which the suffix {y} attaches, resulting in the adjective 
worthy. Worthy then functions as the stem to which the prefix {un} attaches, resulting in 
another adjective, unworthy. The hierarchical structure of unworthy must be {un} added to 
worthy, not {y} added to unworth not only because unworth is not a word but more impor-
tantly because {un} cannot be added to nouns, only to adjectives or verbs. 
Linguists often use what are called tree diagrams to illustrate the hierarchical structure of 
a word. A tree diagram of unworthy is shown in Figure 3.2. 
FIGURE 3.2  Tree diagram for unworthy 
Reading from the bottom up the diagram illustrates the following: 
·  
The suffix {y} attaches to the root worth to derive the word worthy, changing the noun 
to an adjective. 
·  
The prefix {un} then attaches to the stem worthy to derive the word unworthy, still an 
adjective. 
It is important in these diagrams to indicate the lexical category of each word. Because certain 
affixes attach only to certain lexical categories, labeling the lexical category can help us deter-
mine the hierarchical structure of a word. 
We analyzed the linear structure of dehumidify earlier, labeling each morpheme as prefix, 
root, and suffix. An analysis of the hierarchical structure is shown in Figure 3.3. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
MORPHOLOGY 
dehumidify (verb) 
de (prefx) + humidify (verb, stem) 
humid (adjective, root) + ify (suffx) 
FIGURE 3.3 Tree diagram for dehumidify 
In this analysis, the fact that {de} attaches to verbs, not adjectives, is important. We can’t 
say dehumid, for example. Reading from the bottom up the diagram illustrates the following: 
· 
The suffix {ify} attaches to the root humid to derive the word humidify, changing the 
adjective to a verb. 
· 
The prefix {de} then attaches to the stem humidify to derive the word dehumidify, still a verb. 
Let’s take another example: impoliteness, made up of three morphemes: the root polite and two 
derivational morphemes, {im} and {ness}. Since both impolite and politeness are words, we 
need to pay attention to lexical categories and the affixes that can attach to them. We know that 
{im} attaches to adjectives and the resulting word is still an adjective. When {ness} attaches to 
polite, however, it changes the adjective into a noun. So {im} must attach to polite, not polite-
ness. The suffix {ness} can attach to impolite because {ness} attaches to adjectives and makes 
them nouns. Figure 3.4 illustrates this structure: 
impoliteness (noun) 
impolite (adjective, stem) + ness (sufx) 
im (prefx) + polite (adjective, root) 
FIGURE 3.4 Tree diagram for impoliteness 
Reading from the bottom up the diagram illustrates the following: 
· 
The prefix {im} attaches to the root adjective polite to derive the word impolite, still an 
adjective. 
· 
The suffix {ness} attaches to the stem impolite to derive the word impoliteness, changing 
the adjective into a noun. 
Multi-morphemic words, then, like unworthy, dehumidify, or impoliteness, are not randomly 
put together; there is a linear order to them and a hierarchical order, a hierarchical structure 
in which one part contains other parts. Tree diagrams help us see that structure, as we will see 
again in Chapter 6 on syntax. 
L1 ACQUISITION IN FOCUS: SHE COMED, THOSE MOUSES 
You’ve probably heard children say things like goed or foots and wondered why they make such 
mistakes. Turns out, those utterances are not mistakes at all, but rather well-formed utterances for 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MORPHOLOGY 
47 
that child’s internal grammar. It’s just that her grammar has not yet developed to match the adult 
grammar of speakers of her language. How does she get to those utterances and how does she get 
from there to the adult grammar? We’ll discuss part of that process here, focusing on how children 
learn the morphology of their language. What they learn, of course, varies as the languages they 
learn vary. The processes by which they acquire their language are, however, remarkably similar. 
When we say children acquire the morphology of their language, what does that mean? 
Children learn first that words have meaning, an incredible feat in itself. They also learn that 
slight changes in the way those words are said or signed change that meaning. They learn that 
words are made up of parts that have meaning in themselves; that those parts (morphemes) 
are put together in a certain order; and that more than one can occur in a word. That’s a lot to 
learn before they go to school. 
Babies generally say their first words at around the age of one, when children begin 
consistently using a particular string of sounds or a sign to mean a particular thing. The 
meaning connected to these first words does not always match the adult meaning. As noted 
in Chapter 2, during the one-word stage (9–18 months), children use one word to mean 
what an adult would say in an entire sentence, up to mean Pick me up, for example. It’s quite 
amazing that they can do this, given that adult speech does not usually consist of one word 
or one sign, even to small babies. Babies isolate, somehow, one word they need from that 
string of sounds or signs the adult aims at them. An adult might say to a child, Look at the 
pretty bunny, and the child might well repeat just bunny. These first words tend to be nouns 
or verbs, the words that convey the most meaning. 
When they first learn words, children also often overgeneralize, using doggie, for exam-
ple, for all four-legged creatures or ball for all round objects. This over-extension of meaning 
tends to disappear as children learn more words and narrow the meaning of words to more 
closely approximate adult meaning. 
In acquiring their language, children form unconscious hypotheses about how the morphol-
ogy or other aspects of language work. Let’s look at that goed mentioned earlier. Adults do not 
use that word; it’s not part of any dialect of English. Yet English-speaking children produce it 
regularly, just as they produce such oddities as hitted, eated, or comed. It seems clear they are 
applying a morphological rule they figured out—add the {ed} morpheme to the ends of verbs 
to make them past tense. The same thing happens with the plural morpheme {s}. They learn the 
rule: apply it to the ends of nouns to make the plural. At this stage, they haven’t yet figured out 
the exceptions, so they produce words like foots or mouses. Eventually, they figure it all out. 
There is a process that children go through in figuring it all out. For English-speaking 
children, for example, while learning the past tense {ed}, they usually first learn the past 
tense form of individual words like came or saw, storing them as separate units. At this stage, 
children don’t seem to have learned the rule to add {ed}. Once they learn that rule, they apply 
it consistently across the board, including to those irregular verbs they used to say “correctly,” 
producing forms like comed instead of came. Soon they figure out the entire system, the rules 
and the exceptions, as their internal grammar approximates the adult grammar. Utterances 
like comed and goed then disappear from their speech. 
Children learning languages other than English must similarly learn the morphology of 
their language. By the age of two, children learning Italian have usually acquired the rules for 
grammatical gender, correctly using la for feminine nouns and il for masculine ones. (Both la 
and il correspond to the in English.) And they have mastered the system of inflectional mor-
phemes for present tense verbs, a system more complex than ours. In English, we need only 

 
  
 
 
 
 
48 
MORPHOLOGY 
learn to add {s} to the ends of verbs for he/she/it; in Italian, children learn to add {o} for I; {i} 
for you (singular), {iamo} for we, and more. So they learn that I speak is io parlo, you speak 
is tu parli, we speak is noi parliamo. 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
· 
The lexicon of a language changes over time, as do the meanings of words. 
· 
Languages make use of word formation processes to add new words to their lexicon. 
· 
Words have structure as well as histories. They are made up of smaller parts that have 
meaning (morphemes). 
· 
Morphemes vary by function: roots and affixes, free or bound, inflectional or derivational. 
· 
English uses many derivational morphemes but only eight inflectional morphemes. 
· 
The English pronoun system retains inflection for gender (he/she/it), a fact that has led 
to efforts to change that system to be non-gendered. 
· 
Words have both a linear and a hierarchical structure. Hierarchical structures are often 
illustrated with tree diagrams. 
· 
Children learn early that words have meaning, that they are made up of morphemes, and 
that there are rules for combining morphemes. 
KEY TERMS 
lexical categories (aka parts of speech) 
open classes, closed classes 
word formation processes 
compounding 
borrowing 
backformation 
blending 
acronym 
abbreviation 
clipping 
coining 
semantic shift 
functional shift/conversion 
derivation 
eponym 
reduplication 
lexicalization 
morpheme 
derivational morpheme 
inflectional morpheme 
free morphemes 
bound morphemes 
affix 
prefix 
suffix 
infix 
circumfix 
root and stem 
inflection 
diachronic perspective 
synchronic perspective 
productive 
etymological fallacy 
hierarchical structure 
linear structure 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MORPHOLOGY 
49 
EXPLORATIONS 
Exploration 1: Word formation processes 
Using an etymological or other good dictionary, find the origins of the following words and 
identify the word formation process involved (there may be more than one). 
snafu 
hangnail 
netiquette 
selfie-stick 
giddy 
apps 
emoji 
gerrymander 
demo 
televise 
boycott 
LOL 
lynch 
mall 
howdy 
thug 
Zoom 
NIMBY 
Exploration 2: Morphemic analysis 
Divide the following words into their morphemes, identifying the type of morpheme for 
each: bound or free, derivational or inflectional, root or affix. 
One note: Don’t get caught up in spelling. The affix {ify}, for example, changes its spell-
ing to {ifi} when an {er} is attached. It’s still the same morpheme, just a variant in spelling. 
enlargements 
predetermined 
telecommute 
improbably 
fingered 
teacher’s 
grandmotherly 
forewarned 
smaller 
nonrefundable 
deactivation 
textbooks 
dishonesty 
reforming 
disinclined 
message 
expansiveness 
giraffe 
unpredictability untidiest 
Exploration 3: Borrowing in everyday language 
1. 
Make a list of some place names in your area, names of streets, towns, cities, states, 
neighborhoods, rivers, lakes, etc. Which ones are eponyms? Which are borrowed? From 
what languages? Why these languages? 
2. 
Many of our names for foods are borrowed. Investigate the origin of the names of some 
of your favorite foods. Are any borrowed? From what languages? 
3. 
Do you think the borrowing you found in 2 differs from the borrowing you identified in 1? 
How? 
Exploration 4: Identifying hierarchical structure 
Create a tree diagram for the following words that illustrates their hierarchical structure. 
Label the root, stem, affixes, and lexical categories for each level of the tree. You might want 
to first identify the morphemes as root, stem, or bound morpheme, then determine which 
affixes attach to which lexical categories. 
Figure 3.5 offers an example. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
MORPHOLOGY 
decomposition (noun) 
decompose (verb, stem) + tion (sufx) 
de (prefx) + compose (verb, root) 
FIGURE 3.5 Tree diagram for decomposition 
Words to diagram: 
friendliness 
unhelpful 
priorities 
reorganization 
retouchable 
nonrefundable 
inexpensive 
dispassionate 
Exploration 5: Unforgivable curses, unbreakable vows 
In English, we have a very productive prefix, [un], usually glossed as not. So untrue means 
not true. It has another meaning too, however: reversing an action. Untie means to reverse 
the action of tying. English, then, has two separate {un} morphemes; both are pronounced the 
same but each means something distinct. One attaches to adjectives and means not (unhappy, 
unemotional, unlikely); the other attaches to verbs and means reversal of the action (unwrap, 
uncover, unpack). 
a) 
Think about the word unlockable. It has two possible meanings. Identify the two mean-
ings and specify which {un} morpheme is involved in each meaning. Then draw a tree 
diagram for each meaning. 
b) Several years ago, the makers of 7UP created a marketing campaign that heralded that 
drink as the “un-cola.” Although perhaps successful as an ad campaign strategy (I still 
remember it), un-cola is definitely odd in English. Using what you know about the 
prefix {un}, why is it so odd? 
c) 
Recently, a new term has entered the English language, unfriend, as in to unfriend some-
one on Facebook. We noted that {un} attaches to adjectives or verbs but not nouns. Is this 
an example of an exception to that rule or is something else going on? (Hint: Think about 
what friend means here.) 
Exploration 6: Non-gendered pronouns 
Discussion prompt: Some people decry the use of they as a non-gendered pronoun to replace 
or supplement he or she, saying that it is confusing, ugly, ungrammatical, or just plain wrong. 
How would you respond to these people? Do you use this pronoun? Do others around you? 
Why or why not? 
Exploration 7: Grammatical gender 
Do you know any language that marks nouns for grammatical gender (French, Italian, German, 
Spanish, Polish, for example)? Describe how gender is marked in this language: What inflec-
tional morphemes are used? What lexical categories carry these inflections? Give examples. 

   
 
MORPHOLOGY 
51 
Exploration 8: Just wiki it 
Wikipedia has become a useful tool for many people today. Investigate the origins of its 
name. What does wiki mean? Where does it come from? How is it used now? What lexical 
categories can it be? Is it part of any compound words? 
Exploration 9: Running it 
In English, we have three {ing} morphemes, each meaning something different, as in these 
three phrases: I was running; the running of the bulls in Pamploma; the running waters were 
loud. How would you describe each morpheme: derivational or inflectional? What lexical 
categories can it attach to? What lexical categories does it derive through that attachment? 
FURTHER READING 
Baron, D. (2020). What’s your pronoun? Beyond he and she. Liveright Publishing Co. 
Bauer, L. (2003). Introducing linguistic morphology (2nd ed.). Edinburgh University Press. 
Accessible introduction with examples from many languages. 
Bloomfield, L. (1993). Language. The University of Chicago Press. Classic in the field; good 
discussion of what makes a word a word. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4 
Phonetics 
The sounds of English 
First glance 
International Phonetics Alphabet (IPA): 
• 
Voice 
• Consonants: place and manner of 
articulation 
• Vowels 
• Natural classes 
Accents 
Prosody 
What’s in a name? 
Local acts of identity 
Sign language phonetics 
Phonetics in other languages 
Acquiring language sounds 
INTRODUCTION 
Part of knowing any spoken language is knowing its sounds and how they are put together. We 
will begin here with the sound units of language, examining the meaningfully distinct sounds 
of English. In the next chapter on phonology, we will use that knowledge to examine how the 
sound system in English is structured. 
To do so, we will need something besides letters to indicate sounds, since letters in 
English are poor at representing sounds. For one thing, one letter can represent more than 
one sound. How do you pronounce the letter a, for example? It depends; in the word pat it is 
pronounced differently than in father or late. The letter t can also be pronounced in several 
different ways—as in pretty, late, or nation. To make the whole thing even worse, one sound 
can be spelled in a variety of ways; the ee sound can be spelled ee (seed) or ea (lead) or ey 
(key), among other ways. And some letter combinations hide sound differences. Although 
we spell them the same, there are really two th sounds in English, the one in think and the 
one in then. 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-4 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHONETICS 
53 
INTERNATIONAL PHONETIC ALPHABET 
Because there is simply too much inconsistency in our alphabet, we will use a slightly modi-
fied version of the International Phonetic Alphabet or IPA, an alphabet designed by linguists 
to designate a unique symbol for every sound in every language. (You can find and download 
the full IPA at internationalphoneticalphabet.org.) Here we will be concentrating on English, 
learning to use those symbols to represent the minimally distinct sounds of English. Other 
symbols are necessary to represent sounds in other languages, for many of the sounds in other 
languages differ from similar sounds in English or do not exist in English. We will learn what 
aspects of the vocal tract are involved in producing those sounds; that is, we’ll be doing pho-
netics, the study of sounds in human speech. Phonetics includes both acoustic phonetics, the 
study of the physical properties of speech as sound waves, and articulatory phonetics, which 
is our focus in this chapter—the study of how speech sounds are produced. 
At some level, every language sound uttered is distinct from every other sound. The [p] 
sound in pin is slightly different from the [p] sound in spin. My [p] sound is slightly different 
from yours. Somehow, though, as English speakers, we hear all of the [p] sounds as the same; 
whether we hear your [p] or my [p], it’s still a [p], not a [b] or a [d]. That is, [p] is meaningfully 
distinct from [b] or [d]. One way to tell if sounds are meaningfully distinct is to see if there 
are minimal pairs, two words that differ in only one sound. Minimal pairs for [p] and [b] are 
easy to find: pit/bit, pain/bane, tap/tab. Similarly, we can find them for [p] and [d] or [b] and 
[d] or for all three: tap/tad/tap or bad/dad/pad. When linguists say sounds are meaningfully 
distinct, this is what they mean: substitution of one sound for the other creates a different word 
in minimal pairs. Those meaningfully distinct sounds are usually represented in slashes //, but 
for now, we’ll use brackets [] around the IPA symbols as we learn to use them and to classify 
those sounds. We’ll discuss meaningfully distinct sounds and those slashes more in Chapter 5. 
There are anywhere between 36 and 40 of these meaningfully distinct sounds in English, 
depending upon the variety. The variety we use here is what is known as General American. 
Generally associated with mass media and educated speech, General American is really a 
variety of accents spoken in several areas across the United States, most notably the Midwest 
and West. It is usually not associated with local, class, or ethnic differences, but regional, 
class, and ethnic variations do exist within General American; the usage described here may 
or may not match yours. Some of you, for example, will distinguish the vowel sound in cot 
from that in caught, others will not. Some pronunciations that are common across General 
American include the use of an alveolar flap (ladder and latter will sound the same) and what 
is called full rhoticity, pronouncing the [r] sound whether it precedes a vowel or not. 
The symbols we will use to represent sounds are not the ones you may have used when 
learning to read, nor are they always the ones used in the dictionary. Some will be familiar 
to you because they look like letters; some will be totally new. The explorations at the end of 
the chapter are meant to help you learn the IPA; you’ll need that knowledge in Chapter 5. As 
you learn these symbols, it helps to remember we are dealing with sounds, not letters, and to 
remember our purpose is descriptive: to use the symbols to represent our normal pronuncia-
tion, not the pronunciation we think we should have. 
As we classify sounds, it is useful to know what the vocal tract, the parts of the throat and 
mouth used in speech, looks like. Figure 4.1 shows the relevant parts of the vocal tract. 
Language sounds are produced by expelling air through the vocal tract as we exhale. At each 
place along this tract, we can change the air flow slightly by changing the position of the vocal 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54
  PHONETICS 
vocal cords 
larynx 
nasal 
cavity 
tongue 
lips 
alveolar 
ridge 
hard 
palate 
velum 
(soft palate) 
uvula 
pharynx 
FIGURE 4.1 Diagram of human vocal tract 
cords, the tongue, the lips, or other parts of the vocal tract, thereby producing different language 
sounds. As we expel the air from the lungs, it moves up to the larynx, an important place for pro-
ducing different sounds. Here the vocal cords, which are inside the larynx, can be lax or taut, each 
way producing a different sort of sound, voiced or voiceless as described later. As the air moves 
up out of the larynx past the pharynx, the velum, hard palate, alveolar ridge, teeth, and lips, the 
movement of the tongue toward or away from those areas produces different sounds. We don’t do 
this consciously; in fact, it is hard to do so consciously. But whenever we speak, we subtly change 
the position of parts of the vocal tract and thereby change the sound that emerges. Because of this, 
we can classify sounds according to where and how the vocal tract is being manipulated. 
CLASSIFYING LANGUAGE SOUNDS 
Consonants and vowels 
Let’s start with two basic classes of language sounds, classes you are already aware of: conso-
nants and vowels. You probably learned that a, e, i, o, u, and sometimes y are vowels; the rest 
are consonants. You probably did not learn what constitutes vowels and consonants. Briefly, 
the difference between consonants and vowels is a matter of how much the air is constricted 

   
 
 
PHONETICS 
55 
in the vocal tract when the sound is produced. With consonants, there is a constriction of the 
air flow; as air is pushed out through the vocal cords, throat, nose, and/or mouth, we constrict 
those areas so that there is friction, varying the consonant sound by changing the shape and 
place of that constriction. With vowels, there is little or no constriction of the air flow. Try 
saying the [s] sound and then the [a] or ah sound (as in ma). You should be able to feel some 
constriction of air with [s] and a relatively free flow of air with [a]. 
In addition to this large-scale distinction of consonants and vowels, we can classify sounds 
in terms of what are known as articulatory properties, where in the mouth they are produced 
(place) and how they are produced (manner). We will examine these properties as we intro-
duce the IPA symbols for each sound, starting with what is known as voice, a key property in 
all human speech. 
Voice 
If you look at Figure 4.1, you’ll notice the larynx midway down the throat. The larynx con-
tains the vocal cords, which are key to speech production. There are two positions for the 
vocal cords, one in which the folds of the vocal cords vibrate and one in which they do not. 
When we force air through a narrow opening in the vocal cords, thus vibrating the cords, we 
get voiced sounds. You can feel this vibration if you place the tips of your first two fingers on 
the larynx, the lump on the front of your throat. While holding your fingertips there, say the 
[s] sound, the initial sound in sing. Hold it for a while. Then say the [z] sound, the initial sound 
in zing. You should feel a vibration with [z] but not [s]. That’s because [z] is voiced and [s] is 
unvoiced or voiceless. This trick works with many consonants to determine if they are voiced 
or unvoiced. Voiced sounds are those that are produced when the vocal cords are vibrating; 
unvoiced sounds are those that are produced when the cords are not vibrating. This basic 
sound distinction is important not only in English but in most other languages as well. 
All vowels are voiced in English, but not all consonants are, so it is especially important in 
learning consonants to pay attention to voicing. We will indicate the voicing of each conso-
nant as we introduce the symbols for them. 
Consonants 
We continue our classification scheme with consonants. In addition to being sorted into 
voiced and unvoiced, they can be classified by their place of articulation and their manner of 
articulation. Each consonant can be uniquely described by its voicing, its place of articulation, 
and its manner of articulation. 
Table 4.1 lists the meaningfully distinct consonant sounds in English, their IPA symbols, 
and words they are used in. We will describe each sound in more detail as we discuss the 
places and manner of articulation for English consonants. 
Places of articulation 
Each consonant is produced in a particular spot in your vocal tract, anywhere from the 
very front (the lips) to the very back (the pharynx). Languages can take advantage of all 
these places, but not all languages do so. In Arabic but not in English, for example, there are 

 
 
 
 
 
56
  PHONETICS 
TABLE 4.1 Consonant sounds 
Phonetic symbol 
Initial sound 
Medial sound 
Final sound 
[p] 
pun 
lipid 
shop 
[b] 
beet 
rabid 
tab 
[m] 
make 
mommy 
slim 
[f] 
five 
lifer 
tough 
[v] 
vine 
mover 
live 
[θ] 
thing 
ether 
bath 
[ð] 
this 
either 
bathe 
[t] 
take 
city 
cat 
[d] 
deal 
Rodney 
deed 
[n] 
know 
bunny 
man 
[s] 
sit 
sissy 
miss 
[z] 
zit 
fuzzy 
fizz 
[l] 
late 
silly 
tall 
[r] 
red 
sorry 
roar 
[ʃ] 
shun 
masher 
lash 
[ʒ] 
genre 
vision 
beige 
[tʃ] 
church 
teacher 
much 
[dʒ] 
judge 
major 
ledge 
[y] 
yes 
mayor 
[w] 
wink 
bower 
wow 
[k] 
cow 
flicker 
lick 
[g] 
gal 
baggy 
lag 
[ŋ] 
singer 
rang 
[h] 
who 
withhold 
pharyngeal sounds, those made at the pharynx. Here we will concentrate on the places of 
articulation used in English sounds. 
Bilabials [b] [p] [m] 
Sounds that are made with the upper and lower lips touching are called bilabials. In English 
we have three: [p], [b], and [m], the initial sounds in pie, buy, and my. Even though all three 
sounds are made in a similar place in the mouth, they are not identical sounds. The sounds 
[p] and [b] are very similar, but they differ in voice: [b] is a voiced bilabial; [p] is an unvoiced 
bilabial. The [m] sound is also a voiced bilabial. Bilabial sounds tend to be easy to identify 
because we can tell where our lips are as we say them. 
Labiodentals [v] [f] 
As you might have guessed from the name, labiodental sounds are those made with the top 
teeth (dental) touching the bottom lips (labio). The sounds [f] and [v] are labiodental sounds in 
English; [f] is unvoiced and [v] is voiced. So fine and vine both begin with labiodental sounds; 
and leave and leaf both end with them. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHONETICS 
57 
Interdentals [θ] [ð] 
Interdental sounds are made by placing the tip of the tongue between the upper and lower 
teeth. There are two interdental sounds in English, one voiced and one unvoiced, both of 
which are spelled with the letters th. The symbols we use to represent these sounds will most 
likely be new to you: [θ] is the unvoiced sound that can be heard in the initial sound of thigh 
and thin and the final sound of bath; [ð] is the voiced sound that occurs at the beginning of thy 
or then and the final sound in bathe. If you’re having difficulty differentiating the two sounds, 
try this trick. Say the sound and prolong it, without adding a vowel sound to it. If you can feel 
your lips vibrating while you do this, you are producing the voiced sound, [ð]. If they’re not 
vibrating, you’re producing the unvoiced sound, [θ]. 
Alveolars [t] [d] [s] [z] [n] [r] [l] 
Alveolar sounds are made by placing some part of the tongue on or close to the ridge behind 
the upper teeth, the alveolar ridge. If you take your tongue and move it from the back of your 
upper front teeth upward toward the roof of your mouth, you’ll feel a rough area close to your 
teeth. This is the alveolar ridge, which follows the line of teeth from one side of the mouth to 
the other. Try saying the [t] sound and you’ll notice that the tip of your tongue touches this 
ridge. Try saying the [s] sound and you’ll notice that it’s not the tip of the tongue that touches 
the alveolar ridge but the edges of it as it curls up slightly and touches the ridge above your 
back teeth. We have several alveolar sounds in English: [t] and [d]; [s] and [z]; [n]; [r]; [l]. 
There are two pairs here distinguished by voice: [t] and [d] are similar alveolar sounds, but [d] 
is voiced and [t] is unvoiced. Similarly, [s] and [z] are similar, but [s] is unvoiced, and [z] is voiced. 
The other alveolar sounds, [n], [r], and [l] are all voiced. The [n] sound is probably very 
familiar to you; it is the sound we hear at the beginning and end of noon. The [l] and [r] sounds 
vary greatly, depending on where in a word they occur. You can hear the [r] sound in words 
such as red, tiger, and career. In each word, it sounds slightly different. The same is true of 
the [l] sound: at the beginning of life, the middle of jolly, at the end of pill. This slight variation 
is common to all sounds, but it is especially noticeable with [r] and [l]. For ease of reference, 
the symbol we use for our [r] sound is different from that used in the IPA, where this symbol 
represents a slightly different sound. 
Alveopalatals [ʃ] [ʒ]; [tʃ] [dʒ]; [y] 
If you take your tongue and move it from the alveolar ridge back along the top of your mouth, 
you’ll notice that you hit a hard, smooth area. This area is known as the hard palate. Sounds 
made with part of the tongue pushed up close to the hard palate are known as alveopalatal 
sounds. We have five alveopalatal sounds in English: [ʃ] and [ʒ]; [tʃ] and [dʒ]; and [y]. Some 
of these symbols will be unfamiliar to you so let’s go through them one by one. 
The sounds [ʃ] and [ʒ] constitute a pair: [ʃ] is voiceless; [ʒ] is voiced. The [ʃ] represents 
the unvoiced sound heard at the beginning of shun, at the end of hush, and in the middle of 
mission. The [ʒ] represents the voiced sound heard at the end of beige and in the middle of 
pleasure and vision. In English, this [ʒ] sound rarely occurs at the beginning of a word. If 
you’re having difficulty distinguishing the two sounds, try saying mission (the middle sound 
here is unvoiced [ʃ]) and vision (the middle sound here is voiced [ʒ]) and see if that helps. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58
  PHONETICS 
The sounds [dʒ] and [tʃ] also constitute a pair differentiated by voice: [tʃ] is the voiceless 
sound heard at both the beginning and end of church, and [dʒ] is the voiced sound heard at 
both the beginning and end of judge. The voiced [y] sound is a common one in English; it can 
be heard at the beginning of you and yes and in the middle of mayor. 
Velars [k] and [g]; [ŋ] 
If you take your tongue further back from the hard palate, you’ll feel a soft spot. This area 
is known as the velum or soft palate; sounds made in this area are known as velar sounds. 
There are three velar sounds in English: [k] is the voiceless sound at the beginning and end of 
kick, and [g] is the voiced sound at the beginning and end of gag. It may be hard to feel your 
tongue rising toward the velum, but if you say [g] several times quickly, you can begin to feel 
movement there. 
The [ŋ] symbol may be new to you, but the sound is not; it occurs at the end of sing or dang. 
It represents the voiced sound we discussed in chapter one: the n-like sound you hear in the 
word finger. If you say fin and then finger, you can hear and feel the difference between the two 
n-like sounds. In fin, you pronounce an alveolar [n]; you can feel the tip of your tongue against 
the alveolar ridge as you say it. But with finger, the sound between the vowel and the [g] sound 
is not alveolar; it is velar. In fact, that sound is called a velar [n], symbolized by [ŋ]. This sound 
can be heard at the end of many words ending in -ing or -ang: thing, ring, sang. Note that there 
is no [g] sound at the end of these words despite the fact that they end with the letter g. 
Labio-velars [w] 
The voiced [w] sound, the sound heard at the beginning of wink, is a rather unusual one in 
terms of place. It is produced by raising the back of the tongue toward the velum and simulta-
neously rounding the lips. Hence the labio-velar label. 
Glottal sounds [h] [ʔ] 
The unvoiced [h] sound, the sound you produce at the beginning of hold or horse, is a glottal 
sound, that is, produced at the glottis, the space between the vocal cords in the larynx. This 
[h] sound is unusual in that it is made with an open glottis (so it is unvoiced), but neither the 
tongue nor other parts of the mouth manipulate the air flow. There is one other glottal sound, 
one that we usually don’t notice as a separate sound because it is not meaningfully distinct: 
the unvoiced glottal stop, represented by [ʔ]. This is the sound you produce in the middle of 
the expression uh-oh and in the middle of Latin for many speakers. It is made by briefly clos-
ing the glottis tightly and then releasing it. 
Table 4.2 summarizes places of articulation for English consonants. 
Manner of articulation 
In addition to classifying consonants by their place of articulation, we can classify them by 
their manner of articulation. Briefly, manner of articulation refers to the way sounds are 
produced rather than where they are produced. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHONETICS 
59 
TABLE 4.2 Places of articulation 
Voiceless 
Voiced 
Bilabials 
[p] 
[b] [m] 
Interdentals 
[θ] 
[ð] 
Alveolars 
[t] [s] 
[d] [z] [n] [r] [l] 
Alveopalatals 
[ʃ] [tʃ] 
[ʒ] [dʒ] [y] 
Velars 
[k] 
[g] [ŋ] 
Labio-velars 
[w] 
Glottals 
[h] [ʔ] 
Nasal sounds 
Nasals are sounds made by expelling some of the air out through both the nose and the mouth. 
With oral sounds the velum (see Figure 4.1) is in a raised position so that the air flows out 
through the mouth, not the nose. When making nasal sounds, we do not raise the velum, so 
some of the air flows out through the nose. We have only three nasals in English, all of which 
are voiced, each produced at a different place in the mouth: 
· 
[m] a bilabial nasal 
· 
[n] an alveolar nasal 
· 
[ŋ] a velar nasal. 
Oral sounds 
Nasals are the exception in terms of language sound production; most sounds in languages 
of the world are oral sounds, made by blocking the air from escaping through the nose by 
raising the velum. Aside from the three nasal sounds, all sounds in English are oral. The fol-
lowing types of sounds are all oral sounds. 
Stops, also called plosives, are made by blocking the air flow and then letting it all out at 
once in a sort of mini explosion of sound. We have seven in English: 
· 
[p] and [b] bilabial stops (the complete blockage of air is at the lips) 
· 
[t] and [d] alveolar stops (the complete blockage is at the alveolar ridge) 
· 
[k] and [g] velar stops (the complete blockage is at the velum) 
· 
[ʔ] a glottal stop (the complete blockage of air is at the glottis). 
If you put your hand in front of your mouth as you say one of these sounds, especially [p] or 
[b], you can feel the sudden expulsion of air. 
Flaps are similar to stops but not identical. We have only one in English, the voiced alveo-
lar flap, [ɾ], which is produced by briefly touching the tip of the tongue to the alveolar ridge 
behind the front teeth and then releasing the air, but with less plosive force than in a stop. It 
is heard in the middle of words like ladder and pretty in U.S. casual speech. It occurs mostly 
between vowels and is usually represented in spelling by dd or tt. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60
  PHONETICS 
The glottal stop and the flap are not meaningfully distinct sounds in English, as we will see 
in Chapter 5. I include them here as they occur often in many people’s speech. 
Fricatives differ from stops in that we obstruct most, but not all, of the air by constricting 
some area of the vocal tract and then releasing it slowly through the narrow opening created. 
This constriction produces a kind of turbulence (which can feel or sound like a hissing sound) 
as the air is released. We have nine fricatives in English: 
· 
[f] and [v] labiodental fricatives 
· 
[θ] and [ð] interdental fricatives 
· 
[s] and [z] alveolar fricatives 
· 
[ʃ] and [ʒ] alveopalatal fricatives 
· 
[h] a glottal fricative. 
One noticeable difference between fricatives and stops is that you can pronounce fricatives for 
a long time. Try saying [p] for a long time. It can’t be done. But try saying [s] or [v] for a long 
time; that can be done. 
Affricates are a combination of a stop and a fricative. They are made by closing off the air 
and then immediately releasing it in a gradual manner like the release in a fricative. We have 
only two affricates in English: [tʃ] and [dʒ], both alveopalatal: 
· 
[tʃ] unvoiced alveopalatal affricate 
· 
[dʒ] voiced alveopalatal affricate. 
Stops, fricatives, and affricates are obstruents; that is, they obstruct the air as it flows through 
the vocal tract. 
Liquids are produced by obstructing the air flow only slightly. They are called liquids 
because they seem to move around in the mouth. We have two in English, both voiced and 
both alveolar: [l] and [r]. How do we distinguish them, then? The [l] sound is a lateral fricative 
in which the air escapes around the edges of the tongue as the tip of the tongue touches the top 
of the mouth near the alveolar ridge. The [r] sound, known as a retroflex [r], is produced by 
either bunching the tongue upward toward the hard palate or by curling the tip of the tongue 
back into the mouth. 
Glides, [y] and [w], are also produced with little or no obstruction of the air flow. In 
English, they are always preceded or followed by a vowel. When making these sounds, our 
tongues move quickly either toward or away from the vowel sound, hence the name glides. In 
this way, glides are transitional sounds. They are sometimes called semi-vowels. 
Glides and liquids are approximants; that is, the air flow is constricted slightly, but not 
enough to produce the friction found with obstruents. 
Table 4.3 classifies English consonants by voice, place, and manner of articulation. 
Vowels 
When we turn our attention to vowels, the picture becomes less complicated in one sense and 
more complicated in another. Vowel classification is easier than consonant classification, but 
distinguishing vowel sounds and feeling them in your mouth can be tricky. Vowel sounds, 

   
 
 
 
PHONETICS 
61 
TABLE 4.3 Natural classes of consonants 
Manner of 
articulation 
Place of articulation 
Stops 
Voiced 
Unvoiced 
Fricatives 
Voiced 
Unvoiced 
Affricates 
Voiced 
Unvoiced 
Nasals 
Voiced 
Liquids 
Voiced lateral 
Voiced retroflex 
Glides 
Voiced 
Flap 
Voiced 
Bilabial 
[b] 
[p] 
[m] 
[w] 
Labio-dental 
[v] 
[f] 
Interdental 
[ð] 
[θ] 
Alveolar 
[d] 
[t] 
[z] 
[s] 
[n] 
[l] 
[r] 
[ɾ] 
Alveo-
palatal 
[ʒ] 
[ʃ] 
[dʒ] 
[tʃ] 
[y] 
Velar 
[g] 
[k] 
[ŋ] 
[w] 
Glottal 
[ʔ] 
[h] 
you remember, are different from consonants in that the air flow through the vocal tract has 
little or no constriction. When saying vowel sounds, then, it is harder to feel exactly where 
the tongue is. You can begin to feel the configuration of the vocal tract with vowels by saying 
the following pairs several times: heat–hoot. You may notice that the position of the tongue 
and the rounding of the lips vary between these two sounds. In heat, the tongue is high and 
in the front; in hoot, it is high but in the back. In heat, the lips are pulled back; in hoot, they 
are rounded. 
Most of us were taught that there are five vowels in English. There are, indeed, five letters 
we use for vowel sounds, but there are between 12 to 14 vowel sounds in English, depending 
on the variety. It is sometimes difficult to distinguish vowel sounds that are often spelled 
with the same letter. Think of the letter u, for example, as it is used in but and put. The vowel 
sounds are different, yet we use the same letter to represent both. For some vowels sounds, we 
do not have a separate letter to represent them. The vowel sound in bat is common in English, 
but we do not have one letter to represent it. 
There is also more variation in the pronunciation of any one vowel sound, both across 
groups and across individuals. My [a] sound, the sound in hot, for example, will be slightly 
different than yours, even if we come from the same region. If we come from different regions 
or speak different varieties, our vowel sounds may differ greatly. Those from the southern 
part of the United States have very different vowels than those from the Pacific Northwest. 
If we broaden our perspective to include Englishes spoken around the world, the variation is 
staggering. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62
  PHONETICS 
TABLE 4.4 Vowels 
Tongue height 
Part of tongue 
Front 
Central 
Back 
High 
[i] beet 
[u] boot 
[ɪ] bit 
[ʊ] book 
Mid 
[e] bait 
[ə] but 
[o] boat 
[ε] bet 
[ɔ] caught 
Low 
[æ] bat 
[a] cot 
Vowel sounds are classified by the position (front, central, back) and height (high, mid, 
low) of the tongue in their pronunciation. We do not need to indicate voice with vowels since 
all vowels are voiced. 
Table 4.4 lists the vowel sounds found in U.S. English, classified along these two axes, with 
examples of their use in words included to help you hear each sound. 
In addition to these vowel sounds, English has three diphthongs: [aw], [ay], and [ɔy]. 
Diphthongs are vowel sounds where the tongue moves from one place to another as the sound 
is made. If you say the vowel sound [a] followed by the [w] glide, you will get a feeling for the 
tongue movement in the diphthong [aw], the sound in lout or now. It helps to say it slowly to 
feel this movement. The diphthong [ay] is the vowel sound [a] followed by the [y] glide, the 
sound in buy or tide. And the diphthong [ɔy] is the vowel sound [ɔ] followed by the [y] glide, 
to yield the sound in boy or toil. 
Table 4.5 gives examples of each vowel sound used in different words. 
Learning the symbols for vowel sounds takes practice. As you do the exercises at the end of 
this chapter, remember that you may pronounce some words differently than your classmates 
or your instructor. As mentioned previously, some speakers of American English do not use 
TABLE 4.5 Vowel sounds 
Phonetic symbol 
Initial sound 
Medial sound 
Final sound 
[i] 
eel 
meat 
key 
[ɪ] 
it 
hit 
— 
[e] 
ate 
grade 
may 
[ε] 
elevate 
tell 
— 
[æ] 
at 
math 
— 
[ə] 
about 
cup 
sofa 
[u] 
ooze 
groove 
who 
[ʊ] 
— 
could 
— 
[o] 
open 
mowed 
hello 
[ɔ] 
awful 
taught 
— 
[a] 
operate 
lot 
ma 
[aw] 
out 
loud 
cow 
[ay] 
eye 
writer 
try 
[ɔy] 
oil 
droid 
toy 

   
 
 
 
PHONETICS 
63 
the vowel sound [ɔ]; instead, they use the [a] where others use [ɔ]. If you make a distinction 
between the vowel sounds in cot [a] and caught [ɔ], your speech does contain that sound. If 
you do not make that distinction, your vowels sound for both words will be [a]. 
The sounds [ʊ], [ə], and [a] are sometimes difficult to distinguish. If you find this is so, it 
helps to create a list of similar words in which the difference in the vowel sounds is easy to 
hear. Try these three: good [ʊ], gut [ə], and got [a]. Don’t let the letters or spelling mess you 
up; listen for the sounds and you’ll be able to hear the differences. 
NATURAL CLASSES 
Each category described earlier constitutes a natural class, a group of sounds that shares one 
or more articulatory features that are shared by no other sounds. Voiced sounds constitute one 
natural class, unvoiced sounds another, as do consonants and vowels. Bilabials form a natural 
class as do velars, alveolars, alveopalatals, and every place and every manner of articulation. 
Front vowels form a natural class, as do back vowels. We will discuss natural classes more in 
the next chapter when we examine phonological rules that are based on these classes. 
Natural classes allow us to uniquely describe each of the sounds we learned in this chap-
ter. That is, by listing the natural classes a sound belongs to, we describe it and it alone. So 
[b], for example, can be described as a voiced bilabial stop. Only one sound in English fits 
that description. Similarly, [s] can be uniquely described as an unvoiced alveolar fricative. 
Conversely, if I gave you a list of natural classes that a sound belongs to, you would be able to 
tell me what that sound is. Try it: What sound is a voiced labiodental fricative? Only [v] fits 
that description. 
ACCENTS 
We’ve been examining each sound in English as though it were always said the same by 
everyone. Of course, that’s not true. Different people pronounce sounds differently, as we all 
know. Some of this variation is individual. Much, however, is related to accent. 
What is an accent? In linguistics, there is no one meaning, but generally it refers to distinc-
tive pronunciations of a spoken variety, whether it be in pronunciation of individual sounds or 
in use of prosodic features such as stress or intonation. Remember, varieties are distinguished 
by differences in morphology, lexicon, semantics, and grammar as well as accent. 
Accents are often connected to region, in which case we call them regional accents. They 
are also connected to socioeconomic class (sociolects), ethnicity (ethnolects), religion, group 
affiliation, gender identity, sexual identity, or occupation. For non-native speakers, their 
accent may result from the influence of their first language, in which case we sometimes call 
it a foreign accent. It is not just non-native speakers who have an accent, though. We all do. 
Every native speaker of any language has an accent. 
Studies have found that a particular variant of just one sound can be enough to indicate 
social identities to listeners. So how do listeners make use of these perceptions? For the domi-
nant group, which generally believes itself not to have an accent, noticing a speaker’s accent 
can mean more than, Oh, they say that word differently. It can come with all sorts of ste-
reotypes about the group associated with that accent. French accents are seen in the United 
States as romantic, upper-class British ones are seen as sophisticated. Not all stereotypes are 

 
 
 
 
 
64
  PHONETICS 
positive, however. British accents can also be seen as snobbish. And the English spoken by 
Latinx speakers too often evokes unfair and untrue stereotypes of laziness or illegality. None 
of these stereotypes are true. 
In the preface, I wrote about living in London and being subtly encouraged to use the 
British pronunciation of [a] instead of [e] and [t] instead of an alveolar flap [ɾ] in tomato—an 
encouragement that felt more like pressure to be someone I’m not. As a speaker of white, 
middle-class North American English, that was a new and slightly unsettling experience for 
me. For many who speak a variety of English not considered standard, that sort of pressure to 
change their way of speaking happens often. 
For those groups who speak what the dominant group considers a nonstandard accent, 
stereotyping can do real harm. One example: James Kahakua, a native speaker of Hawaiian 
Creole, a variety of English spoken by many in Hawaii, was denied a job reading the weather 
reports on the radio station where he worked because his accent—the way he pronounced his 
English—was deemed unacceptable for radio, even though it was easily comprehensible to 
listeners. 
It is only some accents that are deemed unacceptable in official or formal situations and 
only some speakers who may be pressured to change that pronunciation in school or to get 
a professional job. The question for us here is—Whose accents are deemed unacceptable? 
Those who use the British pronunciation of dance rather than the American one? Probably 
not. In Chapter 2 we noted that when we discriminate against a particular variety of a lan-
guage, it is the people who speak it that we are really discriminating against. The same goes 
for accents. It is generally the people in power, the dominant group, whose accent is perceived 
as normal, correct, and unaccented. Any speech that varies from that is called accented. 
That perception is not true, but it sets up the expectation among many educators, politi-
cians, broadcasters, business leaders, and others that there is only one correct way to speak, 
and everyone should speak that way. When we ask someone to change how they speak, we 
are asking them to change who they are, implying that who they are is not good enough. 
Gloria Anzaldua (1987), a native speaker of English, describes being required, along with 
all the other Latinx students, to take speech classes in college because her accent in English 
was deemed unacceptable. The message was not just that her English needed to be something 
other than it was, but that she herself needed to be something other than she was, something 
other than Latinx. This type of unfair stereotyping based on accents can have serious conse-
quences: not being hired for a job, not being believed on the witness stand, not being allowed 
to rent an apartment because your accent indicated to others that you were African American 
or Latinx or Native American or a member of another marginalized group. 
PROSODY 
In addition to individual vowel and consonant sounds (known as segmentals), there are also 
prosodic or suprasegmental features that make up part of the sound system of a language: 
duration of individual sounds, pitch, stress, and intonation, all of which can be important to 
meaning. Prosody refers to how these features are used. 
Duration or length refers to how long a sound is held. Although it makes no difference to 
meaning in English, we do have systematic differences in vowel length. The [i] is held longer 
in bead than in beat, for example. Try it and see if you can hear it. In many other languages, 

   
 
 
PHONETICS 
65 
vowel length does make a difference to meaning: Japanese, Finnish, Czech, Arabic, and 
Vietnamese, among others. In Finnish, lengthening a vowel or consonant sound can produce 
a different word: [muta] means mud; if the [u] sound is held longer, as in [mu:ta], it means 
other. That colon indicates a long consonant or vowel sound. In Italian, lengthening a conso-
nant can change meaning: [kasa] means house; if the [s] sound is held longer, as in [kas:a], it 
means box. 
Pitch refers to how fast or slowly the vocal cords vibrate as we say a word: the faster the 
vibrations, the higher the pitch. Languages use differences in pitch in different ways. In tone 
languages, the pitch of a syllable, its tone, is used to distinguish between words. In English, 
which is not a tone language, we distinguish meaning by varying one sound: hit can become a 
different word, heat, by changing the vowel sound. In tone languages, changing the pitch of a 
word produces a different word, even when the individual sounds are the same. In Mandarin 
Chinese, which has four distinct tones, the word [ma] can have any of four different meanings 
depending on its tone: said with a high-level tone, it means mother; said with a high rising 
tone, it means hemp; said with a low falling tone, it means horse; said with a high falling tone, 
it means scold. In Mandarin, tones can vary through the course of a syllable, rising or falling 
along the way. These are contour tones. In other languages, such as Yoruba, spoken in West 
Africa, tones are constant, not rising or falling. Many, many languages around the world 
are tone languages: Thai, Vietnamese, Tibetan, Hmong, Cambodian, Yoruba, Zulu, Maasai, 
Somali, Cherokee, Hopi, Navajo, Apache, Mextec, and Ticuna, among others. 
Stress refers to the relative prominence of syllables in a word or phrase; stressed syllables 
are generally said louder, at a higher pitch and/or held longer. In English, stress is not predict-
able, but it is in some other languages. In Italian and Polish, it tends to fall on the penultimate 
syllable; in Hungarian and Latvian, on the first; and in French, on the final syllable. English 
uses stress patterns to distinguish some pairs of words: rebel as a noun has the stress on the 
first syllable, as a verb on the second; similarly, record has stress on the first syllable when it 
is a noun, but on the second when it is a verb. 
Intonation refers to changes in pitch across an utterance. Intonation patterns are used by 
all languages to mark differences in meaning; in conjunction with other prosodic features, 
they are used to express attitudes and emotions or to signal focus in an utterance. We can even 
see this in some one-word utterances in English: for example, great or finally spoken as an 
entire utterance. They can express either enthusiasm or sarcasm, depending on the intonation 
pattern. In English and many other languages, a rising intonation at the end of an utterance 
generally indicates a question; falling indicates a statement. 
PHONETICS IN YOUR WORLD: WHAT’S IN A NAME? 
A few years ago, when Sonia Sotomayor became a justice on the U.S. Supreme Court, some 
political media was aflutter with the question of how to pronounce her last name. She pro-
nounces it as it is pronounced in Spanish, with the stress on the last syllable. Many English 
speakers put the stress on the penultimate syllable. Seems a simple difference, one not impor-
tant to national politics, yes? Several commentators, however, objected to her pronunciation of 
her own name, calling it “unnatural in English” and “something we shouldn’t be giving into” 
(Rosa, 2019, p. 146), implying that a particular pronunciation was being forced on others and 
was somehow dangerous. The real problem for the commentators was not the pronunciation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66
  PHONETICS 
per se; it was what that pronunciation evoked in listeners: a Latina identity, someone suppos-
edly not quite American. Need we reiterate that such an assumption is based on ethnic and 
linguistic prejudice? 
PHONETICS IN YOUR WORLD: LOCAL ACTS OF IDENTITY 
Various studies have found that fine phonetic detail, detail we probably don’t notice con-
sciously, can be used to construct what might be called local social meanings. Eckert (1989), 
for example, in her study of jocks and burnouts in a U.S. high school, found that, among other 
phonetic variants, the pronunciation of the vowel sound [ay] was closely linked to the group the 
speaker belonged to: jocks pronounced it slightly differently than did burnouts. In other words, 
which variant a student used was closely linked to her social identity as a jock or a burnout. 
The social meaning of a particular variant of a sound is not universal, of course. What a 
variant means in terms of social identity will vary across groups and contexts. Different pro-
nunciations of [I], for example, have been found to predict membership in a particular gang 
among a group of Chicana/Mexicana high school girls (Mendoza-Denton, 2008). Pronouncing 
a variant of [æ] further to the front of the mouth has been shown to be associated with cheer-
fulness in Southern Michigan, doing so with [ay] is associated with toughness in Philadelphia 
(Hay & Drager, 2007). Speakers and listeners may not be consciously aware of these variants, 
but they nevertheless judge others based on small variation in how sounds are pronounced. 
SIGN LANGUAGE PHONETICS 
So far, we’ve been analyzing language sounds, how and where they’re made in the mouth. Signs 
used as part of sign languages can be similarly analyzed by where and how they are made. For 
American Sign Language (ASL), for instance, we can think of hand shape, movement, and loca-
tion as being three major articulatory features, all taking place within what is called the signing 
space, that area from head to waist and about forearm distance from the body. Hand shape refers 
to the configuration of the hand as it makes a sign: Are all five fingers spread? Does the thumb 
stick out? Is the hand in a fist? There are over 30 distinct handshapes in ASL. Movement refers 
to how the hand and arms move: Toward the body? Away from the body? Out and back again? 
Location refers to where the sign is produced: By the forehead? Shoulders? Chin? 
In English, a change in manner or place of articulation can result in a new word. In ASL, a 
change in shape, movement, or location similarly results in a new word. 
PHONETICS IN OTHER LANGUAGES 
As we’ve seen, English has around 36 meaningfully distinct sounds; some languages have 
fewer, some many more. The smallest number seems to be 11 in Rotokas, spoken in the 
Indo-Pacific; the largest around 150 in !Xoon, spoken in the Kalahari Desert (Crystal, 2010). 
Generally, languages contain more consonants than vowels. 
!Xoon is interesting in another aspect of its phonology; like several other Southern African 
languages, it uses several different clicks as consonants. Clicks are obstruents, though they 
are not produced by air being pushed through the vocal track. They are made by the lips or the 
tongue creating a suction sound. You can hear a dental click in English when we say tsk, tsk, 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHONETICS 
67 
or tut tut, made with the tongue against the top teeth. In !Xoon, there are five different clicks 
that are meaningfully distinct (substituting one for the other produces a different word): bila-
bial, dental, alveolar, palatal, and lateral. Each of these functions as do our consonants. Unlike 
our tsk, which is not used as a part of words, clicks are fully integrated into the sound system 
and function in combination with other sounds. You can hear clicks on YouTube in Miriam 
Makeba’s Qongqothwane (The Click Song) or How to pronounce Zulu clicks with Sakhile Dube. 
L1 ACQUISITION IN FOCUS: ACQUIRING 
LANGUAGE SOUNDS AND SIGNS 
Children learning a language need to figure out the sounds or signs of that language. And 
the first year of children’s lives is devoted to that task. Children are born with the ability and 
the propensity to pay attention to certain kinds of information, including language sounds or 
signs. Hearing children quickly learn to distinguish language sounds from other sounds in 
their environment, engine noises or animal sounds, for example. Children exposed to sign 
languages learn to distinguish language signs from other types of gesturing. During the bab-
bling stage, from about 6 to 12 months of age, children appear to be practicing or playing 
with sounds or signs. In other words, they babble—a lot. This stage of language acquisition 
appears to be similar the world over. Early in this stage, hearing children rehearse not just 
sounds of the language they hear around them but a wide range of sounds, many of which 
are not used in their language. Soon, however, hearing children begin to hone their learning 
to focus on sounds present in their language, eventually diminishing or losing their ability to 
discriminate among and produce sounds not in their language. 
Children first acquire those sounds that are common in languages in the world and only 
later acquire those that are rare but occur in their own language. Thus, an English-speaking 
child first learns [m, b, d, k] for they are common across languages, and only later masters [θ] 
and [ð], uncommon sounds. Natural class plays an important role in determining the order in 
which children acquire language sounds: nasals are acquired early, fricatives and affricates 
later; labials and velars are acquired early, alveolars and alveopalatals later. 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
• 
Part of knowing any spoken language is knowing its sounds and how they are put 
together. Since letters in English are poor representations of sounds, linguists use the 
International Phonetic Alphabet to represent language sounds. 
• 
Language sounds are produced by manipulating the vocal tract at various places and 
in various manners. Articulatory phonetics studies how these manipulations produce 
language sounds. 
• 
Sounds can be classified according to natural classes; among those important in all lan-
guages are vowels/consonants and voiced/voiceless sounds. 
• 
Consonants are further classified by the natural classes of voice, place of articulation, 
and manner of articulation. Each consonant can be uniquely described using voice, 
place, and manner. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68
  PHONETICS 
• 
Vowels are classified by tongue height and position: front or back and high or low. All 
vowels are voiced. 
• 
Prosody includes pitch, tone, duration, stress, and intonation, all of which are used by 
some languages to distinguish meaning. 
• 
Accents are distinctive pronunciations of a spoken variety; we all speak with an accent. 
• 
Our ways of speaking, including our accents, are emblematic of who we are, signaling 
our various social identities: our region of origin, socioeconomic class, race/ethnicity, 
gender identity, sexual identity, and other social factors. 
• 
Too often people are judged by their accents, often in negative and unwarranted ways. 
These judgments are, in essence, a form of linguistic prejudice. 
• 
Like sounds in spoken languages, signs in sign languages can be classified by their artic-
ulatory properties; for sign languages these are hand shape, movement, and location. 
• 
The number of distinct sounds that occur in languages varies greatly, some as low as 11, 
some as high as 150. Nearly all languages contain more consonants than vowels. 
• 
In the babbling stage, from 6 to 12 months, children first learn and practice a wide range 
of language sounds or signs, even those not used in their language; later they learn and 
practice the specific sounds or signs of their language. 
KEY TERMS 
voiced/unvoiced 
consonant/vowel 
front vowels 
CONSONANTS: PLACES OF ARTICULATION 
bilabial 
labiodental 
interdental 
alveolar 
back vowels 
diphthongs 
natural classes 
alveopalatal 
velar 
glottal 
labio-velar 
CONSONANTS: MANNERS OF ARTICULATION 
stop 
fricative 
affricate 
nasal 
liquid 
PROSODIC FEATURES 
tone/tone languages 
duration/length 
intonation 
glide 
flap 
obstruent 
approximant 
pitch 
stress 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHONETICS 
69 
EXPLORATIONS 
Exploration 1: Sounds not letters 
For each word in the list, identify the number of different sounds involved. Remember, the 
number of sounds may not match the number of letters. 
Examples: note (3 sounds); school (4 sounds) 
charge 
lamb 
league 
plant 
thing 
scarf 
light 
align 
borough 
ax 
cough 
schedule 
Exploration 2: Natural classes 
For each group of sounds listed, identify the feature that they all have in common. In other 
words, state the natural class each group comprises. 
Example: [g] [p] [t] [d] [k] [b] [ʔ] 
All are part of the natural class of stops. 
1. 
[t] [s] [ʃ] [k] [p] [f] [tʃ] [θ] 
2. 
[ɪ] [i] [ɛ] [e] [æ] 
3. 
[v] [ð] [z] [d] [b] [ʒ] [dʒ] [r] [l] [g] [m] [n] [ŋ] 
4. 
[k] [g] [ŋ] 
5. 
[m] [n] [ŋ] 
Transcription practice 
Answer keys for the transcription exercises are available online. It is usually best to say 
the word aloud as you would say it in casual conversation, then try to find the symbol that 
most accurately matches your pronunciation. Your pronunciation may differ from that in the 
answer key, which is based on my pronunciation. If you think your pronunciation is different 
from the answer key, ask in class. Remember to concentrate on sounds, not letters. 
TABLE 4.6 Transcribing consonant sounds 
Initial position 
Middle position 
Final position 
1. pad [p] 
1. added [d] 
1. ache [k] 
2. tad 
2. about 
2. these 
3. cad 
3. appear 
3. cough 
4. choose 
4. other 
4. ring 
5. job 
5. manor 
5. shove 
6. think 
6. catcher 
6. age 
7. this 
7. masher 
7. garage 
8. sure 
8. singing 
8. bash 
9. sir 
9. aging 
9. loathe 
10. use 
10. ladder 
10. beige 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70
  PHONETICS 
Exploration 3: Consonants 
Transcribe the consonant sounds in the words in Table 4.6. 
Exploration 4: Vowels 
Transcribe the vowel sounds in the following pairs of words. You do not need to do the entire 
word (consonants and vowels), but you may if you wish. 
1. sit 
set 
12. buck 
book 
2. sat 
seat 
13. bough 
buy 
3. let 
late 
14. met 
mutt 
4. mid 
mud 
15. key 
cow 
5. bait 
bat 
16. cub 
cab 
6. cap 
cop 
17. gist 
just 
7. hut 
hot 
18. said 
sod 
8. hot 
height 
19. gnaw 
noise 
9. who’d 
hood 
20. how 
hoe 
10. load 
lewd 
21. both 
bother 
11. took 
tuck 
22. font 
front 
Exploration 5: More vowels 
Transcribe the vowel sounds in the following sets of words. 
1. 
luck 
luke 
lack 
lick 
look 
leak 
lock 
like 
lake 
2. 
fell 
fool 
foil 
feel 
full 
fill 
fail 
fall 
foul 
file 
fallow 
Exploration 6: Whole words 
Transcribe each of the words as you would say them in casual speech. Do not be misled by 
orthography; listen for sounds not letters. 
1. meat 
11. flood 
21. plied 
2. great 
12. game 
22. grouch 
3. they 
13. sow 
23. cough 
4. fit 
14. moon 
24. through 
5. whale 
15. voice 
25. speech 
6. soup 
16. size 
7. do 
17. got 
8. don’t 
18. hat 
9. tough 
19. through 
10. ploy 
20. though 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHONETICS 
71 
Exploration 7: Transcription practice 
Transcribe each of the words in the list as you would say them in casual speech. Do not be 
misled by orthography; listen for sounds not letters. 
1. change 
8. ache 
15. laboratory 
2. ouch 
9. okay 
16. freeze 
3. tongue 
10. penguin 
17. face 
4. muse 
11. monkey 
18. cringe 
5. stood 
12. language 
19. played 
6. doubt 
13. chopped 
20. crawled 
7. rot 
14. lies 
Exploration 8: Differing pronunciations 
Fill in the blank with the correct phonetic transcription of a word that is spelled in one way 
but pronounced in two different ways. 
Example: The Olympic crew had a 
[raw]  about the correct way to 
[ro]
 (row) 
1. The dump was so full it had to ___________ any more ______________. (refuse) 
2. If she wants to increase her ______ in the marathon, she’ll have to get the ______out. (lead) 
3. After her illness, they discovered her insurance was ________ for the __________. (invalid) 
4. The ________ quickly __________ into the bushes to avoid the cat. (dove) 
5. She did not __________ to that __________ per se, just what it represented. (object) 
6. They were too ___________ to the door to _____________ it. (close) 
7. We must __________ the antique __________ furniture. (polish) 
8. The _________ was too strong to _________ the sail. (wind) 
9. The nurse __________ a strip of cloth around the ____________. (wound) 
10. It’ll take me a ___________ or two to get this __________ splinter out. (minute) 
Exploration 9: From IPA to English 
These words are in IPA; rewrite them in standard spelling. 
1. [ðoz] 
6. [baks] 
11. [klawd] 
2. [izi] 
7. [ɪʃu] 
12. [brɛθ] 
3. [tʃiz] 
8. [alðo] 
13. [ken] 
4. [tayt] 
9. [kroke] 
14. [ridʒ] 
5. [ʃʊk] 
10. [sin] 
15. [prayd] 
Exploration 10: Finding errors 
In this transcription of a verse about a cat and a fiddle, there is one mistake in each line. Find 
the errors and correct them. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72
  PHONETICS 
TRANSCRIPTION 
ERROR 
[he dɪɾəl dɪɾəl ðə cæt æn ðə fɪɾəl] 
[ðə kaw dʒəmpt ovər ðə moon] 
[ðə lɪɾəl dag (or [dɔg]) læfed tu si ʃətʃ ə sayt] 
[æn ðə dɪʃ ræn əwe wɪð ðə spun] 
[cæt] should be [kæt] 
Exploration 11: Advertising slogans 
Find two or more slogans or jingles from an ad you hear on radio, TV, or other media; tran-
scribe them into IPA. Share the transcriptions with your small group. Ask them to read them 
aloud to see if the transcription is accurate. 
Exploration 12: Discussion prompt: Accents 
Have you ever been told you speak with an accent? Where and when? Have others ever 
teased you about your accent or your way of pronouncing a particular word? What did they 
say? What was your reaction? Have you ever noticed another person’s accent and commented 
on it, either directly to that person or to another person? What did you notice and what sort of 
comment did you make? Share your responses with your small group. 
FURTHER READING 
http://web.uvic.ca/ling/resources/ipa/charts/IPAlab/IPAlab.htm. A good interactive chart with 
clear recordings. 
IPA website: www.internationalphoneticsassociation.org. Useful information about the discipline 
of phonetics. 
Ladefoged, P. (2001). A course in phonetics (4th ed.). Harcourt. Classic in the field. 
Ladefoged, P., & Maddieson, I. (1996). The sounds of the world’s languages. Blackwell. 
UCLA Phonetics Lab Archive: http://archive.phonetics.ucla.edu/ 
UCLA Phonetics Lab Data: www.phonetics.ucla.edu/course/chapter1/chapter1.html. To listen 
to speech sounds. 
REFERENCES 
Anzaldua, G. (1987). Borderlands/La frontera. Aunt Lute Press. 
Crystal, D. (2010). Language death. Cambridge University Press. 
Eckert, P. (1989). Jocks & Burnouts: Social categories and identity in the high school. Teachers 
College Press. 
Hay, J., & Drager, K. (2007). Socio-phonetics. Annual Review of Anthropology, 36, 89–103. 
Mendoza-Denton, N. (2008). Homegirls: Language and cultural practice among Latina youth 
gangs. Blackwell. 
Rosa, J. (2019). Looking like a language, sounding like a race: Raciolinguistic ideology and the 
learning of Latinidad. Oxford University Press. 

 
 
CHAPTER 5 
Phonology 
Why do we say it like that? 
First glance 
How do we put sounds together? 
What is phonology? 
• Phonemes, allophones, minimal pairs 
• Phonetic environment and complementary distribution 
Articulatory processes 
Ask and Aks revisited 
Interaction of phonology and morphology 
Acquiring phonemes and more 
INTRODUCTION 
As you transcribed words and phrases into IPA in the previous chapter, you may have noticed 
that sounds in the middle of a word do not sound the same as they do in isolation. And you 
may have concluded, quite rightly, that sounds influence one another when they are pro-
nounced together, as they are in words and phrases. Take the [t] sound, for example. We prob-
ably pronounce the [t] at the end of first if that word is the last in an emphatic utterance, as in 
I’m first. But if we say first grade, the [t] seems to drop out, so we get [fərsgred]. There are 
other anomalies with [t]—what about the [t] in city? It’s hardly a [t] at all. We pronounce it as 
the alveolar flap [ɾ], but we still see it as a [t]. What’s going on here? Why is there so much 
variation? Is it lazy speech, mispronunciations, or just arbitrary individual differences from 
people who should know better? As you may have guessed already, it’s none of the above. In 
fact, these so-called anomalies in the pronunciation of [t] are rule governed and systematic, as 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-5 

 
 
74
  PHONOLOGY 
is all language. It’s clear that such variation is not the result of arbitrary individual differences 
because most of us make these same adjustments as we speak. We’ll be examining this rule-
governed sound system as we discuss phonology. 
Phonology is often defined as the study of the systematic structuring of sounds in lan-
guage. We could also say it is the study of how sounds are organized when not in isolation, 
that is, when we use them in speech. What does it mean for sounds to be structured or organ-
ized? For our purposes, it means that we can examine how sounds differ from one another, 
identifying which differences are important to meaning and which are not, and identifying 
the principles and processes that explain the variation we find within one sound, such as that 
within [t]. 
SYSTEMATIC STRUCTURING OF SOUNDS 
Phonemes and allophones 
Before we start investigating the regularities involved in the sound system, we will need some 
new concepts, including one that we hinted at earlier but did not really explain: meaningfully 
distinct sounds. Most of the sounds for which you learned symbols in Chapter 4 are meaning-
fully distinct in English, that is, they distinguish meaning. To explain what that means, we 
need to back up a minute and examine language sounds in general. 
We could say that there are an infinite number of sounds in English—or in any language, 
for that matter. This variation occurs not just because of individual variation in pronouncing 
sounds. More importantly, it occurs because of variations of one sound that we all produce: 
the [p] in pit, for example, is slightly different from the [p] in spit for all of us. You can hear 
this difference by saying pit with your hand in front of your mouth. Can you feel a bit of air as 
part of the [p] sound? Now try saying spit, again with your hand in front of your mouth. Can 
you feel that there is less air? The [p] in pit is aspirated—that is, it has some extra air as part 
of its pronunciation—while the [p] in spit is not aspirated (no extra air). 
We recognize that the variations in [p] do not make it a different sound the way that [b] or 
[f] or [r] are all different sounds. The fact that we have separate letters for [b], [f], and [r] but 
the same letter for the two [p] sounds helps us recognize that the latter are variations of one 
sound. 
Having individual letters in an alphabet for a particular sound does not determine the sta-
tus of that sound in the phonological system of a language. For example, we can recognize that 
/n/ is a different sound, a meaningfully distinct sound, from /ŋ/, even though the latter sound 
is not represented by its own letter. Think of sin [sIn] and sing [sIŋ], for example. It is the 
sound at the end that distinguishes the two words. We somehow know that those two sounds 
are different in some meaningful and important way. 
Your brain organizes sounds at two levels: the phonetic level, the sound level itself, and the 
phonemic level, sound differences that make a difference in meaning. At the phonetic level, 
the [p] in pit is slightly different from the [p] in spit, and we easily pronounce them differently, 
even if we don’t consciously recognize that they are different. At the phonemic level, we know 
that both [p]s are the same sound in some fundamental sense, just as we know that [n] and [ŋ] 
are different sounds in some fundamental sense. 
When you learn a language, this is part of what you learn: the sounds that are part of 
your language and the patterns and rules about how to use those sounds in speech. Learning 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHONOLOGY 
75 
English involves learning how to pronounce English sounds and learning which variety of a 
sound to use in what circumstances, the [p] with aspiration or the [p] without it, for example. 
And it involves learning which sound variation is important to meaning and which is not. 
Another example might be helpful here, the [t] sound in English. Try this little experiment: 
say the following words as you would in casual conversation, paying attention to the [t] sound 
in each: city, Latin, ton, stun. The [t] in city is the alveolar flap [ɾ]; in Latin, it is a glottal stop 
[ʔ]; in stun, it is a [t] without aspiration, in ton, it is a [t] with slight aspiration. (We’ll indicate 
this sound with aspiration by [th]; that h indicates aspiration.) In kitten, it is a [t] without aspi-
ration and a glottal stop [tʔ] together. If we were to transcribe these words into the phonetic 
alphabet, they’d look like [sIɾi], [laʔIn], [tən], [sthən], and [kɪtʔɪn]. All four sounds are /t/, but 
they are very different /t/s. We could say they are all variants of one basic /t/. 
On one level all of the variants of /t/ are different; on another level, they are all the same. 
The two levels are the ones mentioned earlier: the phonetic (all different) and the phonemic 
(all the same). We use the term phoneme to refer to the abstract idea of a /t/, the way in 
which they are all the same. (In linguistics, phonemes are indicated with slashes; variants of 
phonemes, called allophones, are indicated with the brackets we used in Chapter 4.) For our 
example here, /t/ is a phoneme, and [ɾ], [ʔ], [th], [tʔ], and [t] are allophones of this phoneme. 
Figure 5.1 models the situation. 
What would happen if you substituted one allophone of /t/ for another allophone of /t/? Try 
it. Say Latin with the [t] allophone instead of the [ʔ] allophone. Still the same word? Sure. Try 
saying city with the [t] or with the [ʔ] instead of the [ɾ] allophone. Still the same word? Yes. 
The thing about allophone variation is that we can substitute one allophone of a particular 
phoneme for another allophone of the same phoneme, and doing so does not produce a new 
word. 
Ok, so what exactly is a phoneme? Perhaps some formal definition will help. One way to 
understand a phoneme is as the minimal unit of sound that distinguishes meaning. In other 
words, the substitution of one phoneme for another phoneme changes meaning. Another way 
is as an abstract representation of a sound of which allophones are the actual pronunciations. 
This definition gets at the fact that phonemes are mental representations that exist as part of 
our knowledge of our language. How any phoneme is pronounced will depend on where it 
occurs in a word. If I say, how do you pronounce /t/, you’d certainly have some idea, but you 
couldn’t say exactly without knowing the word it was in. In some words, it’s pronounced [t], 
in some [ɾ], in some [ʔ], in some [th]. 
How do we know which sounds are separate phonemes and which are merely variations of 
a phoneme? We can determine which sounds are different phonemes through the identifica-
tion of minimal pairs: two words whose pronunciation differs by only one sound. Fat and bat 
FIGURE 5.1 Diagram of allophones of phoneme /t/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76
  PHONOLOGY 
are minimal pairs in that they differ only in the initial [f] and [b] sounds. Fat and brat are not 
minimal pairs because there is a difference of more than one sound: [f] and [br]. 
Minimal pairs are used to determine whether two sounds are separate phonemes. If we 
take the word fat, for example, and substitute a different consonant, say /b/, for the /f/, and 
thereby produce a different word, we know the two sounds, [f] and [b], are separate phonemes 
because they distinguish meaning. In other words, that one sound change creates a different 
word. Remember that substituting one allophone of /t/ for another allophone of /t/ does not 
create a new word: city can be pronounced with [ɾ] or [t] and it’s still the same word, city. But 
if we substitute a different phoneme, say /l/, we do get another word: silly [sIli] is a different 
word from [sIɾi]. City and silly are minimal pairs, just as fat and bat are. From this we know 
that /t/ and /l/ are two separate phonemes just as /f/ and /b/ are two separate phonemes, and 
we indicate that by enclosing them in slashes: /f/, /b/, /t/, and /l/. Those slashes are important 
because they indicate a phoneme. 
This system works because phonemes are always in what is called contrastive distribu-
tion; their distribution is unpredictable, and they contrast with one another: a [t] is not a [p]. 
Allophones, on the other hand, are predictable variants of a phoneme; they do not contrast as 
they are all variants of the same thing: [t], [ɾ], [ʔ], and [th] are all /t/, not different things. 
It’s easy to find minimal pairs that distinguish most of the sounds we’ve learned so far. 
Look at the following series and list the phonemes you can identify from it: 
fat, bat, sat, tat, mat, gnat, hat, cat, pat, rat, vat, that 
To do this little exercise, you’ll need to transcribe the words into the phonetic alphabet so that you 
can see the sounds, not the letters: the gn in gnat, for example, is pronounced as [n] so it is [næt]. 
From the list, we can see that /f/, /b/, /s/, /t/, /m/, /n/, /h/, /v/, /p/, /r/, and /ð/ are all separate 
phonemes in English. Once you have a minimal pair, that’s it—the two sounds that distin-
guish the two words are two separate phonemes. 
What about [w], [d], [θ], [g] and other consonants; are they separate phonemes? The only 
way to answer that is to look for minimal pairs that distinguish, say, [f] from [w], or [b] from 
[g], or [v] from [θ], and so on. Again, it’s easy to find these pairs: fall [f] and wall [w], burl [b] 
and girl [g], sink /s/ and think /θ/. So, we now know that /f/ is a separate phoneme from /w/, /b/ 
is a separate phoneme from /g/, and /s/ is a separate phoneme from /θ/. We could go on listing 
minimal pairs and establish that the sounds we’ve studied so far represent different phonemes, 
except [ɾ] and [ʔ], which, as we’ve seen, are allophones of the phoneme /t/. The alveolar flap 
[ɾ] is unusual in that it can be an allophone of the phoneme /t/ or an allophone of the phoneme 
/d/, depending upon the word it is in. That is, /t/ and /d/ can both be pronounced as [ɾ], as in 
letter and ladder. 
Much of this might seem obvious to you; after all, we know these are distinct sounds 
because we have letters for them, right? Well, letters can be misleading in any analysis of 
sounds, as we saw in Chapter 4. For example, what about [θ] and [ð]? They are both spelled 
the same, th. But are they allophones of the same phoneme, as the spelling might imply, or are 
they different phonemes? We can answer that by looking for minimal pairs. There are only 
a few in English, but we only need one: thy and thigh, for example. If you change the voiced 
[ð] of thy to the unvoiced [θ], you end up with a different word: thigh. That means that the 
two sounds are separate phonemes rather than allophones of the same phoneme, so we’ll use 
slashes: /ð/ and /θ/. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHONOLOGY 
77 
How about two other sounds mentioned earlier, [n] and [ŋ]? Are they separate phonemes? 
We can easily find minimal pairs: thin and thing or sin and sing. The distinction between these 
two sounds makes a difference in meaning so they are separate phonemes: /n/ and /ŋ /. 
So far, we’ve only looked at consonants in identifying phonemes; what about vowels? We 
can easily see that they are part of this system too by looking back at the chart of vowels in 
Chapter 4. Many of the sample words used there are minimal pairs: beet, bit, bet, bait, bat, but, 
boot, boat. We could add bout and bite. These minimal pairs show us that /i/, /I/, /ɛ/, /e/, /æ/, 
/ə/, /u/, /o/, /aw/, and /ay/ are all separate phonemes. In fact, all the vowel sounds introduced in 
Chapter 4 are separate phonemes in English. 
That doesn’t mean that they are separate phonemes in other languages, however. The pho-
nemes we’ve identified are in English; they are not necessarily phonemes in other languages. 
The system of phonemes as units of sound that distinguish meaning, and of allophones as 
variants of phonemes, holds true for all languages, but the details will vary from language to 
language. In English, /p/ and /b/ are separate phonemes; in Arabic they are allophones of the 
same phoneme. In English, park and bark are two separate words; in Arabic, if such words 
existed in that language, they would be heard as the same word, just as [sIti] and [siɾi] are in 
English. In English, an aspirated [ph] and an unaspirated [p] are both allophones of the pho-
neme /p/; in Korean, they are separate phonemes. In Spanish, [b] and [v] are allophones of one 
phoneme, /v/; in English they are separate phonemes. In Turkish, [æ] and [E] are allophones 
of one phoneme; in English, they are separate phonemes. Which sounds are phonemes in any 
language is unpredictable, just as their distribution is unpredictable. 
Allophonic variation: Complementary distribution and free variation 
As we noted earlier, an allophone is a variant of a particular phoneme. One question usually 
arises here. Can we use allophones of a particular phoneme interchangeably, substituting 
one for the other at will? Well, in some ways, yes, we can. As we previously noted, substitut-
ing [t] for [ɾ] in the word city does not make it another word. It merely changes the word’s 
pronunciation. 
Although theoretically we can substitute one allophone for another, in actual speech we 
rarely do. We generally use one allophone in one phonetic environment and another in a dif-
ferent phonetic environment, so they occur in what is called complementary distribution. 
There are, in other words, rules for their use. To illustrate complementary distribution, let’s 
do a simplified analysis of the allophonic distribution of /p/ and two of its allophones: an aspi-
rated [ph] and an unaspirated one [p]. 
Complementary distribution relies on phonetic environment, so we need to examine the 
phonetic environment of each allophone. Phonetic environment refers to a sound’s position 
in the word and its surrounding sounds. When allophones are in complementary distribution, 
there are rules or patterns that specify what type of phonetic environment we use them in. 
Let’s go through the process of figuring out the rules for the distribution of the allophones of 
/p/, using the data in Table 5.1. 
Even with this small amount of data, you can see that there is some regularity in their dis-
tribution. Although both appear before vowels, [ph] appears at the beginning of a word, while 
[p] appears after [s]. If we were to write a rule for the complementary distribution of these 
allophones based on these data, we would say that the phoneme /p/ is pronounced [ph] when 

 
 
 
 
 
 
78
  PHONOLOGY 
TABLE 5.1 Allophones of phoneme /p/ 
[ph] 
[p] 
pot [phat] 
spot [spat] 
pit [phɪt] 
spit [spɪt] 
pat [phæt] 
spat [spæt] 
appearing word initial and pronounced [p] following [s] and before a vowel. (With more data, 
we’d see that it is not word initial but syllable initial when the syllable is stressed. In the word 
repair, for example, /p/ is aspirated because it occurs syllable initial in a stressed syllable.) For 
/p/ allophones, then, the distribution is based on both their position in the word (word/syllable 
initial) and their neighboring sound /s/. 
We can see the same regularity with allophones of /k/ and /t/, as shown in Table 5.2. 
TABLE 5.2 Allophones of phonemes /k/ and /t/ 
[kh] 
[k] 
kit [khɪt] 
skit [skɪt] 
cool [khul] 
school [skul] 
kill [khɪl] 
skill [skɪl] 
kate [khet] 
skate [sket] 
[th] 
[t] 
tack [thæk] 
stack [stæk] 
ton [thən] 
stun [stən] 
tamp [thæmp] 
stamp [stæmp] 
take [thek] 
steak [stek] 
From these data, we can see the following: 
· 
/k/ is pronounced [kh] word/syllable initially and pronounced [k] following [s] and before 
a vowel 
· 
/t/ is pronounced [th] word/syllable initially and pronounced [t] following [s] and before 
a vowel. 
To sum up, /t/ and /k/, like /p/, are aspirated when they are the first sound in a word or a stressed 
syllable, if not preceded by /s/. 
We might ask ourselves if these regularities are the result of three separate rules or if there 
is some more basic rule. In other words, is there one rule for /p/, one for /t/, and one for /k/, or 
is there a single rule that applies to all of them? We might guess that there will be a more basic 
rule because the three phonemes involved are all voiceless stops. In fact, they are the only 
voiceless stops in English, and, as such, form a natural class. We can now rewrite our rule: 
Voiceless stops are aspirated when they occur initially in a word or a stressed syllable and 
unaspirated when they occur directly after /s/. 
Remember, a natural class is a group of sounds that share one or more features. It can be 
comprised of a large group of sounds; voiced consonants, for example, are one large natural 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHONOLOGY 
79 
class. Or it can be comprised of a small group of sounds; for example, nasals are a smaller 
natural class in English. What is important about natural classes is that the regularities gov-
erning our speech generally apply to natural classes rather than to individual sounds. 
Let’s look at two more examples of identifying phonemes and the distribution of their allo-
phones, one in Hindi, a language spoken in India, and one in Italian. For each example, we 
want to know if the two sounds are separate phonemes or allophones of the same phoneme. 
To determine that, we need to follow these basic steps: 
1. 
Determine if they are phonemes. To do that, we first look for minimal pairs. If we find 
one, we know they are separate phonemes. 
2. If we don’t find one, we look at the distribution of the two sounds: What phonetic envi-
ronments does each occur in? In other words, are they in complementary distribution? 
Look for natural classes here. 
3. 
If they are in complementary distribution, we assume they are allophones of the same 
phoneme. 
4. 
To complete the analysis, we must identify the rule that governs that distribution: Is it 
based on their position in a word or on their immediately surrounding sounds? 
Let’s start with Hindi, which has two voiced bilabial stops: [b] which is unaspirated and [bh] 
which is aspirated. Their use is illustrated in Table 5.3. Each Hindi word, written in IPA, is 
matched with its English meaning. Our question is this: Are these two separate phonemes or 
allophones of the same phoneme. 
TABLE 5.3 Voiced bilabial stops in Hindi 
[bitʃ] 
middle 
[abhari] 
grateful 
[bar] 
occasion 
[bhabhi] 
brother’s wife 
[baka] 
crooked 
[bhar] 
burden 
[dʒeb] 
pocket 
[sebhi] 
all 
1. 
First, we look for minimal pairs. And the data show us one: [bar] (which means occasion) 
and [bhar] (which means burden). That means that the two sounds are separate phonemes, 
and we are finished with our analysis. 
Let’s look at some more data, this time from Italian. We know in English that /n/ and /ŋ/ are 
separate phonemes; we have lots of minimal pairs that indicate that. Is this the case for Italian 
too? Table 5.4 illustrates their use. 
TABLE 5.4 [n]  [ŋ] in Italian 
[panda] 
panda 
[aŋke] 
also 
[dʒente] 
people 
[faŋgo] 
mud 
[nero] 
black 
[staŋko] 
tired 
[inalare] 
inhale 
[iŋkanto] 
charm 
[dʒenio] 
genius 
[veŋgo] 
I go 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80
  PHONOLOGY 
1. 
There are no minimal pairs, so we need to move on to steps 2–4. 
2. One way to determine the distribution is to put down all the sounds that immediately 
precede and follow each sound in question: 
e, i, a, [n] r, t, d, a, i 
e, i, a [ŋ] g, k 
As you do this, don’t forget to note whether the sounds are word initial or word final; 
that makes it easier to see what’s going on. We note that the sounds that precede our two 
sounds are the same. That means the complementary distribution is not based on the pre-
ceding phonetic environment. If we look at what sounds follow them, we see that there is 
a difference: only [g] and [k] follow [ŋ]; they never follow [n]. That means that [n] and [ŋ] 
are in complementary distribution: where we find [ŋ] (before [k] or [g]), we do not find 
[n] and vice versa. 
3. 
We can now determine our rule. We know that that [g] and [k] are part of the same natural 
class, velar stops. Our rule then is that [ŋ] occurs before velar stops; [n] occurs elsewhere. 
If we have a rule like this, the two sounds are in complementary distribution and are 
allophones. 
4. 
We have one more question to ask here: Which symbol do we use for the phoneme, [n] or 
[ŋ]? Since [n] occurs in more phonetic environments, we use that one, so the phoneme is /n/. 
Free variation differs from complementary distribution; in free variation, the distribution 
of an allophone follows no pattern. Free variation is rarer than one might think. Most allo-
phonic distribution is complementary, not free. 
ARTICULATORY PROCESSES: CHANGING SOUNDS 
Allophonic variation is not the only kind of phonological variation we find in spoken lan-
guage. Some variation is the result of articulatory processes, which also have to do with the 
phonetic environment. I noted earlier, when we say first as the last word in a sentence, we 
tend to pronounce the [t], as in [aym fərst]. But when we say first in front of some other words, 
that [t] tends to disappear, so first grade becomes [fərsgred]. Why? To give another example, 
when we say hand alone or before a word that begins with a vowel as in hand it to me, we 
pronounce it [hænd]. But try putting ball after hand, as in handball, and what happens? If 
you’re saying it in casual speech, you may pronounce it as [hænbal] or even [hæmbal]. Again, 
why? That’s what we are about to find out. To do so, we need to examine the articulatory 
processes involved, the adjustments made during speech, of which we are, for the most part, 
unaware. Ease of articulation is often the impetus for these articulatory processes as they 
make it easier to pronounce words or word combinations. 
Assimilation 
One of the most common articulatory process in many languages is assimilation. Assimilation 
occurs when some feature (voice, nasalization, place of articulation) of one sound changes to 
become more like a neighboring sound. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHONOLOGY 
81 
Vowels often assimilate by becoming slightly nasalized when they occur before the nasal 
consonants [m, n, ŋ]. To hear this, say back [bæk]; then say bank [bæŋk]. You can probably hear 
the slight nasal quality in the vowel of bank that is not there in the vowel of back, although they 
are the same vowel /æ/. In [bæŋk], the vowel is assimilating to the nasal sound by becoming 
nasalized. We do this automatically and unconsciously, anticipating the nasal consonant by 
beginning the lowering of the velum during the production of the vowel sound. This nasaliza-
tion occurs in English with all vowel sounds when preceding any of the natural class of nasals. 
Consonants also undergo assimilation. They often assimilate to place, but they can assimi-
late to manner or voice. To illustrate assimilation to place, let’s use the example of bank again. 
When we say ban, we pronounce the word as [bæn], using the alveolar [n] sound. When we 
say bank, however, the sound before [k] is not an [n], but an [ŋ]: [bæŋk]. Why? To understand, 
we need to look at place of articulation. The [n] sound is alveolar, said with the tongue on the 
alveolar ridge. The [k] sound, however, is velar, said at the velum in the back of the throat. 
And the [ŋ] sound? It too is a velar sound. When the “n” in bank is pronounced as a velar [ŋ], 
we see assimilation in action. The [n] sound assimilates to the velar [k] and becomes velar [ŋ] 
for ease of articulation. It’s easier to say two velars in a row than an alveolar and a velar so we 
change the [n] to an [ŋ] when it occurs before a [k] or [g]. 
Nasal sounds, [m], [n] and [ŋ], are particularly apt to assimilate to sounds following them. 
We can see assimilation again in the following examples. 
Fun [fən] 
fungus [fəŋgəs] 
in [In] 
input [ImpUt] 
The alveolar [n] assimilates to the following velar [g] in fungus and becomes [ŋ]. It assimi-
lates to the following bilabial [p] in input and becomes [m], in both cases assimilating to place. 
Dissimilation 
Assimilation makes neighboring sounds more similar. Sometimes, however, sounds are too 
similar when put together and that makes them difficult to pronounce. Tongue twisters are 
based on this problem. Sue sells seashells down by the seashore is difficult to say because 
there are so many similar [s] type sounds, what are known as sibilants. The process of dissim-
ilation, changing one sound to be less like a neighboring sound, occurs when two sounds are 
too much alike. It is rarer than assimilation but still common. For most speakers of English, 
for example, fifths becomes [fIfts], changing the middle fricative, [θ], to a stop to break up the 
sequence of three fricatives. 
Deletion 
When several consonants occur together in what is known as a consonant cluster, especially 
if they are similar in some aspect, it is often difficult to pronounce them. Our response, 
unconscious of course, is to delete one or more of them. For example, we easily say cup 
[kəp], and we easily say cupcake [kəpkek], even though there are two consonants in a row in 
the middle of the word. But if we add board after cup, we do not usually get [kəpbord] but 
[kəbərd]. (Ignore the vowel change in board for now; it results from the common practice in 

 
 
 
 
82
  PHONOLOGY 
English of changing unstressed vowels to [ə].) Why do we delete the [p]? Because two bilabial 
stops are difficult to pronounce together. For ease of articulation, then, one is deleted. This 
process is known as consonant cluster reduction, a common one in English. 
A similar thing happens with friend and friendship. Friend can be pronounced [frɛnd], 
especially if it precedes a vowel sound as in a friend of mine. When we add ship to it, how-
ever, the word becomes [frɛnʃIp}, and the [d] is deleted as part of consonant cluster reduction. 
Notice that of the three consonants, only the [d] can be deleted to remain English. We would 
not say [frɛdʃIp] nor [frɛndIp]; the rules of English phonology do not allow that. 
Sometimes more than one of these processes occur in the pronunciation of a phrase or 
word. Let’s look at the pronunciation of [hæmbal] for handball. How do we get there? Two 
processes occur: first deletion and then assimilation. In handball, we have three consonants 
in a row, something not so easy to pronounce. Try it and notice how you pause after the [d] 
before you say [b]. So, applying the articulatory process of deletion, the [d] is deleted and we 
get [hænbal], a perfectly normal pronunciation. Second, for some speakers, a further process 
is involved, assimilation, and [hænbal] becomes [hæmbal] when the [n] assimilates to bilabial 
[b] to become bilabial [m]. Assimilation follows deletion here; the [n] needs be next to the [b] 
to assimilate to it. 
Epenthesis 
Epenthesis, or insertion, is adding a sound to a word. The sound inserted in English is often 
the schwa, [ə]. We see epenthesis in action in such words as realtor when we pronounce it 
[rilətər] rather than [riltər] or in athlete when we pronounce it [æθəlit] rather than [æθlit]. We 
also see it used for special emphasis at times: saying please as puh-leeze [pə:liz] instead of 
the more normal [pliz] to make our request more emphatic. Other sounds can be added too. 
Warmth is often pronounced [wɔrmpθ], adding a [p] after the [m]. Why might we do that? 
Think about place and voice here; [m] is a voiced bilabial; [θ] is a voiceless interdental. The 
[p] sound is a voiceless bilabial; it helps bridge the change from voiced to voiceless by having 
one feature of bilabial [m] and one of voiceless [θ]. 
Metathesis 
Whereas epenthesis is adding a sound to a word to make it easier to say, metathesis reor-
ders the sequence of sounds in a word for the same purpose. If you’re a Star Trek: The Next 
Generation fan, you may remember the character Barcley [barkli], a bit of a nerd who was 
often referred to as broccoli [brakli] by the other members of the crew. That pronunciation 
of his name as a joke is an instance of metathesis, in this case switching the order of the [a] 
sound and the [r] sound. (For true fans, here’s a case when the android Data was wrong. He 
quite rightly explained that saying [brakli] for Barcley was a type of metathesis, but he mis-
pronounced the word, saying [metəθisIs] when it is usually pronounced [mətæθəsIs]). We can 
see examples of metathesis in other words. Cavalry is often pronounced [kælvəri] instead of 
[kævəlri], switching [l] and [ə]. Irony is often pronounced [ayərni] instead or [ayrəni], switch-
ing [r] and [ə]. 
These articulatory processes are part of our knowledge of our language. They are system-
atically applied, nearly always without any conscious attention on our part. Just like knowing 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHONOLOGY 
83 
which allophone of a phoneme to use in a particular phonetic environment, knowing how and 
when to use these articulatory processes marks us as native speakers of a language. In speak-
ing a foreign language, it is often the small differences in pronunciation produced by these 
processes that mark us as non-native speakers. 
PHONOLOGY IN YOUR WORLD: ASK VS AKS REVISITED 
In the United States, the pronunciation of one word has been the focus of many negative 
stereotypes and much derision: the word ask and the pronunciation [æks]. Let’s look at that 
phenomenon from the perspective of phonology and the articulatory processes we discussed 
to show how such derision is unwarranted. 
While the pronunciation [æks] instead of [æsk] is sometimes perceived as an invention of 
African American speakers, it is shared by other English varieties, including one in Appalachia 
and several in Great Britain. This pronunciation is not a creation of these speakers, nor is it the 
result of laziness or ignorance, as some claim. It is a valid and correct pronunciation, just one 
that is different from that of Standard English. It is, in fact, a pronunciation descended from the 
Old English verb acsian, meaning to ask. In Old English, the word was variously spelled either 
acsian or ascian; in Middle English it was often spelled axen by Chaucer and other writers of 
the day. In fact, this variation in pronunciation and spelling were considered standard well into 
the 19th century. Although variation in its spelling has disappeared, variation in the pronuncia-
tion of this word continues today, with some varieties using [æks] and others [æsk]. 
The change from [æks] to [æsk] is an example of metathesis, a process many words went through 
as Old English became Middle and then Modern English. Bird, for example, used to be [brId] and 
horse used to be [hros]. The earlier pronunciations of bird and horse did not survive, but that of 
[æks] did, and because it is associated with oppressed groups, specifically African Americans, it 
is seen as wrong. Phonology may seem a long way from issues of social justice, but knowing the 
history of words and the facts about articulatory processes such as metathesis can perhaps help us 
more easily counter critics of [æks] and those who insist it is incorrect. And countering such critics 
may just move us a small step forward in reducing discrimination based on race. 
MORPHOPHONOLOGY 
Morphophonology sounds daunting, but it’s not as difficult to understand as it sounds. 
Morphophonology, as you might guess, is an area of linguistics that investigates the interac-
tion of morphology and phonology. We saw earlier that phonological analysis can help us 
understand how sounds are pronounced in casual speech. It can also help us understand vari-
ants in morphemes, what are known as allomorphs. That is, one morpheme may not always 
be pronounced the same way. 
Many allomorphs are in complementary distribution; that is, there is a pattern for their use. 
This pattern is based on phonological rules, just like patterns of use for allophones: phonetic 
environments, natural classes, and articulatory processes all play key roles just as they do in 
phonological analysis. 
We can use the past tense morpheme in English as an example for morphophonological 
analysis. In Chapter 3, we indicated the past tense morpheme as {ed}. That {ed} is pronounced 
in three different ways: [d], [t], or [Id], three separate allomorphs of the morpheme {ed}. Their 

 
 
 
 
84
  PHONOLOGY 
TABLE 5.5 Allomorphs of past tense morpheme in English 
Words that add [t] as the past tense morpheme 
Words that add [d] as the past tense morpheme 
miss–missed 
[mɪst] 
use–used 
[yuzd] 
talk–talked 
[tɔkt] 
follow–followed 
[falod] 
push–pushed 
[pʊʃt] 
nab–nabbed 
[næbd] 
cap–capped 
[kæpt] 
live–lived 
[lɪvd] 
lurch–lurched 
[lərtʃt] 
peg–pegged 
[pegd] 
laugh–laughed 
[læft] 
weigh–weighed 
[wed] 
look–looked 
[lʊkt] 
mime–mimed 
[maymd] 
rap–rapped 
[ræpt] 
lie–lied 
[layd] 
use is based on the phonetic environment they occur in, and there is a phonological rule that 
governs their use. 
Table 5.5 lists verbs that add [t] and [d] as the past tense morpheme. 
Following the steps set out with the Italian problem, we need to examine the phonetic envi-
ronment. Here it is the final sound of each word that is important, so we list the final sound of 
each word. Doing so, we can determine what those sounds that add [t] have in common and 
what those that add [d] have in common. 
[t] is used following [s, k, ʃ, p, tʃ, f] 
[d] is used following [z, o, b, v, g, e, m, ay] 
We need to identify natural classes here to determine the rule. Doing so, we see that [t] is 
used following unvoiced consonants and [d] is used following voiced consonants and vowels. 
We have thus determined the rules for the distribution of these two allomorphs. You’ve done 
your first bit of morphophonological analysis. 
Let’s go a bit further as we’re not quite done. We still need to analyze words like need and 
omit. They add neither [t] nor [d] as the past tense morpheme; instead, they add [Id]. What’s 
going on here? Some extra data will help us figure this out. 
Words like those that follow add [Id] as the past tense morpheme: 
need–needed  
 
[nidId] 
want–wanted   
[wantId] 
repeat–repeated  
[ripitId] 
plead–pleaded   
[plidId] 
omit–omitted   
[omItId] 
It seems that we need to add another part to our rule: when the final consonant is an alveolar 
stop ([t] or [d]), the past tense morpheme is pronounced as [Id]. 
The result of our morphophonological analysis looks like this: the past tense morpheme 
{ed} becomes 
[t] following unvoiced consonants 
[d] following voiced consonants and vowels 
[Id] following alveolar stops /t/ or /d/. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHONOLOGY 
85 
The addition of [I] before [t] and [d] is a form of epenthesis. If we did not insert a sound, it 
would be hard, for example, to distinguish the present tense of need [nid] from the past tense 
[nidd]. And using [t] or [d] in the phonetic environments we noted earlier is a form of assimi-
lation, in this case, assimilation to voice. Morphophonological rules, as we can see, follow 
general phonological rules. 
L1 ACQUISITION IN FOCUS: LEARNING PHONEMES AND MORE 
In Chapter 3, we noted that the first year of a hearing child’s life is in some ways devoted 
to figuring out the sounds of their language. What they are really learning, of course, are 
the phonemes. They generally finish this task by around one year of age. In addition to 
mastering the phonemes, a child acquiring a spoken language must also acquire its phono-
logical patterns, figuring out that those phonemes are pronounced differently in different 
phonetic environments, for example. That is, they need to learn the allophones of each 
phoneme and their distribution. Since that distribution is based on natural classes, they 
must figure those out as well. And they must learn the articulatory processes common for 
their language. 
That’s a tricky task, but children finish it successfully. In addition to figuring out allo-
phones, they quickly learn that certain morphemes have allomorphs. They figure out, for 
example, that the [s] sound, the [z] sound, and the [Iz] sound are allomorphs of the plural {s} 
morpheme. It still takes them a while to figure out exactly when to apply which allomorph, 
but less time than you would imagine. 
In an interesting experiment, Berko (1958) found that children figure out which plural 
allomorph to use with which word, sometimes as early as 2 years of age. In this study, chil-
dren were shown an imaginary creature called a wug and asked what they would say if there 
were two of them. Most children correctly added the [s] allomorph. When presented with a 
blick, another imaginary creature, and asked about two of them, they correctly added the [z] 
allomorph. In Exploration 2 at the end of this chapter, you’ll get an opportunity to figure out 
the rule English-speaking children have already unconsciously figured out by the time they’re 
two or so. 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
• 
In this chapter we’ve examined the systematic structuring of sounds. All spoken lan-
guages are made up of phonemes. Phonemes are the minimal units of sound that distin-
guish meaning; their various phonetic representations are allophones. 
• 
Phonemes can be identified with minimal pairs, two words that differ by only one sound. 
• 
Allophones are always of a particular phoneme. Most occur in complementary distribu-
tion; that is, their use is patterned, determined by the phonetic environment in which 
they occur. 
• 
Speakers make use of various articulatory processes as they speak, usually for ease of 
articulation. Processes common in English include assimilation, dissimilation, deletion, 
epenthesis (insertion), and metathesis. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86
  PHONOLOGY 
• 
Allomorphs, phonetic variants of morphemes, also often occur in complementary distri-
bution. This distribution is based on phonological factors. 
• 
Despite the disparagement of the pronunciation of [æks], that pronunciation is very old 
in English. The belief that [æks] is a mispronunciation of ask is erroneous and often 
discriminatory. 
• 
Children learn the phonological system of their spoken language, not only the indi-
vidual sounds but also how those sounds contrast and work together—the phonemes, 
allophones, and articulatory processes of their language. 
KEY TERMS 
phoneme 
allophone 
phonetic level 
phonemic level 
minimal pairs 
contrastive distribution 
allophonic variation 
complementary distribution 
phonetic environment 
free variation 
articulatory processes 
assimilation 
dissimilation 
deletion 
epenthesis 
metathesis 
consonant cluster reduction 
morphophonology 
allomorphs 
EXPLORATIONS 
A note about “correct” pronunciation 
As you do these phonology exercises, keep in mind that we are doing descriptive linguistics. 
We want to describe what people actually do, so we must recognize that pronunciation of a 
word can vary a great deal, depending on the phonetic environment and the casualness of the 
speech. Through our descriptions we can also recognize that this variation is not arbitrary or 
idiosyncratic; it is, like all language use, rule governed. These rules are not imposed on us by 
some authority; they are part of the structure of our language. 
Some of us will be tempted to ask, “But what is the correct pronunciation?” We may 
feel, for example, that saying [aviəs] instead of [abviəs] for the word obvious is simply a 
mispronunciation or the result of lazy, careless speech. Such is not the case. There is an 
articulatory process we apply to obvious, deletion for consonant cluster reduction. When 
we say obvious in casual speech, we pronounce it differently than we do in formal speech, 
but that pronunciation is just as rule governed as its pronunciation in more formal speech. 
This does not mean that any pronunciation of any word is the result of phonological rules 
and thus common in English. There are no rules, for example, that would lead us to pro-
nounce obvious as [obiəs]. 
Some of you may not pronounce words in quite the same way as indicated in these 
explorations. In all of these explorations, the data given is based on speech patterns of 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ɪ
PHONOLOGY 
87 
many people, so the rules we are looking for are indeed part of the language, even if one 
does not apply specifically to you. 
Exploration 1: Allophonic variation: Dialects in English 
In some dialects of English, the phoneme /ay/ has two allophones: [ay] and [əy]. Using the 
data in Table 5.6, state the phonetic environment in which each allophone is used. 
TABLE 5.6 Allophones of /ay/—[ay] and [əy] 
[əy] is used in the following 
[ay] is used in the following 
light 
lied 
fly 
pipe 
dies 
sigh 
dice 
bribe 
tie 
life 
lives 
buy 
mike 
file 
lithe* 
mime 
sign 
List all sounds preceding and following the vowel sounds in question. 
________________________ [əy] ______________________ 
________________________ [ay] ______________________ 
Where should you be looking—at the sounds before or after the allophones? How do you know? 
1. 
What natural classes do you see in each group? 
2. 
State the rule for the distribution of these allophones in terms of natural classes. In other 
words, what phonetic environments does each allophone occur in? 
• [əy] occurs _____________________________________ 
• [ay] occurs _____________________________________ 
*Note: lithe is pronounced [ləyθ] not [ləyð]. Why is it important to know this? 
Exploration 2: Morphophonological analysis: Plurals in English 
As noted earlier, there are three allomorphs for the plural morpheme {s}: [s], [z], and [Iz]*. 
Using the data in Table 5.7, determine the phonological rule for the pronunciation of the plu-
ral morpheme {s}. You will first need to transcribe each word into IPA. 
TABLE 5.7 Plural allomorphs in English 
[s] is used with 
[z] is used with 
[ɪz] is used with 
cat 
dog 
swallow 
church 
pick 
king 
play 
bus 
nap 
boil 
tie 
lash 
myth 
litter 
knee 
buzz 
lot 
nib 
judge 
limb 
roar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ɪ
ɪ
ɪ
88
 PHONOLOGY 
State the phonological rule for our use of the allomorphs of plural {s}: 
[s] occurs ________________________________ 
[z] occurs ________________________________ 
[ɪz] occurs _______________________________ 
* [əz] often occurs as a variant of [ɪz]. In your natural speech, you may use [əz] or you 
may use [ɪz]; the rule is the same for both. 
Note: In order to do this exercise, you need to know that there is a natural class in English 
known as sibilants. This class includes most of the sounds that are produced with friction, 
that is, /s/, /z/, /ʃ/, /ʒ/, /tʃ/, and /dʒ/ (the alveolar and alveopalatal fricatives and affricates). 
Exploration 3: Is that a pin or a pen? 
In some dialects in the United States, there are two allophones of the phoneme /ɛ/–[ɪ] and 
[ɛ]. Using the data from Table 5.8, determine the phonological rule for when [ɪ] is used and 
when [ɛ] is used. 
TABLE 5.8 Allophones of /ɛ/—[ɪ] and [ɛ] 
[ɪ] is used in the following words 
[ɛ] is used in the following words 
pen 
pet 
lend 
mesh 
strength 
ebb 
(the <n> is said [ŋ] here) 
hem 
heck 
men 
led 
end 
stretch 
State the phonological rule for the distribution of these two allophones: 
[ɪ] is used ____________________ 
[ɛ] is used ____________________ 
Exploration 4: Morphophonological analysis: Put it in there. 
In English we have a morpheme, {in}, a prefix that makes words negative. It has three dif-
ferent allomorphs: [ɪn], [ɪm], and [ɪŋ]. The rules for the distribution of these allomorphs are 
phonological, so you will need to change the words into IPA. Using the data in Table 5.9, 
determine what those rules are. 
TABLE 5.9 Allomorphs of {in}—[ɪn], [ɪm], and [ɪŋ] 
[ɪn] is used with the following 
[ɪm] is used with the 
[ɪŋ] is used with the 
words 
following words 
following words 
surmountable 
partial 
complete 
animate 
practical 
consistent 
ordinate 
balance 
glorious 
eligible 
material 
considerate 
dignity 
perceptible 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ɪ
ɪ
ɪ
PHONOLOGY 
89 
TABLE 5.9 Continued 
[ɪn] is used with the following 
[ɪm] is used with the 
[ɪŋ] is used with the 
words 
following words 
following words 
voluntary 
terminable 
famous 
State the rule for when each allomorph is used. 
[ɪn] is used before ________________________________ 
[ɪm] is used before _______________________________ 
[ɪŋ] is used before ________________________________ 
What articulatory process can account for why {ɪn} becomes [ɪm] and [ɪŋ]? 
Exploration 5: Identify the articulatory process involved in the following: 
1. 
Strength is sometimes pronounced not [streŋθ] but [strɛnθ]. (Ignore the vowel sound 
change.) What’s going on with the /ŋ/ change? 
2. 
Kindness often becomes not [kayndnɛs] but [kaynɛs]. What’s going on? 
3. 
Pumpkin is pronounced in one of three ways: 
• [pəmpkɪn] in very formal, careful pronunciation 
• [pəmkɪn] in somewhat casual settings 
• [pəŋkɪn] for some in very casual settings. 
What’s going on? Explain how we get to the final pronunciation through articulatory 
processes. 
4) 
Months is regularly pronounced [məns]. What’s going on? 
5) 
Have is pronounced [hæv] in the phrase I’ll have a soda, but as [hæf] in the phrase He’ll 
have to go. What’s going on? 
6) 
Won’t you is often pronounced as [wontʃyu]. What’s going on? 
7) 
Mystery is often pronounced as [mistri] rather than [mistəri]. What’s going on? 
8) 
Handbag is often pronounced [hæmbæg]. What’s going on? Note: remember there may 
be more than one articulatory process involved. 
Exploration 6: Spanish: Phonemes or allophones? 
Spanish has two sounds, [s] and [z]. Those sounds happen to be phonemes in English. Our question 
here is this: Are these two sounds phonemes in Spanish or are they allophones of one phoneme? 
Use the data in Table 5.10 (adapted from Yule, 2017 and Justice, 2004) to answer this question. 
TABLE 5.10 Spanish [s] [z] 
[bezbal] 
baseball 
[dezde] 
since 
[peskado] 
fish 
[mizmo] 
same 
[vamos] 
we go 
[casa] 
house 
[sistema] 
system 
[izla] 
island 
[razgado] 
torn 
[resto] 
rest 
[hablas] 
you speak 
[riezgo] 
risk 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90
  PHONOLOGY 
TABLE 5.10 Continued 
[espalda] 
back 
[sinko] 
five 
[dostapetes] 
two rugs 
[dozðeðos] 
two fingers 
1. 
Identify any minimal pairs in the data. What does that tell you? 
2. 
If there are no minimal pairs, determine whether [s] and [z] occur in complementary 
distribution. If they do, what phonetic environments does each occur in? State the rule 
for their distribution, referring to natural classes. 
3. 
Given what you found, are [s] and [z] phonemes or allophones of the same phoneme? If 
they are allophones, how would you write the phoneme: /z/ or /s/? Why? 
FURTHER READING 
Davenport, M., & Hannahs, S. (2013). Introducing phonetics and phonology (3rd ed.). 
Routledge. 
McMahon, A. (2002). An introduction to English phonology. Edinburgh University Press. 
REFERENCES 
Berko, J. (1958). The child’s learning of English morphology. Word, 14, 150–177. 
Justice, P. (2004). Relevant linguistics. Center for the Study of Language and Information 
Publications. 
Yule, G. (2017). The study of language. Cambridge University Press. 

 
  
CHAPTER 6 
Syntax 
Ordering words, making sentences 
First glance 
Structural ambiguity, synonymity, and 
relationships 
How do we put sentences together? 
Embedded sentences 
Surface structure and deep structure 
Universal grammar 
Phrase structure rules and syntactic oper-
Do bird songs have syntax? 
ations 
Acquiring syntax 
Recursion 
INTRODUCTION 
Syntax is about structure, specifically the structure of sentences. We saw in our study of 
morphology that we can analyze words structurally, looking at their linear structure, the order 
of morphemes (prefixes, suffixes, stems), and at their hierarchical structure, in which some 
morphemes are constituents of other morphemes. As we analyze sentences—the units that 
make them up and the rules for putting those units together—we’ll see that these two levels of 
structure are even more important. As you no doubt remember, we drew trees to illustrate this 
hierarchical structure in words; we’ll do the same with the hierarchical structure of sentences. 
SYNTAX AND GRAMMAR 
Before we move on to syntax proper, it might be helpful to differentiate syntax and grammar. 
When non-linguists talk about sentence structure, they often call it grammar and refer to 
things like subject–verb agreement or commas, dangling modifiers, or semi-colons. Syntax 
and grammar are related, of course, but for our purposes here, we need to differentiate them 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92
  SYNTAX 
clearly. Here we are not concerned with the aforementioned issues, which are mostly about 
stylistic preferences. Instead, we will be doing descriptive analysis, examining sentences to 
describe the way they are put together. 
As we noted in Chapter 2, in linguistics grammar refers to a system of rules that governs how 
we put sounds or primes together to form words, put words together to form phrases, and put 
phrases together to form sentences. It is our knowledge of this system that allows us to speak, 
write, or sign. Syntax is the branch of linguistics that analyzes the structures and rules that allow 
for combining words into phrases and phrases into sentences to create meaningful utterances. 
Syntactic theory seeks to describe the rules that allow us to construct and understand novel 
phrases and sentences, to create an infinite number of sentences, and to recognize grammati-
cal and ungrammatical sentences in our language (that is, recognize any string of words as 
either being English sentences or not). It investigates our internal grammatical knowledge 
about sentences and phrases, about their structure, about the relationships of parts of a sen-
tence to one another, and about the relationships of sentences to one another both in terms of 
meaning and structure. 
One key to syntactic analysis is the idea of generativity. That is, we need a limited set of 
structures and a limited set of rules for putting those structures together, from which we can 
generate an infinite number of sentences. To that end, we need a way of looking at sentence 
structure that goes beyond the traditional grammar rules you may have learned in school. I’ll 
summarize this approach now and then explain it in more detail. 
We can analyze the structure of sentences in two ways. We can examine what is called 
their surface structure, the approach generally used in traditional grammar: here’s the sub-
ject, here’s the predicate, here’s a direct object, here’s an indirect object. We can also examine 
their deep structure, paying attention to how parts of a sentence relate to one another. In our 
approach, we will examine both the surface and deep structures of sentences, not only dif-
ferentiating them but also showing how they are related. 
Surface or linear structure is what we say or sign or write; it’s called linear because our 
words come out like beads on a string, one after the other. Because it’s impossible to say or 
sign all the words in a sentence at once, they have to be put together one after the other. The 
linear structure refers to those beads on a string and what order they are put in. 
Deep structure offers us a different perspective on the structure of sentences, one that 
takes into account the hierarchical nature of that structure. We know from previous chapters 
that when we combine sounds, we get morphemes; when we combine morphemes, we get 
words. And when we combine words, do we get sentences? Well, yes and no. The next level up 
from words is not sentences, but phrases; and it is phrases, or constituents, that we combine 
to get meaningful sentences, following the syntactic rules of whatever language we are using. 
The key here is that those phrases are arranged hierarchically in the deep structure, as we will 
see. That is, some constituents contain other constituents within them. 
Every sentence, then, has two structures simultaneously: a linear or surface structure 
(what we say or sign, word after word), and a deep structure that is made up of constituent 
phrases arranged hierarchically. 
For any sentence, we can analyze its surface structure or its deep structure. We’ll start with 
a somewhat simplified example to illustrate the two levels: 
1. 
The lazy dog sat in the shade under a tree. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SYNTAX 
93 
On the surface structure level, that sentence is made up of ten words. On the deep structure 
level, it is made up of four phrases that in turn contain those ten words: 
2. The lazy dog 
3. 
In the shade 
4. 
Under a tree 
5. 
Sat in the shade under a tree. 
Although each phrase is made up of individual words, from a syntactic perspective, it is phras-
es or constituents, not individual words, that form the basic units of sentences. That’s why 
another word for deep structure is constituent structure. 
You’ll notice that the last phrase contains two other phrases: in the shade and under a tree. 
That’s because phrase 5 contains phrases 3 and 4 as part of it. That’s an example of hierarchi-
cal structure where some constituents contain other constituents. 
What we will examine in this chapter is that constituent, hierarchical structure: what rules cre-
ate it and how it is related to the linear structure. We’ll start with how that deep structure is created. 
CONSTITUENTS OF A SENTENCE 
To proceed with this analysis, we should clarify what the constituents of a sentence are and 
how they can be put together. Constituents are the units of a sentence put together in specific 
ways to create meaning. Noun phrases (NP) and verb phrases (VP) are the two constituents 
that make up every sentence. Some sentences also include other types of constituents, prepo-
sitional phrases (PP), for example. 
Each phrase has a head, which is a particular lexical category, for example, a noun, a verb, 
a preposition, an adjective, or an adverb. In addition, there are sets of rules and a set of opera-
tions for combining words into phrases and phrases into sentences. These phrase structure 
rules create the deep structure of the sentence. Syntactic operations, discussed later, in turn 
derive the surface structure from that deep structure. 
PHRASE STRUCTURE RULES 
Phrase structure rules specify how sentences are put together; that is, they specify their 
constituent structure. To help us visualize this structure, we draw tree diagrams (or trees), a 
tool for illustrating the deep structure of a sentence. 
Let’s start with the phrase structure rule that specifies what a sentence is. This one will 
probably sound familiar: a sentence consists of an NP and a VP, what you may know as a 
subject and a predicate. We can state this rule succinctly: 
S – NP VP 
The dash has a specific meaning in syntax: whatever appears to the left of the dash consists of 
or can be rewritten as the elements that follow the dash. To put that rule into normal English, 
we’d say: a sentence consists of an NP and a VP. 
That’s true, even if the VP consists of only one word, a verb such as sighed, and the NP 
also consists of only one word, such as John. For a sentence, like John sighed, with only two 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94
  SYNTAX 
constituents, the analysis is very simple. Of course, most sentences are a bit longer and more 
complex, so for those sentences we’ll need to further specify what constitutes an NP and a VP. 
As a way of beginning our discussion of NPs and VPs, let’s look at the types of phrases we 
identified in the lazy dog sentence earlier. 
· 
the lazy dog—an NP 
· 
in the shade—a PP 
· 
under the tree—also a PP 
· 
sat in the shade under the tree—a VP containing two PPs 
You might be asking about now, What’s the difference between a noun and an NP or a 
verb and a VP? Here the distinction is between two different types of categories: a syntactic 
category and a lexical category. Lexical categories are terms we apply to individual words 
to identify their role within a phrase: noun (N), verb (V), preposition (prep), adjective (adj), 
or adverb (adv)—what you may know as parts of speech. Syntactic categories are terms we 
apply to types of constituents in a sentence: NP is a syntactic category that includes a noun; 
VP is a syntactic category that includes a verb. Both may include other syntactic categories, as 
we’ll see later. Together they function syntactically as the constituents of a sentence. 
How do we know whether a group of words is a constituent? There are a few tests we can use. 
· 
First, we can use a proform: any word that substitutes for an entire phrase is a proform. If we 
wanted to use a pronoun, which is one type of proform, to refer to our lazy dog, we’d say she. 
That she would substitute for the lazy dog, the entire NP, not just for dog or the dog. The pro-
form substituting for the entire phrase is evidence that the lazy dog is a constituent phrase. 
We can use proforms with verb phrases too: The lazy dog sat under the tree and so did the 
cat. That did is a proform. It substitutes for the entire VP, sat in the shade under the tree, 
not just the verb sat, because we wouldn’t say, and so did the cat under the tree in the shade. 
· 
Another test relies on the fact that if we move a phrase to a different position within a 
sentence, we must move the entire phrase, not just one or two of its words. For example, 
we could say, In the shade under the tree, the lazy dog sat but not In the, the lazy dog sat 
shade under the tree. The latter is simply not English. 
· 
Still another test relies on asking questions. If we ask where the dog sat, we’d answer with 
an entire phrase, either in the shade or under the tree or in the shade under the tree, but 
not just shade or tree. 
These tests are good tests for determining if a particular group of words is a constituent 
within a sentence. 
Let’s continue our analysis by describing the constituents that make up a sentence as well 
as the rules for putting those constituents together. 
Noun phrases 
To examine the noun phrases in our lazy dog sentence, we will write our first phrase structure 
rule: 
NP – (det) (adj) N 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SYNTAX 
95 
Let’s put that equation into normal English: NP consists of a determiner (det), in this case the; 
an adjective phrase (AdjP), in this case, lazy, and an N, in this case, dog. We’ll look at (det) 
and (AdjP) in more detail later. 
Our NP rule defines what must be present for the phrase to be considered an NP. The 
parentheses mean that whatever category is written inside them is optional. It can either be 
present or not and can appear more than once. In our rule, for example, the parentheses mean 
that you can have an adjective (or more than one adjective) but having an adjective in a noun 
phrase isn’t required. 
Our NP rule, then, tells us that every NP must have a noun (the head word in a noun phrase) 
and can have a determiner and an adjective or adjectives. 
There’s one other lexical category that can be part of an NP: a prepositional phrase or PP. 
We might say, for example, The lazy dog with brown spots. That NP now includes a PP, with 
brown spots. We must, then, expand our NP rule by adding PP as a possible optional unit. 
NP – (det) (AdjP) N (PP) 
That is, an NP can consist of an optional det, an optional AdjP, and an N, as well as an 
optional PP (in this case, with brown spots). We put the PP in parentheses to indicate that an 
NP may include a PP or it may not. We put the PP after the N because, in English, PPs gener-
ally occur after the N in an NP. 
One point about adjectives: we’ve labeled them as adjective phrases (AdjP) in our rule. 
That’s because they can be more than one word: very tall, a bit hot, rather silly. Adjective 
phrases consist of adjectives and optional degree words like very, rather, somewhat, too, 
labelled (deg) in our rules. AdjPs must have an adjective and can have an optional degree 
word. We can write the rule for AdjP as follows: 
AdjP – (deg) Adjective 
Let’s come back to that determiner, the det in our rule. A determiner can be any one of several 
different types: articles (a, an, the); demonstratives (this, that, these, those); possessive pro-
nouns (my, your, her, his, its, our, their); or count words like many, some, several, a few. Try 
substituting one of those words in the sentence and you’ll see that they take the place of the 
determiner the. Generally, you don’t have two determiners before a noun in English, though 
you do in some other languages. 
One other point about determiners. A simple look around shows us that not all NPs consist 
of a determiner and an N. Instead of the lazy dog, for example, I might say Jasmine or she. And 
if I’m talking about the species in general, I would probably say just dogs. Jasmine and she 
and dogs are still NPs. So, an NP can be a phrase specified by our rule, or it can just consist of 
a proper noun (Jasmine) or a pronoun (she). With proper nouns and pronouns, we do not use 
determiners or adjectives or PPs. And we can omit the determiner when the N is plural if we 
mean dogs in general rather than a specific group of dogs: Dogs are sweet animals vs Those 
dogs are sweet animals. 
Here are our final phrase structure rules for NPs: 
NP – (det) (AdjP) N (PP) 
NP – PropN 
NP – Pro 

NP 
NP
NP 
det AdjP 
N 
PropN 
Pro 
Adj 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
96
  SYNTAX 
where PropN stands for proper noun (a name) and Pro stands for pronoun (she, it, he, 
they, etc.). 
You can read these three rules together as a single definition: a noun phrase may be formed 
in one of three ways. It can consist of a determiner, a noun, an optional adjective, and an 
optional prepositional phrase; it can consist of a proper noun; or it can consist of a pronoun. 
Prepositional phrases 
Prepositional phrases (PPs) are phrases such as in the shade and under the tree. (If 
you’re not sure what prepositions are, check the online resources, where you’ll find them 
explained along with a list of common English prepositions.) We can write the rule for PPs 
as follows: 
PP – Prep NP 
In other words, PPs must consist of a preposition (Prep) and an NP. We’ve already seen what 
an NP consists of, so there is no need to rewrite that part here. The phrase structure rule for NPs 
applies to any NP, including those in a PP. 
Prepositional phrases are extremely common in English, more so than in some other lan-
guages: in the morning, over the hill, around the house, for our sakes, under the stairs, behind 
the closet, after the war, before the flood, around the corner—all are PPs and thus consist of 
a Prep and an NP. They can appear in many different places in a sentence: at the beginning, 
middle, or end; they can occur in NPs or in VPs. They are very handy little structures for get-
ting a lot of information into a sentence. 
We can illustrate the NP and PP rules with tree diagrams, as in Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2. 
FIGURE 6.1 Phrase structure rules for NPs 
PP 
Prep 
NP 
FIGURE 6.2 Phrase structure rule for PPs 
Verb phrases 
The verb phrase is often the most complex part of a sentence because a VP can contain sev-
eral elements. Let’s start with a simple sentence: The dog sat. Here the VP consists of just 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SYNTAX 
97 
a verb (V), what you may have been taught as being the predicate of a sentence. All VPs 
must consist of at least one verb. We can write the rule like this: VP – V. For this sentence, 
then, we have a VP that consists of a V (sat). (The NP, of course, consists of a det and an 
N, the dog.) 
Most sentences are not so simple, however. If we use the VP from our lazy dog sentence, 
sat in the shade under the tree, we recognize that a VP can also have one or more PPs. If we 
added a word such as quietly to our sentence, we’d have the following sentence: The dog sat 
quietly in the shade under the tree, and we would know that a VP can also contain an adverb 
phrase, AdvP, in this case quietly. We’ll come back to that AdvP later. So, our rule for a VP 
now looks like this: 
VP – V (PP) (AdvP) 
Here’s how you would read this rule: A VP must consist of a V and can also consist of one or 
more PPs or AdvPs. 
If we examine a different sentence, we learn that one more element can also be present in a 
VP. The cow ate the corn will illustrate our purpose. Here our VP consists of a verb, ate, and 
an NP, the corn. A VP, then, can contain an NP as well as a PP and an AdvP. 
In fact, a VP can consist of all those constituents, as the following sentences show: 
· 
The cow ate the corn in the field hungrily. (Here the VP consists of a V, an NP, a PP, and 
an AdvP.) 
· 
The cow gave the farmer a kiss. (Here the VP consists of two NPs.) 
· 
The cow kissed the farmer sweetly on the cheek. (Here the VP consists of an NP, an AdvP, 
and a PP.) 
We can summarize our examples with this phrase structure rule: 
VP – V (NP) (PP) (AdvP) 
To express that in plain English, a VP must contain a V and may also contain an NP, a PP, and/ 
or an AdvP, each of which may occur more than once. 
We know what NP and PP are already, but AdvP is new. We use adverb phrase because, 
like an AdjP, an adverb phrase can consist of a degree word as well as an adverb: too quickly, 
rather slowly, very happily, all of which consist of an adverb and an optional degree word: too, 
rather, slowly (there are many others). The rule then is as follows: 
AdvP – (deg) Adv 
We can illustrate the rule for VP with a tree diagram as in Figure 6.3. 
VP 
V 
NP 
PP 
AdvP 
FIGURE 6.3 Phrase structure rule for VPs 

S 
NP 
VP 
The dish eloped with the spoon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98
  SYNTAX 
Tree diagrams 
As we’ve discussed, phrase structure rules generate the deep structure of all sentences. What 
follows is the set of phrase structure rules: 
S – NP VP 
NP – (det) N (AdjP) (PP) (S) 
NP – Prop N 
NP – Pro 
VP – V (AdvP) (NP) (PP) (S) 
PP – Prep NP 
AdjP – (deg) Adjective 
AdvP – (deg) Adverb 
You may have noticed that (S) in both the NP and the VP. It simply indicates that we can embed 
sentences into other sentences by putting them in either the NP or the VP. We’ll discuss embed-
ded sentences in more detail later. 
Using our phrase structure rules, we can draw tree diagrams to help us visualize the deep 
structure of sentences. And in illustrating that deep structure with a tree diagram, we can 
identify the hierarchical nature of that deep structure. 
We can use the following sentence to illustrate how to draw a tree diagram: 
The dish eloped with the spoon. 
In drawing trees, we always start with S – NP VP. For our sample sentence, we would draw the 
tree illustrated in Figure 6.4. 
Then we further specify the NP and the VP and, if necessary, do further analysis with the 
PP or other phrases. Thus, our expanded tree diagram would look like Figure 6.5. 
FIGURE 6.4 First step for tree diagram for The dish eloped with the spoon 
S 
NP 
VP 
V
 PP 
det 
N 
Prep 
NP 
det 
N 
The dish eloped with the spoon 
FIGURE 6.5 Final tree diagram for The dish eloped with the spoon 

S 
NP 
VP 
det AdjP 
N 
V 
NP 
AdvP 
Adj 
det AdjP 
N 
deg 
Adv 
The small dish watched the big spoon very warily 
   
 
 
 
 
SYNTAX 
99 
This diagram reveals how the entire sentence is structured, including which elements are 
part of the NP (a det and an N) and which are part of the VP (a V and a PP). 
In all sentences, there is an NP and a VP that are directly under an S, meaning that they 
are immediate constituents of the top S node. In this case, the NP, the dish, is directly under 
the S, so it is an immediate constituent of S; in traditional grammar, this would be called the 
subject. The VP, eloped with the spoon, is also directly under the S, so it is an immediate con-
stituent of S as well; in traditional grammar, this would be called the predicate. 
Not all NPs are immediate constituents of the S, however. Some NPs are part of the VP or 
part of a PP, which is then part of a VP or an NP. In Figure 6.5, the NP, the spoon, is part of 
the PP, which itself is part of the VP. 
The four sentences that follow are diagrammed to further illustrate the phrase structure 
rules. You might try doing them yourself first if you like. Start with S – NP VP and go from 
there. Remember, there can be more than one PP or NP in a VP. Notice how many places NPs 
show up in our trees. 
Figure 6.6 shows the tree diagram for sentence 1, and Figure 6.7 shows the tree diagram 
for sentence 2. 
FIGURE 6.6  Tree diagram for sentence 1 
S 
NP 
VP 
V
det 
N 
Prep 
PropN 
NP 
PP 
Prep 
NP 
PP 
det 
N 
Prep 
PropN 
NP 
PP 
The dish from Montana eloped with the spoon from New York 
FIGURE 6.7 Tree diagram for sentence 2 

S 
NP 
VP 
det
N
V 
NP 
NP 
det 
N det 
N 
The dish gave the spoon a 
book 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100
  SYNTAX 
1. 
The small dish watched the big spoon very warily. 
2. The dish from Montana eloped with the spoon from New York. 
Notice the two PPs here. One is part of the NP the dish. The other is part of the VP, but 
it does not come directly off the VP. That is because it does not modify or belong to the VP 
directly. It modifies and belongs to the NP, the spoon. It is thus a part of that NP, and that NP 
in turn is part of the VP. 
Figure 6.8 shows the tree diagram for sentence 3. 
3. 
The dish saw the spoon through the fence. 
S 
NP 
VP 
V
det 
N 
det 
N 
det 
N 
NP 
Prep 
NP 
PP 
The dish saw the spoon through the fence 
FIGURE 6.8 Tree diagram for sentence 3 
Note that the PP here, through the fence is part of the VP directly, not part of the NP the 
spoon. That’s because the seeing takes place through the fence; the spoon is not through the 
fence the way it is from New York in the previous sentence. 
Figure 6.9 shows the tree diagram for sentence 4. 
4. 
The dish gave the spoon a book. 
FIGURE 6.9 Tree diagram for sentence 4 

   
 
 
 
SYNTAX 
101 
In this sentence, there are two NPs in the VP, what in traditional grammar are called the 
direct object (a book) and indirect object (the spoon). 
From these sentences, we can see in how many different places NPs can appear: directly 
under the S, in the VP, or in a PP that is part of the VP or part of an NP. 
RECURSION 
Using tree diagrams to illustrate a sentence’s deep structure also enables us to illustrate a 
principle called recursion, which permits phrase structure rules to produce phrases of infi-
nite length by embedding one phrase within another of the same type. This crucial property 
of all languages allows identical elements in a sentence to be used repeatedly. To put it another 
way, it allows us to embed phrases within phrases over and over. For example: 
The boy played on the swing in the yard near the campus of the school for wayward boys. 
Here PPs are involved in the recursion, one within the other, as shown in Figure 6.10. 
It is not just parts of a sentence that can occur over and over; entire sentences can also be 
embedded in other sentences ad infinitum. The children’s rhyme about the house that Jack 
built relies on embedding one sentence within another sentence within yet another sentence, 
connecting them all with that. 
S 
NP 
VP 
det
N 
V
 PP 
The boy played 
Prep 
NP 
det
N
 PP 
on the swing 
Prep 
NP 
det
N
 PP 
in the yard 
Prep 
NP 
det
 N 
PP 
near the campus 
Prep 
NP 
det
 N 
PP 
of the school 
Prep 
NP 
adj 
N 
for wayward boys 
FIGURE 6.10 Tree diagram illustrating recursion 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102
  SYNTAX 
This is the cow that kicked the cat that chased the rat that ate the corn that lay in the house 
that Jack built. 
There are five sentences embedded in the main sentence This is the cow: 
1. 
The cow kicked the cat. 
2. The cat chased the rat. 
3. 
The rat ate the corn. 
4. 
The corn lay in the house. 
5. 
Jack built the house. 
STRUCTURAL AMBIGUITY 
Earlier we noted that any syntactic theory needs to be able to account for one sentence having 
two or more meanings. Let’s examine now how that happens. How does our syntactic theory 
help us account for the ambiguity around Hermione, the wizard, and the tower in this sentence? 
Hermione watched the wizard from the tower. 
The ambiguity in this sentence does not lie in any one word; the meaning of each word is 
clear. It is not lexical ambiguity that is at issue here. Lexical ambiguity refers to ambiguity 
that is caused by one word having more than one possible meaning—tie or bank, for example. 
For this sentence, what is at issue is not lexical ambiguity but structural ambiguity. That is, 
the ambiguity lies in the relationships among the parts of the sentence: the PP from the tower 
could belong to the NP the wizard (he’s from the tower), or it could belong to the VP (the 
watching is being done from the tower). Where that PP belongs is the crux of the ambiguity. 
Because there are two possible relationships among watch, wizard, and tower, there must 
be two deep structures, each one having a different meaning that reflects one of those rela-
tionships. The two deep structures associated with those two different meanings are illus-
trated in Figure 6.11 and Figure 6.12. 
S 
NP 
VP 
V
Prop N 
NP 
det 
N 
Prep
 NP 
PP 
det 
N 
Hermione watched the wizard from the tower 
FIGURE 6.11 One tree diagram for Hermione watched the wizard from the tower 

   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
SYNTAX 
103 
S 
NP 
VP 
V
Prop N 
NP 
det 
N 
Prep
 NP 
PP 
det 
N 
Hermione watched the wizard from the tower 
FIGURE 6.12 Second tree diagram for Hermione watched the wizard from the tower 
The tree diagram in Figure 6.11 illustrates the deep structure of the sentence that means 
it is the wizard who is from the tower because the PP (from the tower) comes directly off the 
NP (the wizard). 
The tree diagram in Figure 6.12 illustrates the deep structure of the sentence that means 
the watching is being done from the tower because the PP ( from the tower) comes directly off 
the VP (watched). 
What causes the ambiguity is that the two deep structures happen to appear the same in the 
surface structure. In fact, structural ambiguity is defined as two different deep structures that 
are realized as the same surface structure. 
STRUCTURAL RELATIONSHIPS AMONG SENTENCES 
It may seem odd to talk about sentences being related, but they are. In fact, they can be related 
in several ways. We can see this relationship with declarative statements and their corre-
sponding questions, for example, or positive statements and their corresponding negatives. 
The following pairs of sentences, though not synonymous, are clearly related somehow: 
1a. Sally will win that race. 
1b. Will Sally win that race? 
2a. Sally aced the exam. 
2b. Sally didn’t ace the exam. 
Our theory of syntax needs to be able to account for these relationships. To do so, we posit that 
both sentences in the pair are derived from the same deep structure. Our theory can account for 
this phenomenon, but we’ll need a new concept to explain it: syntactic operations. 
SYNTACTIC OPERATIONS 
So far, we’ve been focusing on the constituent structure of sentences, gliding over how that 
structure is related to the surface structure. The concept of syntactic operations helps fill 

 
 
 
 
 
 
104
  SYNTAX 
in that gap. Syntactic operations are a set of rules that derive surface structures from deep 
structures. The basic assumption here is that related sentences derive from a common deep 
structure, and it is syntactic operations that derive those related sentences from that common 
deep structure. Deriving a surface structure from a deep structure may produce a surface 
structure that does not resemble that deep structure or one that looks very much like it. It 
is this aspect of our theory that accounts for structural synonymity and sheds light on other 
structural relationships, as we shall see. 
Our knowledge of the syntax of our language extends beyond knowing phrase structure 
rules; it also includes knowledge of these syntactic operations and the ways that they can 
move constituents around, delete constituents, add elements, and do even more complicated 
maneuvers, like embedding sentences. There are unique rules for each operation and con-
straints on which constituents they can be applied to. We won’t go into detail about these 
operations (there are hundreds of them); instead, we will briefly examine a few common ones. 
Structural synonymity 
Just as there are two types of ambiguity, there are two types of synonymity, lexical and struc-
tural. Lexical synonymity refers to two words that mean the same thing. Structural syno-
nymity refers to two sentences that mean the same thing. Ambiguous sentences occur when 
one surface structure represents more than one deep structure. Synonymous sentences occur 
when the opposite happens, when one deep structure can be realized in more than one surface 
structure, as illustrated in the following sentences: 
1. 
The wizards approached cautiously. 
2. Cautiously, the wizards approached. 
Although the emphasis may differ slightly, these two sentences are structurally synonymous; 
that is, the two surface structures derive from a common deep structure. The deep structure has 
gone through a specific syntactic operation to derive sentence 2, whose surface structure looks 
different from sentence 1 but whose meaning is the same. 
Active and passive sentences can serve as another example of structural synonymity, as 
illustrated with these two sentences: 
3. 
A wizard threw his wand at the dementor. 
4. 
The wand was thrown at the dementor by a wizard. 
The first sentence is active; the second passive. Granted, there is again a difference in emphasis 
between the two sentences, but in essence they are synonymous. That is, they share a common 
deep structure. The deep structure of sentence 3 has gone through a syntactic operation, in this 
case the passive operation, to derive the surface structure of the second sentence. 
Movement operations 
Movement operations are among the most common of syntactic operations. We find them in 
many, if not all, languages in the world. They move phrases around, sometimes from the VP 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
SYNTAX 
105 
to the NP as in sentence 2 and sometimes from the NP to the VP as in sentence 4. (There is 
more to the syntactic operation that derives passive sentences from their active deep struc-
tures that we won’t go into here.) 
Adverb movement 
One common syntactic operation is called adverb movement, which allows certain AdvPs in 
the VP to move to different parts of the sentence, including the very beginning. If it is placed 
at the beginning of a sentence, the AdvP might appear to be part of the NP, but it is not. It is 
still part of the VP in the deep structure, no matter where it appears in the surface structure 
because it modifies the verb, not an NP. 
5. 
The wizards entered the cave fearfully. 
6. 
Fearfully, the wizards entered the cave. 
S 
VP 
V 
NP 
det 
N 
Adv 
AdvP 
NP 
det 
N 
The wizards entered the cave fearfully 
FIGURE 6.13 Tree diagram for sentences 5 and 6 
Applying the adverb movement operation moves fearfully from the end of the sentence 
to the beginning, as in sentence 6. This creates a difference between the deep structure and 
the surface structure. It does not, however, change the meaning of the sentence. Those two 
sentences are synonymous and share an identical deep structure as illustrated in Figure 6.13. 
This operation can occur with some PPs in the VP as well, as shown in sentences 7 and 8. 
7. 
All muggles take their final exams on Friday. 
8. 
On Friday, all muggles take their final exams. 
Here again, the PP appears to be part of the NP, but in the deep structure for both sentences 
it is part of the VP. 
Yes/no question formation 
As noted earlier, related sentences derive from a common deep structure. Questions, then, 
have the same underlying structure as the declarative sentences from which they are derived. 

S 
NP 
Aux 
VP 
PropN 
V 
AdvP 
Adv 
Mark should leave now 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
106
  SYNTAX 
The yes/no question syntactic operation derives the surface structure of these questions. Let’s 
look at two statements and their corresponding questions: 
9. Mary is playing her guitar. 
Is Mary playing her guitar? 
10. Mark should leave now. 
Should Mark leave now? 
We can see that forming these questions involves moving part of the VP to a position in front 
of the subject NP, but what part is it that moves? To answer that, we need to revise our phrase 
structure rules slightly and posit the inclusion of what is known as AUX, an auxiliary verb. 
Auxiliary verbs are have, be, do, or modals, verbs like should, can, must, will, may, might, 
could, shall. Auxiliary verbs usually occur with another verb: can read, must work, is playing, 
has eaten, should apologize, will succeed. Have, be, and do, but not modals, can function as 
main verbs or as auxiliaries in the following sentences: 
11. Mary has a guitar. 
Mary has borrowed a guitar. 
12. Mark is hungry. 
Mark is eating. 
In the first of each pair of sentences, the verb (has or is) functions as the main verb in the 
sentence. In the second, has and is are auxiliary verbs, functioning as part of the main verbs 
borrow or eat. 
Our theory posits an AUX as part of the deep structure of all sentences, whether or not it 
appears in the surface structure. Our revised phrase structure rules then become this: 
S – NPAUX VP 
AUX – (modal) (have) (be) or (do) 
We can now describe the syntactic operation for forming yes/no questions; it even has a name, 
subject-auxiliary inversion. In plain English, we move the AUX verb from its usual place 
before the main verb to a position in front of the subject NP. 
For the sentence, Mark should leave now, the tree diagram would look like Figure 6.14. 
The subject-auxiliary inversion would then take the AUX should and move it to the begin-
ning of the sentence, creating Should Mark leave now? as the surface structure. 
FIGURE 6.14 Tree diagram for sentence 10 

S 
NP 
Aux 
VP 
PropN 
V 
NP 
det N 
Jerry 
Ø wanted an apple 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SYNTAX 
107 
FIGURE 6.15 Tree diagram for sentence 13 
If there is no AUX in the surface structure, we insert a different auxiliary: do, what is 
sometimes called a dummy do. Thus, for sentence 13, we insert a dummy do to make a ques-
tion and get sentence 14. 
13. Jerry wanted an apple. 
14. Did Jerry want an apple? 
Figure 6.15 illustrates the deep structure for sentence 13. The AUX does not appear in the 
surface structure, but it is present in the deep structure, as evidenced by its appearance when 
we turn that declarative sentence into a question, as in sentence 14. 
Auxiliary verbs are the only ones that undergo subject-auxiliary inversions; they are also 
the verbs that show up in tag questions and occur to the left of not in negative sentences. You 
haven’t eaten yet, have you? illustrates both occurrences of an auxiliary. 
Embedded sentences 
You may be thinking about now, this is all well and good but most of the sentences I read or 
hear or see are a lot more complex than the examples you’ve used here. Very true. One way 
that sentences become complex is having other sentences embedded within them. In fact, the 
syntactic definition of a complex sentence is one that contains another sentence within it. 
There are several ways this can happen. Two sentences can be joined through coordination, 
using conjunctions like and or but or other coordinators. One of the first ways children learn 
to join sentences is by stringing them together in a linear sequence with ands: I went to the 
store and I saw a doggie and he licked me and I petted him—sentences like that. When we 
do this, we’re joining what are called two independent clauses; that is, each could stand on its 
own as a sentence. A clause is a unit that contains a subject and a predicate, in our terms, an 
NP and VP together. 
As children get older, they learn to embed sentences, putting a dependent clause, one that 
cannot stand on its own as a sentence, within an independent clause, creating adverb clauses, 
complement clauses, or relative clauses. We’ll examine the latter two types here. 
As our phrase structure rules show, one constituent that can occur within NPs or VPs is a 
sentence (S). That is, we can embed sentences within sentences by placing them within NPs 
or VPs. Let’s look at two similar sentences to illustrate an embedded sentence. 

S 
NP 
VP 
PropN 
V 
NP 
det 
N 
Tom 
saw the train 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
108
  SYNTAX 
FIGURE 6.16 Tree diagram for sentence 15 
15. Tom saw the train. 
16. Tom saw that the train was late. 
Figure 6.16 illustrates the deep structure for sentence 15: 
If we want to diagram sentence 16, a question immediately arises. What should we do with 
the train was late? It’s neither an NP nor a VP but both as one unit; in other words, a clause 
or sentence (S). 
That S takes the place of the NP after saw; that is, it is a complement clause, a clause that 
functions as an NP in a VP or PP. We place that complement clause within the VP because it 
is related to the verb saw, as shown in Figure 6.17. 
You’ll notice there’s a new element in Figure 6.17, a COMP, which stands for complemen-
tizer. It is there as a sort of place holder, indicating that the S that follows is embedded in the 
main clause. In the surface structure, it can appear as that, in which case we would say, Tom 
saw that the train was late. Sometimes it does not appear at all, as in Tom saw the train was 
late. 
Let’s look at another type of embedded sentences, relative clauses. Here the embedded 
sentence does not function as an NP but rather as part of an NP, functioning as a modifier of 
the noun that it follows, known as its head noun. When two NPs with the same referent occur 
in the deep structure of the main sentence, a relative clause can occur, embedding one clause 
S 
NP 
VP 
V 
S
PropN 
NP
COMP 
det 
N 
VP 
V 
Adv 
Tom
saw 
the train was 
late 
FIGURE 6.17 Tree diagram for sentence 16 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SYNTAX 
109 
S 
NP 
VP 
V 
AdvP
N
det 
S 
Adv
NP
COMP 
det 
N 
det 
N 
VP 
V 
NP 
NP 
Pro 
The woman 
the woman sold me that car disappeared suddenly 
FIGURE 6.18 Tree diagram for sentence 17 
within the other. Relative clauses always occur within NPs, never directly under the VP node; 
they are usually introduced in the surface structure with a relative pronoun: who, which, 
whom, whose, that. 
17. The woman who sold me that car disappeared suddenly. 
Here, who sold me that car is a relative clause. It contains an NP and a VP, so it is a clause; 
it modifies the NP the woman, so it is a relative clause not a complement clause. Diagramming 
the sentence as shown in Figure 6.18, we can see that there are two NPs with the same referent, 
that is, two NPs that refer to the same thing, the woman. In the surface structure, one of them 
becomes part of a relative clause modifying the other through the relative clause syntactic 
operation. 
The main clause here is the woman disappeared suddenly as indicated in the tree with the 
NP the woman and the VP disappeared suddenly directly under the top S node. The deep 
structure of the embedded sentence again contains a COMP, but in this case, it serves as a 
place holder for the relative pronoun who that appears in the surface structure. That relative 
pronoun takes the place of the repeated NP, the woman, which does not show up again in the 
surface structure. You’ll notice that the embedded sentence S comes under the NP the woman 
in the main sentence because it modifies that NP. 
Under some circumstances, the relative pronoun may be omitted, as the following sentence 
indicates. 
18. The book that I lent you is due at the library. 
19. The book I lent you is due at the library. 
We can use these diagrams to help us differentiate what, in the terminology of traditional 
grammar, are called dependent clauses and independent clauses. If an S (a sentence) occurs 
within another constituent, an NP or VP, rather than as the top node, it is a dependent clause. 
Independent clauses are only dominated by the S node. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
110
  SYNTAX 
USING SYNTAX IN WRITING 
We’ve examined only a few of the many syntactic operations possible. It is these syntactic 
operations that allow for the same underlying structure to have many surface forms, a phe-
nomenon that is particularly helpful to writers as it allows them many ways to say something. 
A man who was wearing a blue hat stole the pies from the cart yesterday. 
The pies were stolen from the cart by a man who was wearing a blue hat yesterday. 
Yesterday, a man wearing a blue hat stole the pies from the cart. 
A man wearing a blue hat stole the pies from the cart yesterday. 
The pies were stolen from the cart yesterday by a man wearing a blue hat. 
It was a man wearing a blue hat who stole the pies from the cart yesterday. 
It was yesterday that the pies from the cart were stolen by a man wearing a blue hat. 
I could go on, but you get the picture: Although not all are particularly graceful sentences, 
they all mean the same thing. For writers, this is particularly useful when they want to fore-
ground a word, put a phrase at the beginning of a sentence for cohesion or as a transition, or 
move it to the end of a sentence for emphasis. 
UNIVERSAL GRAMMAR 
Obviously, there is a lot of variation among different languages on the surface level; anyone 
who has studied a language other than their native language is aware of that. But what about 
at the deeper level? It turns out that there are some aspects of structure that apply across 
all languages; linguists call those aspects principles of Universal Grammar (UG). There 
are also areas of structure in which there is variation among languages; linguists call those 
aspects parameters. NPs can serve as a somewhat simplified example. All languages have 
NPs that contain a noun and may contain other elements such as determiners, adjectives, or 
prepositional phrases. That is a principle of UG. The order of those elements in the surface 
structure varies greatly across languages. In English, as we saw, the usual order is det Adj N. 
If there is a numeral, it comes directly after the determiner: the four little pigs, for example. 
In some languages, the determiner and numeral would come before the noun, but the adjec-
tive would come after it; in other languages, that numeral would come last; in still others, 
all those elements would follow the noun. The order of these elements, then, is a parameter 
that can vary across languages, but the constituent NP occurs in all languages and is thus a 
principle of UG. 
L1 ACQUISITION IN FOCUS: ACQUIRING SYNTAX 
Acquiring a first language entails not only learning that language’s sounds or signs and the 
ways in which they can be put together into morphemes and words, but also how those words 
can be put together to form sentences. That task entails learning the underlying system we 
have been examining in this chapter. Children learn the permissible and impermissible word 
orders for sentences and allowable variations (questions or negations, for example); the rules 
for embedding phrases and sentences (what constituents can go inside other constituents); and 

   
 
SYNTAX 
111 
all the many syntactic operations that allow us to manipulate the deep structure of a sentence. 
One key aspect of that system, you’ll recall, is its ability to produce novel sentences; in learn-
ing that underlying system, children learn to not only produce novel sentences but understand 
them as well. 
Seems like a lot to ask small children to do, but children do so easily and quickly. By the 
age of three, children have mastered most of the complex set of rules and syntactic operations 
required to form questions and negations and to embed sentences. This ability shows that 
children clearly understand that sentences possess a structure that is distinct from the surface 
linear order of words. There is a great deal of evidence for this; we’ll discuss only a small part 
of that evidence here. As we noted in Chapter 2, at the age of two, children begin to form two-
word utterances that are not just two words randomly joined. Instead, those two words have 
clear syntactic relations: two NPs, for example, that are subject and object in adult speech, 
Daddy shoe used to mean Daddy is putting on his shoe. 
They also rarely make errors in word order; their utterances, though not adult-like, still 
follow the word order rules of whatever language they are learning. English-speaking chil-
dren, for example, put NPs that are subjects before the verb and NPs that are objects after it, 
as required by English syntax. If we examine sentences typically uttered by young children, 
such as Molly play new game, we can see that although there are no inflectional morphemes 
to indicate tense on the verb, the sentence clearly consists of an NP and VP, and the NP after 
the verb clearly consists of AdjP and N. 
SYNTAX IN YOUR (NATURAL) WORLD: DO BIRDS HAVE SYNTAX? 
We’ve seen that syntax is about how the combination and order of phrases create meaningful 
utterances. For many years, linguists believed that syntax was unique to human communica-
tion. That may not be true, however, as new research has shown. Birds, it turns out, may have 
a syntax of their own. That is, they may combine different sounds or notes to communicate 
complex meanings. 
Researchers in Japan wondered if some bird songs were composed of different elements 
with distinct meanings, as human language is, and if reordering their notes allows for the cre-
ation of compound meanings. What these researchers concluded was that the Japanese great 
tit, a species related to chickadees, may indeed have a sort of syntax that uses note-ordering 
rules to combine different meanings into one compound meaning. Though not quite syntax 
as we have discussed it here, the study provides evidence that these birds pay attention to how 
notes are put together in specific combinations. 
SYNTAX IN OTHER LANGUAGES 
Like all aspects of language, syntax varies greatly across languages and at all levels. We’ll 
examine a small part of this variety in the word order of sentences and noun phrases. Though 
all languages have NPs and VPs, they do not all put them in the same order. In English, the 
usual word order for sentences is SVO, subject–verb–object. We indicate that in our phrase 
structure rules: S – NP VP and VP – V (NP). In Maori, spoken in New Zealand, and in Scots 
Gaelic, spoken in Scotland, the usual order is VSO, verb–subject–object. The usual word 
order in Japanese is SOV, subject–object–verb. In Fiji, it is VOS, verb–object–subject. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
112
  SYNTAX 
The order of elements in an NP also varies across languages. In English, we usually put 
the article before the noun: the boy, a dog. In Ewe, spoken in West Africa, the article comes 
after the noun. In Ewe, the dog would be avu la (literally, dog the). If we add a number and 
adjective, in English, we usually have det–number–adjective–noun: these four red apples. 
In Basque, the order would be number–noun–adjective–determiner: Lau sagar gorri hauek 
(four apples red these). In Spanish, the order would be det–number–noun–adjective: estas 
cuatro manzanas rojas (these four apples red). 
We can see differences from English in both sentence order and noun phrase order in the 
following sentence from Scots Gaelic: chummaic an duine more an cu beag (literally, saw the 
man big the dog small) or in English, the big man saw the small dog. 
A NOTE ABOUT THEORY 
The syntax theory we have used here was originally proposed by Noam Chomsky, perhaps 
the most influential linguist of the 20th century. In his 1957 book Syntactic Structures, he 
revolutionized the field of linguistics when he introduced the theory of generative grammar, 
a theory that seeks to describe a set of rules and operations that allows us to produce and 
understand the infinite number of possible sentences in a language. In the years since then, 
several newer theories have evolved within generative grammar (lexical functional gram-
mar, relational grammar, head-driven phrase structure grammar), all of which differ from 
the original formulation in significant ways. What they all have in common with that original 
theory, however, is a realization that syntactic relationships among phrases in a sentence can-
not be accounted for by examining only the linear surface structure. Instead, to represent how 
sentences are put together, we need to examine what we have called the deep structure. 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
• 
Syntax is the branch of linguistics that analyzes the structures and rules that allow for 
combining words into phrases and phrases into sentences to create meaningful utterances. 
It investigates the structure of sentences, the relationship of parts of the sentence to one 
another, and the relationship of sentences to one another in terms of both meaning and struc-
ture. It seeks to describe the rules that underlie the generativity that is present in all languages. 
• 
All sentences have a surface structure, which is the linear word order, and a deep struc-
ture, which is composed of hierarchically arranged constituents (noun phrases [NP], 
prepositional phrases [PP], and verb phrases [VP], among others). 
• 
A finite set of phrase structure rules describes this deep constituent structure, indicating 
which elements make up each constituent and which constituents can be part of other 
constituents. The deep structure of any sentence can be illustrated with a tree diagram 
using these phrase structure rules. 
• 
Syntactic operations can be applied to that deep structure to derive different surface 
structures. Some common syntactic operations include adverb movement and yes/no 
question formation. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SYNTAX 
113 
• 
These syntactic operations help us account for how some sentences are related: structur-
ally synonymous sentences or declarative statements and questions, for example. 
• 
There is a set of syntactic principles that all languages share, what linguists call Universal 
Grammar, and parameters that are variations of these principles across languages. 
• 
In acquiring their first language, children learn the structure of that language as they also 
learn its words. 
KEY TERMS 
syntax 
grammar 
generativity 
surface structure/linear structure 
deep structure/constituent structure/hierar-
chical structure 
constituents: NP, VP, PP, AdjP, AdvP, S 
phrase structure rules 
determiner (det) 
syntactic categories 
immediate constituent 
recursion 
structural and lexical ambiguity 
structural and lexical synonymity 
structural relationships 
syntactic operations 
movement operations 
adverb movement 
auxiliary (AUX) 
subject-auxiliary inversion 
embedded sentences 
complementizer (COMP) 
complement clause 
relative clause 
relative pronoun 
principles and parameters of 
Universal Grammar 
EXPLORATIONS 
Exploration 1: Write a phrase that conforms to each structure: 
Noun phrases 
1. 
Det + N 
2. 
Det + AdjP + N 
3. 
Det + AdjP + AdjP + N 
4. 
Det + AdjP + N + PP 
5. 
Det + AdjP + N + S 
Verb phrases 
1. 
V 
2. 
V + AdvP 
3. 
V + NP 
4. 
V + NP + PP 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114
  SYNTAX 
5. 
V + AdvP + NP + NP + PP 
6. 
V + AdvP + S 
Exploration 2: Identifying NPs 
Identify the NPs in the following sentences: 
The girl on the red swing pumped her legs as though her life depended on it, but she 
couldn’t get that swing to go any higher than the top of the fence in the yard nearby. 
My neighbor plays the French horn for a well-known orchestra that recently went on 
strike to protest their treatment by the management of the organization. 
Exploration 3: Practice using phrase structure rules 
Using the phrase structure rules listed in the chapter, draw a tree diagram of the deep structure 
of each phrase or sentence. Not all are complete sentences. 
1. The angry child 
2. A difficult theoretical book about linguistics 
3. Into the fog in the dead of night 
4. Sat on the chair on the porch 
5. Enjoys chocolate at any time of the day 
6. The puppy found a bone. 
7. My guitar gently weeps. 
8. The ice cream melted in her hand. 
9. She wanted another cone immediately. 
10. The fierce wind destroyed the potato crop. 
11. A fabulous old castle appeared in the mist. 
12. A demented passenger drove the train into the tunnel at high speed. 
13. The school for gifted children collapsed in the storm. 
14. The children put the toys from their aunt in the box. 
Exploration 4: More practice 
Using our phrase structure rules, draw a tree diagram of the deep structure of each sentence. 
1. 
The committee awarded the cup to the winner of the race. 
2. 
The senator apologized for his mistake. 
3. 
The linguistics professor challenged her students with an extremely difficult test. 
4. 
The reporter realized that the interviewee had lied. 
5. 
A stranger cleverly observed that a dangerous spy lurked in the alley by the old shipyards. 
6. 
The spy met his contact, who was a double agent in disguise. 
7. 
Yesterday, our student was given the prize for the best new essay by the faculty 
committee. 
Exploration 5: Structural ambiguity 
The sentences that follow are ambiguous. First determine the two possible meanings for 
each, then explain the ambiguity in terms of the relationships among the constituents in the 

   
 
 
 
 
 
SYNTAX 
115 
sentence. Finally, choose one sentence to diagram, noting which diagram reflects which 
meaning (remember, if it is ambiguous, there will be at least two diagrams). 
1. 
Annie called the monster from Minneapolis. 
2. 
My living room has several small tables and chairs. 
3. 
The president announced they would leave on Friday. 
4. 
She attacked the thief with the umbrella. 
5. 
The commission finally decided on the train. 
Exploration 6: How many ways can you say it? 
Choose one of the example sentences in this chapter or create one of your own; then see how 
many ways you can rewrite it without changing the meaning. That is, write as many surface 
structures for your sentence as you can without changing its deep structure. 
FURTHER READING 
Larson, R. (2010). Grammar as science. MIT Press. Further discussion of concepts from this 
chapter. 
phpSyntaxTree: http://ironcreek.net/phpsyntaxtree. This site helps you produce trees. 
Tallerman, M. (2020). Understanding syntax (5th ed.). Routledge. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 7 
Semantics 
Relationships among words 
First glance 
How do we mean things with words? 
Reference, sense, and meaning 
Semantic relations: 
• Synonymity, slurs, and euphemisms 
• Antonymity, complementarity 
• Hyponymy 
INTRODUCTION 
• Homonymy and polysemy 
Figurative language: 
• Metaphors: Do tables have legs? 
• Metonymy: Can a House, even a White 
one, talk? 
• Idioms: Who’s pushing up what daisies? 
Semantic fields, semantic roles 
In this chapter, we’ll turn our attention to semantics, the study of how we construct and 
understand the meanings of words and sentences. For a word, that might seem like a straight-
forward endeavor: Just look it up in the dictionary; that’ll tell you what a word means. Well, 
yes and no. The dictionary definition never tells the whole story of a word’s meaning. And 
words help construct the meaning of a sentence by the roles they play in it. 
MEANING AND MEANINGS 
We can start by asking what it is we know when we know a word. Clearly, we know how to 
pronounce or sign it; how to use it in a sentence; how to use it appropriately in discourse; 
how to use it non-literally ( freeze to mean stop as well as to make something frozen). 
What is not so obvious is that our knowledge includes much more than that: what other 
words it is related to; what affective connotations it has; what social meaning it carries, 
and more. 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-7 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
SEMANTICS 
117 
The concepts of reference and sense can help us begin to differentiate various aspects of 
word meaning. Reference (also called referential meaning) is the association of the word 
with the object or concept it refers to; that object or concept is the word’s referent. This 
type of meaning is most easily seen in words that refer to objects or individuals: the car, 
her cat, that sandwich, Michelle Obama, my teacher in fifth grade. Not all words, not even 
all nouns, refer to specific objects or individuals, however. Take the following sentence: 
Preparing to become a teacher takes years. In that sentence, teacher has a related but not 
identical meaning to its meaning in the phrase, my teacher in fifth grade. In the former, 
there is an additional element to the meaning, something broader and more abstract, not 
referring to any one teacher. Sense is the term used to refer to the additional elements of 
meaning beyond reference. 
The distinction between sense and reference does not exhaust our ideas of meaning, by 
any means. We know that certain words and phrases carry what is called affective meaning, 
meaning about the speaker’s attitudes or emotions toward what is said. The idiot who banged 
into my car hadn’t a clue how to drive has a different affective meaning from the driver who 
accidentally hit my car seemed to be unsure of how to maneuver his vehicle, even though their 
sense is about the same. 
Words and utterances also carry social meaning: information about social identities 
of the speaker and information about the relationship between the speaker and listeners. 
Take the following utterances, for example. Thanks for the grub, Jake; it was great and 
Thank you so much for dinner, Mr. Jackson. It was delicious. We can probably guess that 
the relationship between the speaker and listener in the first utterance is closer and more 
equal and in the second is more distant. Again, it’s partly the word choice that carries 
that information. We will discuss social meaning in more detail throughout Chapters 8 
through 13. 
Connotation is the suggested or implied meaning commonly associated with a word; 
denotation is the explicit or literal meaning. Affective or social meanings are often expressed 
through connotation, which can be positive or negative. Roses connote romance or love; rain 
often connotes sorrow. Calling someone rigid connotes disapproval of his actions; calling him 
determined connotes approval. Connotative meanings are not universal; they are ones that are 
commonly associated with a term in a particular culture or society. The heart is seen as the 
seat of emotions in English-speaking cultures, for example, so its use connotes emotions for 
English speakers. The liver is seen as the seat of emotion in Indian culture, so heart would not 
carry the same associations for Hindi speakers. 
SEMANTIC RELATIONS: IS SALT THE OPPOSITE 
OF PEPPER? 
Word meanings exist in relationship with other word meanings. That relationship may be one 
of similar meanings or opposite meanings; it may be a part/whole relationship, or a “kind of” 
relationship; it may be a matter of multiple meanings, some figurative, some literal; or a mat-
ter of being part of a semantic field, a relationship discussed later. Knowing the meaning of 
a word also means knowing the ways a particular word relates to other words. Not only are 
those relationships an important part of lexical semantics; an understanding of them can help 
us examine certain social issues as well. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118
  SEMANTICS 
Synonyms 
Synonyms are perhaps the best known of semantic relations. As you probably learned in school, 
synonyms are words that mean generally the same thing: attorney/lawyer or bush/shrub, for 
example. Writers often use a thesaurus to find synonyms. As any thesaurus user knows, how-
ever, synonymous words are not always interchangeable; in fact, there are no synonyms that 
mean exactly the same thing. Doctor and physician are often listed as synonyms, but their 
meanings do not exactly overlap. I am a doctor, for example, as I have a Ph.D., but I’m not a 
physician, as I do not practice medicine. Even words that mean generally the same thing can 
vary by how formal or casual they are: intelligent means about the same as smart but is less 
casual in tone. And the use of the two terms is different; we talk about street smarts, but not 
about street intelligences. That is, synonyms differ by how they collocate. 
A collocation is a set of words that seem to native speakers to naturally belong together. They 
can be combinations of adjective and noun, verb and object, or other types of combinations: salt 
and pepper collocate, for example. They belong together. In the earlier example, we can say that 
smart collocates with street (street smarts) but intelligence doesn’t. Strong and powerful are 
synonyms, to examine another example, but they collocate differently. We generally say strong 
tea but not powerful tea. It’s not that powerful tea is wrong; it’s just odd in English. Similarly, 
some nouns collocate with certain verbs and not others. We use the phrase commit murder, for 
example, rather than make murder or do murder, which seem logically possible. We use make 
and do for other actions: make a proposal and do research. We use still other verbs for other 
actions: we say catch (not find) a bus and we talk about snow falling, not dropping or descending. 
Synonyms can differ in social meaning as well as usage. Purse and pocketbook are often 
listed as synonyms, but one, pocketbook, indicates that the speaker is probably older than 50; 
its synonym, purse, does not. Use of hot dish, a synonym for casserole, carries the additional 
social meaning of being from the Midwest, a social meaning casserole does not carry. 
Semantics in your world: slurs and euphemisms 
Euphemisms are synonyms used to make a concept sound less offensive or more accept-
able. These can be common and unremarkable: the john for the bathroom, which in itself is 
a euphemism for toilet; make love for sexual intercourse; knocked up for pregnant; lose your 
lunch for vomiting. Many euphemisms replace either religious terms or swear words: jeez for 
Jesus, darn for damn, or the f-word for fuck. These common euphemisms can offer insight 
into what a society deems unacceptable to discuss: sex, excretion, vomit, obscenities, for 
example. It is a bit hard for me to see why society deems pregnancy in need of euphemisms, 
but it does; there are lots of them: bun in the oven, in the family way, with child, preggers. 
Euphemisms can also be used to hide some disturbing activities, as the following military 
euphemisms demonstrate: anti-personnel device for bomb, neutralize for kill, friendly fire for 
fire coming from one’s own side that causes injury or death to one’s own forces. 
Slurs are offensive synonyms for more neutral terms, usually for groups of people. Towel 
head is an offensive term or slur used to refer to Arabs, for example; bitch an offensive term 
for women. Dago and greaser were slurs my father remembers being aimed at him as an 
Italian immigrant to the United States. I remember him telling me how he and most Italians 
he knew also felt the pronunciation of Italian as [aytælyən] was a slur. When I tell my students 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEMANTICS 
119 
that, many react with concern, knowing that they and their families use that pronunciation 
without meaning it to be derogatory. They bring up the question of who gets to decide whether 
a particular term is a slur, a question that can lead to heated debates. 
A few years ago, for example, Arizona decided to rename a mountain near Tucson. What had 
been called Squaw Peak became Piestewa Peak, named after a Hopi woman from the area who 
had been killed on combat duty in Iraq, the first Native American woman killed while a U.S. sol-
dier in combat. The debate centered around whether or not the term squaw was a slur and around 
who gets to decide that question. Some claimed it was just a term for a young American Indian 
woman. Others pointed out, quite correctly, that it had long been used derogatorily, at least since 
the early 1800s, a time when a general belief system that Whites were superior to other groups 
necessitated different terms to refer to men, women, and children who were not White. Thus 
buck, squaw, and papoose became a common way of referring to Native Americans, but not to 
Whites. Squaw seems to have been borrowed into English from Massachusett, an Algonquin 
language in which it did indeed mean a young woman, with no pejorative connotation. That 
fact, however, has little or no bearing on the question of whether it is a slur today in English. To 
determine whether a word is a slur, we need to examine the historical context not just of that 
individual word, but also of any history of oppression, whether it be of Native Americans and 
their cultures or other oppressed groups. And we need to ask: who gets to decide if a word is 
offensive? To me, the answer to that question belongs to those to whom the term refers. 
Antonyms 
Antonyms are pairs of words that are opposite in some way. Good/bad, dead/alive, 
teacher/student are all antonym pairs, but they differ in significant ways in their “opposite-
ness.” The clearest type of antonyms are gradable antonyms: big/small, young/old, up/down, 
long/short, wide/narrow. These antonyms express two ends of a scale with gradations: a thing 
can be smaller or bigger, the biggest or smallest, or very small or extremely big. Thus, with 
gradable antonyms, what counts as the meaning of any one term is relative; my dog, for 
example, is considered big compared to the dog down the street, a Scottie, but small when 
compared to the one next door, a Great Pyrenees. 
Relational (or converse) antonyms are not really opposites at all but pairs of words that 
describe a certain relationship: parent/child, above/below, teacher/student, or lend/borrow, 
for example. Although they are often seen as opposite ends of a relationship, these terms 
describe what is called converseness: parent is not the opposite of child; instead, they have a 
converse relationship such that if A is the parent of B, then B must be the child of A. Similarly, 
above and below have a converse relationship: if X is above Y, then Y must be below X. 
Complementary antonyms are in a binary relationship: if you are one, you cannot be the 
other. They are sometimes defined as absolute opposites—something is either legal or illegal, 
someone is either dead or alive, you either passed that test or you failed it, you’re either single 
or married, at least legally. 
Semantics in your world: Complementarity 
Some introductory linguistics textbooks use male and female as examples of complementary 
antonyms. We noted in Chapter 3 that the terms man and woman are not complementary 

 
 
 
 
120
  SEMANTICS 
antonyms because transgender or intersex individuals have attributes of both. If we see man 
as the opposite of woman, we run the risk both of seeing people as belonging to opposing 
camps (people still talk about the opposite sex) and of seeing all people as either one or the 
other. Defining men and women as binary categories can have consequences in many fields 
of life. Recently, the International Olympic Commission decided that an athlete who had 
competed as a woman for years could no longer do so without taking drugs that lowered her 
unusually high level of testosterone. This athlete, who is intersex and identifies as female, 
has naturally, not drug-induced, high levels of testosterone, higher than many other female 
athletes. The commission basically decided that people needed to fall into one of the binary 
categories of man or woman; there was no room for an in-between classification. 
Semantics in your world: Markedness 
Although antonyms are opposites, they are not always equal opposites. Or to be more precise, 
they do not sit on equivalent ends of a scale. Markedness refers to this phenomenon, one in 
which one term, the unmarked term, is seen as neutral or the norm, a sort of default mode, 
and its opposite or related term, the marked term, is seen as an abnorm, somehow out of the 
ordinary. Generally, for example, big is unmarked and small is marked. That is, if we want 
to know something’s size, we ask, How big is it? That big is unmarked, no special meaning 
attached. We could ask, How small is it? If we do so, however, we’ve used a marked term and 
thus indicated that something is unusual, perhaps the object is especially small. Many pairs of 
gradable antonyms have marked and unmarked words: tall is unmarked, short is marked (we 
ask how tall someone is, not how short); wide is unmarked, narrow is marked. 
We can see markedness at work in other ways too. The term bird, for example, includes 
various types of birds, but birds that fly are the unmarked type. We generally mark those birds 
that do not fly by adding the adjective flightless before the noun. We have birds (unmarked for 
flight) and flightless birds (marked for lack of flight). 
This markedness with birds is innocuous. It is not so innocuous with terms about social 
relations. If we constantly mark certain terms for race, as we do with Black History or Asian-
American History, the implication is that the norm, the unmarked form, of history is White, 
for we do not mark history for whiteness by saying White History. If we consistently mark 
certain professions for gender, as we do when we say female astronaut or female engineer, 
or male nurse or male kindergarten teacher, the implication is that the unmarked, normal 
situation is that astronauts and engineers are male, and nurses and kindergarten teachers are 
female. Using male or White as unmarked terms sets up in people’s minds a view of reality 
in which history is the history of White people and where women are not astronauts or engi-
neers, a view of reality which does not conform to the world we live in. 
Hyponymy and part/whole relationships 
Hyponyms are specific terms that are part of a more general superordinate term: roses, 
lilacs, and peonies are all hyponyms of the superordinate term flower; chair, sofa, and table 
are hyponyms of the superordinate term furniture; tigers, lions, bears, raccoons, snakes, and 
birds are hyponyms of the superordinate term animal. Hyponyms have a “kind of” relation-
ship with their superordinate term: lilacs are a kind of flower; lions are a kind of animal. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEMANTICS 
121 
Each term may have other terms which are its hyponyms: insect is a hyponym of animal, and 
mosquito, gnat, and butterfly are hyponyms of insect. 
The term hyponym simply refers to words and their relationship to other words, but how 
we see that relationship gives us insight into how we see the world. Cultural anthropologists, 
for example, study hyponyms as a window into how different languages conceptualize the 
world. Color terms are notorious for varying across cultures and languages. Ancient Greek 
and Biblical Hebrew had no word for blue or green; objects that we call blue or green were 
a kind of black in those languages. Ancient Egyptian, however, did have words for blue and 
green. The Meriam language, spoken on Murray Island, has names for black, white, and red, 
but no separate name for blue; like Greek and Hebrew, the name used for something blue is 
the same as that used for something black. Modern Russian, on the other hand, has two words 
for our word blue: siney, which means dark blue, and goluboy, which means light blue. To us, 
light blue and dark blue are both hyponyms of blue; to Russian speakers, they are not. They 
are separate colors. 
A part/whole relationship is like hyponymy in that it is hierarchical but different in that it 
does not consist of a “kind of” relationship. Body parts are good examples: toes are in a part/ 
whole relationship to foot, for example, but toes are not a kind of foot. Rather, the term foot 
includes the idea of toes, for toes are part of the foot. 
Homonymy and polysemy 
Words can carry more than one meaning in various ways. Homonyms are words that have 
the same spoken or written forms but different meanings. They can be homophones, words 
that are pronounced the same but have different meanings (bank—a financial institution or 
the edge of a river) or homographs, words that are spelled the same, but are pronounced dif-
ferently and have different meanings: row (moving a boat with oars) and row (an argument). 
A polysemous word is one that has multiple meanings that are related either historically or 
conceptually: rich is polysemous in that it does not mean the same thing in describing a per-
son or soil. In one case it refers to quantity (amount of money); in the other, quality. But the 
meanings are related conceptually in a way that the two meanings of row, for example, are 
not. Thus, rich is considered a polysemous word. 
FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE 
So far, we’ve been discussing word meaning as if it is always literal, but much of our language 
use is non-literal or figurative. Phrases like keep an eye out for her or getting hitched, for 
example, are figurative in that no eye is really out, nor is anyone being physically yoked to 
another person. Non-literal or figurative language expressions, whose meanings do not con-
form to their primary meaning, are an important part of the meaning of words and expressions. 
There are various types of figurative language, including metaphors, metonymy, and idioms. 
Metaphors 
Metaphors make use of or create figurative meanings by extending the meaning of a word 
beyond its primary sense to describe something not originally part of its primary reference. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122
  SEMANTICS 
Thus, two dissimilar things are presented as having a type of resemblance, which can be 
implied or directly stated. Metaphors work by referring to one domain of meaning using 
language usually associated with another domain. Metaphorical language is often seen as 
a rhetorical device found in poetic language, but it is extremely common in our everyday 
discourse. For example, the manager of a company is described as its head, a metaphorical 
use of a body part to describe company relationships. Using body parts or body functions 
metaphorically, we talk about the leg of a chair, the foot of the table, the eye of a needle, pull-
ing someone’s leg, the neck of a bottle, having a heart-to-heart, seeing through an argument, 
having a long face, lending a hand, seeing eye-to-eye, the long arm of the law, and more. 
Each of these expressions, which probably do not seem like metaphors to most of us, take one 
domain, the body, and apply terms from that domain to another domain: furniture, objects, 
activities, etc. 
Some metaphorical use is so widespread it seems to be woven into the language itself. For 
example, in English, time is talked about metaphorically as money, as we can see in the fol-
lowing expressions: waste time, spend time, live on borrowed time, save time, budget one’s 
time. Similarly, arguments are often metaphorically a type of war: attack her argument, be 
right on target in her arguments, win or lose an argument, shoot down an argument. Lakoff 
and Johnson (1980) argue that some metaphors are such an integral part of language that they 
provide a structured way of mapping the world onto a language. As such they are a funda-
mental part of our thinking and can influence how we see the world and behave in it. We will 
come back to this claim in Chapter 14 when we discuss ecolinguistics and the metaphors we 
use about nature. 
Metonymy 
Metonymy, a type of figurative language similar to metaphor, involves extending the mean-
ing of one word to refer to something commonly associated with it. The distinction between 
metaphor and metonymy is not always clear cut, but generally metaphors extend the mean-
ing of a word to areas not usually associated with it while metonyms extend it to areas 
related to that word. Like metaphors, metonyms are common in everyday language. It’s not 
unusual to hear utterances like the following: The White House imposed tariffs on China 
today or The Pentagon responded to claims of corruption. The Pentagon and the White 
House are buildings so they cannot literally do anything (except perhaps stand there). Using 
the name of a building to refer to either an institution or a person is a form of metonymy. 
We similarly use names of countries or cities metonymically to refer to sports teams: The 
United States has never won a world championship in men’s soccer, but they have in wom-
en’s soccer or Baltimore won the final game of the World Series. We can use the material 
an object is made of to refer to it metonymically: plastic for credit cards. We can even use 
ourselves to refer to our cars at times: I’m parked three blocks away uses I metonymically 
to refer to my car. 
Like metaphors, metonymic expressions structure not just our language but our thoughts, 
attitudes, and actions. Metonyms, for example, can hide certain features of a situation. Using 
an expression like boots on the ground, a metonym for combat troops, disguises the fact that 
actual people, the soldiers, are involved. They have become merely a piece of clothing, boots, 
rather than individuals who can be killed or wounded. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEMANTICS 
123 
Idioms 
Still another type of figurative language is idioms, conventionalized phrases whose meaning 
cannot be predicted by examining the literal meaning of the words themselves, phrases like 
putting your foot in your mouth, sawing wood, pushing up daisies, flying by the seat of your 
pants, a fly in the ointment, a cross to bear, a rotten egg, the squeaky wheel (the one that gets 
the grease), one’s heartstrings (the ones pulled by a sad story), and more. We can see the dif-
ference between idioms and non-idiomatic phrases by examining a common idiom: going out 
on a limb (taking a chance). Limb has a synonym, branch, but going out on a branch has a 
different meaning altogether, only a literal one. Idioms, then, tend to function as phrases in 
which one cannot substitute different words. 
SEMANTIC FIELDS 
Semantic fields are sets of related words that denote or connote something about the same 
general phenomenon. Sports is a semantic field, one containing terms like baseball, bas-
ketball, soccer, team, field, equipment, fans, leagues, win, lose, and many more. Terms in a 
semantic field may be in a hyponymic relation to the superordinate term (soccer is a kind of 
sport); some may be synonyms (football is synonym for soccer, at least in some countries), and 
some may be antonyms (win/lose). There is evidence that we mentally store word meanings 
by semantic field so that one term in the field may evoke another. 
What’s interesting, at least to me, about semantic fields is that they help us see how differ-
ent languages and cultures divide the world up differently. Anthropologists have long been 
interested in these differences, often citing kinship terms as examples of them. All cultures 
and languages have ways of referring to the semantic field of kin relations; they just divide 
up that field differently. The Yanomamo Indians in Brazil, for example, make no distinction 
between one’s brother and one’s male cousins, as long as those cousins are sons of paternal 
uncles or maternal aunts! Both are [ɛiwə]. There is a different term for son of a maternal uncle 
or paternal aunt: [tʃoriw] (Deutscher, 2010). The semantic field for English contains the terms 
brother and cousin; that for Yanomamo contains the terms [ɛiwə] and [tʃoriw], neither of 
which quite matches up with brother and cousin. 
SEMANTIC ROLES AND SENTENCE MEANING 
It’s clear that we rely on word meanings in creating sentences. But knowing the meaning of 
individual words in a sentence does not tell us the meaning of the sentence itself. We also need 
to understand what roles those words, especially the NPs, play in the sentences. Those roles are 
referred to as semantic (or thematic) roles. Each sentence consists of a verb and one or more NPs 
that relate to that verb. Each NP in a sentence plays a different semantic role vis-à-vis the verb; 
that is, it contributes to the action, situation, or state described by the verb in different ways. 
This rather abstract theory may be easier to understand with a simple example. Let’s look 
at two sentences: 
1) 
The dog gnawed the bone. 
2) 
The bone was gnawed by the dog. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
124
  SEMANTICS 
In sentence 1, the NP the dog is the doer of the action of the verb, gnawing. We call that role 
the agent. The bone has a different role in the sentence; it is being acted upon; we call that role 
the patient (I know, a rather odd term, but that’s what we have). 
The syntactic roles of the dog and the bone are different in sentences 1 and 2: in 1, the dog 
is the subject; in 2, the bone is the subject. The semantic roles of the NPs the dog and the bone 
are still the same, however: the dog is the agent; the bone is the patient in both 1 and 2 because 
the dog is still doing the action of the verb, gnawing, and the bone is still being acted upon. 
The important point here is that the semantic roles have not changed because the mean-
ing has not changed. Semantic roles, then, are a way of characterizing the meaning relation-
ship between NPs and the verb, no matter how they show up in the surface structure of the 
sentence. 
The major semantic roles include the following. The noun playing the listed role is italicized. 
1. 
Agent: the one who does the action: The dog gnawed the bone. 
2. Patient: the entity that is acted upon: The dog gnawed the bone. 
3. 
Experiencer: the noun that experiences emotional or sensory input: The dog was 
hungry. 
4. 
Instrument: the means through which an action occurs: The dog was groomed with a 
special comb. 
5. 
Locative and temporal: nouns that show time or place: We brought the dog home in 
October. 
6. 
Recipient: something that receives a physical object: The vet gave our dog a shot. 
7. 
Beneficiary: someone or thing for which an action is done: She gave us some treats for 
our dog. 
8. 
Cause: a natural force that causes a change: The storm ruined our plans for a walk with 
the dog. 
We can see from all this that one important factor in how meaning is constructed in sen-
tences is the semantic role each NP plays. 
CORPUS LINGUISTICS 
Corpus linguistics has given linguists a powerful tool for examining semantics questions. 
Suppose you want to know what words most often collocate with other particular words in 
American English or what adverbs are most often used in sports reporting. Those would be 
difficult things to ascertain as just one individual. With the help of databases, however, it is 
easily done. 
A corpus is a database, a machine-readable collection of texts. Corpus linguistics uses 
these databases to analyze language. As a field, corpus linguistics has been around for dec-
ades; with recent advances in technology, its use has expanded greatly. The assumption 
underlying computer analysis of these databases is that by examining a large number of texts, 
we can detect patterns that otherwise might not be apparent. 
And these corpora are large. The first one was the Brown Corpus in 1967, which con-
sisted of about a million words. That’s peanuts nowadays. One current corpus, the Corpus 
of Contemporary American English, consists of about 450 million words. Many of these 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEMANTICS 
125 
databases contain not just texts from today, but ones from hundreds of years ago as well. Such 
large databases are being used in all sorts of ways today: speech synthesis, speech recogni-
tion, machine translation, and more. 
As you may have noticed if you’ve been on the phone with a machine lately, using com-
puters to emulate speech is not an easy matter. Computers must first break the stream of 
sound into words (phonology and morphology), then ascertain the relationship among those 
words and determine what it all means (syntax and semantics). Each of those steps, of course, 
involves numerous smaller steps; if a word can be both a noun and a verb, determining which 
it is in a specific case, for example. The human brain does so easily; computers have to work 
a bit harder at it. 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
• 
Semantics is the study of meaning, of how we construct and understand the words and 
sentences in our language. Meaning includes not only referential meaning but sense, 
affective meaning, and social meaning. 
• 
Word meanings are part of a network of semantic relations that include synonyms, anto-
nyms, hyponyms, part/whole relationships, and homophones. 
• 
Figurative language, which includes metaphors, metonyms, and idioms, is an important 
part of our everyday language and offers insight into the ways we view the world. 
• 
Examining semantic relations and concepts such as slurs, markedness, and complemen-
tarity can help us analyze and understand social issues. 
• 
Semantic fields are sets of related words that denote or connote something about the 
same general phenomenon. 
• 
The meaning of words in sentences includes the semantic role they play in a sentence: 
agent, patient, experiencer, instrument, locative, temporal, recipient, beneficiary, and cause. 
KEY TERMS 
reference/referential meaning/referent 
sense 
connotation and denotation 
semantic relations 
synonyms 
collocation 
slurs 
euphemisms 
antonyms: gradable, relational, complemen-
tary 
markedness: marked and unmarked terms 
hyponymy 
part/whole relationship 
homonymy: homophones, homographs 
polysemy 
figurative language 
metaphors 
metonymy 
idioms 
semantic fields 
semantic roles 
corpus linguistics 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126
  SEMANTICS 
EXPLORATIONS 
Exploration 1: Synonyms 
How do the following synonyms differ in terms of their affective and/or social meanings 
or their collocations? Think about level of formality, gender, age, ethnicity, things like that. 
Then identify a context in which one synonym would work but another would not. Can you 
add any terms to each list? 
• 
Idiot, ass, jerk, airhead, bastard, punk, fool, nincompoop 
• 
Talk, converse, gossip, swap stories, chat, chitchat, gab, yak, discuss, parley, have a 
heart-to-heart, have a conversation 
• 
Friend, bud, pal, mate, chum, comrade, BFF, colleague, associate, bestie, kindred 
spirit 
Exploration 2: Antonyms 
Identify antonyms for each term and mark each pair as gradable, relational, or complemen-
tary. Identify any pairs which have an unmarked and marked form and explain your reason-
ing. Compare your answers and discuss any differences. 
1. High 
2. Beginning 
3. Inside 
4. Question 
5. Day 
6. Cheap 
7. Sad 
8. Hero 
9. In front of 
10. Poor 
11. Polite 
Exploration 3: Euphemisms 
Choose one term or phrase from the list provided and provide as many euphemisms (words 
or phrases) as you can. When might such euphemisms be used? 
1. 
Tell a lie 
2. 
Have sex 
3. 
Defecate 
4. 
Be drunk 
5. 
Die/be dead 
Exploration 4: Which nym is it? 
Identify the type of semantic relationship in each group of words. If it is antonymic, identify 
which type of antonym. If it is hyponymic, identify the superordinate term. 
1. 
Elm, oak, maple, sycamore, pine, cedar 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEMANTICS 
127 
2. 
Pester, annoy, bother, harass 
3. 
Gigantic, minuscule 
4. 
Sister, brother 
5. 
Sister, brother, parent, aunt, uncle 
6. 
Asleep, awake 
7. 
Foot, knee, thigh, calf, leg 
Exploration 5: Euphemisms in war 
For each euphemism, identify the non-euphemistic meaning. What do you think of the use of 
such terms in discussions of war? 
1. 
Air campaign 
2. 
Extraordinary rendition 
3. 
Surgical strike 
4. 
Collateral damage 
5. 
Detainees 
6. 
Use of force 
Exploration 6: Collocations 
Quick and fast are often listed as synonyms but they collocate very differently. Which term 
would you use with each of the words provided? How does it sound to use the other term? For 
example, we generally say fast lane, not quick lane, as fast and lane collocate but quick and lane 
do not. 
Food 
meal 
bite 
train 
learner 
shower 
glance 
fix 
wit 
Exploration 7: Markedness 
We noted earlier that certain terms are marked for gender. Recently on Facebook, I came 
across a site selling T-shirts with sayings such as male architect, male astronaut, and male 
president. What makes such phrases odd and worthy of being sold on Facebook? Can you 
come up with similar phrases playing on the marked/unmarked language around gender and 
professions that could be used on T-shirts? 
Exploration 8: Body parts 
Words for body parts are particularly susceptible to being used figuratively: heart-to-heart 
conversation or pain in the butt, for example. Come up with other phrases that use heart 
or butt figuratively; then identify what type of figurative language is involved: metaphor, 
metonymy, or idiom. 
Exploration 9: Semantic roles 
Identify the semantic role of each italicized noun in the following sentences: 
1. 
We were exhausted flying back from New Zealand last week. 
2. 
The gardeners worked the soil with a backhoe. 
3. 
The final game of the World Cup was postponed because of a hurricane. 

 
 
 
 
128
  SEMANTICS 
FURTHER READING 
British National Corpus: http://natcorp.ox.ac.uk. 
Corpus of Contemporary American English: www.americancorpus.org. 
Saeed, J. (2009). Semantics (3rd ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. A broad introduction to the field. 
WordNet: http://wordnet.princeton.edu/, A lexical database of English where you can investigate 
related words. 
REFERENCES 
Deutscher, G. (2010). Through the looking glass: Why the world looks different in other 
languages. Picador. 
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. University of Chicago Press. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
CHAPTER 8 
Language in everyday interaction 
First glance 
• Silence. 
How do we use language in everyday 
Pragmatics: Things we do with words. 
interaction? 
• Speech acts 
What is discourse? 
• Cooperative principle and maxims 
Are conversations structured? 
• Indirectness: Why don’t we just say what 
• Opening and closing sequences: Just 
we mean? 
saying hello. 
Politeness: That’s just rude. 
• Turn-taking: Stop interrupting me. 
INTRODUCTION 
We start our investigation of language in everyday interaction by examining how we actually 
use language throughout our day: in conversations with family, small talk at the office, gab 
fests with friends, or the little snippets of interaction we might have with a stranger on the 
elevator. Those conversations and snippets can seem natural and random. A casual conversa-
tion with friends probably doesn’t look like the language presented in grammar books. We 
don’t use complete sentences; we overlap and interrupt; we use phonological forms (wanna, 
gonna) not considered proper; our pronouns do not have clear antecedents. It’s all a chaotic 
mess from one perspective. From another, it’s highly structured, following certain patterns. 
It’s those patterns that we’ll examine in this chapter. 
There is, as in all language use, variation in those patterns. Quite a bit of it sometimes. If, 
for example, I wanted you to pick up the shoes you’d left in the doorway for me to trip over, 
I might say any of the following, all meaning the same thing: 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-8 

 
  
130 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
Pick up your shoes! 
Shoes? 
You left your shoes there, again! 
Ahem! (with a slightly guttural sound and a nod toward the shoes) 
Your name (with a similar nod). 
That’s a lot of variation for such a small request. Why are there so many ways to say that same 
thing? An examination of phonological, morphological, and syntactic structures would not 
provide much help here. To understand how language works in everyday interaction, we need 
to move beyond a focus on form and begin asking questions about discourse and other social 
factors. 
DISCOURSE 
Discourse is a term used by linguists to refer to several different concepts, all related but 
slightly different. At its most basic, discourse is any unit of language beyond the sentence, so 
a friendly conversation, an interaction between doctor and patient, an extended anecdote, a 
college lecture, and a political speech are examples of different types of discourse. Discourse 
analysis examines these units for their structure; conversations are not put together the same 
way as lectures, for example. Discourse need not be oral or signed; written texts are also 
discourse: college essays, leases, newspaper articles, and online blogs can all be examined 
as discourse. For any discourse, we can ask how it is structured and how people make sense 
of it. We can also ask how our discourse interacts with the social, political, and cultural lives 
we lead and how we construct our world through language. We will discuss the latter two 
questions in subsequent chapters; here we begin by examining a common type of discourse: 
conversations. We then turn our attention to pragmatics, a subfield of linguistics that focuses 
on everyday interaction and our attempts to make sense of what others say. 
CONVERSATION PATTERNS AND ORGANIZATION 
Conversations are, perhaps, the quintessential type of verbal interaction; for most of us, it’s 
probably hard to imagine a day when no conversation occurs. It may also be hard to imagine 
that our conversations are organized. Don’t we just talk? Well, no, we don’t. Rather than a 
free-for-all, there are ground rules for conversations that we generally follow, if mostly with-
out conscious attention: ground rules for openings, turn-taking, holding the floor, closings, 
among other aspects. In the following sections, we examine some of these patterns. One bit of 
terminology before we start; the term interlocutors refers to persons involved in a conversa-
tion through speaking or signing to one another. 
Opening and closing sequences 
The beginnings and ends of conversations are nearly always marked somehow. Rarely do we 
just walk up to someone, except perhaps a good friend we see often, and jump into a topic; nor 
do we just stop in the middle of an interaction and walk away. We ease our way in and out of 
conversational interactions. 

   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
131 
Opening sequences tend to be fairly formulaic, with people choosing from a limited num-
ber of ways to greet someone and initiate a conversation: Good morning, nice day isn’t it? or 
Hey, Jude, ready for break? or Hello, Dr. Lennon. How was your vacation? or Sally, I haven’t 
seen you in ages or Hi, Ben. What’s up? Opening sequences usually involve more than just 
greetings. Often, we follow a greeting with a question, as in the examples, giving our inter-
locutor a chance to offer a comment. After a greeting, we also sometimes indicate that we’re 
about to jump into the conversation with such phrases as You’ll never guess what just hap-
pened to me or The weirdest thing just happened or Have you heard about . . . ? These types 
of phrases can be used as part of an opening sequence or in the middle of a conversation to 
introduce a new topic. What we do in an opening sequence can depend on who we’re interact-
ing with; with strangers, for example, a phrase such as Excuse me is often used not so much 
to greet but to open an interaction. 
Closing sequences are sometimes quite protracted and negotiated, with one interlocutor 
testing the waters to see if the other concurs that it’s time to end the conversation. Sometimes 
they are quite brief and simple, as in Gotta go, see you in class. The following is an example 
of an elaborate, negotiated closing: 
A: Well, I’ve got to get going. 
B: It’s been good to talk to you. 
A: You too. We should get together more often. 
B: Yeah, I miss talking to you. 
A: Me too. 
B: OK, see you soon. Take care. 
A: You too. Bye. 
Whether short or protracted, the end of a conversation is nearly always marked somehow, usu-
ally with a conclusion to the topic at hand, slightly longer pauses between utterances, some 
preparation for the actual closing (I’ve got to get going) and of course, some sort of farewell 
(Bye, now). 
Linguistics in your world: Just saying hello 
The example of leave-taking in the last section comes from the area I live in, the U.S. state 
of Minnesota. In fact, people in the Midwest often joke about how long Minnesotans take to 
say good-bye. Other parts of the United States and other cultures throughout the world have 
different conventions for opening and closing conversations. In many cultures, it’s not the 
closing but the opening sequence that is expected to be lengthy and formulaic. 
Such lengthy and formulaic greetings seemed to be the norm in Sudan when I was trave-
ling there several years ago. Their greetings were more than just hello or hey; they were elabo-
rate exchanges of blessings and good wishes. From what I could work out, opening sequences 
included an overt greeting, Salaam aleikum, a response of Aleikum salaam, several question-
and-answer sequences about the other’s wellbeing, and usually blessings on their family. This 
ritual took place even if one met someone several times a day or in an official setting. Only 
after this greeting could the conversation begin. To me, it seemed to take forever; I’m sure to 
them my greetings seemed curt and rude. 

 
  
  
  
  
  
132 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
What is considered appropriate in telephone call greetings can also vary greatly across 
cultures. In France, for example, the caller generally apologizes for interrupting whoever 
answers, not to do so is impolite. In the United States, no such apology is expected; indeed, to 
do so can seem unnecessarily formal. 
Turn-taking 
Once the opening sequence has been accomplished, the tricky part of managing the interac-
tion begins. In any conversation, interlocutors must manage turn-taking and topic-raising: 
who gets to speak when and about what. Such management includes negotiations about tak-
ing the floor, raising topics, picking up on other’s topics, keeping the floor, relinquishing the 
floor, inviting others to speak, among other moves. 
One important aspect of any conversational interaction is managing the floor. The person 
speaking or signing at any one time is said to have the floor. When we have the floor, we fol-
low certain patterns to indicate to our interlocutors either that we want to keep it or that we 
are finished. If we want to keep the floor, when we need to pause, we’ll do so in the middle 
of a sentence or thought, perhaps after a preposition: We’re going on . . . uh . . . Friday. We 
also use fillers, terms like um or kinda or you know to indicate we’ve paused but still have the 
floor. When we’re finished, we can indicate that in various ways: by matching our pauses with 
the end of a sentence or thought; by using a tag question and/or nominating someone else to 
take the floor (Isn’t that right, Sally?); or by changing our pitch (in spoken languages), raising 
or lowering it sharply. 
When one speaker is finished with her turn, if no one is nominated, confusion can some-
times occur as to who will take the floor next. More than one interlocutor can start, in which 
case interlocutors may try to work it out (Sorry, you go ahead . . . That’s all right, you go 
ahead . . . No, that’s okay. You go.), each apologizing and trying to smooth out the transition. 
In some cultures, if more than one person speaks at once, each keeps going, raising their vol-
ume to gain the floor until one backs off. 
Linguistics in your world: Stop interrupting me! 
What constitutes an interruption is sometimes difficult to determine. Some interruptions 
result from one person trying to take the floor or trying to dominate the conversation. Others 
are inadvertent interruptions, a result of misjudging cues from the speaker. Still other inter-
ruptions are not interruptions at all but what is called overlapping, when two interlocutors 
contribute to the conversation at the same time. 
Turn-taking mishaps such as interrupting or overlapping can be a source of misunderstand-
ing, especially when those conversing come from different cultures or subcultures. Some 
cultures, for example, expect the pause that marks the end of one person’s turn to be quite 
short; other cultures expect it to be longer. For most Euro-Americans, a pause of a second is an 
indication that the speaker is finished with her turn and someone else may now safely take the 
floor. In other cultures, Athabaskan for example, a pause of a second-and-a-half is the norm. 
Shorter than that means I still have the floor. That half second may not seem like much, but in 
the middle of a conversation, it can be important. 
Misunderstandings occur when interlocutors interpret those pauses differently. The 
addressee may interpret that second-long pause as permission to now take the floor, while 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
133 
the speaker might mean he’s pausing but not ready to give up the floor. These types of mis-
understandings are common across cultures, even when all are speaking the same language, 
and can be a source of stereotypes. If I’m from a long-pause culture, I would wait, politely, for 
a long pause before I started talking. My interlocutor might assume that, because I don’t join 
in after her short pause, I have nothing to say and so continue talking. To her, I might seem 
unresponsive, not engaged, a bit aloof. The opposite interpretation can also occur. If I’m from 
a culture that expects short pauses between turns, it would be perfectly polite for me to start 
talking after a second. If my interlocutor, however, comes from a culture that expects longer 
pauses, she might think that I’m rude, interrupting her and dominating the conversation. You 
can see the potential for misunderstandings and misjudgments of others, especially as these 
patterns generally occur below the level of consciousness. 
Silence 
Although not usually thought of as meaningful, silence can carry a lot of meaning in an 
interaction: it can be awkward, companionable, polite, respectful; its social meaning depends 
on the situation. In many English-speaking communities, silence, especially if it goes on for 
more than a very short while, is seen as something negative, a gap to be filled. In other cul-
tures, this is not so. According to Meshrie et al. (2000), in Athabaskan communities, certain 
interactions require a lengthy period of silence: when first interacting with strangers, when 
meeting again with friends or relatives after a period of separation, or when initiating court-
ing, in other words when the relationship is ambiguous in some way. Rather than engaging in 
small talk to get to know the other person, as many English speakers might do, Athabaskans 
will remain together in silence until they feel they have become acquainted or reacquainted 
with the other enough to then talk. 
PRAGMATICS 
Pragmatics deals with analyzing language in context, especially how we interpret possible 
meanings of others’ utterances. Pragmatics, then, is the study of how context shapes our use 
and interpretation of utterances: the when, why, where, how, and who of language use. It is 
concerned with questions like the following: 
· 
How do we understand what others say or sign? 
· 
What do context, power, and solidarity have to do with this meaning-making? 
· 
Why are we so often indirect when directness is so much clearer? 
· 
What exactly is politeness? 
As the questions indicate, pragmatics focuses on how people use language to do things in spe-
cific contexts. It is concerned with the distinction between what is said and what is meant, with 
intentions, and with interpretations. 
One key concept in pragmatics is the fact that we do things with words. That may seem 
like a strange concept; we are used to thinking of words as meaning things, not doing things. 
Part of their meaning, though, is what they are doing. If you think about it, it’s not so odd to 
say we do things through language. We even have words for these actions: promise, suggest, 
threaten, compliment, insult, to name but a few. For some of these, it is hard to imagine doing 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
134 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
them without using language—complimenting, for example. You might give a thumbs up to 
indicate Well done!, but generally compliments are expressed through language. 
Language is used to do more abstract, less immediate, less concrete things too: to signal 
and establish our social identities, to signal and establish our relationships to others, to be 
polite or impolite, to negotiate power relations, to increase or decrease solidarity, and much 
more. Take, for example, the seemingly simple decision of how to greet someone: Hi? Hello? 
Hey? Good morning? What’s up girl? Stella? That decision is influenced by such factors as 
the relative status of the individual we’re greeting, our closeness or distance, the context in 
which we encounter each other, and a host of other factors. I might greet a colleague with Hi, 
a student with Hey, a dean with Hello, and my neighbor with Good morning. All of this is 
influenced by who I am: my personal characteristics (how formal I am generally), my social 
standing (a student, a professor, a dean), and who I’m greeting. Each greeting does more than 
just greet; it signals my relationship to the other person in some way. 
We can use greetings to illustrate other concepts in pragmatics. When someone passes you 
in the corridor, nods and says, “Hi. How are you?” what does that utterance mean? It looks 
like a question, but we all know what can happen if we respond to it as a question and start 
relating our latest troubles. We’re often met with a blank stare and subtle efforts to end the 
conversation. If that and similar questions (How’s it going? What’s up?) are not real questions, 
what are they? 
Instead of asking what does How’s it going? mean, we might more productively ask, what 
is the speaker doing by saying it? Put that way, it’s easy to answer—she’s greeting us, of 
course. That’s the meaning; it’s a greeting. Similarly, Could you pass the salt? is not a yes/no 
question, even though it looks like one, but a polite request. And we know this because if we 
answer yes instead of just passing the salt, we’re considered at worst odd or rude and at best 
lamely humorous. 
So, we have utterances that look like questions but aren’t really questions, and greetings 
and requests that don’t look like greetings or requests at all. We usually understand the mean-
ing intended with no problem, but how do we do so? In other words, how we do know what 
an utterance means? 
It would seem to make sense that to analyze meaning, we should focus on the words, for 
they carry the meaning, don’t they? Although words do indeed have meaning, or perhaps 
constellations of possible meanings, those meanings do not carry the entire meaning of an 
utterance. In fact, sometimes the meaning of an utterance does not seem to lie in the words at 
all. Take a phrase like, Oh, yeah. The words have virtually no referential meaning at all: they 
don’t refer to a particular thing or concept. But that simple phrase can have multiple mean-
ings: agreement (Oh, yeah, I see what you mean), disagreement (Oh, yeah? I don’t think so), 
sarcasm (Oh, yeah. I’m sure!), threat (Oh, yeah? just try it), expression of recall or recognition 
(Oh, yeah, I almost forgot), or expression of joy (Oh yeah! with raised fist). How do we figure 
out the meaning? 
Speech acts 
One way is to figure out the pragmatic intent: what the speakers intends her utterance to 
do. As we saw with Oh, yeah, one phrase can serve various pragmatic intents: to threaten, to 
disagree, to agree, to name a few. The meaning, then, depends on what the speaker intends 

   
 
 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
135 
the utterance to do. If she intends it to threaten, then that is what it means. The meaning of 
the utterance thus includes the action it is meant to accomplish, or to put it in more linguistic 
terms, the speech act or pragmatic intent it is meant to accomplish. 
Speech acts are actions that we perform through language. We often think of language as 
a tool to inform others. It is, but when we speak, we are usually doing more than just inform-
ing. We can be disagreeing, agreeing, threatening, questioning, suggesting, reminding, advis-
ing, promising, greeting, taking leave, apologizing, complimenting, lying, bullying, flirting, 
replying, insulting, and many more. All of these are speech acts. 
We cannot do everything with words, of course. Borrowing, for example, is not a speech 
act. It is not borrowing until the object changes hands. The speech act involved, then, is 
requesting, in this case, requesting to borrow something. Similarly, being grateful is not a 
speech act. Gratitude is a feeling; you can be grateful and not express it. It’s the expression of 
gratitude that is a speech act. 
Each speech act consists of three components: locution, illocution, and perlocution. The 
locution of a speech act refers to the form it takes, the utterance that is spoken, written, or 
signed. For every utterance, the speaker has some intention in uttering it. This aspect of 
a speech act is referred to as its illocution: what the speaker intends the utterance to do. 
Illocution can be thought of as the pragmatic intent of the speaker. Perlocution, not an actual 
part of the utterance itself, refers to what is called the uptake of a speech act: what the hearer 
takes the utterance to mean. 
We can see the distinction between locution and illocution more clearly with an example: 
Could you hold this for me? The locution or form of that utterance is a question, in this case 
a yes/no question. As such, a simple yes or no answer should suffice. Such an answer does 
not suffice in real life, however, because the illocution of the utterance is not a question but 
a request for action: hold this. The illocution, the pragmatic intent, is a request, so that is the 
speech act being performed. 
The perlocution may or may not match the illocution of a particular utterance. In fact, 
many misunderstandings are the result of a mismatch between the illocution, the pragmatic 
intent of the speaker, and the perlocution, what the addressee takes as the intent. Many jokes 
too are based on this mismatch, as shown in Figure 8.1. 
In some cases, one locution can serve more than one function, as we saw previously with 
Oh, yeah. The opposite is true too. Any illocution can be expressed with more than one 
FIGURE 8.1 Mismatch between Sarge’s illocution and Beetle’s perlocution 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
136 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
locution; that is, we can perform the same speech act with very different utterances. Look at 
how many ways we have to make a request. Even such an everyday request as passing the salt 
can be done with numerous locutions: Could you pass the salt?, Would you pass the salt?, Can 
you pass the salt?, Would you mind passing the salt?, Send the salt down this way, We need 
the salt down here, Salt?, and many more. Each of these has the same illocution but different 
locutions. 
Most of those examples are easily recognizable as requests because they are so commonly 
used to ask people to do things. But what about an utterance like This food needs salt, uttered 
while eating dinner? How do we interpret the speech act meant here? It could be a request, a 
complaint, or an evaluative judgment of the quality of the food, all different illocutions. How 
do we work out which one is meant? One explanation of how we do so involves a principle 
we all unconsciously agree to when conversing: the cooperative principle and its attendant 
maxims of conversation. 
Cooperative principle and maxims of conversation 
The cooperative principle posits that generally we try to be cooperative in interacting with 
others, and we assume that others try to be cooperative too. This seems like a simple idea, but 
there are some important ways in which this simple idea can help us account for seemingly 
aberrant expressions, as we shall see. The cooperative principle has four maxims attached to it. 
Maxim of quantity 
We expect speakers to be as informative as, but no more or less than, is necessary. If, for 
example, we ask a new acquaintance whether he has any kids and he answers “Two girls,” 
using the maxim of quantity, we would assume that he has only two girls. If we found out later 
that he also had a boy, we might feel deceived. He would have broken the maxim of quantity 
by giving too little information. 
Maxim of relevance 
We expect speakers to offer utterances that are relevant to the ongoing context. If we ask some-
one whether he is ready to go and he replies, “I can’t remember the capital of Albania,” he has 
broken the maxim of relevance, for his answer has nothing to do with the question. 
Maxim of manner 
We expect speakers to be clear and orderly in their utterances, not opaque and rambling. That 
is, we expect those we converse with to speak in such a way that it is easy to follow. Not all 
conversational contributions are clear and orderly, of course, but our general expectation is 
that they should be. 
Maxim of quality 
We expect speakers to say what they believe to be true and to have some reason to believe 
what they say to be true. In other words, we generally expect people not to lie. Obviously, 

   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
137 
people do lie, but we see lies as exceptions to the rule, not the norm. This maxim only applies 
to statements; questions cannot be said to be true or false in any meaningful sense, though 
their implications can be. 
As we are conversing with our friends, we don’t consciously think, OK, be sure to follow 
the maxims here. How do they help us understand conversations, then? For one thing, they 
help us understand the function of such phrases as to make a long story short or bear with me 
or not to change the subject, but . . ., each of which signals we’re about to follow or violate a 
maxim: quantity, manner, or relevance, respectively. Hedges, those little phrases like sort of 
or kind of can sometimes indicate we are violating the maxim of quality. Saying It was kind 
of purple allows us to follow the maxim of quality by indicating we’re not totally sure about 
the color. 
And we certainly notice when someone violates these principles egregiously or too often. 
If someone gives us too much information, thus violating the maxim of quantity, we might 
say, TMI. If someone gives too little information, we might call her secretive or aloof. If 
someone breaks the maxim of quality, we call her a liar. Conversing with someone who 
consistently breaks the maxim of manner or relevance might evoke the thought, What is she 
on about? 
People do routinely violate these maxims, yet these violations do not seem to disrupt 
communication. The question becomes, then, how do we interpret these seemingly non-
cooperative utterances? We use the cooperative principle and our knowledge of these max-
ims to help us figure it out. As an illustrative example, let’s look at a conversation taking 
place at home between partners. 
George: Someone’s at the door. 
Martha: I’m on the phone. 
George: Okay, I’ll get it. 
Now we might say that Martha’s reply to George’s utterance breaks the maxim of rel-
evance. What does being on the phone have to do with the doorbell ringing? That’s exactly 
the question that leads George to his response. He must go through an unconscious reasoning 
process that goes something like this: I assume Martha is being cooperative (the cooperative 
principle), so although her response literally breaks the maxim of relevance, I’ll look for an 
alternative interpretation. Using my knowledge about the context and about the real world, 
I deduce that being on the phone precludes her from answering the door, and her mention of 
it is meant to indicate that. 
Indirectness 
As we can see from that little interaction, we often don’t say directly what we mean. In fact, 
in everyday conversations, much of what we say is indirect. We rely on the addressee’s will-
ingness and ability to figure out what we mean when we state something indirectly. Three 
questions arise here: What is indirectness? How do we figure it out? Why is it so common, 
especially given that it requires more work on the part of addressees since they must figure 
out what the speaker means? 
Let’s start with what it is. An utterance can be indirect in any one of several ways: 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
138 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
1. 
It can seem to violate one or more maxims of the cooperative principle. Martha’s response 
earlier seems to break the maxim of relevance, so it is indirect. 
2. It can also be indirect because its form does not match its function, a request phrased as 
a question, for example. You may have noticed that George’s statement in the first place 
is indirect as well. He says Someone’s at the door, literally a statement, but his pragmatic 
intent is a question, Will you answer it or should I? (We can also say it is indirect because 
it violates the maxim of quantity by stating the obvious.) To respond to George’s initial 
statement, Martha needs to go through an inference process to determine that its meaning 
is a question. We know she went through such a process from her response, not a response 
to a statement of the obvious, but an indirect response to an indirect question. 
3. 
When the literal meaning of an utterance differs from its intended meaning, it can also 
be indirect. Some humorous responses, such as Is the Pope Catholic? to mean yes, are 
indirect in this way. 
Speech acts are considered indirect if they do any of the aforementioned acts. These indirect 
speech acts, as we saw with George, require some additional reasoning to figure out. We can 
summarize the reasoning a hearer goes through to interpret indirect speech acts as follows: 
1. 
Recognizing an apparent violation of a maxim or recognizing that the form of an utter-
ance does not match its function, and assuming the speaker is trying to be cooperative, 
the hearer identifies the utterance as indirect in some way. Thus, we use the theoreti-
cal concept of the cooperative principle and its maxims to help us understand indirect 
speech acts. 
2. The addressee works out its intended meaning using knowledge of the context and real-
world knowledge, what we know or believe about the world around us, including the 
social world. 
Continuum of indirectness 
Indirect speech acts are not all equally indirect, of course. There is a continuum of indirect-
ness from conventionally indirect, to indirect, to very indirect. 
Conventional indirectness 
As mentioned earlier, some expressions are so conventionally used that they barely seem 
indirect at all; indeed, they seem like direct speech acts. Could you pass the salt?, the exam-
ple used earlier, is a conventionally indirect request that most people would see as a direct 
request, easily interpreted. Utterances like could you possibly . . ., would you mind . . ., would 
you be so kind as to . . ., if it’s not too much trouble, could you . . ., and many more are also 
conventionally indirect. 
Indirectness 
Other utterances seem a little more indirect and thus a little harder to interpret. Martha’s 
response to George’s statement falls in this category; it is simply indirect. It takes a little 

   
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
139 
unconscious interpretation to work out Martha’s meaning but not so much that the answer 
calls attention to itself by its indirectness or is incomprehensible because of its indirectness. 
George probably did not consciously scratch his head and say, What the heck does she mean 
by that? 
Extreme indirectness 
When utterances are extremely indirect, we often do scratch out heads and say, What the 
heck does he mean by that? And we can get it wrong sometimes, misinterpreting the speak-
er’s intent. The following interaction happened at the university where I teach, though I’ve 
changed some details and names. The president, who has her own parking spot and who 
usually drives a Honda, walked into her office one morning and said to her secretary, “Tell 
Pete [the head of parking] that there’s an Oldsmobile in my parking spot.” Her secretary, 
trying to interpret what the president’s pragmatic intent was, assumed she meant that the 
Oldsmobile was illegally parked there, called Pete, and asked him to have the car towed. You 
may have guessed that the president had a very different pragmatic intent. She had borrowed 
an Oldsmobile for the day and wanted to alert Pete so that he would not tow it. 
Functions of indirectness 
As noted in the previous section, indirectness is very common in all sorts of situations. Why 
should this be so? If it’s harder to interpret indirect utterances, you’d expect them to be rather 
rare, but they’re not. They must, then, serve some purposes important enough to override the 
cognitive difficulties they can cause. 
Politeness 
One of the most obvious functions of indirectness is to be polite. In many English-speaking 
societies, indirectness is considered polite. You would probably not ask a stranger to open a 
window by saying, Open the window! though you might use such an expression to a close 
friend or family member. With a stranger or acquaintance, you’d probably be more likely to 
phrase the request more indirectly to be polite: Would it be too much trouble to open the win-
dow? Such conventionalized indirect forms are considered much more polite in many cultures 
but not all. In Moroccan culture, directness is generally more polite than indirectness. We 
return to indirectness, including questions of the variability of what is seen as polite, in the 
section on politeness later. 
Avoiding overt markers of power 
Indirectness also allows speakers to avoid overt expressions of power through seeming to 
offer options. A boss might, for example, say to her secretary, If you have time, could you send 
this out for me today? Such an indirect request implies that the secretary has a choice here. 
That may be true, but it also may not. Chances are the indirect request is really an order: this 
needs to be done today. The appearance of choice implied by the indirectness politely masks 
the fact that it’s an order. 

 
  
 
 
140 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
Creating solidarity 
Earlier we mentioned the importance of context in interpreting indirect utterances. The point 
about such contextual knowledge is that it must be shared knowledge. That is, for an indirect 
utterance to be successful, interlocutors must share the contextual knowledge necessary to 
interpret the utterance. Let’s look at an example here. If a friend asks you, Coming to the party 
tonight? and you reply, Got a test tomorrow, you are both using shared background knowledge 
about the interaction itself (questions demand answers), about each other (you are a serious 
student who cares about your learning), and about the real world (tests require that one study 
the night before, thus precluding a party). When you reply to his question, you rely on the fact 
that he has this knowledge; when interpreting your answer, he relies on the fact that you do 
too. The whole thing only works smoothly if you both share the necessary contextual knowl-
edge and both know (however unconsciously) that you share it. 
This is all rather a round-about way of getting to another function of indirectness, that of 
creating closeness or solidarity. Indirectness can be used to create closeness because it signals 
that you and I share this knowledge to such an extent that it need not even be stated explicitly. 
Indirectness can also be used to create distance, the opposite of solidarity. When one per-
son does not share the knowledge necessary to interpret an indirect utterance, it can create 
social distance in that it implies, You don’t get it. 
Language and social meaning: Context and identity 
Earlier I noted that one definition of pragmatics is the study of language in context. In some 
ways, it is redundant to say language in context, for language is always in some context, even 
if that context is a linguistics textbook or a cheer at a ball game. The context of interest here is 
not a linguistics textbook, of course, but language as it is used by people in everyday interac-
tion. Context includes much more than the physical location in which we interact. It includes 
aspects of the social setting as well: the relationship among interlocutors, the speech event, 
the purpose of the interaction, and other social factors. One aim of our analysis here is to illu-
minate the role these contextual factors play in the construction of social meanings, including 
social identities and relationships. 
Register 
We all know that we talk or sign differently depending on where we are, who else is there, 
and what we’re there for; we don’t talk the same at dinner with our families as we do in a job 
interview, for example. We adapt our language use, our discourse, to the situation or context 
in which it occurs. The term we use for language variation that relates to social situations is 
register. As we learn to be communicatively competent, we learn to use different registers, 
that is, to adapt our language to different speech situations. Some research has shown that 
quite young children, as young as four, have an understanding of register, and they adapt 
their way of speaking to reflect that understanding. Kids can often quite accurately mimic 
the register of doctors or nurses, for example. Registers can differ in vocabulary, pronuncia-
tion, grammar, politeness, eye contact, proxemics (how close you might stand to another), and 
other aspects of communication. In one situation, for example, we might say Would you like 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
141 
to leave now?; in another, we might say Wanna go? In one situation, we might call someone 
inebriated; in another, stinking drunk. 
Level of formality is one factor connected to register. Formal situations tend to have clearer 
conventions about what is appropriate discourse and what is not. They call for certain rules of 
linguistic interaction: interruptions are frowned upon, one person speaks at a time, each per-
son has a specific role that dictates who speaks when, titles are often used. In a courtroom, for 
example, certain terms of address are required of certain participants: the judge is addressed 
as Your honor; in many college classrooms, the instructor is addressed as Professor or Doctor. 
Other less formal settings, hanging out with good friends perhaps, call for different ways of 
interacting; jokes are common, overlaps occur easily, and nicknames and references to shared 
past interactions are common. Our discourse not only reflects what we see as the formality 
level of a setting; it can also construct a particular setting as more or less formal or informal. 
Formality and informality, then, apply both to settings themselves and to the discourse used 
in any situation. Hello is more formal than howdy or hey, no matter the setting, and the use of 
the latter helps construct a setting as informal. 
Identity work 
It seems obvious that an analysis of language in social interaction must include the partici-
pants, their social identities, and the roles they play. (The term participants is added here to 
includes more than interlocutors, for participants may not speak or sign but are still part of 
the context.) Participants’ status or closeness vis-à-vis each other, for example, is important. 
If a good friend asked you for the time when a clock was on the wall right in front of her, you 
might make a snide remark about her powers of observation. Can you imagine a scenario in 
which you as a student would respond in a similarly snide fashion to a professor? The relation-
ship, especially the power differential in the relationship, makes the latter scenario less likely. 
Not impossible, but certainly less likely. 
When we interact with others through language, we are always to some extent doing iden-
tity work, indicating something about who we are and constructing a certain kind of relation-
ship with others. A somewhat drawn-out example might help us examine the factors involved 
in this construction. Imagine two people talking in a coffee shop near a college campus. 
We might ask: Is this a conversation between friends or a conference between teacher and 
student? The interaction may well have elements of both; it may be a hybrid; one participant 
may see it as one thing, the other as something different. For now, our question is not what the 
context and relationship are, but how do the interlocutors in this interaction signal their social 
identities and their relationship? What linguistic forms are used by the professor, for exam-
ple, to present herself as the professor, not the friend? What forms are used by the student to 
signal that she accepts that representation, a sort of metaphorical, OK, I’ll be the student now? 
As I was writing that paragraph at a coffee shop near a college campus, I noticed two 
people at the next table, one a male traditional-aged college student, the other female, a bit 
older. I wondered if they were friends or a professor and her student. Within a few moments of 
(inadvertently) overhearing their conversation, I knew. She was clearly a professor; he clearly 
a student. So how did I know? She established her identity as the professor through her dis-
course, by asking questions and offering evaluative comments; he established his identity as 
a student by reporting on his experience studying abroad, not his excursions to exotic parts, 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
142 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
but what he learned and how he fared in classes. She listened attentively. She gave advice: You 
need to send an email to the people you met there. As the conversation moved on to other top-
ics, she continued to give advice and offer judgments: You need to read X (not you gotta [with 
elongated vowel sound] read X, as a fellow student might phrase it); I approve of that. There 
were no hedges or fillers. His utterances included I’ll do that; I’m hoping to find a position 
at X. Do you have any advice for going about that? And she was the one who indicated the 
conversation was about to end, saying Well, it sounds like things are going well for you. Both 
contributed smoothly to the construction of their roles as professor and student. 
Clearly, the fact that the participants’ roles outside of this conversation differ so clearly 
in power and status is important. There are words and deeds allowed a professor that are not 
allowed a student; the professor can make evaluations and demands (Good point or Get this 
to me by tomorrow) that the student cannot reciprocate. The professor can ask to be called 
by her title; the student cannot easily do so. As the person with more power in this situation, 
the professor can more easily frame the event; her interpretation will most likely hold sway. 
Indeed, the ability to have one’s representation of the context and the relationship accepted by 
the other is one mark of power. 
Sometimes, differences in status and power may be negotiated. For example, if a professor 
and her student meet by accident at a movie theater, each must come to an understanding of 
what their relationship is in this context. Each must decide (though probably not consciously) 
whether this is a chance meeting of acquaintances (in which case neither is owed deference 
by the other), or a chance meeting of teacher and student (in which case some deference may 
be owed to one). Each will signal how she sees the situation. The professor might signal that 
she sees this situation as the chance encounter of acquaintances by saying hey instead of 
hello; using contractions (wanna, gonna instead of want to or going to); and using colloquial 
forms such as D’ya like it? instead of Did you enjoy the movie? The decision to use the former 
forms may not be conscious, but it carries meaning. A different meaning would be expressed 
by other forms. Linguistic choices we make about words, topics, and pronunciation all signal 
how we see our social identities and the nature of the relationship in a particular context. 
POLITENESS 
Expectations of politeness or appropriateness are also important parts of any context. Politeness, 
in fact, is one reason we have many ways of saying the same thing. We probably all think we 
know what politeness and impoliteness are: we know it when we see it, at least. If we’re going 
to examine politeness from a theoretical perspective, we’ll need a bit more than that, however. 
Perhaps the most influential theory of politeness is that of Brown and Levinson (1987), 
who define politeness as behavior, including linguistic behavior, used to express positive con-
cern for others and/or not to impose on others. According to this theory, all people have two 
important needs: the need to be valued and the need for autonomy. That is, we all want our 
self-worth and our autonomy to be respected by others. Politeness is one way people accom-
plish that. In Brown’s and Levinson’s terms, politeness helps to mitigate possible threats to the 
listener’s face that might be caused by the speaker’s words or actions. 
Face, a key concept related to those two needs, refers to the self-image a person wants 
to maintain in social situations. For example, if you are reluctant to answer a question in 
class for fear of appearing dumb, you are attending to your own face. If you are reluctant to 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
143 
speak up for fear of making another look dumb, you are attending to that other person’s face. 
Politeness is about attending to others’ face by enhancing it or not threatening it. An insult 
would threaten it; a compliment enhances it. Face can be saved, threatened, lost, maintained, 
or enhanced; it needs to be attended to for things to go smoothly in any social interaction. 
Face has two related but distinct aspects: positive face and negative face. Despite their 
names, it is not that positive face is good and negative face is bad; both are normal parts of 
social interactions, neither good nor bad. We use different politeness strategies depending 
upon whether we are attending to others’ positive face or their negative face. 
Positive face and positive politeness 
Positive face refers to our desire to be well thought of in whatever way is relevant in a particu-
lar context. It includes our need to be appreciated and approved of and generally to be thought 
of in a positive manner. Positive politeness strategies are efforts to enhance or avoid threaten-
ing another’s positive face. They attend to others’ positive face needs by, for example, overtly 
showing appreciation or making others feel good or included. Welcoming someone is a posi-
tive politeness strategy. Such strategies also avoid threatening another’s positive face by avoid-
ing overt disagreement or disapproval. Thank you is a prime example of positive politeness. 
Negative face and negative politeness 
Negative face refers to our desire to have our autonomy respected, that is, not to be imposed 
upon. Negative politeness strategies are used when an utterance might impose upon the other. 
Requests of someone to do something for us are good examples of utterances that threaten 
others’ negative face by imposing upon their freedom of action; such requests, therefore, often 
include some negative politeness markers: please, if it’s not too much trouble, sorry to bother 
you, etc. Suggestions and advice also have the potential to threaten a person’s negative face, so 
they too are often expressed indirectly or with disclaimers that mitigate the threat: I’m no expert, 
but you might want to try X, for example. Please is a prime example of negative politeness. 
In negative politeness, it is not that we necessarily want to avoid imposing on someone 
else. What we want to do is avoid appearing to threaten their face by imposing, and it is polite-
ness strategies that allow us to do that. If we want the salt passed, and we must impose on the 
person at the end of the table to get that done, we do impose on them. We just do so politely by 
using strategies that give the appearance of choice: Could you pass the salt, for example. We 
know and they know that we are not really offering choice; we want the salt. 
Politeness strategies are needed when what we are about to say may threaten someone’s 
face, but not all expressions of politeness are equally polite. There are, in fact, levels of polite-
ness. In deciding the degree of politeness we need to use in any one situation, we take into 
account three factors (two of which were mentioned earlier under indirectness): power differ-
ential between interlocutors, social distance between interlocutors, and amount of imposi-
tion. The larger any factor is, the higher the possibility that the other’s face will be threatened, 
and thus the more polite we have to be. When we make requests, we are more polite to those 
of higher status or those with more power; we are more polite to those we are less close to, 
acquaintances or strangers; and we are more polite when the imposition is larger. Asking to 
borrow someone’s notes from class requires more politeness than asking to borrow their pen. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
144 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
The concept of face, and Brown’s and Levinson’s (1987) theory in general, can help to 
explain some instances of politeness, but certainly not all. Their theory focuses on utterances 
that are clearly and overtly polite: Thank you; Do you mind if I close the window; Please, you 
go first, things like that. Even with those that are clearly polite, however, politeness is not 
always just a matter of face. For one thing, politeness can be and often is seen as empty talk, 
as insincere, or as something used to manipulate others. For another, such phrases as please 
or thank you, it can be argued, are mere social conventions rather than politeness: in saying 
thank you to a server at a restaurant, for example, we are doing what is expected as appropriate 
rather than trying to enhance the server’s positive face. 
Appropriateness 
According to recent theories of politeness, in addition to attending to face, politeness is a mat-
ter of judgments we make of others’ behavior, especially judgments of the appropriateness of 
their behavior in a particular context. Appropriateness can be a tricky concept to pin down. 
For one thing, different social groups and individuals in different situations may have differ-
ent ideas of what constitutes appropriate behavior, including, of course, linguistic behavior. 
Asking a stranger or a colleague at work to do something by saying, Would it be too much 
trouble to ask you to move a bit? might be deemed appropriate and thus polite; using the same 
phrase with your best friend might evoke a different interpretation: Why is she mad at me? 
It’s not that we’re impolite to our friends when we say, move your ass. It’s that the rules of 
appropriate behavior are different in that context with that set of people than they would be in 
a different setting with different people. 
Thus, politeness is not intrinsic to any utterance. We might think of Thank you as intrinsi-
cally polite, but that’s not necessarily so. Several years ago, I taught at a Polish university for a 
semester. When I first got there, I tried to practice what little Polish I knew whenever I could, 
so in a restaurant, whenever a server filled my water glass or took a used plate away, I said 
Dziękuję, Polish for Thank you. I noticed that the servers often seemed a little put out by me, 
a fact I put down to my atrocious Polish accent. Later I found out that in Poland, unlike in the 
United States, to thank a server for such mundane tasks is not considered appropriate or polite 
but almost rude. From the servers’ perspective, it is their job to deliver food and take plates 
away; they do not need to be thanked for doing their job. 
As that anecdote and many studies have shown, what is considered polite varies greatly 
across cultures, across subcultures, across speech communities, even across situations within 
one culture. Different ethnic groups can have very different perspectives on what is appro-
priate. Most of us probably think finishing another’s sentence is inherently rude. That’s not 
always the case, however. I come from an Italian family, for example, in which interrupting 
was not impolite but a normal, appropriate part of conversations. And finishing another’s 
sentence was not so much rude as an indirect way of saying: I’m listening so closely to what 
you are saying that I can even finish your sentence! 
Since politeness is a matter of judgments of appropriateness in a particular context or 
group, it comes with all sorts of gender, racial, and class constraints. What is considered 
appropriate linguistic behavior for a man, for example, can be considered rude or totally inap-
propriate for a woman. Take swearing, for instance. In many situations, swearing is consid-
ered rude for both genders; in others, it’s appropriate for men but not women. I remember as 

   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
145 
a college student using a swear word in front of my mother, who, of course, immediately told 
me never to use that word again. My brother came in a few minutes later, used the same word, 
and she totally ignored it. I was livid but was told it was okay for him because he’s a boy! You 
can imagine how well that went down with me. 
As noted in the discussion of indirectness, Moroccans, unlike most English speakers, often 
find indirectness less polite than directness. Asking a member of one’s family for help by 
saying the Arabic equivalent of Could you . . . would be impolite, not polite. In Israel, direct-
ness rather than indirectness is similarly valued; what we would consider polite, appropriate 
behavior might be seen as potentially irrelevant or manipulative in Israel. In Deaf culture too, 
directness is considered appropriate, not impolite. The same linguistic behavior, then, can 
have different, even opposite, meanings in different contexts and cultures. 
It is important to remember that just as judgments of polite, appropriate behavior vary, 
so do judgments of inappropriate behavior, what is called impoliteness. It is well known, so 
much so that it is almost a cliché, that Midwesterners who visit New York City often find 
New Yorkers rude and pushy, asking personal questions, and being too direct. What is less 
well known is that New Yorkers often find Midwesterners rude too, not because they are too 
direct but because they are too indirect, not asking questions, and not saying directly what 
they mean. 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
• 
Conversations have a patterned organization which includes opening sequences, turn-
taking, and closing sequences. 
• 
Pragmatics is the field of linguistics that investigates how we use language in context, 
especially in everyday interactions. It focuses on discourse, any unit of language beyond 
the sentence. 
• 
A key concept in pragmatics is that we do things with words. Speech acts are those 
things we do through language; each speech act consists of a locution, an illocution, or 
pragmatic intent, and a perlocution. 
• 
To explain how interlocutors make sense of another’s utterance, linguists posit the coop-
erative principle and its four maxims: quantity, relevance, manner, and quality. 
• 
Indirectness, though more difficult for a listener to interpret, is very common. Utterances 
can be indirect, conventionally indirect, or very indirect. The functions of indirectness 
include being polite, avoiding overt markers of power, and creating solidarity. 
• 
Contextual factors such as the social setting, the relationship among interlocutors, the 
purpose of the interaction, and the social identities are important to any understanding 
of language use. 
• 
We use discourse to do identity work, indicating who we are and how we see our rela-
tionship with our interlocutors. 
• 
Expectations of politeness and appropriateness are an important part of understanding 
language use. Politeness consists of attending to another’s positive or negative face. It 
is also related to what is deemed to be appropriate behavior in a context and thus varies 
across cultures, subcultures, and speech communities. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
146 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
KEY TERMS 
discourse 
conversational patterns: opening sequences, 
closing sequences, turn-taking, floor 
silence 
pragmatics; pragmatic intent 
interlocutors 
speech acts: locution, illocution, perlocution 
cooperative principle: Maxim of Quantity, 
Maxim of Quality, Maxim of Relevance, 
Maxim of Manner 
indirectness; indirect speech acts, conven-
tional indirectness 
register 
politeness and impoliteness 
face; negative face; positive face 
power differential 
social distance 
appropriateness 
EXPLORATIONS 
Exploration 1: Class rules 
Observe either a lecture class and a discussion class at your institution. Identify the unspoken 
rules of interaction common to that class so that someone who isn’t familiar with higher edu-
cation settings might be able to fit in. Comment on the interlocutors and their roles, the level 
of formality, meanings of silence, turn-taking patterns (who holds the floor the longest, for 
example), topics discussed and who gets to decide which topics are discussed. You might note 
the conversations that take place before and after class as well as interactions during class. 
Discussion Prompt: Share your observations with your group, noting which interactional 
patterns the two types of class share and what patterns differentiate them. 
Writing prompt: Summarize your observations, noting which patterns the two types of 
class share and which differentiate them. 
Exploration 2: Locutions and illocutions 
• 
It’s a snake? Imagine the phrase, There’s a snake in there! spoken by someone with 
outstretched arm pointing to the next room. (Take snake to mean the reptile, not a rep-
rehensible person.) List as many speech acts (pragmatic intents) as you can to describe 
what that utterance might mean. 
• 
I kid not. Imagine the phrase, Are you kidding? Like It’s a snake, its speaker can have 
various pragmatic intents in uttering it. What are those pragmatic intents and what 
contexts might they be used in and with whom? 
Exploration 3: Giving advice (group project) 
There are many ways to make suggestions or offer advice. Imagine a friend coming to you for 
suggestions about a problem. In your small group, decide on a specific problem to offer sug-
gestions about. Then list as many ways as you can for doing so, writing down exactly what 
you would say. Rank your locutions (what you’d say) from very indirect to conventionally 
indirect to direct. What factors might influence your choice of which form to use? 
Discussion prompt: Compare your findings with your small group; discuss any similari-
ties or differences you see, using concepts from the chapter to guide you. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
147 
Writing prompt: Write a one-page description of what you found, using concepts from 
the chapter to guide you. 
Exploration 4: Politeness 
Choose a club or organization or group of friends you are part of. Describe how politeness 
and impoliteness work in this group. What is considered polite? Impolite? What type of 
politeness strategies, positive or negative, are most prevalent? What might be considered 
impolite or rude by an outsider but would be normal for this group? How do theories of 
politeness illuminate (or not) what is going on? 
Discussion prompt: Share your findings with your small group and compare similarities 
and differences. 
Writing prompt: Write a one-page description of how politeness works here. 
Exploration 5: What’cha sayin’? 
Using [In] or [Iŋ] for -ing at the end of verbs is related to both social identity and register. Notice 
your own use of these variants and their use by speakers around you. Imagine you are explaining 
them to a new student who is learning English and trying to fit in. What would you tell them about 
when to use which variant? 
Exploration 6: What’s so funny? 
Figure 8.2 and Figure 8.3 show two cartoons. Which concepts from this chapter can be used 
to explain what’s going on in each? 
FIGURE 8.2 What’s so funny here? 
FIGURE 8.3 What’s so funny here? 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
148 
LANGUAGE IN EVERYDAY INTERACTION 
FURTHER READING 
Austin, J. (1962). How to do things with words. Oxford University Press. 
Gumperz, J., Jupp, T., & Roberts, C. (1979). Crosstalk: A study of cross-cultural 
communication. National Centre for Industrial Language Training and BBC. A video 
showing miscommunication between native and non-native speakers of English due to 
differing conversational norms. 
Levinson, S. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge University Press. A classic in the field. 
Wardhaugh, R. (1985). How conversation works. Blackwell. An accessible classic in the field. 
REFERENCES 
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge 
University Press. 
Mesthrie, R., Swann, J., Deumert, A., & Leap, W. (2000). Introducing sociolinguistics. John 
Benjamins Publishing Company. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 9 
Language variation and society 
First glance 
• Sociolinguistics in your world: Mock 
Spanish 
Why don’t we all speak or sign the same? 
• Native American Englishes 
Structured variation 
Regional variation 
Standards: development and policing 
Social variation: Sociolects, ethnolects 
• Standard language ideology 
• Hispanic English 
Variation in sign language 
• Codeswitching and translanguaging 
INTRODUCTION 
In Chapter 1, I mentioned how, when I lived in London many years ago, I took exception to 
the pressures on me to drop my American accent. I couldn’t have explained then why that 
pressure made me uncomfortable, though I realized I didn’t want to sound like something 
I was not. Now I understand those feelings a bit more. Language is a resource for expressing 
our social identities, who we are and how we want others to see us. Asking me to change my 
accent, then, was asking me to change who I was. 
We all use language to express our social identities, but we can only do so because of the 
inherent variation in all languages. If we all sounded exactly alike, we’d have no way to mark 
who we are through our language use. Because of variation, we use certain lexical, phonologi-
cal, and grammatical variants as resources to mark and construct ourselves as certain kinds of 
people in particular social contexts. The field of linguistics that looks most closely at this vari-
ation and its social meanings is sociolinguistics, a field we’ll examine here. Sociolinguistics in 
its broadest form investigates how linguistic behaviors reflect and construct social distinctions 
and how language relates to various social phenomena, including social inequalities. 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-9 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
150 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
First, we’ll look at variationist linguistics, those studies that examine different varieties 
and the social meanings ascribed to them. Then we’ll turn to standardization, the process 
whereby certain varieties in modern nation states came to be valued and other varieties deval-
ued. Finally, we’ll look at critical sociolinguistics, a subfield that studies the ideologies that 
underlie and resist the pattern of valuing and devaluing that supports social inequalities. 
Throughout, we’ll address the consequences of common attitudes about linguistic diversity 
and specific varieties, locating our discussion within larger systems of difference and inequal-
ity. And we’ll revisit some of the myths about correctness we first touched on in Chapter 2. 
A note about terminology 
We noted in Chapter 2 that the very concept of a language is in some ways problematic. When 
we label a system of communication as English or Swahili or Tagalog, we imply an unchang-
ing, monolithic entity and thus hide the staggering amount of variation found within most 
languages. Those labels are often convenient, if we keep in mind that they are imprecise terms 
for constellations of different varieties of what we call English or Swahili or Tagalog. 
This constellation brings up an important question any discussion of variation must 
address: what term to use for those varieties? As we noted in Chapter 2, many people think 
of dialects as substandard or old-fashioned, as something others speak, or as slang. We know, 
however, that everyone speaks a dialect, no matter our educational level; that no dialect is 
substandard; and that slang is present in all dialects. Those negative connotations of the term 
dialect remain present for most people, so what term can we use instead? 
Variety is one candidate, but as we saw in Chapter 8, there are many kinds of variation: 
variation based on the situation of use (register) and individual variation (idiolects), to name 
two. The variation we examine in this chapter differs from register and idiolect. For one thing, 
all dialects have different registers and idiolects. For another, dialect refers to a variety shared 
by a group that also shares some regional or social identity. In our discussion, we will use the 
term variety as a cover term for various types of dialects: regional dialects, sociolects, and 
ethnolects, each of which is examined in the following sections. 
Of equal importance is the question of what label to use for any one variety. As with labe-
ling a language, giving a variety a name carries implications: that this variety is somehow 
monolithic, that all speak it the same, that all who share a particular social identity speak 
it. Such a label essentializes both the variety and the group that speaks it. This is especially 
important when those groups are marginalized or stigmatized by mainstream society. The 
variety spoken by many, but not all, African Americans is often called African American 
English or African American Language. That label subtly equates ethnicity or race with 
speaking a particular variety, as though it is somehow part of one’s genes. It is not. Just as we 
can talk about Minnesota English and acknowledge that not everyone in Minnesota speaks 
that variety or speaks it the same way, we need to recognize there are differences among 
speakers of African American English and all varieties. We discuss more of this variety in 
Chapter 10. For now, keep in mind that although we need labels to discuss difference, labels 
are always potentially problematic. 
One more note about terminology: sociolinguistic variants, or just variants, here refer 
to the alternate forms of a linguistic feature that are associated with specific social groups or 
social identities. To give a simple example, the use of G’day, mate! as a greeting is a variant 

   
 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
151 
associated with Australians. For non-Australians, its use evokes that identity. For Australians, 
it is just the way they talk. 
STRUCTURED VARIATION 
Early sociolinguist research focused on the ways that variation within any one language is 
not random but structured; that is, it reflects social identities: our region of origin, our ethnic-
ity, our gender, our social class, our age, among other identities. The pronunciation of /r/ can 
serve as an example of what is meant by structured variation. That feature varies greatly 
across varieties of English. To be precise, the pronunciation of /r/ in word-final position or 
before a consonant, what is known as post-vocalic /r/, varies greatly. Some varieties are what 
is known as rhotic: /r/ is pronounced. Some are non-rhotic: unless it is before a vowel, /r/ is 
not pronounced. 
A classic study by William Labov (1966) investigated the presence of that post-vocalic /r/ 
in the speech of different socioeconomic classes of New Yorkers using a very clever tech-
nique: asking sales personnel in different department stores (Saks, an upper-middle-class 
store; Macy’s, middle-class; and Klein’s, working-class store) for a department located on the 
fourth floor. Labov then noted how often the /r/ was pronounced in the answer, fourth floor. 
What he found was a structured pattern: those from the upper-middle-class store pronounced 
it most often, those from the middle-class one less often, and those from the working-class 
store pronounced it least often. This and subsequent studies in various parts of the English-
speaking world have shown that pronunciation of that sound and others reflects speakers’ 
social identities in a structured way. 
That post-vocalic /r/ brings into focus another key concept: value judgments of linguistic 
features are arbitrary, based on judgments of people rather than judgments of the language 
itself. In the United States, rhotic dialects, those that pronounce /r/, are generally more pres-
tigious; in Britain, the opposite is true. The upper class tends not to pronounce that /r/, but the 
working class does. 
Regional variation 
Regional variation is the kind of variation most commented on by people, who often find 
accent and vocabulary differences fascinating. When I teach this in my classes, students read-
ily come up with differences between the neighboring states of Minnesota and Wisconsin: 
bubbler vs drinking fountain or duck, duck, grey duck vs duck, duck, goose. These examples 
may create the impression that the line between varieties is clear cut. Not so. For one thing, 
varieties tend to blend into one another. For another, each regional variety has variation within 
it based on age, gender, class, or ethnicity. 
The regional dialect divisions in Britain are quite old, reflecting conquest and settlement 
patterns from centuries ago. In the mid-5th century, the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes brought 
slightly different varieties of their Germanic language when they invaded and settled in dif-
ferent areas of Britain. The general dividing line for those areas remains a general dividing 
line among varieties today. When the Norse invaded a few centuries later, they tended to settle 
mostly in the northeastern part of England; the varieties spoken there still reflect the influ-
ence of the Norse language. English spread throughout the British Isles, coming into contact 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
152 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
with the Celtic languages spoken by the Welsh, Scots, and Irish, all of whom gave their own 
color to the English varieties that developed in those areas. 
In the United States the origins of regional varieties reflect regional varieties in Britain. 
In the 17th and 18th centuries, settlers from certain areas in Britain tended to settle in certain 
areas of what is now the United States, bringing their varieties with them. The result was the 
creation of three major dialect regions by the time of the American Revolution: Northern, set-
tled mostly by people from Anglia; Midland, settled mostly by people from the Midlands of 
England; and Southern, settled mostly by people from Northern England, Northern Ireland, 
and Scotland. Later, people from all three areas took their varieties with them as they moved 
west. As they did so, they interacted with people from other areas speaking other dialects, 
resulting in a mingling of varieties and a leveling of some distinct features in each. Part of that 
intermingling also involved the languages of the peoples conquered in that western expan-
sion, Native American languages and Spanish most notably. 
Leveling is a process whereby differences among dialects decrease, usually the result of 
social or geographic mobility. This leveling partly accounts for the fact that there is less 
regional variation in the western United States than in the East. People from Los Angeles and 
people from Portland sound more like one another than do people from New York and those 
from Savannah. 
English spread not just to the United States, of course, but to many regions of the world. It 
is spoken as the dominant language in Ireland, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South 
Africa, among other nations. Each of these nations has what is known as a national vari-
ety: Australian English, South African English, Canadian English, etc. The same is true for 
languages of other colonial powers who spread their languages across the globe; we have 
Senegal French and Colombian Spanish, for example. The Spanish of Colombia is differ-
ent from that of Spain; the French of Senegal is different from that of France. Like those of 
English, the national varieties of Spanish and French spoken both inside and outside Spain 
and France have their own regional dialects, which reflect settlement patterns and interaction 
with indigenous groups and their languages and with immigrants from other countries. All of 
these varieties are rule governed and valid varieties of those languages, not broken Spanish 
or fractured French. 
British English and North American English 
The national varieties of those languages and of English are generally mutually intelligible; 
they share many features but differ in others. Those differences appear not only in vocabulary 
but in pronunciation, spelling, and syntax as well, so much so that there are books, for exam-
ple, to help North Americans understand Australian English or Scottish English. 
The British use of lift for U.S. elevator is among the most well-known differences in vocab-
ulary; others include British bonnet and boot for North American hood and trunk of a car, 
rubbish for garbage, chips for French fries, tin for can of food, and braces for suspenders. 
Some of these differences can get you in trouble. In Britain, knock up does not mean to get 
someone pregnant but to wake someone up or cook something up; mad means crazy in Britain, 
not angry as in the United States; and if you get pissed in Britain, you’ve gotten drunk, not 
mad. Many pronunciation differences between British and North American English are well 
known: dance [a] or [æ]; data [dætə] or [detə], luxury [ləgʒəri] or [ləkʃəri], for example. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
153 
There are fewer differences in syntax or grammar among English varieties than in vocabu-
lary or pronunciation, but there are some notable ones. The British say in hospital; North 
Americans say in the hospital; speakers in North America tend to prefer simple past as in 
Did you eat yet? The British prefer present perfect, Have you eaten yet? The British some-
times use a plural verb for some group nouns: the committee are meeting tomorrow, while 
North Americans normally use a singular verb: the committee is meeting tomorrow. Variation 
appears even in writing, where efforts to eliminate it are intense: in spelling (honor or honour, 
tire or tyre) and in punctuation (is a comma required after an introductory subordinate clause 
or not?). Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, and many other countries that were once 
colonized by the British have generally adopted the British standard of spelling. 
Regional variation in the United States 
Like all varieties, regional varieties of U.S. English differ in phonology, vocabulary, and 
sometimes in syntax. One of the most well-known vocabulary differences is pop (in the 
North), coke (South), or soda (Midland and West). Others include pail (the North) or bucket 
(elsewhere); skillet (Midland) or frying pan (elsewhere); quarter till the hour (Midland) or 
quarter to (elsewhere). Some vocabulary differences are quite localized: what I call a rubber 
band is called a gum band in Pittsburgh and a rubber binder in Minnesota. In Colorado, cer-
tain mountain peaks, those above 14,000 feet, are called fourteeners. In the Pacific Northwest, 
an expensive item may be described as spendy, and in Southern California, numbers for free-
ways take a definite article: the 580, though that’s not the case in Northern California. 
Pronunciation differences abound in regional varieties. The Boston dialect tends to be 
non-rhotic: that non-postvocalic /r/ is not pronounced, though it is in most other parts of the 
country; in the Bronx and some other areas of the East coast, you can hear [dIs] for this and 
[tiŋk] for think. In most parts of the United States, the vowel sound in buy is [ay], but it’s [a] 
in the South. In the North and South, the second vowel in pajamas is pronounced [a]; in the 
Midland, it is [æ]. One phonological variant I still retain from my childhood in Baltimore is 
what is called intrusive /r/, adding an [r] sound where others don’t. I still pronounce wash 
as [warʃ] even though I haven’t lived in the East coast since I was a teenager. And I still get 
teased about it! 
Based on differences in pronunciation and vocabulary, U.S. English is often divided into 
four major regional dialect areas: the North, the South, the Midland, and the West. There 
is a great deal of variation within each of these, of course, and many linguists divide U.S. 
English into many more smaller dialect areas, some as small as one city, New York City or 
Philadelphia, for example. Although speakers in the West share many features and are thus 
seen as speaking the same major regional dialect, they do not all speak the same, so much so 
that some linguists divide the Pacific Northwest dialect from the Pacific Southwest dialect 
and both from the Southwestern one and the Rocky Mountain one. There is even more varia-
tion in the eastern part of the U.S. The South often gets lumped together into one dialect areas, 
but there are many different dialects within that major one: Gulf Southern, Coastal Southern, 
Floridian, and Texas South, to name a few. The Northeast has perhaps the most variety: Inland 
North, East New England, West New England, Hudson Valley, and others. And the Midland 
dialect region, which stretches from Delaware to Kansas, contains Mid-Atlantic (that’s where 
my intrusive /r/ comes from), Western Pennsylvania, and others. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
154 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
Social variation: Sociolects 
Sociolects is the term used for varieties related to social class and other aspects of social 
status. Social class variation was clearly shown in Labov’s (1966) study examining the use 
of post-vocalic /r/ in Saks, Macy’s, and Klein’s mentioned earlier. Other studies have found 
similar results for class. Trudgill (1974), for example, found a connection between social class 
and the use of certain variants of the pronunciation of -ing: [ɪn] or [ɪŋ]. Members of the middle 
class generally used [ɪŋ] more than [ɪn], and members of the working class did the opposite. 
Use of [ɪn] is often believed to be sloppy pronunciation or just plain bad English, an erroneous 
belief but one that is still widespread. There is nothing in any feature or variety or language 
that determines its worth; it is the connection of that feature with certain social groups that 
determines its value, as we’ll discuss further. 
Rickford’s (1987) study on the use of creole in Guyana can shed light on how social class 
interacts with language use. (Creoles, which are discussed in more detail in Chapter 12, are 
language systems created from two languages, usually in situations of colonization, such as in 
Guyana, which was colonized by the British.) Rickford found that class differences are more 
important than ethnicity in explaining linguistic differences: the speech of the working class, 
who do the lowest status jobs, contains more creole features, while that of the “estate class,” 
shopkeepers, clerks, and skilled trade workers, contains more standard features. 
The differences found in those studies, and in most studies examining social class, are 
not absolute. No one has found that all members of a particular social group use a particular 
variant and that no members of other social groups do. Rather, those differences are a matter 
of tendencies, of percentages rather than all or nothing. In fact, it is often the case that certain 
variants generally seen as part of working-class speech are used by all classes at times. Nearly 
all of us, for example, use [ɪn] for -ing in very casual speech, though we might not in formal 
settings. 
Social classes are not monolithic, of course, and other aspects of our social identities are 
connected to sociolects. Those aspects can be quite local, as Eckert showed in her classic 
study of high school students. Eckert (1989) studied the speech of jocks and burnouts at a 
high school in Detroit, Michigan. The distinction between these two groups is a familiar one 
in many U.S. high schools, though they may have different names: jocks see school as part of 
their identity, participate in extra-curricular activities, and aspire to higher education; burn-
outs identify more with the local community, do not participate as much in extra-curricular 
activities, and do not aspire to higher education. Eckert found that jocks and burnouts pro-
nounced the vowel sound [ay] very differently, as noted in Chapter 4. She also found that their 
speech varied in other ways: burnouts used variants connected to the local community and 
jocks used variants that carried mainstream social prestige. Each group saw itself as different 
from the other; their sociolects reflected that belief. 
Social variation: Ethnolects 
Recent work in sociolinguistics has focused a lot on ethnic dialects or ethnolects, especially 
those spoken by African Americans and Hispanic Americans in the United States, by Maori 
in New Zealand, by Aboriginals in Australia, and those of Caribbean ancestry in the United 
Kingdom. Chapter 10 discusses AAE in some detail; here I describe some other ethnic 

   
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
155 
varieties and the social meanings those varieties can carry. It is important to remember that 
they are as rule governed and correct as Standard English and that each contains a range of 
registers and variation; Hispanic English is not spoken the same way in all situations. 
What makes a variety a variety is not one or even a few lexical, phonological, or syntactic 
variants, but a cluster of them. Many of those can overlap with variants of other varieties. 
Double negatives, for example, are a rule-governed feature of many varieties of English, both 
in the United States and other countries. When we focus on differences that make varieties 
distinct, we can forget the deep similarities that make them all English. It is also important to 
remember that just because an ethnolect is called Hispanic English, for example, it does not 
mean that all who identify as Hispanic speak that ethnolect, nor that there is only one way to 
speak it. 
Hispanic English 
Hispanic English is the name used to identify the many varieties of English spoken by 
Americans of Hispanic descent. In the United States that descent may be from Puerto Rico, 
Cuba, Spain, Mexico, Dominican Republic, or other Central or South American nations. 
That’s a lot of different places. These groups vary not just by their place of origin, but by 
how long they have been in the United States, both as individuals and as communities. Some 
Hispanic communities in parts of the Southwest have been in what is now the United States 
for centuries. Among the different varieties of Hispanic English, the most well-known and 
well-studied are Chicanx English, Puerto Rican English, and Cuban English. (That first vari-
ety is sometimes called Chicano English, a name that connects its use to males, for that -o is 
a masculine ending in Spanish. To avoid that implication, I use Chicanx.) 
Many think Hispanic English is just English spoken with a Spanish accent or is what is 
sometimes called Spanglish, a mixture of English and Spanish. It is neither. Although recent 
immigrants may speak English with an accent influenced by their native Spanish, the accent 
of their children who grow up speaking English (or both English and Spanish) is not a “for-
eign” accent but merely a phonological variation of English, like that of New Yorkers or 
Southerners or any of us. They do not speak funny English; they speak a normal, valid variety 
of English, with a range of registers just like any other variety. 
Chicanx English or CE, the variety examined here, is the variety spoken by people of 
Mexican descent in the United States. Spoken across the United States, in major cities and 
in rural communities, especially those in the Southwest, it is a distinct, stable variety of U.S. 
English spoken by a large percentage of the population. 
Some phonological features of CE are most likely the result of influences from Spanish 
that have now become part of this variety. Since Spanish has no [I] vowel sound, the sound [i] 
takes on its role; thus, leap and lip are both pronounced the same [lip]. The [ʃ] sound in SAE is 
pronounced [tʃ] at the beginning of a word in CE, so shame becomes [tʃem] rather than [ʃem]. 
At the end of a word, the opposite occurs: [tʃ] in SAE is pronounced [ʃ] in CE, so such is pro-
nounced [səʃ]. Word-final consonant clusters tend to be reduced in CE more so than in SAE, 
especially when the last consonant is a [d]: kind is pronounced [kayn] and herd can sound just 
like her. Like French, Italian, Spanish, and many varieties of English, CE allows for nega-
tive concord (aka double negatives), as in I don’t want nothing. Perhaps because of consonant 
cluster reduction, CE often omits the past-tense morpheme {ed} when the verb ends with [t], 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
156 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
[d], or [n]. Although these features are highly stigmatized as uneducated or incorrect English, 
they are rule governed. 
Code switching/translanguaging 
Here might be a good place to discuss code switching, the phenomenon in which a speaker 
uses two or more languages or varieties of a language within one utterance or conversa-
tion. It seems to be a universal phenomenon when interlocutors share two or more languages 
or varieties. Many people have the mistaken impression that code switching indicates the 
interlocutors do not have mastery of either language. Far from it. Code switching occurs 
when someone has enough fluency in both languages to switch easily—a sign of mastery, 
not its opposite. Indeed, code switching is often used to signal membership in multilingual 
communities. 
In code switching, interlocutors keep the phonological and grammatical properties of each 
language as they speak. A person bilingual in Spanish and English might use a noun phrase 
in Spanish within an otherwise English sentence, keeping the adjective after the noun, as it is 
done in Spanish, rather than shifting the adjective before the noun as in English. Phonological 
features from each language are kept too. In this way, code switching is different from bor-
rowing in which the pronunciation of the borrowed term changes to fit the phonological 
patterns of the new language. An example from my own life might help here. In an Italian 
restaurant a few years ago I ordered a meal, saying I’d like the manicotti. Because I speak 
Italian, I pronounced the last word as it is pronounced in Italian [manikoti] rather than the way 
it is pronounced as a word borrowed into English, [manikaDi]. Unfortunately, the server did 
not understand me as I had broken a cardinal rule for code switching: both interlocutors must 
understand both languages. 
An alternate perspective on what is called code switching is translanguaging, which offers 
a different way of looking at multilingual speakers. The term code switching implies the exist-
ence of more than one language within an individual in a way that emphasizes the separate 
nature of those languages. Individuals are seen as switching back and forth between them. 
Theories of translanguaging instead posit that individuals make use of all of their languages as 
part of an integrated communication system. That is, multilingual speakers utilize their entire 
language repertoire, whichever of their available linguistic resources seems most appropriate 
to the situation at hand, without worrying about what language they are using. What is often 
seen as code switching is not so much switching between languages, but rather choosing words 
or phrases from one’s linguistic repertoire regardless of the language. Theories of translan-
guaging thus recognize that bilinguals are not two monolinguals in one body. 
Sociolinguistics in your world: Mock Spanish 
Mock Spanish is, as the name implies, a way of making fun of Spanish and Spanish speak-
ers. It is not an actual variety of Spanish or English; instead, it consists of a limited number 
of terms that are generally used by monolingual speakers of English to impart a humorous 
or light touch, terms such as Hasta la vista, baby or manana. It “borrows Spanish-language 
words and suffixes, assimilates their pronunciation to English, . . . [and] changes their mean-
ing” (Hill, 2008, p. 134). According to Hill, those who use Mock Spanish often see themselves 

   
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
157 
as showing an openness and respect for the Spanish language and culture. She points out, 
however, that Mock Spanish is often seen as offensive by those of Hispanic ancestry. So why 
should such phrases as Hasta la vista, baby or manana be offensive? 
To explore that, we should first remember that Spanish has been spoken in what is now the 
United States for centuries, not only in those areas that used to be part of Mexico but else-
where as well. As such, English speakers and Spanish speakers have come into contact often. 
It would only make sense that such contact might lead to lexical borrowing. Mock Spanish is 
fundamentally different from such borrowing, however. 
Hill points out that one way it is different is that it evokes racist stereotypes. For example, 
though it simply means tomorrow in Spanish, manana in English takes on a connotation of 
laziness or procrastination and suggests a stereotype of a lazy Mexican. Hasta la vista means 
see you later; adios means good-bye. In Spanish neither carries hints of a threat or a brush off. 
Yet they do when used in English and evoke an offensive stereotype of Hispanic treachery or 
duplicity. Does this mean that every time we use Mock Spanish, we are being racist? That’s a 
tricky question. Most people who do use it do not, I’d guess, mean to be offensive and would 
be shocked to think they are insulting anyone. The problem is that through its use, negative 
stereotypes such as those we’ve discussed are continually circulated and normalized in ways 
we don’t generally recognize. 
Native American Englishes 
Native American Englishes are not one thing but a range of diverse varieties of English spo-
ken by those of Native American ancestry across the United States and Canada. These varie-
ties differ linguistically, historically, and socially. For some speakers, this variety is their first 
or native language; for others, it is a second, learned language. Some Native American varie-
ties are strongly influenced by the Native American language still spoken in the community; 
for others, only some features of the ancestral language remain. Thus, they are quite diverse. 
It is important to remember the history of Native Americans and their languages as we 
discuss Native American varieties of English. At the time of first contact with Europeans, 
there were more than 500 separate languages spoken by indigenous groups in what is now the 
United States and Canada. These 500 languages were quite diverse. That linguistic landscape 
changed dramatically with the coming of Europeans in the 16th century, an invasion which 
had devastating effects on Native American cultures and languages. Today, of the 500 lan-
guages spoken before the 16th century, only approximately 200 are still being used and many 
of them are in danger of dying. 
One important contributor to that devastation was the development of what were called 
boarding schools in the United States and residential schools in Canada. Starting in the mid to 
late 19th century, Native American children were taken from their families and communities, 
often forcibly, and sent to boarding schools where they were severely punished for speaking 
their native languages. The stated aim of the schools and of government policy in general 
was to eradicate their indigenous languages and cultures to force assimilation to English and 
White culture. These schools had catastrophic effects, disrupting families and communities, 
and leading to the loss of many Native American languages. 
As Leap (1993) points out, the English these young Native American students learned was 
not necessarily the English the schools were trying to teach. Students learned much of their 

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
158 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
English from other students—not from the teacher or in the classroom—on the sports fields 
or work shifts, in dormitories or dining halls. In those settings, they learned “varieties of 
English which are heavily influenced by . . . ancestral language grammars, rules of discourse 
and text making practices” (quoted in Mesthrie et al., 2000, p. 270). Leap calls the new varie-
ties that developed Indian-affirming English codes and concludes that they allow speakers “to 
maintain ancestral language fluencies by incorporating the linguistic traditions of others into 
their own language resources” (quoted in Meshrie et al., p. 271). 
One Indian-affirming English code used today is Rez English and its accompanying rez 
accent, spoken in many indigenous communities. Although it is a variety of English, not of 
their ancestral language, Rez English has become emblematic of American Indian identity for 
many. It is well known that ancestral languages are often important to ethnic identity for indig-
enous peoples. Newmark et al. (2017) note, however, that Native American varieties of English 
can play an equally important role, especially given that many indigenous people have little or 
no access to their ancestral language. In a study in different locations in the United States and 
Canada, they found that through use of the rez accent, indigenous peoples create and maintain 
a Native ethnic identity. Echoing Leap (1993), they suggest that such use is a way to reconcile 
one’s identity with not being able to speak the indigenous language of one’s ancestors. 
Variation in sign languages 
Variation is inherent in sign languages, as it is in all natural languages. In fact, sign languages 
tend to be highly variable, partly because of their history and the ways that children learn 
them. Unless hard-of-hearing children are born to Deaf parents, they tend not to learn a sign 
language at home. Instead, they often learn it at school, often at a school for Deaf children. 
As Mesthrie et al. (2000) note, this variation is related to the same factors as it is for spo-
ken languages: region, gender, sexual orientation, ethnicity, and social class. The Black Deaf 
community in the United States has its own variety of ASL, a variety that was unfortunately 
seen as nonstandard for many years. The gay Deaf community likewise has its own variety, 
which includes its own set of signs, especially those that are integral to gay Deaf culture. The 
most noticeable differences are those in the lexicon, with different groups having different 
signs for the same thing, rather like lift and elevator, but there are also differences in morphol-
ogy and phonology. 
Factors specific to Deaf communities also play a part in this variation. Children of Deaf 
parents whose native language is a sign language tend to use certain variants more than those 
who learn it as a second language. Learning it before the age of six or being deaf oneself also 
plays a role in sign language variation. 
STANDARDS AND STANDARDIZATION 
So far, we’ve been discussing different varieties of English without naming the one that most 
people see as the language itself, what we’ve called Standard English. It’s also called Proper 
or Broadcast English and sometimes BBC English in the United Kingdom. The standard var-
ies across different nations, so Standard American English is slightly different from Standard 
Australian English or Standard British English, as anyone who has traveled from one nation 
to the other knows. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
159 
We’ve noted several times that all varieties of all languages are equally correct, valid and rule 
governed. And each variety of English has as much right to be called English as any other. We 
often subtly imply the opposite, however, through our labels. Calling a variety Hispanic English 
or Scottish English or working-class English implies that there is an English without a preceding 
adjective. There is not. The same holds true for other languages. Sicilian Italian is just as much 
Italian as what is called the standard. What most people consider the standard language is but 
one variety among many, granted one that is accorded prestige and respect. That term itself, 
standard language, is a misnomer, in fact. To be precise, it should be called a standard variety. 
The standard is sometimes defined as the variety used by those who have status and power. 
And its use confers status and power on those who use it. It is also said that those who use the 
standard are considered well-spoken and that the standard is defined as the variety used by 
those who are considered well spoken. If those definitions seem a bit circular to you, they are. 
The point here is that what we mean by a standard variety is hard to pin down. There is even 
disagreement among linguists as to whether or not it really exists. Some say it is an idealized 
variety that no one actually speaks; others say that speaking a standard is mostly about avoid-
ing stigmatized features like double negatives or ain’t; still others that it is the native variety of 
the middle or upper-middle class. Still others term it a “mythical beast” (Lippi-Green, 2012). 
Standard varieties are generally defined as codified forms of a language that come to be 
accepted as the dominant variety and the only correct way of speaking. They are the varie-
ties generally expected to be used by political leaders, mainstream media, and educated 
professionals—in other words, those with high levels of education, status, or authority. 
A standard variety fulfills certain functions outside those of everyday language: it is the 
variety used in formal writing, education, mass media, government, and most professional 
endeavors. It can serve as an emblem of nationhood and make communication across diverse 
languages easier. It can also, however, contribute to social inequality. 
The process of standardization converts one variety, or an amalgam of several varieties, 
into a standard by regulating its spelling, grammar, and pronunciation and by creating the 
expectation that it is the only acceptable variety. A central part of that regulation involves 
creating dictionaries and grammar handbooks to serve as authorities on the language, espe-
cially in education. That is what is meant by codified: dictionaries, grammar handbooks, and 
educators explicitly dictate what is correct and what is not. 
Standardization is a recent phenomenon in the history of languages. It occurred earliest in 
Europe where the process went hand in hand with the growth of nation states and capitalism, 
with the newly emerging standards becoming prominent symbols of the new nations. In some 
cases, as in France, the central government played a direct role in the process. Standardization 
in France began in the early 17th century under King Louis XIV when the Academie Francaise 
was established with the express purpose of identifying explicit rules for the French lan-
guage. Before that, various languages and dialects were spoken throughout France. After the 
Revolution of 1789, the new government decreed that to be French, one had to speak French, 
despite the fact that only about 10% of the population actually spoke it (May, 2017). None of 
the multitude of other languages spoken in what is now France was acceptable if one were to 
be a citoyen, a citizen of the new Republic. Nor were all varieties acceptable. It was the vari-
ety of French spoken in Paris, the economic, political, and cultural center of the new nation, 
that became the standard. This standardization took place over the next two centuries as the 
central government instituted educational policies to promote a uniform national language. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
160 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
In England, the process was similar, but with less direct government control. The vari-
ety spoken in the Midlands, specifically the triangle formed by London, Oxford University, 
and Cambridge University, the area whose speakers had the greatest economic, social, and 
political power and prestige, became the standard variety. The process took place gradually 
through the 14th to 16th centuries. As in France, there was great variety in the dialects spoken 
and written throughout the land before this time. Variety in spoken language remains wide-
spread to this day, but written language has been standardized. 
The development and spread of printing and literacy helped enable this process, for 
literacy and standardization reinforce one another. When a language is written, it can be 
regulated and codified in a way not easily done when it exists only in spoken or signed 
form. Written language requires some codified standards so that people can understand 
it across space and time. The written language carries a great deal of prestige, a prestige 
shared with the standard. In fact, the written language is often seen as the purest, most cor-
rect form of a language. Despite this valorization, it is most definitely not the original form 
of a language, nor is it the purest or most precise or elegant form, whatever those terms 
might mean. Even more importantly, other varieties are not derivations or aberrations of 
that supposedly pure form. 
Standardization is the result of both historical accident and deliberate planning. 
Historical accident only in that there is nothing inherent in the variety that develops into 
a standard that makes it more qualified to be one. Rather it is the connection of a variety 
with centers of power and influence that helps it become a standard. Still today, the rise of 
standards is essentially a social, economic, and political matter, not a linguistic one. It is a 
deliberate process, just as the development of standards for measurements was deliberate. 
That standardization arose because trade and commerce required it—an inch needed to be 
standardized as a certain length, an hour a certain duration, a pound a certain weight—a 
no variation, one-size-fits-all system, which as we know from trying on clothes, rarely 
works. 
The development of Standard American English differed in some major respects from 
the process in England, France, and other European nations. There, the standard variety 
emerged from the variety spoken in centers of economic, political, and cultural power. Given 
that, one would expect the speech of New York City to emerge as the new U.S. standard 
because it was the center of commerce and culture. It did not, however. Instead, that of the 
Midwest became the basis, at least for pronunciation, of standard U.S. English. Bonfiglio 
(2002), in his study of the rise of Standard American, notes that it is unusual for a standard 
to develop from the speech of rural areas, which the Midwest was. It did so here for spe-
cific reasons having to do with demographics and stereotypes about those demographics. 
New York and its speech were associated with immigrants, especially those from southern 
and eastern Europe, immigrants who were seen as undesirable. The Southern Italians and 
Eastern European Jews came in for special vilification during this time. In contrast to them, 
the Midwest was seen as White (Southern Italians were not considered White) and Christian 
(which Jews were not), a purer America whose speech was not debased by outside influ-
ence (Bonfiglio, 2002). Thus, when radio arose as a mass medium in the early 20th century 
and broadcasters had to decide which accent should be the standard for radio announcers, 
and later for television and other media, the speech chosen was that of the Midwest, and it 
quickly became the standard accent. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
161 
Policing standards 
Because it is an imposed characteristic of language communities, that is, not a necessary 
occurrence in the evolution of any language, the standard must be continually maintained, 
even policed. Some countries have institutions specifically designed to do so; the Academie 
Francaise in France is probably the most famous and Accademia della Crusca in Italy is 
the oldest linguistic academy in the world. In English-speaking countries, dictionaries often 
serve a similar role, deciding what is acceptable. Such decisions can be a source of fierce 
debate, especially about new terms entering the language. Should ghosting be included as a 
real word, for example? How about google as a verb? Those decisions change over the years. 
Certain variants that used to be considered standard can become nonstandard. In the North 
American standard variety, for example, the past tense of sneak remained the old form snuck, 
a word that became nonstandard in Britain, where they now use sneaked instead. 
Despite its conceptual vagueness, the process of standardization remains a main agent of 
inequality today. That is partly because what nearly always comes along with the rise of a 
standard is a subsequent devaluing of other varieties. Varieties other than the standard come 
to be seen as a threat to the nation state. As such, they are banished from public and civic 
spheres. I remember being at a community meeting a few years ago when a Hispanic woman 
got up to speak. As soon as she began, people around me began to mutter, asking why we 
should have to listen to her since she couldn’t even speak proper English. The points she was 
making were insightful and important, but many could not seem to hear them. Such incidents 
happen often, effectively barring certain groups from having a voice in civic discourse. 
Our linguistic behaviors have not just social but market value. One generally needs some 
mastery of whatever is considered the standard to succeed in professional, educational, or 
power settings. When we speak a certain way (using the standard, for example), it connotes 
certain personal characteristics (a certain level of education and intelligence) that are valued 
by society in general. Indeed, the standard carries social prestige and benefits that are then 
accorded the speaker in many important settings: job interviews, educational settings, politi-
cal discourse. In other words, the standard variety has substantial market value in a way other 
varieties do not. Since access to the standard is unevenly distributed across society, such con-
nections to power effectively disempower those groups who do not speak it. 
Standard language ideology 
If the standard is no more logical or correct, then why do we so strongly believe it is? And more 
importantly, why do we so strongly believe that other varieties are incorrect and illogical? Both 
beliefs are part of what is called the standard language ideology. Ideology here can be defined 
as a “constellation of fundamental or commonsensical, and often normative, ideas and atti-
tudes related to some aspect(s) of social ‘reality’” (Bloommaert & Verschueren, 1998, p. 25). 
Language ideologies are those ideas, norms, and values that inform how we think about lan-
guages. The standard language ideology has several components. First, if there are two or more 
variant forms, only one can be correct. Second, varieties can be ranked according to their cor-
rectness and some varieties or languages are deservedly more prestigious and accepted because 
they are more correct. Third, the optimal society is one that is culturally and linguistically 
uniform. Fourth, linguistic and cultural heterogeneity is a threat; differences are dangerous. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
162 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
This ideology, though based on misapprehensions about language, is widely believed and has 
important social consequences. One is that the social and economic benefits that accompany 
speaking the standard are seen as rightfully deserved, as are the stigmas that come with not 
speaking it. Not to acquire it is seen as a sign of moral failure, lack of ambition, or lack of ability, 
and those who do not acquire it are seen as willfully ignorant or recalcitrant. None of these con-
clusions is based in fact, of course, even if the standard language ideology seems to justify them. 
Related to those conclusions are the illusory promise and threat of the standard: if you speak 
the standard, you’ll get economic and social rewards; if you don’t or won’t, you’ll never succeed, 
a threat aimed at those who speak what is seen as a nonstandard variety. That puts a big burden 
on those speakers. It asks them to change their way of speaking to succeed in school, to get a 
good job, or to be seen as credible in public settings. Two things to notice about that burden: One, 
since how we speak is part of who we are, asking people to change it is asking them to change 
who they are. Two, it is important to note who we ask to change: not someone from Australia 
in the United States, whose accent will be noticed but not condemned, but someone with a 
Hispanic accent who may be told they need to change their accent in order to get a job or suc-
ceed in school. The former need not hide part of who they are to succeed; the latter are asked to. 
Competing ideologies about language 
People, especially those who speak some version of the standard, often ask why those who 
speak a stigmatized variety don’t just learn to use the standard so that they are no longer 
stigmatized? That’s a complicated question. As noted earlier, the suggestion that they should 
change their way of speaking ignores the fact that our way of speaking is a potent symbol of 
who we are. We might more productively ask, why should they have to give up part of who 
they are to get a good job? 
We should also note that the original question entails another question: stigmatized to 
who? Not all speech communities share the standard language ideology discussed previously. 
That is, they don’t necessarily see the standard as better than the local variety they speak. In 
fact, a local variety, even if it is stigmatized by mainstream society, can carry a different kind 
of prestige, what is called covert prestige, a sort of hidden positive connotation. 
Sociolinguists use the terms overt and covert prestige to distinguish the different values that 
language varieties may have. In mainstream, dominant society, the use of Standard English 
carries with it an overt prestige; people generally think you’re smarter and more capable. And 
nonstandard variants, like double negatives or ain’t, carry stigma. In some communities, that’s 
not so. Working-class communities, for example, may consider those nonstandard variants as 
markers of group loyalty. Thus, they carry prestige, rather than stigma, in the local commu-
nity. To return to our original question, if the use of a stigmatized feature brings prestige to 
a speaker in their local community, the impetus is to continue using it, since street cred is an 
important aspect of language choice, whether it be Wall Street or the street we hang out on. 
All of this underscores the fact that there are often competing ideologies about language. 
Concepts of status, stigma, and prestige vary across communities, ethnicities, and social 
classes. What is seen as prestigious in one can be seen as stuck up or disloyal in another, so 
that the same linguistic feature can carry stigma in one community but prestige in another. 
Some communities may value solidarity above status, so adherence to local norms, including 
linguistic norms, is valued above accepting non-local or standard norms to gain status and 
get ahead. 

   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
163 
CRITICAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
As the discussion about standard language ideology indicates, social inequalities often have a 
linguistic component; those who speak what are considered nonstandard varieties or non-
dominant languages experience discrimination often justified by the standard language ideol-
ogy. Critical sociolinguistics examines the role language plays in creating and maintaining social 
inequalities and discrimination. It seeks to enlarge our understanding of the relationship of lan-
guage, society, and power, especially how power can be hidden in discourse. Critical linguists 
examine how societies and individuals come to accept or resist that standard language ideology; 
how individuals construct their identities in diverse social contexts; how educational institutions 
promote language standardization and the subsequent devaluing of other varieties; and how 
language and society are related both locally and in our globalized world that communicates 
increasingly through cyberspace. Thus, critical sociolinguistics, in locating linguistic choices 
within larger social systems of inequality, advocate for a more just and equitable world. We will 
be touching on these issues in the following chapters, but first let’s focus on a few key concepts. 
Critical discourse analysis, a part of critical sociolinguistics, analyzes discourse—oral, 
signed, and written texts—to make visible the ways language creates and maintains social 
inequalities. Discourse here has a slightly different meaning from our examination of it in 
Chapter 8. Here, discourses are common ways that groups use language or images: their charac-
teristic ways of speaking, writing, signing. All discourses contain within them underlying values 
and beliefs about how the world is and how it should be, values and beliefs generally shared by 
a group. These values and beliefs are not necessarily stated overtly; they are usually embedded 
in such a way as to appear natural and as just plain common sense. If we critically analyze dis-
course, we seek to bring to light the ways that language helps reproduce and create social rela-
tions, especially social relations of power and domination. This entails examining those aspects 
of life we take for granted in order to learn to see them as historically and socially constructed. 
Take a simple phrase like mankind’s greatest asset is his imagination. Such a phrase rep-
resents humanity as male; the simple use of man does so without having to state it overtly. 
A phrase like humans and animals represents humans as something other than animals, when 
of course we are not. 
I’ll borrow an example from Fairclough (2014) to illustrate how discourse can hide power. 
Saying Thousands are out of work represents the situation as a fact, something that just hap-
pens, with no indication that there were people behind it. Saying Company directors have 
sacked thousands of workers represents the situation as the direct result of specific actions 
by certain people. The first sentence hides the decision by those in power who have caused 
the layoffs; the second describes the action and names those responsible for it. Use of the first 
subtly presents a world in which no one is to blame for layoffs and renders invisible those 
who make decisions about those layoffs. The point is that repeated use of such phrases, or any 
ideology embedded in discourse across multiple texts, forms patterns that shape how we see 
the world. Such patterns can be destructive, as they misrepresent human social and economic 
relations. We return to this type of analysis in Chapters 11 and 14. 
Language and local identity 
Identity construction, from a critical perspective, moves beyond broad social categories to a 
view of identity as multifaceted. None of us is simply one thing. Our social identity includes 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
164 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
many factors: our gender, social class, ethnicity, race, sexual orientation, ableness, educa-
tional level, and others, including factors important in the local context. Since, from a critical 
perspective, languages are not separate, distinct entities but social practices that always occur 
within particular local and social contexts, we need to look beyond those broad categories to 
understand their underlying meanings. 
Two recent studies illuminate how those intersecting identities and local contexts play 
important roles in language choices. Slomanson and Newman (2004) found that among young 
male Latino New Yorkers, differing variants of particular consonant sounds were connected 
to the subgroups they were part of. Thus, although all shared a male Latino identity, their 
language use differed noticeably in ways connected to the local environment they lived in. 
Mendoza-Denton (2008) found the same overall pattern for young Latinas in Los Angeles: 
they used differing pronunciations of certain vowels to construct identities as part of different 
Latina gangs. Mendoza-Denton also notes another important point: these girls, like all of us, 
signal their identities not only through linguistic choices, but also through choices in other 
areas. For these girls, their choice of color of lipstick, type of music, and hair style are also 
semiotic resources that can be used to convey social meanings like I’m part of this group, not 
that one. Together with their linguistic choices, these girls use all their semiotic resources to 
construct distinct identities as part of different local groups. And the identity they thereby con-
struct is complex and local, not just based on their gender or their ethnicity but on iterations 
of those identities important to a particular place and time. In this sense, identity construction 
is an act of languaging rather than a passive reflection of already existing social categories. 
Looking back at the concept of covert prestige mentioned earlier, we can illuminate an 
added perspective. Variationist sociolinguists focus on language variants and what they mean. 
Do they impart prestige or stigma? How do different groups view their social meanings differ-
ently? Those are still important questions to examine. A languaging perspective enlarges that 
focus by asking how individuals use those variants for their own purposes. The Latina girls 
mentioned earlier choose their vowel variants, though not consciously, to gain prestige within 
their particular social context, regardless of whether the variants have prestige or stigma in the 
wider society. They are thus agents of their own identity. 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
• 
Variation, which is inherent in all languages, allows us to construct our social identities 
through use of different sociolinguistic variants. 
• 
Variation includes regional varieties (those tied to region), sociolects (those tied to social 
class or other aspects of social status), or ethnolects (those tied to ethno-racial groups). 
• 
Hispanic Englishes, varieties of English spoken primarily by those of Hispanic ancestry, 
are not English spoken with a Spanish accent but fully formed, rule-governed varieties of 
English. 
• 
Code switching is the process of using two or more languages or varieties in a conversa-
tion that occurs when both interlocutors know both languages or varieties. 
• 
Translanguaging describes that process not in terms of languages being spoken but in 
terms of individuals using their entire linguistic repertoires for communicative purposes, 
no matter the language. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
165 
• 
Native American Englishes are diverse varieties of English spoken primarily by those 
of Native American ancestry. Rez English, an Indian-affirming English variety, allows 
its speakers to construct and maintain their Native American identity even if they do not 
speak their ancestral language. 
• 
Standardization is the process whereby a variety becomes codified and accepted as the 
correct form of a language. Standard varieties, which emerged with the growth of nation 
states, often become potent symbols of nations. 
• 
Ideology can be defined as a pattern of ideas and attitudes about social reality that appear 
commonsensical. Language ideologies are those ideas, norms, and values that inform 
how we think about language. 
• 
The standard language ideology posits that if there are two or more variant forms, only 
one can be correct; that varieties can be ranked according to their correctness; that some 
varieties are deservedly more prestigious and acceptable than others; and that the opti-
mal society is one that is culturally and linguistically uniform. 
• 
In some communities, forms that would be considered nonstandard, and thus incorrect, 
can have covert prestige as symbols of community solidarity. 
• 
Critical sociolinguistics examines the role language plays in creating and maintaining 
social inequalities and discrimination; it seeks to deepen our understanding of the rela-
tionship of language, society, and power. 
• 
Within critical theories of language, languages are not separate, clearly distinct entities 
but social practices that always occur in particular social contexts. 
KEY TERMS 
sociolinguistic variant 
structured variation 
rhotic and non-rhotic varieties 
regional dialect 
leveling 
national variety 
sociolects 
ethnolects 
Mock Spanish 
Hispanic Englishes 
Chicanx Englishes 
code switching 
translanguaging 
Mock Spanish 
Native American Englishes 
rez English and rez accents 
standardization 
standard language ideology 
covert prestige 
languaging 
critical sociolinguistics 
critical discourse analysis 
EXPLORATIONS 
Exploration 1: What do you call that? 
If you’ve traveled to other areas or countries that speak English, what unfamiliar terms or 
pronunciations did you notice? What did you think of them and the people who used them? 
Did they evoke any stereotypes? Did your way of speaking seem unfamiliar to them? Were 
you teased about it? Share your responses in small groups. 

 
  
166 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
Exploration 2: Group talk 
We use certain variants, words, or pronunciations to identify ourselves as members of a par-
ticular community or group. Can you identify any variants used by you or people you know 
that signal such membership? These might be abbreviations, clipped forms, particular pro-
nunciations, or other features. Groups may relate to academic major, occupation, neighbor-
hood, ethnicity, region of origin, sexual orientation, religion, or any number of other social 
identities. Share these in small groups. Did any of you come up with the same terms or 
groups? Were there any disagreements? 
Exploration 3: Movie stereotypes 
Movie directors and advertising professionals are aware of the stereotypes evoked by certain 
accents, both regional and social. As you watch TV or movies or other media, notice any 
characters whose accents or varieties differ from the standard or from other characters. Do 
you see any language stereotypes at play? 
Discussion prompt: Compare your conclusions with your classmates. What conclusions 
can you draw? 
Writing prompt: Write a two-page essay describing your observations and what conclu-
sions you draw from them. 
Exploration 4: Animated accents 
Animated characters are often revealing about accent-based stereotypes since writers can 
give them any accent they want. Choose an animated feature (Aladdin, The Lion King, South 
Park, The Simpsons). What do you notice about who speaks which accents? What conclu-
sions can you draw from your observations? Compare notes with your classmates. 
Exploration 5: Spanglish 
Investigate the use of the term Spanglish by googling it or entering it in Urban Dictionary or 
another such site. Ask others what it means. How would you characterize the definitions— 
complimentary or demeaning? 
Discussion prompt: Share your conclusions with your group. How would you define 
Spanglish now? 
Writing prompt: Write a two-page essay describing what you found and what conclu-
sions you draw from your findings. Define Spanglish as you see it now. 
Exploration 6: Dissing a variety 
We’ve talked about how some languages or varieties are treated as less valuable than others 
in many circumstances. Have you seen this devaluing in any social settings or interactions 
you have been part of? Have you ever had it directed at your speech? 
Discussion prompt: Share your stories in small groups. Are there any similarities, differ-
ences, or surprises among them? 
Writing prompt: Write a two-page essay describing what your experiences and what 
conclusions you draw from them. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE VARIATION AND SOCIETY 
167 
Exploration 7: Covert prestige 
Are you part of or do you know of any communities in which certain variants carry covert 
prestige? What local social meaning do they carry? 
Discussion prompt: Share your responses in small groups. Are there any similarities, 
differences, or surprises among them? 
Writing prompt: Write a two-page essay describing the community, the variants, and 
their social meanings. 
FURTHER READING 
American Tongues: This video, though a bit dated, is an engaging presentation of regional 
accents in the U.S. 
Fought, C. (2003). Chicano English in context. Palgrave Macmillan. 
Lippi-Green, R. (2011). English with an accent (2nd ed.). Routledge. 
Mesthrie, R., Swann, J., Deumert, A., & Leap, W. (2000). A case study: Language contact, 
maintenance, and shift among Native Americans, Section 8.5. In Introducing sociolinguistics. 
John Benjamins Publishing. 
Trudgill, P. (2000). Sociolinguistics: An introduction to language and society. Penguin. A brief 
coverage of basic concepts in sociolinguistics. 
REFERENCES 
Bloommaert, J., & Verschueren, J. (1998). Debating diversity. Routledge. 
Bonfiglio, T. (2002). Race and the rise of standard American. Mouton de Gruyter. 
Eckert, P. (1989). Jocks & burnouts: Social categories and identity in the high school. Teachers 
College Press. 
Fairclough, N. (2014). Language and power. Longman. 
Hill, J. (2008). The everyday language of white racism. Wiley-Blackwell. 
Labov, W. (1966). The social stratification of English in New York City. Center for Applied 
Linguistics. 
Leap, W. (1993). American Indian English. University of Utah Press. 
Lippi-Green, R. (2012). English with an accent. Routledge. 
May, S. (2017). Language, imperialism and the modern nation-state system. In O. Garcia, N. 
Flores, & M. Spotti (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of language in society. Oxford University 
Press. 
Mendoza-Denton, N. (2008). Homegirls: Language and cultural practice among Latina youth 
gangs. Blackwell. 
Mesthrie, S., Swann, J., Deumert, A., & Leap, W. (2000) Introducing sociolinguistics. John 
Benjamins Publishing Co. 
Newmark, K., Walker, N., & Stanford, J. (2017). The rez accent knows no borders: Native 
American identity expressed through prosody. Language in Society, 45(5), 633–664. 
Rickford, J. (1987). Dimensions of a Creole continuum. Stanford University Press. 
Slomanson, P., & Newman, M. (2004). Peer group identification and variation in New York 
Latino English Laterals. English World-Wide, 25(2), 199–216. 
Trudgill, P. (1974). The social differentiation of English in Norwich. Cambridge University 
Press. 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 10 
African American Language 
First glance 
What is African American Language (AAL)? 
• Brief history 
• Morphology and phonology 
• Variation 
Micro-aggressions 
Language, race, and identity 
Linguistics in your world: AAL and education 
INTRODUCTION 
Imagine elementary school students learning to read. As part of the drill, each student is 
asked to read aloud a passage. One African American girl reads her passage, clearly under-
standing what she’s reading. She pronounces the word passed as [pæs] instead of the way 
her teacher does, [pæst]. The teacher asks her to read it again, and again she says [pæs]. The 
teacher tells her she’s wrong, corrects her pronunciation, and then concludes that she has 
problems reading and doesn’t understand the past tense. Not true, of course. Our student has 
no problem reading; she just has a different pronunciation of passed, one based on the rules 
of her variety of English, African American English. 
This fictional scene is, unfortunately, not all that fictional. Every day African American 
students have their language mistakenly disparaged, corrected, and scorned in school. That 
scorn and constant correction have consequences: as Lanehart (2015) points out, “diminish-
ing a child’s language diminishes and ultimately silences the child” (p. 869). 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-10 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
AFRICAN AMERICAN LANGUAGE 
169 
It is those consequences that make it important for us to examine African American 
English in some detail. In this chapter, we examine African American English and the mis-
taken judgments about it that often have dire consequences for those who speak it. I begin 
with an overview of ideas about this variety, go on to discuss its history and describe salient 
parts of its structure, including variation. I then discuss some connections among language, 
race, and identity, especially in the educational system of the United States. 
OVERVIEW 
By now, if you’ve worked your way through the first six chapters, you know quite a bit about 
the morphology, phonetics, phonology, and syntax of English—of what we call Standard 
American English (SAE), that is. Most of our examples have been from that variety of English 
because it’s the one typically used in educational settings. We could just as easily, however, 
have taken examples from any variety of English—British English, Australian English, Indian 
English, Appalachian English, Latinx English, or African American English. It’s easy to see 
the rule-governed nature of SAE; most of us were forced to study some form of those rules 
in school. For many, it’s a bit more difficult to see how other varieties of English, especially 
heavily stigmatized varieties, are equally rule governed, equally correct, and equally valid. In 
this chapter, we will examine one of the most stigmatized varieties of English in the United 
States, what linguists call African American Language, to identify its rule-governed nature 
and to interrogate its place within educational settings and U.S. society. 
One of the first questions to arise in any discussion of this vibrant variety spoken by mil-
lions of people in the United States is what to call it. It has gone by various names, some used 
in scholarly discourse, others not. In one of the first scholarly treatises from 1884, it was 
referred to as Negro English. When linguists first began studying this variety, they referred 
to it as Nonstandard Negro English. In the 1960s that gradually changed, and the terms Black 
Vernacular English or Black English became prevalent. (Vernacular refers to the every-
day language used by people as opposed to written or formal language.) Those terms soon 
changed to reflect changes in how Americans of African descent often preferred to be called, 
and linguists began using African American English. 
Spoken Soul, coined by the writer Claude Brown to connect the spoken variety and the 
soulful attitudes and qualities necessary for it, is the term used by Rickford and Rickford 
(2000) in their book of that name. Ebonics, a term coined by Dr. Robert Williams in 1973 
(cited in Rickford and Rickford) combining ebony (black) and phonics (sound), was used by 
the Oakland School Board in a resolution recommending its use in the classroom (see fur-
ther for a summary of the debate over that resolution). Recently, the term African American 
Language or AAL has come to be used as a mark of respect for the many ways it functions as 
a language. I use that term here. 
Some people wrongly insist that there is no such thing as African American Language, 
claiming it is merely slang or lazy, ignorant English. AAL is no such thing; it is a valid 
and expressive variety of English that has long been recognized as such by linguists who 
study its structure, history, uses, and meanings. It is, as Rickford and Rickford (2000) 
note, “an inescapable vessel of American history, literature, society and popular culture” 
that “lives on authentically . . . in homes, schools, and churches, on streets, stages, and the 
airwaves” (p. 3). 

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
170 
AFRICAN AMERICAN LANGUAGE 
African American writers have long been aware of the importance of AAL to its speakers’ 
lives. James Baldwin (1979) called AAL “this passion, this skill, . . . this incredible music,” 
echoing a passage from Shakespeare. June Jordan notes that its speakers “depend on this lan-
guage for our discovery of the world” (1985, p. 124). Toni Morrison describes AAL as “a love, 
a passion.” She goes on to add, “The worst of all possible things that could happen would be 
to lose that language. There are certain things I cannot say without recourse to my language” 
(cited in Lippi-Green, 2012, p. 185). Its place in U.S. history is complex, long-standing, and 
intimately related to issues of race and class within American society. 
Many non-speakers of AAL have a somewhat skewed idea of what it is. They tend to focus 
on one or two features—the use of be and the pronunciation of ask. Studies have shown that 
non-speakers will throw in a random be to try to sound as if they are speaking AAL or to 
mock its speakers as ignorant. As we will see later, these features are not random but part of 
its grammatical system; similarly, they are not the result of laziness or ignorance or stubborn-
ness but of the rules of this variety of English. 
Non-speakers also often have a skewed idea of who speaks AAL, perhaps because of the 
way it is portrayed in the media—as spoken by poor people living in inner cities, by drug deal-
ers and other criminals, and by street-savvy youth who’ve dropped out of school. Although 
this perception might be understandable given the media portrayal, it is quite simply a misper-
ception. AAL is spoken not just by the poor, but by the middle class; not just in the inner city, 
but in suburbs and rural communities; not primarily by drug dealers, but by working women 
and men and families across the country. Exact numbers are hard to determine, but it has been 
estimated that 80%–90% of African Americans can speak some variety of AAL, making it 
the second most spoken variety in the United States (Smitherman, 1977). 
HISTORY OF AAL 
The history of AAL is, like that of all languages, closely connected to the history of those who 
speak it—that is, the history of those Africans forcibly brought to work as slaves in the United 
States and their descendants. Although there is debate about the exact nature of its develop-
ment, linguists generally agree that AAL developed out of three main sources: the African 
languages that enslaved peoples brought with them from Africa; the varieties of English they 
were exposed to; and creoles that developed among enslaved peoples in the Caribbean, many 
of whom were later brought to the United States. Linguists agree that there are elements of all 
three sources in the AAL spoken today but debate their relative importance. 
As Smitherman (1977) points out, AAL developed in a time of enslavement as a vehicle of 
solidarity among oppressed people. The harsh circumstances suffered by enslaved Africans 
probably contributed to the development of AAL in that it may have become quite early on a 
marker of oppositional identity (Rickford & Rickford, 2000). After the Civil War and eman-
cipation, most African Americans continued to live in Southern states until the early 20th 
century. The migrations of African Americans to the North, especially the Great Migration 
that took place from 1916 to 1930, and the urbanization of African-America populations that 
resulted from that migration, helped create the AAL we see today. The speech of those from 
various parts of the South converged in Northern cities to produce an urban variety that then 
spread across the country. Its status as a marker of oppositional identity continued, fueled by 
segregation in housing and education and by the discrimination that many African Americans 
faced and continue to face. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AFRICAN AMERICAN LANGUAGE 
171 
Part of the history of AAL includes the stigmatization that has too often accompanied it: the 
refusal of many people to recognize it as a valid variety of English and the persistent disparag-
ing of it as “lazy, ignorant, uneducated slang.” As we saw in Chapter 2, language is an integral 
part of people’s life, culture, and identity. What does it mean if the dominant culture mocks and 
disparages one variety while upholding another as proper? The consequences of this inequality 
echo through the education system, affect employment opportunities, and foster other social 
injustices. The long history of stigmatization of AAL illustrates the effects of this linguistic 
inequality even as its continued survival demonstrates how strongly language and identity are 
intertwined. That AAL is alive today is testament to its remarkable vitality, surviving and 
thriving despite several hundred years of extreme stigmatization and attempts to eradicate it. 
STRUCTURE OF AAL 
Here we will examine some of the structure of AAL, just as we examined the structure of 
SAE in previous chapters. 
There are several morphological and phonological features of AAL that set it apart from 
SAE; some of these features are noticed and highly stigmatized while others are often unno-
ticed by non-AAL speakers. In the following section, we offer but a brief glimpse of the struc-
ture of AAL as we examine some of the most noticed and stigmatized features. To cover the 
phonological, morphological, and syntactic rules in detail would require an entire textbook; 
there are several excellent ones listed at the end of the chapter. 
Morphological structure 
While AAL shares most of the structural and grammatical features of SAE, it has many dis-
tinctive rules of its own, including distinctive rules for certain morphemes. 
{s} morphemes 
You will remember that in SAE there are three morphemes with the same phonological rep-
resentation: the plural morpheme {s}; the possessive morpheme {s}; and the third-person sin-
gular, present tense morpheme {s}. AAL has the same three {s} morphemes, and it treats each 
slightly differently in terms of use. Despite the misconception that AAL speakers drop the {s} 
everywhere, they rarely drop the {s} morpheme when it means plural. Use of the third-person 
singular, present tense {s} is in some ways optional; it is sometimes applied and sometimes 
not: both I always listen to what she say and I always listen to what she says are possible. The 
possessive {s} is also optional. The context of the sentence and the positioning of the two 
nouns, the possessor immediately followed by the thing possessed, make the meaning clear 
without adding the morpheme {s}; for example, The President speech was long and rambling. 
Be verb 
The use of the verb be is one of the most distinctive and misunderstood features of AAL. 
Because of this distinctiveness, it serves as a marker often used when non-AAL speakers 
mimic or mock the language. And because the rules for its use are often misunderstood, those 
trying to imitate AAL often get it wrong. AAL uses be differently from SAE in several ways. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
172 
AFRICAN AMERICAN LANGUAGE 
Invariant be 
As the name suggests, invariant be does not vary; it does not become am, are, or is. Invariant 
be occurs in SAE, for example, after modal verbs such as can or must (They must be quick), in 
infinitives with to (They tried to be quick), or as an imperative (Be quick!). AAL uses invari-
ant be in these structures too. AAL also uses invariant be in other situations where it might 
not be used in SAE. 
The most distinctive usage of invariant be in AAL is the habitual invariant be. Because 
the meaning of habitual invariant be is misunderstood by outsiders, many think African 
Americans are just replacing is and are with be. Not so. Its use is rule governed and carries 
meaning: that the action is habitual, happening on a regular basis. In the sentence She be run-
nin’ with her team, the invariant be indicates that she regularly goes running with her team. 
If the speaker were describing an event happening right now, she would say, She runnin’ with 
her team. These sentences are not interchangeable as they have different meanings. 
An examination of how to form the negative of a sentence further illustrates how habitual 
invariant be is part of the grammatical system of AAL. Usually, one would use the word 
ain’t to form a negative sentence in AAL: She ain’t runnin’ with her team. But in a sentence 
using the habitual invariant be, ain’t is not used; instead, don’t is: She don’t be runnin’ with 
her team everyday. The sentence She aint’ be runnin’ with her team everyday is simply not a 
well-formed utterance in AAL. 
Zero copula 
Another distinctive grammar rule in AAL related to the verb be is the absence of a copula in 
certain situations—what is called zero copula. A copula is a be verb used as a connecting 
verb such as is or are. The rules of SAE demand that we use is or are in such sentences, as 
in She is a student or They are tired. That is not the case in many other languages, includ-
ing Russian. To say She is a student in Russian, for example, one would say ona studentka, 
literally she student, with no copula (and no article a, but that’s another story). Similarly, 
the copula is not required in AAL: She ready now and They tired are perfectly well-formed 
utterances. Interestingly, only is and are can be deleted when used as copulas; am, was, 
or were are generally not deleted, at least not if you are trying to create well-formed AAL 
utterances. 
The rules for zero copula are a bit more complicated than that, however. Those two forms 
of be (is and are) cannot be dropped in every situation. Generally speaking, if you can con-
tract the form in SAE, you can delete it in AAL. Where you cannot contract the form in SAE, 
you generally cannot delete the copula in AAL. In the sentence, I’m not a runner, but she is, 
the she is cannot be contracted in SAE and the copula cannot be dropped in AAL. In addition, 
the copula cannot be deleted when it is in the past tense; was and were are not left out. 
Existential it is 
Instead of the there is or there are used in SAE, an AAL speaker may use the alternatives it’s 
or i’s (reductions of it is) to express the same meaning. The existential it is, it’s, or i’s, like 
the existential there is/are, signals the existence of something. If we say in SAE, There is (or 

   
 
 
 
 
 
AFRICAN AMERICAN LANGUAGE 
173 
there’s) a problem with his logic, we are positing the existence of a problem. The there does 
not indicate a particular place as it might in the sentence, Put it over there. Instead, the con-
struction there is or there are in SAE merely indicates that something exists. The construc-
tions it’s or i’s similarly mean that something exists: i’s a problem with his logic. Unlike SAE, 
where a distinction is made between singular and plural (there is a snake in that room or there 
are a lot of snakes in that room), AAL uses it’s or i’s for both singular and plural nouns: it’s a 
lot of people here, for example. 
Phonological structure 
The phonological rules of AAL are in most ways similar to those of SAE, but there are some 
interesting and important differences in terms of both the articulatory processes and the pho-
nological rules that produce distinctive AAL pronunciations. 
Consonant cluster reduction 
As we saw in Chapter 4, we all use articulatory processes for ease of pronunciation. Consonant 
cluster reduction, a common articulatory process in many languages of the world, including 
English, occurs more frequently in African American Language than in many other varieties. 
Consonants are not deleted randomly, however; their deletion is dependent on the phonetic 
environment. Two aspects of the phonetic environment are important here: whether the con-
sonant to be deleted is surrounded by other consonants or by vowels and whether the conso-
nants in the cluster are voiced or unvoiced. 
For example, the consonants [l] and [r] can be deleted only if they follow a vowel, not if 
they follow a consonant: help can be pronounced [hɛp] and cold as [kod]. These two conso-
nants can also be deleted if they are at the end of a word and are preceded by a vowel sound, 
even if they are not part of a consonant cluster: car is pronounced [ka] and ball pronounced 
[ba] unless the following word begins with a vowel. 
The rule governing the deletion of consonants in a cluster appearing at the end of a word 
is dependent on the voicedness of those sounds: to delete the final consonants in a cluster, all 
of the consonants must be either voiced or all unvoiced. If they are a mixture, you can’t do it. 
In the word band [bænd], the final sound [d] can be deleted and the pronunciation becomes 
[bæn] because [n] and [d] are both voiced. Our previous rule still applies too; this only occurs 
if the word is not followed by a vowel sound. This attention to voice means the word link, for 
example, cannot become lin in AAL because [n] is voiced and [k] is unvoiced. There is an 
exception to this rule. The negatives won’t, can’t, and shouldn’t can lose their final unvoiced 
[t] sound despite the voiced [n] immediately preceding it. That’s the rule. It may seem a bit 
complicated to those who do not speak AAL, but for those who do, it’s just the way the lan-
guage works. 
There is a pattern of pronunciation in AAL that may seem at first glance to be another 
example of deleting a final consonant: dropping the final ‘g’ in words like thinkin’ or walkin’. 
This so-called dropping is not the result of deletion. Instead, the velar nasal [ŋ] in walking is 
replaced with the alveolar nasal [n], as it is in the casual speech of most American English 
speakers. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
174 
AFRICAN AMERICAN LANGUAGE 
Other features 
One feature often noted about AAL is its use of [d], [t], [f], or [v] where SAE would use [θ] 
or [ð]. As with consonant cluster reduction, this phenomenon is not random. Just as dance is 
pronounced with an [a] in British English but with a [æ] in American English, certain words 
are pronounced with [t] or [d] or [f] or [v] in AAL but with [θ] or [ð] in SAE. The correspond-
ence depends on voice again. Unvoiced [θ] corresponds to unvoiced [t] or [f]; voiced [ð] cor-
responds to voiced [d] or [v]. Mother, for example, pronounced with a voiced [ð] in SAE, is 
pronounced with a voiced [v] in AAL, not with an unvoiced [f]. Similarly, bath, pronounced 
with an unvoiced [θ] in SAE, is pronounced with an unvoiced [f] in AAL, not a voiced [v]. 
Thus, unvoiced [t] or [f] is used in AAL where the unvoiced [θ] is used in SAE, and voiced [d] 
or [v] are used in AAL where the voiced [ð] is used in SAE. 
Several features of AAL are regularly stigmatized as nonstandard or illogical. We dis-
cussed negative concord, also known as double negatives, in Chapter 2, noting that many 
languages require that all elements in a sentence that can be made negative must be made so 
for the sentence to be negative; AAL is one of those languages. As also noted there, double 
negatives are not illogical, nor are they difficult to comprehend. Other AAL phrases are also 
stigmatized. I’m going to find you in SAE would be said, I’ma find you in many varieties of 
AAL. That phrase is not a mispronunciation nor a slurring of words; it is simply the way it is 
said in AAL. 
We discussed the pronunciation of ask in Chapter 5, noting its long history and the articu-
latory process that led to two different pronunciations: [æks] and [æsk]. Despite its long his-
tory, the stigmatization of the pronunciation of [æks] has, alongside other judgments, had 
damaging consequences for African Americans. In school, students are often sent to remedial 
speech classes partly because they say [æks]; in the courtroom, witnesses’ testimony has been 
dismissed as unreliable by jurors who mention [æks] specifically; in the business world, appli-
cants for jobs may not even be considered; in public settings, speakers have been reprimanded 
and dissed specifically for their use of [æks]. 
A short anecdote may help illuminate the issue here. The former mayor of New York City, 
Edward Koch, once chastised a young African American student who read an essay she had 
written to an audience which included Koch. In responding to her, he noted not the qual-
ity of her essay but her pronunciation of that one word, claiming it detracted from, indeed 
almost ruined, what would otherwise have been a good performance (Lippi-Green, 2012). To 
return to the comparison between pronunciation differences in schedule and in ask made in 
Chapter 2, it is hard to imagine him doing anything similar if she had been the daughter of 
British parents and had used [ʃɛdyul] instead of [skɛdyul]. Most likely, such a pronunciation 
would have gone unnoticed or at least unremarked upon. Yet the girl’s similar minor pronun-
ciation difference was noticed and used to discredit her. Seems a bit unfair, yes? 
VARIATION WITHIN AAL 
Not all speakers of AAL speak it in the same way, as is true of all languages. There are 
differences related to region, class, and gender, among other factors. Early studies of AAL 
tended to focus on young inner city males, seeing them and their language as the core of 
AAL. Subsequent research, and everyday experience, shows that AAL is spoken by diverse 

   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
AFRICAN AMERICAN LANGUAGE 
175 
groups: by families, preachers, comedians, women, old and young, by “poets, disc-jockeys, 
and rappers . . . politicians, academicians, and preachers,” by members of the middle class as 
well as members of the Hip Hop Nation (Rickford & Rickford, 2000). Britt and Weldon (2015) 
describe the use of AAL among the African American middle class, noting that their grammar 
is usually that of SAE, but they employ AAL rhetorical strategies such as signifying, which 
is “highly stylized lying, joking and carrying on as part of ritualized wordplay” (Rickford & 
Rickford, p. 81) and tonal semantics, the “use of voice rhythm and vocal inflection to convey 
meaning” (Smitherman, 1977 p. 134). For these speakers, AAL “is valued as a tool that keeps 
them connected to their African American heritage” (Britt and Weldon, p. 810). 
AAL use can also vary by gender. Both women and men use AAL to construct their 
identities as African Americans but do so differently. Black Masculine Language, which is 
discussed in more detail in Chapter 11, conforms closely to what is usually seen as AAL, 
including those grammatical and phonological features described earlier, perhaps because 
research in AAL has focused mainly on males. As a result, African American women’s speech 
is often absent from linguistic studies of AAL. It is similarly often absent from linguistic 
studies of women’s language because research on women’s language has too often focused on 
White women (Morgan, 2015). Recently, more research has focused on African American 
Women’s Language (AAWL) and how certain features are used to express solidarity among 
women, indirectness, for example. Spears (2009) describes the use of girl by women and girls 
(spoken with long rising intonation) as a way to express solidarity and identity with other 
African American women: “In using GIRL, they . . . mark their discourse as AAWL, i.e., as 
African American women talking in AAWL” (Spears, p. 86). 
AAL IN THE COURTROOM 
In 2013, an African American boy, Trayvon Martin, was shot and killed as he was walk-
ing back to his father’s house in a suburban subdivision in Florida. The man who shot him, 
George Zimmerman, was tried and found innocent. The use of AAL by a key witness for the 
prosecution, Rachel Jeantel, whose evidence supported Zimmerman’s guilt, played an impor-
tant part in the jury’s deliberations. Morgan describes reactions to Jeantel’s testimony by both 
the defense and the media. Both disparaged it as hostile, aggressive, and unintelligible. Her 
use of AAWL was seen as hostile and aggressive when compared to what is considered proper 
women’s language, yet “had she been a vernacular-speaking Black male, her speech . . . might 
have been viewed as the norm for [an African American] teenager” rather than unintelligible 
and hostile (Morgan, 2015, p. 829). Such characterizations were doubly unfair to Jeantel. 
MICRO-AGGRESSIONS 
Recently social media has been paying a lot of attention to micro-aggressions. Instead of 
making overt statements stigmatizing a particular group, micro-aggressions express that stig-
matization subtly and indirectly. They may not be intentionally offensive, but to the recipients, 
they often feel that way. I recently saw micro-aggressions in action when a Latina student 
dropped off a book at my house. As I was walking her out to her car, a neighbor walked by 
and stopped to chat. Without even being introduced, he asked her, Where are you from? She 
answered, St. Paul. His response was, No, where are you really from? because he assumed 

 
  
 
 
 
 
176 
AFRICAN AMERICAN LANGUAGE 
because she looked Latina she could not really be from here. The student handled it much 
more graciously than I would have; she just smiled and said, No, I’m from St. Paul and then 
got in her car. 
African Americans, like members of all marginalized groups, complain about these sorts 
of encounters because they happen a lot. Another student, who is African American, told me 
people are often visibly surprised when she speaks Standard English. Even presidents are not 
exempt. When Barack Obama was running for president, several newscasters commented on 
how articulate he was, as though being articulate was odd for an African American male. No 
one commented on the articulateness of his opponent, who, of course, was White. 
LANGUAGE, RACE, AND IDENTITY 
In Chapter 9, we began an examination of the many connections between language and racial 
or ethnic identity. Here I’d like to take that discussion a step further. When sociolinguists 
speak of the connection between language and identity, they sometimes frame it in ways that 
essentialize groups; that is, people tend to speak a certain way because they are members of 
a certain group: African American or Latinx or Minnesotan or working class. This perspec-
tive assumes the existence of predetermined social categories such as race, class, ethnicity, 
and gender. Certain ways of speaking, then, are seen to be indicative of a speaker’s race, and 
because of this, listeners can use these ways to assign racial categories to speakers. In some 
ways this is true. Studies have shown that listeners can often accurately label a speaker’s 
race by speech alone, even when they cannot identify specific features that led them to their 
conclusion. 
Those labels can and do lead to discrimination. One study found that landlords responded 
differently to prospective tenants requesting to see a rental unit based on whether their speech 
on the telephone contained AAL features or not. Even if they did not consciously assign a 
racial category to the speakers, they invited those whose speech contained those features to 
visit the rental unit less often. Since the interactions took place on the telephone, landlords did 
not know the race of the caller; they did, however, react in race-based discriminatory ways 
based on the perceived race evoked by the speech on the telephone. 
Recent studies challenge the assumption that there is a one-to-one correspondence between 
language and race or ethnicity, the idea that AAL is used only by African Americans, for 
example. Paris’ (2016) study of students at a Southern California high school found that not 
to be the case, for Latinx and Pacific Islander immigrants used AAL in many contexts, both 
social and academic. They effectively became “proficient in AAL as part of their linguistic 
socialization into American Englishes” (p. 248). That did not mean they gave up the heritage 
languages of their parents. Essentially, the linguistic landscape of these students included 
heritage languages such as Spanish or Samoan, the AAL learned in the school community 
outside the classroom, and the standard being taught in the classroom, demonstrating both 
traditional notions of language as being tied to race or ethnicity and contemporary notions of 
language use as being dynamic and varied. 
Other recent scholarship complicates the relationship between language and race even 
more, noting that people do not just use language a certain way based on their social identi-
ties. Instead, they perform those identities through their use of language. In other words, it’s 
not so much a matter of speaking a certain way because of one’s particular social identities, 

   
 
 
  
 
 
 
AFRICAN AMERICAN LANGUAGE 
177 
but a matter of people unconsciously using the linguistic resources available to them to create 
and recreate those identities. Thus, language plays a central role in constructing and shaping 
racial and ethnic identities across diverse ethno-racial contexts. 
Local context is important to how speakers use their linguistic resources to position them-
selves and construct identities. In their study of the use of AAL among different groups, Blake 
and Shousterman (2010) note that the use of Black and African American as interchangeable 
terms glosses over the differences among the many groups in the United States that see them-
selves as Black: not just African Americans but also immigrants from the West Indies, for 
example. They studied the speech of second-generation Caribbean Americans and African 
Americans in New York City, two groups who were often seen as speaking AAL. Their 
study showed that the second-generation Caribbean Americans used subtle differences, the 
pronunciation of post-vocalic /r/, for example, to differentiate themselves from native African 
Americans. Their use of this feature had specific meaning in the local context of New York 
City as it was not present in their parents’ speech nor common in that of African American 
New Yorkers. Its increased use by this group, then, was a way of shaping a distinct identity, 
saying “I’m a Black New Yorker, who is somewhere between African-American and West 
Indian” (Blake, 2016, p. 164). In other words, the speech of two groups who might be seen as 
identical in an essentialist understanding of identity and language (both African Americans 
speaking AAL) showed important differences tied to distinct local context and identities. 
AAL AND EDUCATION 
In the United States the achievement gap in education is correlated with race in uncom-
fortable ways, with African American students scoring consistently lower on standardized 
tests than White students. Often the blame for this gap is erroneously put on the language of 
African Americans. African American Language has long been labeled as deficient in educa-
tional settings: “a non-logical mode of expressive behavior . . . lacking the formal properties 
necessary for formulating cognitive concepts” to quote a report by Bereiter and Engelman, 
education psychologists of the late 20th century (Smitherman, 2015, p. 549). Students were 
seen as needing to be “cured of their dialects” before they could succeed. Such sentiments 
might not be stated as overtly today, but they still exist. 
Rickford and Rickford (2000), however, point out it is not the students who have been fail-
ing, but “schools [who] nationwide have been failing African American students” (p. 163). In 
1996 the School Board of Oakland, California, decided to do something about that situation. 
They had a large number of children in their schools, most of whom were African Americans, 
who were failing. With input from linguists, the Oakland School Board recommended that the 
students’ home language, AAL or what they called Ebonics, be used in the classroom to help 
students learn Standard English, the language of wider communication—a perfectly reason-
able recommendation. Unfortunately, the media picked up on this story and misrepresented 
it as the School Board wanting to teach Ebonics instead of Standard English. A media storm 
erupted, with many decrying the Board’s recommendation without fully understanding it or 
its purpose. 
Among those who didn’t understand were many experts, including the U.S. Secretary of 
Education, who refused to see AAL as a valid form of English. Newspapers and pundits regu-
larly referred to it as gibberish, vulgar slang. Cartoonists made fun of it, often in offensive, 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
178 
AFRICAN AMERICAN LANGUAGE 
racist ways. AAL was regularly disparaged as “disgusting English,” “nothing more than igno-
rance,” “lazy English,” “bastard English,” “ridiculous,” a “made up language,” and more. 
Although these descriptions were inaccurate, much damage was done with their use. Even 
today, over 20 years later, the term Ebonics denotes the speech of African Americans but 
connotes disparagement and ridicule. What was lost in all the media storm was the reason the 
Oakland School Board was doing this in the first place: to change their way of teaching so as 
to help their students succeed in school and beyond. 
One part of the Oakland School Board resolution called for the recognition of Ebonics as 
a legitimate, rule-governed language system, something linguists have demonstrated over 
and over. The Linguistics Society of America publicly supported the Board’s resolution and 
noted substantial research showing that using students’ home language to teach the standard 
is an effective pedagogy. Rickford and Rickford (2000), in their discussion of that extensive 
research, also advocate using AAL as a resource in the classroom to help students learn 
Standard English. 
Recently studies of AAL in the classroom have echoed that idea. As Baker-Bell (2020) 
points out, there is a connection between linguistic hierarchies and racial hierarchies; people’s 
language experiences are not isolated from their ethno-racial experiences. As noted at the 
beginning of this chapter, diminishing a student’s language has consequences, for it can and 
does diminish and silence the student. Such diminishment need not be overt. Students who 
speak a variety other than the standard are often told that their language is fine, but it is not 
appropriate for school. The implicit message here is that their language is not good enough, 
for it cannot be used in schools, in writing, or in any formal or official setting. So not good 
enough, period. Advocates for linguistic justice in the classroom see this implicit messaging as 
linguistic discrimination and have called for recognizing AAL, and all students’ languages, 
as rich resources to be used in the classroom for learning about and understanding the world. 
Paris (2016), in the study mentioned previously, adds that given its use not just by African 
Americans but by other students of color, the use of AAL in the classroom can also help stu-
dents learn to navigate the multilingual, multicultural future that demographics show is here, 
repositioning not just AAL but the “languages, literacies, and cultures of youth of color” as an 
asset rather than a hindrance to classroom learning (Paris, p. 251). Given that more than half 
of public-school students nationally are now students of color, compared to only 20% in 1970, 
it seems timely that changes are made. We return to some of these ideas in Chapter 12 in the 
discussion of multilingual education. 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
• 
African American Language, which has been called by various names over the years, is 
a variety of American English widely spoken across the United States. It has been a part 
of American history and culture from the beginning. It is estimated that 80%–90% of 
African Americans speak some variety of AAL. 
• 
Linguists generally agree that its origins lie in the languages of Africa brought over by 
those who were enslaved, in the English varieties those enslaved peoples were exposed 
to, and in the creoles of enslaved peoples brought here from the Caribbean. 
• 
Its history is closely connected to the history of those who speak it, including their expe-
riences as enslaved peoples and as victims of discrimination. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AFRICAN AMERICAN LANGUAGE 
179 
• 
As with all varieties of all languages, AAL is rule governed; those who view those rules 
as instances of bad grammar are mistaken. 
• 
Although the pronunciation of ask as [æks] is unjustly stigmatized, that pronunciation 
has a history that goes back to Old English. 
• 
Language is connected to race in multiple and complex ways; it is both tied to our ethno-
racial identity and used as a way of constructing or shaping our identities. 
• 
Variation within AAL is related to gender, socioeconomic class, and local contexts. 
• 
Micro-aggressions are a form of covert linguistic discrimination. Such covert discrimi-
nation can also take place in the classroom when AAL is presented as not appropriate for 
school or other important settings. 
KEY TERMS 
invariant be 
Ebonics 
zero copula 
micro-aggressions 
existential it is 
linguistic discrimination 
African American Women’s Language 
variation within AAL 
EXPLORATIONS 
Exploration 1: Short writing assignment 
This is a fictional letter written to the Linguistics Society of America, based on a real letter 
written as an editorial. 
Dear Sirs and Madams, 
I write to you today in frustration and confusion. I was taught that there is a right way 
and wrong way to speak English. Yet around me I hear utterances that seem to break all 
the rules of English, especially from inner city Black youth. And I hear experts such as 
you say, “This is their dialect. It is rule-governed just like every other language variety.” 
I simply do not believe it. If you listen to how they speak, I’m sure you’ll agree with me; 
there are no rules. 
How can a dialect of English include such utterances as “She pass the test yesterday,” or 
“They code” (meaning “They’re cold”). I’ve even heard such craziness as “Can ya hep me?” 
for “Can you help me?” and “They went over to that girl house.” Surely this is not English. 
Even worse, these speakers seem to have no understanding of English grammar. What 
does “It’s a lot of food here” even mean? Or “he seem kinda crazy”? And why can’t they 
conjugate the verb be like the rest of us? “She be talkin’ with her man every day”—what 
is that? Or “She ready now.” HUH? I can figure out what some of it means—“I done had 
enuf” is certainly clear, but why not say it like it is supposed to be said? 
Can you enlighten me about all of this? Isn’t this just jibberish? 
Sincerely, 
A concerned American 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
180 
AFRICAN AMERICAN LANGUAGE 
The Society, of which you are a well-known and well-respected member, has asked you 
to formulate a reply. 
Discussion prompt: Discuss in your small group how you would reply to this letter, if 
you have heard others voice ideas similar to those in the letter, and what you would say to 
such comments now. 
Writing prompt: Write a letter answering this writer, explaining what is really going on, 
using your knowledge as a linguist. The Society asks that you cover both the big picture and 
the details the writer mentions. Feel free to use IPA if that helps you explain your ideas. 
Exploration 2: Well-formed utterances in AAL 
Which of the utterances are not well-formed utterances in AAVE? Why or why not? 
1. 
She be here right now, watchin’ the game. 
2. 
Us wented home yesterday. 
3. 
We young kids when that happened. 
Exploration 3: AAL in the courtroom 
First read the blog about testimony at the Trayvon Martin case by John Rickford at https:// 
languagelog.ldc.upenn.edu/nll/?p=5161. You might also want to find out more about the case 
in general. Then see what more you can find about people’s reactions to the witness’ lan-
guage. What was your response to the comments? 
Discussion prompt: Compare notes with your small group. Share what you found out 
and your reactions. 
Writing prompt: Write a short essay explaining your reactions to the comments about 
Rachel Jeantel and where you think such comments come from. 
Exploration 4: Micro-aggressions 
There are many videos about micro-aggressions on YouTube and other social media. Track 
some down to see what you can find; then discuss your findings in your small group. Have 
you ever been the victim of micro-aggressions? Have you ever perpetrated such aggressions, 
even if not intentionally? 
FURTHER READING 
Ebonics Information Page: www.cal.org/topics/dialects/aae.html Useful discussion of issues 
related to Ebonics. 
Green, L. (2002). African American English. Cambridge University Press. 
Linguist List Topic page on Ebonics: http://linguistlist.org/topic/ebonics/ 
REFERENCES 
Baker-Bell, A. (2020). Linguistic justice: Black, language, literacy, identity, and pedagogy. 
Routledge & National Council of Teachers of English. 
Baldwin, J. (1979, July 29). If Black English isn’t a language, then tell me what is? The New 
York Times, A28. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AFRICAN AMERICAN LANGUAGE 
181 
Blake, R. (2016). Toward heterogeneity: A sociolinguistic perspective on the classification 
of Black people in the 21st century. In H. S. Alim, J. R. Rickford, & A. F. Ball, (Eds.), 
Raciolinguistics: How language shapes our ideas about race (pp. 153–169). Oxford 
University Press. 
Blake, R., & Shousterman, C. (2010). Second generation West Indian Americans and English in 
New York City. English Today, 26(3), 35–43. 
Britt, E., & Weldon, T. (2015). African American English in the middle class. In S. Lanehart 
(Ed.), The Oxford handbook of African American Language (pp. 800–816). Oxford 
University Press. 
Jordan, J. (1985). Nobody mean more to me than you and the future life of Willie Jordan. In J. 
Jordan (Ed.), On call: Political essays (pp. 123–139). South End Press. 
Lanehart, S. (2015). African American Language and identity: Contradictions and conundrums. 
In S. Lanehart (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of African American Language (pp. 800–816). 
Oxford University Press. 
Lippi-Green, R. (2012). English with an accent. Routledge. 
Morgan, M. (2015) African American Women’s Language: Mother tongues untied. In S. 
Lanehart (Ed.), African American Language (pp. 817–833). Oxford University Press. 
Paris, D. (2016). It was a Black city: African American Language in California’s changing urban 
schools and communities. In H. S. Alim, J. R. Rickford, & A. F. Ball (Eds.), Raciolinguistics: 
How language shapes our ideas about race (pp. 241–253). Oxford University Press. 
Rickford, J., & Rickford, R. (2000). Spoken soul. John Wiley & sons, Inc. 
Smitherman, G. (1977). Talkin and testifyin: The language of Black America. Wayne State 
University Press. 
Smitherman, G. (2015). African American Language and education: History and controversy 
in the twentieth century. In S. Lanehart (Ed.), African American Language (pp. 547–565). 
Oxford University Press. 
Spears, A. (2009). Theorizing African American Women’s Language: Girl as a discourse 
marker. In S. Lanehart (Ed.), African American Women’s Language: Discourse, education 
and identity (pp. 76–90). Cambridge Scholars. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11 
Genders, identities, and 
linguistic performance 
First glance 
Do women and men speak different languages? 
Early studies: Report style, rapport style 
Deficit, dominance, or difference? 
How do languages encode gender? 
Multiple identities: Black Masculine Language 
Gender as performance 
Gender binary revisited 
INTRODUCTION 
The belief that women’s and men’s speech styles are so different that they cause a great deal of 
miscommunication in everyday interactions is so widespread it is almost a cliché. Books based 
on that belief (Men are from Mars, Women are from Venus and You Just Don’t Understand 
to name just two) continue to be published and widely quoted. But is it true? Do women and 
men really use language so differently? That’s part of what we’ll investigate in this chapter. 
If I were writing this chapter 60 years ago, I would most likely have called it Women’s 
Language, if I addressed the issue of gender at all. If it were 30 years ago, I would probably 
have titled it Language and Sex, examining how women and men speak differently and how 
language is sexist. And I’d probably have assumed that terms like woman, man, and sex 
were not problematic. It’s a bit harder to do that today. For one thing, we always need to ask: 
Which women? Which men? In what circumstances? Much of the early research was done on 
white, middle-class English speakers in industrialized societies. It’s not that their findings are 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-11 

   
 
GENDERS, IDENTITIES, AND LINGUISTIC PERFORMANCE 
183 
necessarily wrong; it’s just that they are more narrowly applicable than we thought. Different 
identities, based on both broad social categories (race, ethnicity, social class, age, ability) and 
smaller local categories (a member of a motorcycle gang, a farmer in rural Canada, a high 
school nerd, a community organizer in the inner city) will express their gender differently. 
For another thing, although gender has become a substitute for the term sex in linguistic 
studies, it too is not unproblematic: how many genders are there, anyway? Can we choose our 
own? Can we be more than one? There are increasing challenges to the idea that gender, with 
a few minor exceptions, is a binary thing. Those so-called exceptions have entered the main 
event as intersex, trans, queer, asexual, and more. And gender has come to be seen as fluid, 
mutable—something performed, not given. All of this has implications for how we discuss 
and investigate the role of genders in language use, as we will see. 
EARLY STUDIES OF LANGUAGE AND GENDER 
Robin Lakoff’s 1975 Language and Women’s Place is often credited, along with the women’s 
movement, with inspiring the huge upsurge in research on language and gender that has taken 
place since then. Lakoff claimed that certain features used predominantly by women make 
them appear indecisive, hesitant, and weak: features such as uptalk (rising intonation at the 
end of a statement that makes it sound like a question); empty adjectives like nice; tag ques-
tions (it’s hot, isn’t it?); hedges (sort of ); and avoiding interruptions and swear words. Two 
questions immediately arose here: do women really use these features more often than men, 
and do those features cause speakers to appear indecisive and weak? Linguists eagerly began 
investigating those questions, with sometimes contradictory results. And they began examin-
ing ways a language itself, in this case English, can be sexist. We’ll discuss the findings and 
limitations of these investigations before going on to problematize some basic assumptions 
they are based on. 
Do women and men speak differently? 
Studies inspired by Lakoff often examined her claim that men and women speak differently by 
measuring the frequency of specific features for women and men: the number of occurrences 
of interruptions, hedges, silence, tag questions, and other features. Based on these studies, 
much early work on language and gender concluded that women and men do indeed speak dif-
ferently. Men, at least in cross-gender interactions, tend to be the ones who talk more, despite 
the stereotype of the talkative woman. When men raise topics, they tend to be picked up on 
more by women than women’s topics do by men. According to Fishman (1978), cross-gender 
interactions function despite the difference in style because women do most of what she calls 
the “interactional shitwork” required to keep them going: asking questions; showing they are 
paying attention through minimal responses like um, yeah; picking up on others’ topics. Two 
broad generalizations arose from these findings: women tend to be cooperative, and men tend 
to be competitive in their speech styles. Women’s rapport style is meant to open up space for 
others to contribute and men’s report style is meant to get and maintain the floor. 
When we look in detail at some of these results, however, we see things are a bit more com-
plicated than those two styles suggest. Women, for example, both do and don’t interrupt more 
than men. One study found that women, even those in positions of power, were interrupted 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
184 
GENDERS, IDENTITIES, AND LINGUISTIC PERFORMANCE 
by men at a higher rate than were men by women (Zimmerman & West, 1996). James and 
Clarke (1993), however, noted that in the 54 studies about interruptions they examined, there 
was basically no difference in use, except perhaps in some circumstances where women used 
a certain type of interruption more often: one that served a rapport-building function. Not 
exactly a ringing endorsement of difference. 
Although the public seems to believe that men speak quite differently from women, there is 
nearly always at least as much variation within each group as there is between them. Hyde’s 2005 
meta-analysis of numerous studies showed that nearly all the differences reported were very 
small or close to zero, “statistically negligible” in analysis-speak. In other words, there were few 
differences in language use directly attributable to gender, even when we just count occurrences. 
It seems clear, then, that simple totals do not tell the whole story. One also needs to look at 
function and context: who is speaking to whom, and what are they using a particular linguis-
tic feature to do? Any utterance can potentially carry different meanings in different contexts 
and be used for very different functions. Cameron (2008) elaborates on the importance of 
function with what she calls the missing link, the function of the feature in question and the 
roles of speakers. An examination of tag questions can illuminate that missing link. One 
common generalization is that women use more tag questions than men. Tag questions are 
those little questions that we add to the ends of statements: The meeting starts at 11, doesn’t it? 
Those flowers are lovely, aren’t they? Much early research assumed that their use makes the 
speaker seem insecure, needing confirmation about what she is saying. Some tag questions do 
function this way. In our first example, the speaker seems to be asking for confirmation that 
she’s correct about the starting time. Others, however, function quite differently. Our second 
example is not asking if the flowers are indeed lovely. That tag question seems more like a 
conversation facilitator, an invitation for the interlocutor to add a comment on the flowers. We 
can see from these examples that tag questions can serve different functions, and these func-
tions are the missing link that needs to be taken into account when examining any potential 
gender differences in their use. 
Still other tag questions are not seeking confirmation or inviting a comment. You are 
going to clean your room, aren’t you? is more like a command. The thing is, only certain 
roles in certain relationships use that type of tag question: a parent, perhaps, but not a room-
mate. Thus, it’s also important to examine roles and relationships among the interlocutors. 
Expectations about the roles and behaviors appropriate for each gender are especially impor-
tant when examining language use. If societal expectations are that women should play a 
facilitative role in cross-gender conversations, then we’d expect to find women using more tag 
questions, especially those facilitative ones. 
The point is this: “Speaking like a woman, or a man, is not just the automatic consequence 
of being one” (Cameron, 2008, p. 152). That is, gender doesn’t directly lead to differences; 
rather, it is the expected gendered roles that do. As Cameron puts it, “just because the fre-
quency of a linguistic feature is higher in one gender’s speech than in the other’s, we cannot 
assume that it is ‘about’ masculinity or femininity” (p. 152). It may be about the function that 
a particular feature fulfills, or about the local context in which we interact. The Latina girls 
in Mendoza-Denton’s (2008) study (described in Chapter 9) used slight linguistic differences 
not to differentiate themselves from Latino boys but from other Latina girls in the context in 
which they lived. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GENDERS, IDENTITIES, AND LINGUISTIC PERFORMANCE 
185 
A look at high school groups illustrates another important factor in understanding lan-
guage and gender: we use the resources available to us to construct our identities. In her 
study of burnouts and jocks in a California high school described in Chapter 9, Eckert 
(1989) found that boys gain status within their groups through sports (for the jocks) or 
fighting (for the burnouts). Those opportunities are generally not open to girls. Instead, 
girls are restricted to symbolic ways—language, for example—to gain status. The girls 
Eckert studied tended to use more of the features that characterized their group than did 
the boys because that was the only way available to them to say, I’m a jock or I’m a burn-
out. In other words, these girls used those features to construct an identity not so much as 
a girl rather than as a boy, but as a jock or a burnout, using the resources available to them 
in that context. 
Deficit, dominance, or difference? 
Interpretations of gender differences in language use have generally fallen into one of three 
models: deficit, dominance, or difference. A deficit model echoes Lakoff’s (1975) claim that 
women’s ways of speaking make them appear hesitant and indecisive. It is not that these ways 
of speaking necessarily and always indicate weakness, but they are seen that way because the 
criteria used to judge speech is men’s language. Since women’s language does not meet those 
criteria, it is deemed inferior. 
In a dominance model, interactional patterns that differ by gender are seen as evidence of 
the dominance men have in most areas of life, conversations included. It is not necessarily the 
case that any one man is intentionally dominating a conversation, but the social practices and 
patterns of interaction are such that he does so, even if he is not conscious of it. Terms such as 
mansplaining allude to this domination. There is obviously some truth to this perspective. We 
must be careful, however, not to overgeneralize or essentialize; not all men have power over 
all women, nor are all women victims of male domination. 
In a difference or two-cultures model, these differences stem from the fact that men and 
women have different cultural styles of speaking. Thus, cross-gender interactions are prone to 
the same types of misunderstandings as cross-cultural ones. This model in some ways seeks 
to value women’s ways of speaking, seeing their style not as abnormal but equal, if not supe-
rior to, men’s. One problem is that this model is based on the false premise that boys and girls, 
women and men, live in separate subcultures. They may indeed be socialized differently, but 
to claim they live in separate cultures is, at the least, an overstatement. Boys and girls, women 
and men, interact on a daily basis. More importantly, this model ignores the very real power 
differentials between many women and many men. Also, the characteristics attributed to 
women’s speech style closely echo traditional ideas about what is appropriate for each gender. 
Ideas about women’s communication style (women are cooperative, build rapport, talk about 
their feelings more easily, prefer verbal interaction to action) reflect stereotypes similar to 
claims that women make good nurses, primary school teachers, counselors, and social work-
ers but not scientists, engineers, computer programmers, or architects. Not surprisingly, jobs 
in the first list are generally less prestigious and well-paid than those in the second, which are 
male dominated. Ideas about gendered communication styles can thus reinforce stereotypes 
about appropriate gender roles. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
186 
GENDERS, IDENTITIES, AND LINGUISTIC PERFORMANCE 
Sugar and spice or puppy dog tails? 
Stereotypes such as those mentioned earlier assume an innate, natural connection between 
one’s gender and one’s language use. Differences between women and men are seen as the 
result of biology, often attributed to differences in brain structure. Pitch can serve as an illus-
trative example of the limitations of this type of generalization. There is a noticeable difference 
in the pitch of adult men and adult women. Men’s vocal cords tend to be thicker and longer, 
thus producing a lower pitch. Women’s pitch is generally higher as their vocal cords tend to be 
thinner and shorter. This natural difference is only part of the explanation, however. Holding 
size constant, Polish men have a higher pitch than American men. And the average pitch for 
women in Japan is substantially higher than that for American women, again holding size con-
stant. If pitch in speaking were the natural result only of physical size, we would not find such 
discrepancies. Thus, any gender differences in pitch result not solely from innate differences 
in vocal cords but from learning to conform to social norms. As with most things in life, there 
may be a natural element, but social norms play an equal, if not more important, role. 
We can see society’s norms playing out in how differences in pitch are talked and thought 
about. Women’s voices are often called shrill; they are seen as too high because the norm is 
taken to be men’s voices. Men’s voices are seen as commanding, unless of course they are 
high-pitched and sound like a women’s voices. Women’s pitch range, which is usually wider 
than that of men, is seen as indicative of being over-emotional, again because the norm is 
taken to be men’s more limited range. These differences are often cited as evidence that 
women are more emotional by nature, a conclusion certainly not true. 
How do languages encode gender? 
Do languages, not just speakers, treat women and men differently? If so, how? Does the fact 
that some languages have masculine and feminine nouns mean they are sexist? To begin 
to answer that second question, we first need to discuss a concept introduced in Chapter 3: 
grammatical gender. Grammatical gender refers to different classes of nouns that occur in 
many languages. We noted in Chapter 3 that most Indo-European languages have a system 
that classifies nouns as masculine or feminine (Spanish, French, Italian, for example) or as 
masculine, feminine, or neuter (German). That classification determines which morphologi-
cal endings are used in articles, adjectives, and sometimes verbs. In French, for example, to 
say the dog left, one would say, le chien est parti but to say the car left, it would be la voiture 
est partie. That extra e is necessary because car, la voiture, is feminine, and feminine nouns 
require it. But the noun dog, le chien, is masculine, no matter whether we are referring to a 
female or male dog, so no final e. This concept of grammatical gender does not necessarily 
correspond to what we have been calling gender. 
Languages like English that do not have grammatical gender, and even those that do, 
encode gender in other ways. Linguists have long been interested in the ways that women and 
men are represented in language itself. Much of the early work grew out of the women’s move-
ment and sought to identify the many ways women were rendered invisible or subtly dissed in 
everyday discourse. An early focus was on androcentric generics. These are terms like man 
or mankind when used for all humans, the pronoun he when used for everyone (everybody 
should bring his own book), and male-centric terms for groups of people who could be either 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GENDERS, IDENTITIES, AND LINGUISTIC PERFORMANCE 
187 
male or female (mailman, fisherman, etc.). There are, of course, certain terms that are used 
only for women: stewardess, waitress, actress, even poetess (yes, that used to be a word and 
people actually used it). The two sets of terms work in different ways, as we shall see. 
Androcentric generics imply that the norm for humanity is male, as several studies have 
shown. Although some claim that terms like mankind or man do not exclude women, if we 
look at analogous terms for other species, we can gain some insight into that claim. Dog is 
used for both sexes, but there is a separate term only for a female dog, bitch. In this way, it 
is analogous to the system for humans: man as supposedly inclusive of both genders, with 
a separate term for female humans, woman. Dog, however, clearly does contain the idea of 
female because we can talk about a dog giving birth. Try that with the term man: The man 
gave birth? Hmm, doesn’t quite work. Thus, it is subtly gendered male, no matter what people 
say. Despite efforts to get people to understand that such androcentric expressions render 
women invisible, man is still routinely used to mean humans. As an example: On a box for a 
new type of coffee maker I was thinking of buying just last week, I found the following state-
ment: I own every brewing device known to man. I added to myself, and a few known only to 
women. Of course, I did not buy it. 
Recognition of the sexist nature of terms like mailman has been more widespread than for 
mankind and has led to efforts to reform the language to eliminate those overtly sexist terms, 
in some ways a quite successful effort. Mailman has now regularly become mail carrier; 
stewardess is now flight attendant, waitresses and waiters are now servers, and both males 
and females are actors, except at the Academy Awards. Whether such reforms have changed 
social expectations and stereotypes is a question still up in the air, however. 
The example of actor and actress brings up another aspect of the English language often 
seen as sexist: terms differentiated by gender that are supposedly equivalent: governor, gov-
erness; master, mistress; bachelor, spinster. Most of these now seem outdated; who talks 
about spinsters or governesses anymore? We do, however, still use master and mistress, and 
their different connotations can tell us something about sexism in our language. The phrase a 
master of his trade could refer to any of a number of professions; the phrase a mistress of her 
trade sounds odd and has a definite sexual connotation. And we still have bachelors, though 
not spinsters, bachelorette being used instead, at least on television. That’s not much of an 
improvement to me. In fact, that term takes us to another problem: adding that feminizing 
ending (-ette or -ess) to a term that is unmarked as male implies that males are the norm, and 
women need to be marked somehow as an abnorm. 
Viewing male terms and designations as unmarked and female ones as marked runs 
through a lot of our discourse. Astronaut is unmarked for male but marked for female, as 
recent headlines about the space walk by several astronauts who happened to be women 
clearly showed. No headlines mentioned men astronauts; it is assumed astronauts are male, 
just as it is assumed that architects, presidents, and basketball players are. We have the NBA, 
National Basketball Association (men’s teams, no initial adjective needed), and the WNBA, 
the Women’s National Basketball Association, with the required initial adjective to mark it. 
Although terms for many professions, especially high status ones, are generally unmarked as 
male, that’s not the case for some other professions. Prostitute is unmarked female; it goes 
without saying that when we say prostitute, we mean women. We have to add an adjective to 
mark a prostitute as male, male prostitute. Similarly, for nurse; we mark it when the nurse is 
a man by saying male nurse. It’s the opposite for doctor, of course. Despite the fact that more 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
188 
GENDERS, IDENTITIES, AND LINGUISTIC PERFORMANCE 
and more doctors are women, they are still marked as abnormal in that profession; the term 
woman doctor is common, man doctor is non-existent. 
MULTIPLE IDENTITIES: BLACK MASCULINE LANGUAGE 
As we saw in Chapter 9, our socioeconomic class, ethnicity, nationality, age, education, occu-
pation, and sexuality affect how we talk, as do our political or religious allegiances and the 
subgroups we belong to or want to belong to. Gender is but one aspect of this multifaceted 
identity. How we experience gender and what roles and activities are seen as appropriate for 
our gender are affected by those other aspects. Not all women talk the same, nor do all men. 
Thus, although gender as an important part of our identity will be expressed through our lan-
guage use, its expression will not be the same for all. 
As we discussed in Chapter 10, African American Women’s Language (AAWL) was often 
left out of studies of African American Language (AAL), which focused on men’s language 
and out of studies of language and gender which focused on White, middle-class English-
speaking women. Here I’d like to examine a variety of English rarely investigated in studies 
of language and gender, what is called Black Masculine Language (BML). After all, men 
have gender too. 
BML is an especially stigmatized variety in American society, often associated with street 
talk, at least by those who do not speak it or know much about it. It is, however, as all language 
is, a rule governed, valid variety that is spoken in daily life to accomplish all those actions 
we want to get done. BML, as described by Kirkland (2015), conforms closely to what is usu-
ally seen as AAL, including use of those grammatical and phonological features described in 
Chapter 10. Kirkland defines it as the “communicative practice associated more or less with 
Black male identity” (p. 835). Although it is demonized in the wider society, it is, according to 
Kirkland, used by many African American males to define themselves and express solidarity 
with their community. 
For many of its speakers, especially young Black males, BML serves as a language of resist-
ance, a way to define themselves rather than be defined by a White society that systematically 
devalues and oppresses them, a way of “languaging Black masculine being” (Kirkland, 2015, 
p. 842). We can see a glimpse of this use with an example from Hip Hop language: a new use 
of the invariant be discussed in Chapter 10. Instead of only indicating a habitual action, it is 
used by rappers to construct and brag about a self-identity: I be the king supreme (p. 841). 
Such uses go beyond just bragging; they allow the speakers to have agency over their own 
self-definition and resist images of them and their language as deficient. 
GENDER AS PERFORMANCE 
Earlier we noted that recent theory sees gender as something we do, not something we are. 
What does that mean? Aren’t we born girls or boys, as those birth announcements proclaim? 
Yes, we are born with certain chromosomes and genitalia, though not all who are proclaimed 
girls or boys have identical chromosomes or genitalia. In recent years we have become more 
aware that there are intersex individuals who have some of both and trans people whose 
gender identity doesn’t match the sex assigned to them at birth. It’s complicated, even on the 
physical level. 

   
 
GENDERS, IDENTITIES, AND LINGUISTIC PERFORMANCE 
189 
It’s even more complicated when we turn to the social level. What does it mean to say we 
perform femininity or masculinity? We do so through our choices in such areas as dress, 
hairstyle, way of walking or sitting or talking, to name but a few. Here’s where language 
comes in. Linguistic resources are important resources to perform gender and perhaps the 
ones used with the least conscious attention. We have seen that certain linguistic forms index 
a feminine identity and others a male one. The term index has a specific meaning of evok-
ing specific identities without explicitly stating them. That indexing, that evoking by some 
linguistic features of masculine or feminine identities, is necessary in order to create those 
gendered performances. What any one linguistic feature indexes varies across cultures, of 
course. In Madagascar, for example, directness and swearing are seen as women’s ways of 
talking (Keenan, 1983). To perform femininity there, or to undermine it, requires a different 
set of linguistic resources than it would in the United States. 
Ideas of gender as a social construct mapped onto a biological designation are common. 
These ideas assume that biological designations somehow exist outside of and before any 
socialization. In her ground-breaking book Gender Trouble, the philosopher Judith Butler 
(2006) challenges that idea. She suggests that the gender binary has its existence mainly in 
the performance and the interpretations of that performance. It’s not that, for example, as men 
we act a certain way because of an innate nature or brain structure or hormones or whatever 
we are born with. Our performance does not reflect the fact that we are born men or women; 
it creates the whole idea of man or woman. 
From this perspective, the idea of male and masculinity, or female and femininity, is a 
largely social construct. We learn to be men or women by performing masculinity or femi-
ninity, and that performance comes out of what we see as masculine or feminine and what 
society tells us is masculine or feminine. This is true whether we are conforming to society’s 
vision or challenging it. And we learn what it means to be a man or a woman from reactions 
to our performance. We do not, of course, exist in a vacuum in which we can create any ideas 
of gender we want. We interact within what Butler calls a rigid regulatory frame about binary 
gender, one that presupposes what masculinity and femininity already are. It is within and 
against this frame that we perform gender. One small example of that frame: when Sally Ride 
became the first American woman in space, one headline noted the momentousness of the 
moment by remarking that she had no lipstick out there. That headline frames women, even 
those working professionally in outer space, as mere users of make-up, thus trivializing their 
considerable achievements. 
Focusing on the local context allows us to see ways that individuals’ performances, 
although always constrained by those rigid frames, can be and are creative and agentive not 
only for heterosexual individuals, but also for those regarded as marginal or non-normative. 
That is, those frames do not totally determine how we speak, partly because the norms con-
tained in them vary greatly in their local articulation. Dominant ideologies of gender and gen-
dered language are played with, undermined, manipulated, or challenged when they interact 
with local norms, as we saw with the jocks and burnouts. 
Linguistics in your world: The heterosexual marketplace 
In her study of pre-adolescent boys and girls, Eckert (1989) examined some of the lin-
guistic changes they go through upon reaching adolescence and entering the heterosexual 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
190 
GENDERS, IDENTITIES, AND LINGUISTIC PERFORMANCE 
marketplace, becoming interested in and interesting to the so-called opposite sex. Both boys 
and girls are expected to do so, but they have different sets of resources with which to gain 
status in that marketplace. Boys can continue being boys; playing sports and being rambunc-
tious still bring them status. Girls, however, must find different ways to gain status, unless 
they want to be called tomboys, a label not designed to enhance one’s status in the hetero-
sexual marketplace. They must become spectators rather than participants, cheerleaders not 
quarterbacks. And they must pay attention in a new way to their bodies and their speech: new 
ways of walking; using nail polish, lipstick, and make-up; shaving their legs; and talking like 
a girl. These gender performances are often policed, sometimes overtly, sometimes not so 
overtly. Girls are told not to yell or swear, but they are also tacitly told not to interrupt, espe-
cially not to interrupt boys. Teen girl magazines are full of advice about how to talk to a boy 
so he’ll like you: agree a lot, don’t contradict him, compliment him on his abilities, and most 
of all, smile a lot. Now obviously this sort of advice is not relevant to all girls; many reject 
it and rebel against its strictures. Nevertheless, those magazines help reinforce heterosexual 
gender performances as normal, what is known as heteronormativity, a view in which the 
natural state of affairs is a world where girls and boys, men and women, are distinct, binary 
and heterosexual. 
The gender binary revisited 
The early work we previously examined focused on the differences between men’s and 
women’s use of language and assumed that all humans are either one or the other and that 
basically all individuals of one gender are pretty much alike. Today, linguists challenge 
those assumptions. Instead of a gender binary (males and females are all there is), they 
have begun to focus on how language is used to construct the diverse forms of femininity 
and masculinity we see around us, including identities that embrace one, both, or neither 
of those binaries. Thus, we see more interest in the ways a person may not be what society 
calls a woman or a man but rather may be gender nonconforming: transgender or queer 
or intersex or any number of other nonbinary identities. Each of these identities, of course, 
is also multiple. 
What’s all this got to do with language? For one thing, as we saw in Chapter 3, the pronoun 
they is increasingly used to avoid having to assign a binary gender. For another, those chal-
lenges have led to a host of new words in English, and at least one new and fluid abbreviation: 
LGBTQIA (lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, queer, intersex, asexual). Increasingly, one sees that 
abbreviation in newspapers and other media, often with no explanation of its meaning, a sign 
that it is becoming part of the lexicon of the language. Trans and queer are also used increas-
ingly outside of LGBTQIA circles, though they often are accompanied by some explanation. 
Trans can be taken to mean either transsexual or transgender, though it seems to have come 
to refer to those who identify with a gender not assigned to them at birth, whether they have 
sexual reconstruction or not. Cisgender refers to those who live the gender assigned to them 
at birth. Queer today is often used as a form of gender subversion, undermining the binaries 
encoded in our language that categorize people as male or female and as heterosexual or 
homosexual. This subversion is often reflected in the language use of trans and queer com-
munities, where these terms are used as markers of positive in-group identity, thereby under-
mining the use of queer as an insult. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GENDERS, IDENTITIES, AND LINGUISTIC PERFORMANCE 
191 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
• 
Early studies concentrated on assumed differences between the ways men and women 
use language, especially in conversational interaction. They sought to determine if 
women and men did indeed use language differently and, if so, whether women’s ways 
of speaking caused them to be seen as hesitant and insecure. 
• 
These studies often focused on interruptions, tag questions, silence, and hedges; many 
studies found that women and men do indeed differ in their use of these features. Various 
models seek to explain these results: deficit, dominance, and difference. 
• 
Subsequent studies did not support a claim of significant difference. Instead, the local 
context and the function of any one feature may influence the use of language more 
directly than gender. These studies note that there are nearly always more differences 
within each group than between groups. 
• 
Other studies have examined the ways that languages encode gender in general and the 
ways that women are rendered invisible in specific. Androcentric generics and marked and 
unmarked terms for sports teams and professions are among the most noticeable ways. 
• 
More recent theory has questioned the idea that gender is an innate characteristic of any 
individual. Instead, it is seen as a social construct, created through our acts, our linguistic 
acts among them. These gender performances vary across other social identities. 
• 
This theory also challenges the idea of a binary view of gender. That binary perspective 
ignores the various ways that gender is lived and performed by trans, queer, or other 
gender-nonconforming individuals. 
KEY TERMS 
rapport style 
report style 
deficit model 
dominance model 
difference model 
grammatical gender 
Black masculine language 
cisgender 
gender binary 
androcentric generics 
heteronormativity 
gender nonconformity 
trans 
queer 
EXPLORATIONS 
Exploration 1: Greeting cards 
On your own, examine 10 to 15 greeting cards that are explicitly or implicitly aimed at women 
or men or boys or girls, such as those expressing appreciation for friendship or birthday cards for 
little girls and little boys or other family members. What stereotypes about gender can you glean 
from those cards? How is gender constructed in them: in the discourse, the images, the colors, etc. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
192 
GENDERS, IDENTITIES, AND LINGUISTIC PERFORMANCE 
Discussion prompt: Bring your notes to class and compare them with several of your 
classmates. In your group, create a summary of how these cards construct gender. 
Writing prompt: Write a two-page essay describing what you found. 
Exploration 2: She’s a cow; he’s a pig 
Derogatory words and insults tend to be very gendered. We use some for men, some for 
women, and some for those who don’t fit gender norms. Make a list of such words referring 
specifically to women, then to men, then to nonconforming genders. 
In small groups, compile a comprehensive list with everyone’s input. Which list is 
longer—derogatory words for women or for men or gender nonconformists? What do they 
tell you about society’s ideas about gender? What a woman should and shouldn’t be, what a 
man should and shouldn’t be, what nonbinary genders should and shouldn’t be? 
Exploration 3: Food and animal terms 
Terms for food are often similarly applied to people: calling someone a cupcake or a sweetie 
pie, for example. Make a list of as many of these terms as you can, both positive and nega-
tive; then determine who each term might be applied to, whether men, women, or gender 
nonconformist? In other words, who gets called a cupcake? 
Exploration 4: She’s a they 
In Chapter 3, we discussed the use of they as a non-gendered, third-person pronoun for an 
individual. One of the explorations asked what you thought of that use. Given what you’ve 
learned in this chapter, has your perspective changed? Why or why not? 
Exploration 5: Bossy women, independent men 
As we noted, some terms tend to index women and some index men. Since people sometimes 
are not aware that these terms do so, to investigate their use, it is best to ask indirectly, as we 
will do. Ask several people to write a sentence about a person who epitomizes each term from 
the list that follows, using a separate sentence for each word. Do not tell them why you are 
asking, and don’t mention gender at all. 
In small groups, compare your results. What do your data tell you about how these words 
are marked for gender? What do they tell you about how women and men are viewed? Note: 
not all of the words index gender. 
calm   
strong  
frumpy  creative  feisty  
mechanical 
musical  
shrill  
blonde  
smart  
ditsy  
emotional 
Exploration 6: Reclaiming slurs 
Recently, people in some marginalized groups have tried to reclaim the slurs used against 
them, turning them into positive markers of group identity rather than insults. Some 
LGBTQIA individuals have reclaimed queer, as mentioned earlier, and some women have 
reclaimed bitch and slut as positive terms. There were even slut marches a few years ago. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GENDERS, IDENTITIES, AND LINGUISTIC PERFORMANCE 
193 
What do you think of these efforts? Can one reclaim a derogatory term used for a group 
and get rid of its toxicity? 
Discussion prompt: Share your reactions to these questions in small groups. If you 
know of any other efforts, add those to the discussion. 
Writing prompt: Write one to two pages explaining your response to those 
questions. 
FURTHER READING 
Cameron, D. (2008). The myth of Mars and Venus: Do men and women really speak different 
languages? Oxford University Press. 
Holmes, J., & Meyerhoff, M. (Eds.). (2005). The handbook of language and gender. Blackwell. 
Zimman, L., Davis, J., & Raclaw, J. (2014). Queer excursions: Retheorizing binaries in 
language, gender, and sexuality. Oxford University Press. 
REFERENCES 
Butler, J. (2006). Gender trouble: Feminism and the subversion of identity. Routledge. 
Cameron, D. (2008). The myth of Mars and Venus: Do men and women really speak different 
languages? Oxford University Press. 
Eckert, P. (1989). Jocks and burnouts: Social categories and identity in the high school. Teachers 
College Press. 
Fishman, P. (1978). Interaction: The work women do. Social Problems, 25(4), 397–406. 
Hyde, J. (2005). The gender similarities hypothesis. American Psychologist, 60(6), 581–592. 
James, D., & Clarke, S. (1993). Women, men, and interruptions: A critical review. In D. Tannen 
(Ed.), Oxford studies in sociolinguistics: Gender and conversational interaction (pp. 231– 
280). Oxford University Press. 
Keenan, E. O. (1983). Norm-makers, norm-breakers: Uses of speech by men and women in a 
Malagasy community. In R. Bauman & J. Sherzer (Eds.), Explorations in the ethnography of 
speaking (pp. 125–143). Cambridge University Press. 
Kirkland, D. (2015). Black Masculine Language. In S. Lanehart (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of 
African American Language (pp. 834–849). Oxford University Press. 
Lakoff, R. (1975). Language and woman’s place. Harper & Row. 
Mendoza-Denton, N. (2008). Homegirls: Language and cultural practice among Latina youth 
gangs. Blackwell. 
Zimmerman, D., & West, C. (1996). Sex roles, interruptions and silences in conversation. 
Amsterdam Studies in the Theory and History of Linguistic Science, 4(1), 211–236. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 12 
Multilingualism 
First glance 
Most of the world is multilingual: 
• Individual and social multilingualism 
• Diglossia 
Language contact: Pidgins and creoles 
Superdiversity 
Hip Hop as a multilingual phenomenon 
Linguistics relativity 
Learning to be multilingual: L2 acquisition 
Multilingualism in education: 
• Monolingual mindset 
• Bilingual education in the United States 
• Sign language education 
INTRODUCTION 
When I graduated from college (I won’t tell you how many years ago), I set off on a trip 
around the world. As part of that trip, I hitch-hiked my way through Africa, ending up out of 
money as I entered South Africa. So I stayed there a while to earn enough money to continue 
on. While there, I met Sophia, the maid employed by the family of a friend of mine. They 
were White; she was Black, and this was before the end of apartheid, the legal segregation and 
oppression of the majority population (Blacks) by a small minority (Whites). What I remem-
ber vividly about her was her fluency in so many languages. She spoke English well. I was 
surprised to discover that she also spoke Xhosa, her first language; isiZulu, her husband’s first 
language; Afrikaans, South Africa’s other official language along with English; and Greek, 
which she learned when she worked for a Greek family. Five languages, and none of them 
learned in school. I was in awe, even more so when I discovered that this situation was far 
from unusual, at least among the majority native population. They were forced to learn the 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-12 

 
MULTILINGUALISM   195 
languages of their White colonizers to survive; the latter had no need to learn any native lan-
guages, though Whites were generally bilingual in the languages of the two White dominant 
groups: English and Afrikaans. Under apartheid, South Africa was an officially bilingual 
nation; after apartheid, it is now officially a multilingual nation with 11 official languages 
and many non-official ones. 
In this chapter we will examine multilingualism in some detail. Why an entire chapter on 
multilingualism, you might ask? Isn’t multilingualism unusual? Well, no. It turns out that, 
despite the ideology of one-nation-equals-one-language we discussed in Chapter 9, nearly all 
nations, even those that see themselves as monolingual, are in fact multilingual, as are the 
majority of the world’s population. Grosjean (1982) estimated that at least half the world’s 
population was multilingual. That number has likely increased by now with increased global 
migration. Worldwide, monolingualism is the exception rather than the rule. 
We’ll start our examination by asking what multilingualism is and how it functions in 
societies, touching on common beliefs and myths about it. Then we’ll turn to what happens 
when speakers of different languages come into contact, how people learn a second language, 
how ideologies affect how we perceive multilingualism, and how multilingualism is handled 
in educational settings. 
WHAT IS MULTILINGUALISM? 
We can define multilingualism as the use of two or more languages or varieties either by a 
single individual or by a society. For our purposes, that definition includes bilingualism, so a 
person who speaks two languages is multilingual, just as is someone who speaks three or four 
languages, even if the speaker is not equally fluent in all of them. 
Linguists differentiate between individual and societal multilingualism. Individual mul-
tilingualism refers to one individual’s use of more than one language. Societal multilingual-
ism refers to a community’s regular use of multiple languages. There are different ways that 
societies come to be multilingual. Migration, the movements of large numbers of people from 
one area to another, is perhaps the most common. The causes of migration are many: wars, 
famines, or any number of social, political, or economic upheavals. 
The redrawing of political boundaries is another common way that nations become multi-
lingual. After World War I, for example, the victorious European nations unilaterally drew the 
national boundaries of several countries in the Middle East. As a result, various ethnic groups 
suddenly found themselves part of a newly created nation, one that was perforce multilingual, 
or found they were split up as populations within several different nations. The Kurds, for 
example, became part of Syria, Iraq, Iran, and Türkiye, with the Kurdish language contribut-
ing to the multilingual makeup of those countries. 
In some countries that are officially multilingual, multilingualism is based on region, 
with some regions speaking one language and others a different language. Switzerland, 
for instance, has French-speaking, German-speaking, and Italian-speaking regions. In 
Switzerland, most people can speak more than one of those languages, even if most of their 
daily interactions take place in only one. In Canada the situation is different. Quebec is mostly 
French speaking, though most individuals also know some English. In the other Canadian 
provinces, though, people speak mostly English, with bilingualism in French much less com-
mon. Among Canada’s First Nations, speakers may use their heritage languages and English. 

 
  
 
196 
MULTILINGUALISM 
In major cities in many countries, the regionality is even more local, with certain neighbor-
hoods being multilingual. You can find neighborhoods across the United States where speak-
ers regularly use, for example, Somali and English, Spanish and English, Farsi and English, or 
combinations of many other languages. In many countries, we find what is known as asym-
metrical multilingualism, a situation like that in South Africa mentioned previously, where 
groups with less power are expected to learn the language of the dominant group, but the 
dominant group does not generally learn the languages of those less powerful groups. Thus, 
groups of lower status tend to be more multilingual than those of higher status. 
People who speak more than one language often use those languages in different domains 
for different purposes, a situation known as diglossia. Domain here refers to the context 
in which a language is used, that is, a sphere of activity with particular roles in a particular 
setting. These domains can be formal—such as religious rituals, government settings, court-
rooms, or some types of employment—or they can be informal, such as family or neighbor-
hood activities, particular types of employment, or informal gatherings. 
Not all multilingual societies are diglossic in this strict sense. With increasing mobility, 
especially across borders and into large metropolitan centers, we often find speakers of many 
languages interacting on many levels with more fluid rules and boundaries among those lan-
guages (a point we will return to later in the chapter). 
Social meaning 
In any multilingual setting, speakers’ choice of language or variety is not neutral; it always 
carries social meaning. In diglossic situations, that meaning is related to the situation of use. 
As we’ve seen already, however, languages and varieties also index social identities. They 
send messages about who we are and who we are not. 
Traditional studies of code switching generally assume languages have clear bounda-
ries that separate them, what are called bounded languages. This is French; that is German. 
This assumption of clear linguistic boundaries is challenged, however, not only by language 
theorists, but by multilingual speakers themselves. For some multilingual speakers, the lan-
guages do feel compartmentalized, with one language linked to one part of their identity and 
another to a different part (Koven, 2007). For others, their multilingual practices are fluid and 
dynamic, making use of multiple linguistic resources with little regard for which language 
those resources are part of. Speakers may translanguage, as we discussed in Chapter 9, and 
index social identities that are not separate, but mixed. In fact, for some speakers, that mixing 
of languages itself indexes a new sort of identity, one that is blended and multiple. 
Deciding which language to use 
Obviously, in deciding which language to use, people use the language they have in common 
with their interlocutors if the interlocutors speak only one language. If both interlocutors 
speak the same two or more languages, code switching or translanguaging often takes place. 
In other situations, communities have conventions about which language to use. Leap (1993) 
describes how Native Americans, before the arrival of Europeans, managed that decision 
for trade among groups speaking different languages. If the languages were closely related, 
speakers used their own language, adjusting expectations as to correctness and learning to 

 
 
MULTILINGUALISM   197 
figure things out as they went along. If they were not closely related, basic rules about which 
language should be used in any given situation were developed by each community: in some 
cases, the host was expected to use the language of the guest; in others, the guests were 
expected to use the language of the host. Alternatively, a lingua franca developed. A lingua 
franca is a language learned as a second language and regularly used for interactions among 
speakers who do not speak each other’s language. Ojibwe functioned this way for many years 
in the Great Lakes region of North America. 
A similar decision must be made by individuals in many societies: if two multilingual 
speakers meet, what language do they use? Some communities consider it appropriate that 
speakers accommodate to the needs of the least fluent speaker. This is the expectation in some 
parts of South Africa. If we both speak isiZulu and Xhosa, but you speak only isiZulu well, 
I will use isiZulu with you to accommodate to your best language. Some other societies, such 
as the United States, expect the speaker of the less dominant language always to accommo-
date to speakers of the dominant language, in this case, English. 
LANGUAGE PLANNING 
Deciding what language to use is sometimes an individual decision. Sometimes, though, there 
are laws and policies that encourage the use or disuse of certain languages. Efforts by gov-
ernments, educational institutions, the media, and the courts that seek to influence or change 
linguistic behavior are part of language planning. Language planning decisions can range 
from the selection of an official language to the choice of language to use in the classroom 
or on ballots, from mandating interpreter services in the courtroom or in health settings to 
obscenity laws and spelling reform. Some language policies seek to promote assimilation 
of linguistic minorities to the dominant language, while others seek to protect the rights of 
speakers of all languages and promote linguistic pluralism. For language communities that do 
not have a written form to their language, language planning may include the development of 
an orthography to represent their language. 
Language planning can be official or de facto. In the United States, for example, Congress 
has never officially recognized English as the official language. It is, however, a de facto 
official language; all government interactions take place in English, all laws are published in 
English, schools are taught in English, and judicial proceedings take place in English, though 
there are laws requiring interpreters for those who do not speak it. Congress has passed a few 
laws to protect the rights of some non-English languages; the Native American Languages 
Act of 1990 sought to protect and support those languages. Support for other languages such 
as immigrant languages, however, is not part of U.S. law. In fact, the situation is one of de 
facto support for linguistic assimilation, encouraging immigrants to not only learn English 
but to give up their home language. 
LANGUAGE CONTACT 
Multilingualism is often the result of what is known as language contact, in which speakers 
of two or more languages come into prolonged contact with one another. Such contact comes 
about in different ways, mostly through trade, invasion, colonization, or migration. Language 
contact can lead to different outcomes: maintenance of separate languages; emergence of 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
198 
MULTILINGUALISM 
new languages; language shift; or linguistic diversity, even superdiversity, within a com-
munity. In Switzerland and Belgium, the languages in contact are maintained by each group. 
In Belgium, most people speak both French and Flemish. Although Belgium is officially 
bilingual, tensions around language issues often run very high. When I was in Brussels many 
years ago, one morning I woke up to see street signs in French (most signs are in both French 
and Flemish) having been blacked out by those who championed Flemish. The next morning, 
the opposite happened. 
New languages: Pidgins and creoles 
New languages sometimes emerge from language contact. Pidgins and creoles are two types 
of contact languages that developed in the 17th through 19th centuries; they emerged when 
people needed to communicate but did not know each other’s language and there was no lin-
gua franca available. Some of these new languages emerged in what we might now call global 
trade centers, where traders from around the world came to buy and sell wares. Most, how-
ever, developed out of language contact in colonial situations. Under colonization, especially 
of the Western Hemisphere by European nations, various subjugated peoples, often enslaved 
peoples brought from elsewhere, were forced to work side by side. They often spoke different 
languages and did not speak the language of the colonizers, a language contact situation that 
resulted in many new pidgins and creoles. 
Pidgins are languages that developed when groups of people who did not speak each oth-
er’s languages needed to communicate over a period of time, most often in colonial situations. 
Combining elements of two or more languages, they have simplified syntax and morphology, 
a limited range of use, and a small set of content words, generally taken from the colonizer’s 
language, that allow just enough communication for getting work done. The definition of a 
pidgin, then, combines sociological, historical, and linguistic characteristics. Thus, we had 
various English, French, Portuguese, and Spanish pidgins in lands forced into a colonial rela-
tionship by speakers of those languages. These pidgins became the way the colonizer and 
the colonized communicated; they also often became the language of interaction among the 
colonized peoples themselves, especially when they were brought from overseas as workers 
or slaves. 
Pidgins have no native speakers; they are always learned languages. Once they acquire 
native speakers, as linguists say, they become what are called creoles. Creolization, the 
process whereby pidgins become creoles, does not happen overnight. When the social situ-
ation is stable, pidgins begin to be used in more and more domains and serve more and 
more functions in a community. They then become a group’s primary means of communi-
cation and are learned by children as their first language. Once this happens, the structures 
of creoles gradually become more complex, and their lexicon increases dramatically to 
meet the needs of their speakers. As with all languages, there is variation within creoles 
based on speaker and situation, and as with all languages, they develop to fulfill the needs 
of their speakers. Rather than simplified versions of a language, creoles are languages 
like any others, with their own lexicon, phonology, morphology, syntax, and all the other 
characteristics of language. Creoles have become the national language in many places in 
the world. 

 
 
 
 
 
MULTILINGUALISM   199 
In Papua New Guinea, for example, Tok Pisin, an English-based creole, is used in govern-
ment, the media, literature, and education. It is even used in road signs, such as the following 
provided by Romaine (2000): 
Wok long rot: Ol kar mas stop. 
If you say this aloud, you may be able to figure it out, especially if you remember the underly-
ing source for words here is English: Work along road; all cars must stop. 
It is estimated that 60 to 100 creoles are spoken around the world today. In Anglophone 
countries of the Caribbean such as Antigua, Barbados, Jamaica, and Belize, creoles based 
on English are spoken by most of the population: they include Jamaican Creole; Barbadian 
Creole; and Trinidadian Creole, also called Trini. Another creole based on English is 
Hawaiian Creole, which is often mistakenly call Hawaiian Pidgin. Those based on French 
include Haitian Creole, with nearly 10 million speakers, and Guadalupe Creole. Nubi and Juba 
Arabic are both creoles based on Arabic and are spoken in South Sudan, Kenya, and Uganda; 
and Andaman Creole, spoken on the Andaman Islands, is based on Hindi, Bengali, and Tamil. 
Language shift 
In many cases of language contact, it is not so much that new languages emerge but that 
speakers shift their language practices. Language shift refers to a situation where a commu-
nity stops using its language and begins using another in more and more domains to such an 
extent that the first language is no longer passed on to the next generation. We see this shift 
with immigrant communities, with indigenous communities that were colonized, and with 
globalization. Reasons for such a shift include economic circumstances, trade, employment 
opportunities, and urbanization. 
My family history illustrates the language shift that has taken place in most immigrant 
communities in the United States. My grandparents, who migrated to the United States as 
adults, were more or less monolingual in Italian. My father, the second generation, was 
equally bilingual in Italian and English. My siblings and I, the third generation, were raised 
as monolingual English speakers. (I learned Italian as a foreign language when I was in col-
lege.) Within three generations, Italian disappeared from not only my family but also from 
the community in which they lived. This pattern of language loss or shift in three generations 
has long been common among immigrant groups to the United States and many other nations. 
Recently, studies have shown that language shift among immigrant groups now happens even 
more quickly, often within two generations. 
Deliberate, intentional efforts by a government to eradicate an indigenous language 
can also lead to language shift, as we saw in Chapter 9 with Native American languages. 
Unfortunately, such efforts are not just a thing of the past. To use a contemporary example, in 
1959 the Chinese invaded and annexed Tibet. They then imposed the Chinese language on all 
governmental and educational domains, so that Tibetans are forced to learn Chinese to live 
in their own country. The Chinese government also encouraged its citizens to move to Tibet, 
where they set up schools taught in Chinese and where they eventually became the dominant 
population. In this way, Tibetans became second-class citizens in their own country, and their 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
200 
MULTILINGUALISM 
language became a minority language looked down upon as not modern or sophisticated 
enough for use in public. 
We discuss language shift in more detail in Chapter 13. 
SUPERDIVERSITY 
In Chapter 1, we discussed the difficulty of defining a language or a variety, noting that com-
mon definitions often have more to do with political and social realities than linguistic ones. 
That difficulty becomes even more apparent when we turn to multilingualism. Questions of 
who speaks which language(s)—questions that seem simple on the surface—turn out to be 
quite complex, especially because many modern metropolitan centers are superdiverse in 
terms of languages and varieties. 
Globalization is one factor that has led to this superdiversity. Globalization is often thought 
of as the increased flow of money, goods, culture, and media around the world. That flow also 
includes an increased movement of peoples. As Bloommaert (2013) puts it, since the end of 
the Cold War, “more people from more places [have] migrated into more and different places 
and for more and different reasons” (p. 5). And they have brought their cultures and languages 
with them. The result in many cities has been linguistic superdiversity, both an increase in 
the amount of linguistic diversity present and a difference in the functions of that diversity. 
One aspect of modern communication plays an important part in these superdiverse com-
munities: the increased ability to communicate across space enabled by technology. Cell 
phones and social media, to name just two technologies, allow people to keep in contact 
across vast distances easily and instantaneously. Individuals are now able to keep in touch 
with the people and languages of their home countries, even as they daily interact with speak-
ers of other languages. Thus, they can more easily maintain their languages. 
If we look at certain neighborhoods in large cities today, we can see how linguistically 
diverse they have become. Bloommaert (2013) describes the neighborhood of Brussels 
where he lives, one that has changed dramatically in the last 20 years through migration 
from Türkiye, Morocco, various parts of West Africa, and elsewhere. In this neighborhood, 
where before one heard mostly French or Dutch, one now also hears varieties of several West 
African languages, West African English, Turkish, Arabic, Urdu, and Punjabi. Residents use 
many languages or varieties daily. He describes how an Igbo-speaking Nigerian immigrant 
may use Dutch to interact with shopkeepers and then turn to Nigerian English to speak to her 
child’s teachers, who would in turn speak to her in their Belgian-Flemish variety of English. 
A bewildering mix of languages, to say the least. As Bloomaert points out, it is hard to say 
what the dominant language in the community is, given this diversity on the street. 
Nigerian English is one of what are called World Englishes, new varieties of English that 
have arisen in the last few centuries. I discuss these in more detail in Chapter 13. 
Hip Hop as a multilingual phenomenon 
Hip Hop is now a global phenomenon, performed around the world in multiple languages. It 
is both global and local, with young people forging local Hip Hop cultures by drawing on and 
reframing references to African American Hip Hop, including African American English, 
and to local conditions, including local languages and varieties. It seems the more established 

 
 
 
 
MULTILINGUALISM   201 
Hip Hop becomes, the more it utilizes local references and languages. We see this clearly 
in Williams’ 2016 study of how Hip Hop rappers in Cape Town, South Africa, use mul-
tiple languages and varieties: Colored South African English, African American English, 
Cape Afrikaans, and Sebela. Colored South African English is a variety of English spoken 
by what are known as Coloreds in South Africa, those with both African and White ances-
tors. Afrikaans is a variety of Dutch spoken by descendants of South Africa’s Dutch settlers. 
Cape Afrikaans is a variety of Afrikaans spoken mostly by Coloreds, and Sebela is a local 
street variety that draws from Xhosa and isiZulu (local indigenous languages) as well as Cape 
Afrikaans and English. Both Sebela and Cape Afrikaans are highly stigmatized in education, 
politics, and the job market; their speakers are similarly stigmatized as “unintelligent, lazy, 
and criminal” (p. 114). 
Hip Hop performers challenge those stereotypes and construct alternate identities by using 
those stigmatized varieties and what Williams calls “extreme locality,” the use of references 
to local spaces, slang, sports teams, and values. In the performances described by Williams 
(2016), performers creatively use local languages and varieties to express their “marginalized 
and ethnic identities” (p. 132). As Williams points out, similar creativity in reclaiming stig-
matized identities through an imaginative mixing and remixing of languages and varieties in 
Hip Hop can be seen in diverse places around the world: from Fresno, California to Tanzania, 
Brazil, and Nigeria. 
LINGUISTIC RELATIVITY 
In any discussion of language differences, the idea of linguistic relativism usually arises. 
Linguistic relativism, also known as the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, is the theory that the 
structure of the language we speak determines, or greatly influences, the way we perceive 
the world. Language is seen to work like a filter on reality. Because languages differ, this 
filter, and thus our worldviews, will differ, and cultures that speak different languages will 
think and behave differently. There are two versions of this hypothesis: a strong one in which 
language is thought to determine how we see the world (linguistic determinism) and a weak 
one which claims instead that language influences it (linguistic relativity). 
The reasoning goes something like this: as we learn our first language, its structure and 
lexicon provide systems for organizing our experiences in the world. These systems come to 
seem natural; we see the world the way those systems organize it without even realizing it. 
It’s not a matter of imposition but of language predisposing us to perceive the world in certain 
ways. The examples often used come from Native American languages, which require certain 
elements that English and most Indo-European languages do not. Hopi, for example, has no 
morphological way of indicating that an event took place in the future or the past, no equiva-
lent to our {ed} morpheme, for example. From this, Whorf concluded that the Hopi world 
view did not include concepts of past and future. Not true, as Malotki (1983) notes; her study 
among the Hopi showed that they have several ways of indicating both past and future tense; 
they just don’t do it morphologically. 
The strong version of this theory has been pretty much debunked. For one thing, if it were 
true, we would not be able to translate from language to language. For another, if one lan-
guage does not have a word for a particular concept, does that mean its speakers can never 
understand that concept? That seems a bit far-fetched. We have the ability to be creative with 

 
  
 
 
 
 
202 
MULTILINGUALISM 
language, and languages themselves change, for example, by borrowing a word for that new 
idea or creating a new word. 
The weaker version is not so easily dismissed. Most would agree that different cultures 
perceive the world differently and those differences may well be related to their languages. 
Proposals to alter language to lessen sexism or racism, for example, rely on this reasoning. If 
we can change how people talk about a group, we may change the way they think about them. 
Propogandists also rely on this. To constantly refer to enemies or opponents as vermin or sav-
ages dehumanizes them and helps to legitimize their oppression. 
LEARNING TO BE MULTILINGUAL 
Some speakers learn more than one language in early childhood, having in effect two or 
more native or first languages. In fact, some estimates are that half of the world’s population 
are native speakers of more than one language. Many others learn a second language after 
acquiring their first: in childhood, adolescence, or as adults. Some learn it at home; some in 
a community where it is used; some in the classroom; and some online. The circumstances 
in which people learn a second or third or fourth language vary greatly. The field of second 
language acquisition (L2 acquisition) examines how we learn a language beyond our first 
one, whether it be our second, third, or fifteenth language. There is no one clear answer to 
how we do so, but linguists agree that social, linguistic, cognitive, and affective factors play 
a role in this complex process. 
Linguists tend to use the term acquisition rather than learning in talking about this pro-
cess, partly to emphasize that much of the process is unconscious and unknown. We can learn 
grammar rules, for example, but being able to use them automatically requires more; acquisi-
tion refers to that more. Linguists also make a distinction between a second language and a 
foreign language. Second language acquisition refers to a language learned for communica-
tion in communities that are multilingual, not necessarily in international communication. 
Foreign language acquisition generally refers to languages learned for international commu-
nication or for study in school to meet a requirement. With the increased spread of English 
globally, and its use by many different peoples for many different purposes, that distinction 
may no longer be valid, as we will see in Chapter 13. 
In terms of the process of L2 acquisition, we might start by asking how L2 acquisition is 
different from first language acquisition. The most obvious difference was mentioned earlier: 
everyone learns a first language fluently but not all who attempt it learn a second one equally 
well. The learning of that first one appears effortless; it just seems to happen. In acquiring our 
first language, we seem to move quickly and effortlessly from hearing or seeing it to produc-
ing it. Yet that movement from learning words and grammar rules to producing language is 
often difficult in acquiring a second language. When we are doing so, we are not a blank slate, 
for we already know our first language. And that knowledge can either interfere with or help 
our learning. The circumstances in which we learn and our motivations for learning also play 
a role in L2 acquisition, as we’ll see further. 
What does success in L2 acquisition look like? Do you have to be totally fluent in all 
aspects of a language to be considered successful? Obviously, how we define success in learn-
ing a second language, what is known as the target language, will vary. If we look around, 
it’s easy to see that there is a range of mastery when it comes to learning a second language: 

 
 
 
 
MULTILINGUALISM   203 
some become fluent, some can hold a simple conversation, some know enough phrases to 
get by in a tourist situation, some can speak it but not read, some can read it but not speak 
it. There’s no clear-cut line here; we see rather a continuum of mastery. To my mind, all are 
examples of some success in SLA. 
Linguistic factors in L2 acquisition 
Age has something to do with success in L2 acquisition. There may be a critical period for 
acquiring a second language, a biologically determined point beyond which we find it dif-
ficult. The exact time of the critical period is debated: 8 years old? Puberty? Puberty seems to 
be a cutoff point after which native-like proficiency in phonology is rarely achieved. In other 
words, if we start learning after puberty, we’re always going to have what is called a foreign 
accent. Aside from accent, however, it is possible to become fluent in another language at any 
age, although there is a general decline in our ability to do so as we age. It seems that the older 
we are, the harder it is, but whether that has to do with biology or other psycho-social factors 
is not clear. 
One key question here is how our first language influences our learning and use of a second 
language. One way seems clear: interference from our first language can be a source of error 
in the target language. If our first language does not use articles such as a or the, for example, 
we are more likely to omit them when using a second language that requires them. If our first 
language does not make a sound distinction that is important in the target language, it will be 
harder to learn that distinction. In Arabic, for example, [b] and [p] are allophones of the same 
phoneme, so when Arabic speakers are learning English, they often mix up those two sounds. 
Some errors, however, do not seem to be the result of interference. Instead, they arise from 
specific aspects of the target language. In English, for example, we can say either I like swim-
ming or I like to swim, but if we use the verb enjoy, we can only use the -ing form, swimming, 
not the infinitive to swim. Learners of English commonly say I enjoy to swim, at least until 
they’ve mastered this little complexity and I enjoy swimming has become automatic. 
Affective factors in L2 acquisition 
How we get to that automatic production remains somewhat of a mystery, but we do know two 
mechanisms that are related to it: the monitor and affective filter. The monitor is the part of 
us that watches what we say and tries to make sure it is correct. Our monitor is mediated by 
an affective filter that can facilitate or inhibit our efforts by making us more or less willing to 
use the target language. If we are afraid of making mistakes, for example, our affective filter 
is high, and we will be less willing to speak or to ask for clarification, hindering our efforts 
to learn. I remember my French teacher in high school saying that to learn any new language, 
you needed to be willing to make a fool of yourself, that is, lower that affective filter. The 
presence of this filter may be one key difference between L2 acquisition and L1 acquisition; 
young children learning their first language do not seem to worry about being wrong or mak-
ing fools of themselves. 
Motivation appears to play a key role in learning, especially the difference between instru-
mental and integrative motivation. Instrumental motivation, learning a language to achieve 
another goal, includes learning a language for a school requirement or business reasons with 

 
  
 
204 
MULTILINGUALISM 
little desire for integration into a new community. Integrative motivation is more complex, 
but generally includes a desire to become part of a community or to learn more about, and be 
able to partake in, a different culture. Integrative motivation can include a willingness to take 
on a new identity. Our learning, both what we learn and how well we learn it, can be affected 
by these motivations. Instrumental motivation can lead to successful acquisition of a limited 
range of aspects needed for our purposes. Integrative motivation generally leads to more suc-
cessful acquisition of a wider range of registers. 
Social factors in L2 acquisition 
Individual attitudes toward language learning often reflect attitudes prevalent in the local 
community and wider society. During and after World War I in the United States, for exam-
ple, the number of students learning German decreased drastically as a result of intense and 
widespread anti-German sentiments. In many parts of the world, in addition to being neces-
sary for a career or higher education, English carries social prestige, a situation that may 
well contribute to the motivation to learn it. In some communities, multilingualism is valued 
and expected. Such expectations undoubtedly contribute to learning. In other communities, 
multilingualism is neither valued nor expected. Or some types may be valued and other types 
not. In the United States, for instance, bilingualism in French/English or German/English 
is thought admirable; bilingualism in Hmong/English or Somali/English carries much less 
prestige. 
Sociocultural theories of L2 acquisition note that second learning acquisition may not be 
a universal process, but rather one mediated by the social, historical, cultural, and political 
contexts in which it occurs. From this perspective, language is predominantly a social tool, 
one that we learn to use through interacting with others in various contexts. Since these con-
texts and our roles within them will vary greatly, our learning may do so as well. Similarly, 
our needs as learners will vary according to our goals in learning a language, which can 
range widely. Some learn for a specific job, some to be able to read scientific material, some 
to travel, some to move to a new country, some to be Hip Hop artists, some to fulfill an edu-
cational requirement, some to experience a new culture, and some because they’ve fallen in 
love with someone who speaks a different language. Each of these goals may affect how we 
interact with others using the target language and thus affect how we go about acquiring it. 
MULTILINGUALISM IN EDUCATION 
Given the amount of multiculturalism in the world, the role it plays in education is important 
to examine. Decisions about which language to use within a school system are faced by all 
communities but are especially complicated in multilingual communities. Should children 
be taught in their home language to begin and then transition to the dominant or school lan-
guage? Or should they be taught to read and write in the school language from the beginning? 
In communities that see themselves as monolingual, that question is often not even asked, 
even though students bring various languages to school. 
In the first few years of schooling, many children do not learn to read and write in their 
home language. Even if they do, most children worldwide must transition to a different lan-
guage to continue learning. Globally, education beyond early primary school happens in only 

 
MULTILINGUALISM   205 
a small percentage of the world’s languages. In fact, more and more secondary education 
takes place in one of a small number of other languages: English, Arabic, Spanish, French, 
Chinese, or Hindi. That means that for most children around the world, the school language 
they are expected to use does not match their home language or home variety. There is, in 
other words, a mismatch. 
This mismatch is obviously different for different populations; for example, speakers of 
languages of immigrant groups, of indigenous heritage languages, of varieties different from 
the dominant one. In Minnesota, where I live, Anashinabemowin-speaking children, Somali-
speaking children, Hmong-speaking children, and African American English-speaking chil-
dren may all come to school with little knowledge of the Standard English they will be taught 
in. In other parts of the world, it may be Luo-speakers in Kenya or Sebela-speakers in South 
Africa. What do the experiences of these groups have in common? 
First, all of these children bring rich linguistic resources to the classroom, even if those 
resources do not include the school language. Many bring more than one set of resources, 
speaking more than one language before they even enter a classroom. They also often face an 
educational system that shows little understanding of this richness, instead seeing their lan-
guage as unsuitable for educational purposes, something to be corrected. Their languages are 
thought to stymie their success in school. It is no wonder, then, that for far too many children, 
going to school in a language not their home language leads to high failure and dropout rates. 
The blame is often put on the fact that the children do not speak the school language, or that 
their parents do not speak it at home, or their parents do not engage in the child’s education— 
in essence, blaming the victims. As Labov (1972) notes, however, nonstandard varieties or 
languages are not in themselves an obstacle to learning. It is the lack of understanding about 
language on the part of administrators and instructors that is the chief problem. In fact, it is 
not these children who fail, but the educational institutions that are failing to educate them. 
Numerous studies have shown that children learn to read more easily in their home lan-
guage. That seems like common sense. Learning to read is a difficult endeavor; doing it in 
a language that you do not speak well makes it even more difficult. Studies also show that 
literacy skills, once learned, can be and are transferred to another language. Yet too many 
schools still teach basic literacy in the school language rather than the child’s home language. 
In one study of students in Papua New Guinea, Siegel (2012) describes what happened when 
schools began using Tok Pisin, an English-based creole that is the students’ home language, as 
the medium of instruction in schools. Instead of falling behind in learning Standard English, 
students who first learned to read and write in Tok Pisin did better academically, not just in 
the early grades but in the higher grades as well. Similar educational results have been found 
in other studies as well. 
In countries with large immigrant populations, people are often afraid that letting children 
learn in their own languages will lead to social disunity, with ethnic communities refusing 
to learn the dominant language. Most parents of immigrant or minority-language students, 
however, want their children to learn the dominant language, the language of opportunity. 
They also want to maintain their home language and culture (Romaine, 2000). Linguistically, 
there is no reason that cannot happen. Some people also believe that teaching students in their 
own language and in English will confuse children, so they discourage students from speak-
ing their home language in favor of speaking only English. We know this is not so; students 
do not need to stop using their home language to learn the school language. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
206 
MULTILINGUALISM 
Monolingual mindset 
The assumption that children need to give up their home language to learn the school lan-
guage is part of the monolingual mindset, a concept closely related to the standard language 
ideology discussed in Chapter 9. A term coined by Michael Clyne (2004), monolingual mind-
set refers to the belief that monolingualism should be the norm for nation states and that 
multilingualism is strange and dangerous. This mindset underlies objections in the United 
States and other English-speaking nations to the use of languages other than English in public 
spaces. Thus, we hear about people being told, This is America; speak English. Just today 
I read of notices put up in an apartment block in Norwich, England, the day after Brexit took 
effect: We’ve got our country back. Speak English. (To their credit, the managers of the block 
quickly took those notices down.) Such sentiments exemplify this mindset: the devaluing and 
fear of languages other than English. 
As part of this mindset, educational success is often equated with mastery of the stand-
ard language. Think of all the standardized tests students in the United States take, many of 
which focus on the grammar of Standard English. Other codes—any languages or varieties 
that do not match the school language—are considered not only nonstandard and inappropri-
ate for school but illogical, and those who speak them are often seen as morally deficient. 
(Remember that double negative we discussed earlier?) Thus, speakers of languages or varie-
ties that do not match the school language are seen as needing constant correction, both gram-
matically and morally. 
We know that multilingual children bring remarkably complex linguistic skills to the 
classroom, skills that should be valued and rewarded, even if their language is highly stigma-
tized by society at large. Multilingual children code-switch and translate multiple languages 
regularly. Perez (2016) notes that Zapotec-speaking students in California often serve as tri-
lingual interpreters for their families, moving between their indigenous language, Spanish, 
and English as the need demands. Instead of measuring success in terms of mastery of one 
standard language, as most schools do, what if we defined success as being able to use two or 
more languages in appropriate situations? 
Bilingual education in the United States 
Such a definition might lead to more support for bilingual education, a topic that has long 
been fiercely debated in the United States. It is helpful to look at a bit of the history, as it 
gets to the heart of much thinking about multilingualism in the United States. For much of 
U.S. history, bilingual programs were available in many schools: German/English bilingual 
schools were common in Ohio until World War I, during which anti-German sentiments led 
to their closure. In the latter part of the 20th century, bilingual educational programs became 
more common after the Supreme Court mandated programs for students who did not speak 
English. Since around 2000, however, with the passage of the No Child Left Behind legisla-
tion, those programs have been effectively eliminated. 
To understand recent debates about bilingual education in the United States, it is important 
to know that even when they were available, these programs reached only a small portion of 
the students who could have benefited from them. And the types of programs varied greatly. 
Most were transitional programs whose purpose was to get students speaking English as 

 
 
 
MULTILINGUALISM   207 
soon as possible so they could transition into English-only classes. They used the student’s 
home language merely as a tool to support learning English, not as a valuable skill worth 
developing. This attitude usually led to subtractive bilingualism, in which learning the dom-
inant language leads to losing the home language. Very few programs were maintenance 
programs whose aim was to help students maintain and develop their first language while 
also learning English. Maintenance programs lead to additive bilingualism, where a second 
language is learned without leading to loss of the home language. How successful were bilin-
gual programs? It depends on which type you are assessing. Cummins (1979) notes that nearly 
all studies that show a negative outcome for bilingual programs are assessing transitional 
programs. Studies assessing maintenance programs, however, show a high degree of success. 
Proponents of bilingual programs point to those studies and argue that, as a 1953 UNESCO 
(United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) report noted, all children 
have a right to an education in their home language. They also point out that such an educa-
tion leads to improved educational success. Critics of bilingual education often draw upon 
the monolingual mindset mentioned earlier. In addition, they see these programs as “special 
treatment” for Hispanic students since most of them were for Spanish-speaking children, the 
majority of non-English speaking students when the programs were developed. It is interest-
ing to note, however, that the Supreme Court case that made bilingual programs mandatory, 
Lau vs Nichols, was brought by parents of Chinese-speaking children. Nevertheless, argu-
ments against bilingual programs occur within the larger context of immigration and the 
place of Spanish in the United States. 
Spanish in the United States 
The United States was a multilingual nation at its beginning; it remains so today. According 
to recent U.S. census data, there are 14 languages other than English spoken by more than half 
a million speakers each: Chinese by over three million people and Spanish by over 37 million. 
Some people see these data as proof that immigrants today, unlike those of the past, are not 
learning English. Such claims are, however, untrue. Census data also show that over 80% of 
speakers of languages other than English also speak English well or very well. 
The perception that newer immigrants are not learning English is often directed specifi-
cally at Spanish speakers. The second most spoken language in the United States, Spanish 
holds a unique place in the linguistic landscape of the United States not only because it is so 
widely spoken but also because it has such a long history here. It was the first European lan-
guage spoken in what is now the United States with the Spanish settlement of St. Augustine, 
Florida, in 1565, long before Jamestown or the Pilgrims. It spread in the 16th to 19th centuries 
as the Spanish conquered and settled many parts of the southwestern North America. Many 
communities in that area became part of the United States through military annexation from 
Mexico, leading to a large number of Spanish speakers becoming part of what are now the 
states of Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, and California. Thus, Spanish has been part 
of the U.S. landscape for centuries, well before the recent immigration from various Spanish-
speaking countries in Latin America. 
Many Americans today think of Spanish as an immigrant language, forgetting its long 
history here. Throughout that long history, Spanish has had a conflicted place. The original 
constitution of California, for example, ensured that governmental decrees would be issued in 

 
  
 
208 
MULTILINGUALISM 
both Spanish and English; within a few years, however, that policy was abandoned as Anglos 
became the majority. 
Both Hispanics and non-Hispanics hold a range of attitudes toward Spanish. For many 
non-Hispanics, Spanish is seen as a threat to the English language. Hispanic students have 
even been expelled for speaking Spanish in school, not in the classroom but outside of it with 
friends. Non-Hispanic students learning Spanish and using it outside the classroom would 
most likely not face such punishment. Despite these sentiments, statistics show that it is the 
Spanish language, not English, that faces a threat. In fact, Bills and Vigil (2008) conclude 
that Spanish-speaking immigrants are shifting to English and abandoning Spanish even more 
quickly than earlier immigrant groups. 
For some Hispanics, English is the language of opportunity, education, and power, while 
Spanish is the language of the barrio, not a language that will help them succeed. For many 
others, it serves as a potent emblem of their heritage, one they are proud of. Indeed, there are 
some forces contributing to its maintenance today: the ease of travel to and communication 
with Spanish-speaking countries, now made easier by modern communication technologies, 
and a new respect for the Spanish language and Hispanic culture among many young people. 
Spanish speakers are often seen as having an L2 accent, what is generally called a foreign 
accent. If they learned English as adults, that L2 accent is difficult if not impossible to lose. 
Despite this fact, Spanish accents are stigmatized. In the movies, Spanish accents are used to 
suggest a drug dealer or gang member, a wetback (an ethnic slur for Mexicans who enter the 
United States without legal permission), or as just plain lazy. My guess is that such stigmatiza-
tions would not occur with Swedish or French accents. 
Sign language education 
When we speak of multilingual education, most people probably don’t think of the education 
of Deaf students, but that is indeed a type of multilingual education. How does one best teach 
Deaf students? That question was heatedly debated in the late 19th century, with some arguing 
for an oralist approach and others for the use of sign languages. The oralist approach included 
teaching lip reading and oral language, both extremely difficulty to learn for hard-of-hearing 
students, especially if deaf from birth. And this approach insisted that signed languages had 
no place in the classroom. By the end of the 19th century, the oralist approach was almost 
universally accepted in Europe and North America. Before that, in the mid-19th century in 
the United States, nearly every school for Deaf students used American Sign Language or a 
local sign language; by 1907, none did (Dolnick, 1993). In Britain, there were similar policies, 
with students reporting being hit if caught using their sign language (Harris, 1995). 
By the 1960s, educators began to reconsider this approach in light of activism by the Deaf 
community and new research demonstrating that sign languages are fully functional lan-
guages like any other. Today, Deaf people are increasingly recognized as a linguistic and 
cultural minority and sign languages recognized as their first language. As a result, in some 
schools in Europe and North America, bilingual education programs have been developed 
for Deaf and hard-of-hearing children. In these programs, students are taught first in the sign 
language of their Deaf community and then taught the language of hearing society as a sec-
ond, written language (Mesthrie et al., 2000). In Sweden, these programs align with the legal 
recognition of the Deaf as a linguistic and cultural minority. In the United States, such legal 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MULTILINGUALISM   209 
recognition does not exist; instead, Deaf students’ educational rights fall under the Americans 
with Disabilities Act, which guarantees them equal rights based on that disability. Many Deaf 
people object to being seen as disabled and advocate for the right to be taught in their own 
language, not because they are disabled but because American Sign Language is their native 
language. That language is used in the only liberal arts university for the Deaf in the world, 
Gallaudet University in Washington, D.C. 
Multilingualism on Martha’s Vineyard 
Martha’s Vineyard, an island off the coast of Massachusetts, offers an interesting case of 
community bilingualism, in this case in English and a local sign language. During the 18th 
and 19th centuries, a relatively large proportion of the island’s population was Deaf. As Groce 
(1985) notes, instead of being marginalized and discriminated against, as happened in many 
other places, Deaf people were fully integrated into society, with both hearing and Deaf peo-
ple learning sign language and using it to converse with each other. There was a high degree 
of bilingualism throughout that time, especially in the towns with the highest number of 
Deaf inhabitants. Hearing inhabitants learned sign language casually from an early age, and 
English/sign language bilingualism became an emblem of island identity. However, as more 
and more people began moving to the island in the early 20th century and as the percentage 
of Deaf individuals decreased, this bilingualism began to disappear and today is almost gone. 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
• 
Multilingualism refers to the use of two or more languages or varieties by individuals, 
societies, and/or nations. Multilingualism, which includes bilingualism, is more common 
than monolingualism around the world; most of the world’s population is multilingual. 
• 
Societies come to be multilingual through migration, trade, invasion, and colonization. 
• 
The situation in many multilingual societies is diglossic, with different languages being 
used in different domains. 
• 
Language contact occurs when speakers of different languages interact on a regular 
basis. It can lead to any of several different outcomes: diglossic multilingualism, super-
diversity, language shift, and new languages (pidgins or creoles). 
• 
Pidgins are simplified languages created for specific purposes among those who do not 
speak the same language. Many have arisen in colonial circumstances. 
• 
When pidgins become the common language of communication and are learned by chil-
dren as their first language, they develop into creoles. 
• 
Language shift refers to a situation in which speakers of one language begin using 
another language in its place. 
• 
Superdiversity refers to the increased linguistic and cultural diversity seen today in large 
metropolitan centers. 
• 
Second language acquisition differs from first language acquisition in important ways, 
with linguistic, social, and affective factors all playing a role. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
210 
MULTILINGUALISM 
• 
Educational settings are important sites where multilingualism plays a role. Although chil-
dren learn best in their home language, most children in the world are taught in a language not 
their own. 
• 
Despite the fact that most of the world is multilingual, in many English-speaking coun-
tries a monolingual mindset prevails, one that sees multilingualism as odd and a threat 
to national unity. 
• 
The United States has always been a multilingual nation, despite what many believe. Among 
the many who speak a language other than English, nearly 80% also speak English well. 
• 
Among multilingual phenomena discussed are Hip Hop, Spanish in the United States, 
and multilingualism on Martha’s Vineyard. 
KEY TERMS 
bilingualism/multilingualism 
individual multilingualism 
societal multilingualism 
asymmetrical multilingualism 
diglossia 
domain 
lingua franca 
language planning 
language contact 
pidgins 
creoles, creolization 
language shift 
superdiversity 
linguistic relativity 
linguistic determinism 
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis 
second language (L2) acquisition 
target language 
critical period 
interference 
affective filter 
monitor 
instrumental motivation 
integrative motivation 
interference 
monolingual mindset 
transitional bilingual programs 
subtractive bilingualism 
maintenance bilingual programs 
additive bilingualism 
EXPLORATIONS 
Exploration 1 
1. 
How many languages do you know? (Remember, you need not be totally fluent to claim 
some knowledge of a language.) How often do you use them? In what circumstances? 
How about if we enlarge the definition of multilingualism to include using more than 
one variety? What happens to your answers then? Revisit your language autobiography 
from Chapter 1. Would you change any of it now? 
2. 
Do a survey of your classmates and friends to determine the extent of multilingualism 
in your community now and in the past. Start by asking people your age how many 
speak a language other than English; then how many of their parents do, then how many of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
MULTILINGUALISM   211 
their grandparents or great-grandparents. What languages do they speak? What happened 
to knowledge of those languages over time? Compare your findings in your small groups. 
What do they tell you about multilingualism in your community? Discuss whether you think 
the results would be different if you had asked other groups or those living in other regions. 
Exploration 2 
1. 
To discover more about multilingualism in the United States, investigate census infor-
mation online at the U.S. census (www.census.gov/data.html). Did any of the language-
related statistics there surprise you? Why? 
2. 
Investigate the linguistic situation in a country other than the one you live in. South 
Africa, Finland, Papua New Guinea, Belgium, India, China, and Israel all have complex 
linguistic histories. Share your finding with your small group. 
Exploration 3 
1. 
There are many English-based creoles around the world: Tok Pisin, Hawaiian Creole, 
Gullah, Cameroonian English Pidgin, and many more. Choose one and investigate its 
history, origins, and current status. 
2. 
Using an online source such as YouTube, find a video of someone speaking an English-
based creole. How much of it can you understand? If you listen longer, does it become 
more comprehensible? 
3. 
Show that video to some friends not in this class and ask them what language they think 
is being spoken. What is their reaction when you tell them it is an English creole? 
Exploration 4 
1. 
Where do you see evidence of the monolingual mindset around you? Have you heard 
people say, “This is America. Speak English” or other similar comments? What would 
you say to someone who made such comments? 
2. 
Have you spoken a language other than English in public? Have you had hurtful or dis-
missive comments aimed at you? What was your reaction? 
Exploration 5 
Currently, the United States does not have an official language, though English is clearly the 
dominant language. Over the last several decades, several organizations have pushed to make 
English the official language of the United States. Other organizations have fought against it 
and pushed for language rights for speakers of all language, a campaign called English Plus. 
1. 
Investigate the main arguments of the first type of organization: 
• U.S. English (https://www.usenglish.org) 
• Pro-English (http://proenglish.org/). 
2. 
Then examine the arguments of the second type: 
• Conference on College Composition and Communication, The National Language Policy 
https://web.archive.org/web/20080726173538/www.ncte.org/cccc/resources/ 
positions/123796.htm 

 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
212 
MULTILINGUALISM 
• Center for Applied Linguistics https://web.archive.org/web/20080724024953/www. 
cal.org/resources/archive/digest/1992englishplus.html 
• League of United Latin American Citizens https://lulac.org/advocacy/issues/eng-
lish_vs_spansih/index.html 
3. 
Debate these arguments in your small group. Do concepts from this chapter shed any 
light? 
FURTHER READING 
Appel, R., & Muysken, P. (2005). Language contact and bilingualism. Academic Archive. A good 
introduction to language contact that focuses on bilingualism and language acquisition. 
Gass, S., & Selinker, L. (2008). Second language acquisition: An introductory course. Routledge. 
Accessible and informative. 
MacGregor-Mendoza, P. (2005). Bilingualism: Myths and realities. In K. Denham & A. Lobeck 
(Eds.), Language in the schools: Integrating linguistic knowledge into K-12 teaching. 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Weinreich, U. (1953). Languages in contact. Linguistic Circle of New York. Classic work in the 
field. 
Winford, D. (2003). An introduction to contact linguistics. Blackwell. 
Yip, V., & Matthews, S. (2007). The bilingual child: Early development and language contact. 
Cambridge University Press. An interesting study of children learning two languages. 
REFERENCES 
Bills, G., & Vigil, N. (2008). The Spanish language of New Mexico and southern Colorado: 
A linguistic atlas. University of New Mexico Press. 
Bloommaert, J. (2013). Ethnography, superdivesity and linguistic landscapes. Multilingual 
Matters. 
Clyne, M. (2004). Trapped in a monolingual mindset. Prime Focus, 37, 40–42. 
Cummins, J. (1979). Linguistic interdependence and the educational development of bilingual 
children. Review of Educational Research, 49, 221–251. 
Dolnick, E. (1993). Deafness as culture. Atlantic Monthly, 272(3), 37–53. 
Groce, N. (1985). Everyone here spoke sign language. Harvard University Press. 
Grosjean, F. (1982). Life with two languages: An introduction to bilingualism. Harvard 
University Press. 
Harris, J. (1995). The cultural meaning of deafness: Language, identity, and power relations. 
Avebury. 
Koven, M. (2007). Selves in two languages: Bilinguals’ verbal enactments of identity in French 
and Portuguese. Benjamins. 
Labov, W. (1972). Language in the inner city: Studies in the Black English Vernacular. University 
of Pennsylvania Press. 
Leap, W. (1993). American Indian English. University of Utah Press. 
Malotki, E. (1983). Hopi time: A linguistic analysis of temporal concepts in the Hopi Language. 
Mouton. 
Mesthrie, S., Swann, J., Deumert, A., & Leap, W. (2000). Introducing sociolinguistics. John 
Benjamins Publishing Co. 

 
 
 
 
 
MULTILINGUALISM   213 
Perez, W. (2016). Zapotec, Mixtec, and Purepecha youth: Multilingualism and the marginalization 
of Indigenous immigrants in the United States. In H. Samy Alim, J. Rickford, & A. Ball 
(Eds.), Racio-linguistics: How language shapes our ideas about race (pp. 255–271). Oxford 
University Press. 
Romaine, S. (2000). Language in society: An introduction to sociolinguistics. Oxford University 
Press. 
Siegel, J. (2012). Second dialect acquisition. Cambridge University Press. 
UNESCO. (1953). The use of vernacular languages in education (Monographs of Fundamental 
Education No. 8). UNESCO. 
Williams, Q. (2016). Ethnicity and extreme locality in South Africa’s multilingual Hip Hop 
ciphas. In H. Samy Alim, J. Rickford, & A. Ball (Eds.), Racio-linguistics: How language 
shapes our ideas about race (pp. 113–133). Oxford University Press. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 13 
Language birth and death 
First glance 
Origins of language 
How are languages related? 
• Indo-European language family 
• Regular sound correspondence 
• Language families around the world 
History of English: Old English, Middle 
English, Modern English: 
• Great Vowel Shift 
Global spread of English; New Englishes 
Origins of American Sign Language 
Language loss and endangerment 
INTRODUCTION 
When I was traveling around the world in my early 20s, using local transportation and places 
to sleep, I was amazed that everywhere I went, from a small village in the Sudan to the back 
streets of Lahore, I could find someone who spoke English. That widespread use of English 
was certainly helpful for me as a traveler. I remember walking down the one street in a small 
village in the Sudan, looking for some food to buy, when I came upon a Coca-Cola machine 
outside a small shop. The owner came out and asked, “Can I help you?” in English. Though 
his accent was very different from mine, I could understand him and get the food I needed. 
I remember even at the time wondering how it was that he, and so many others around the 
world, spoke English. It wasn’t that everyone did; far from it. But you could almost always 
find someone who did, even those many years ago. 
How did that come about? That’s one of the questions we’ll be addressing in this chapter. 
We’ll also look at how languages come into existence, how they spread, and how they die. 
We don’t usually think about languages being born and dying; after all, for most of us, the 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-13 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
215 
language we speak has always been around. Like any human artifact, however, they have not 
always been around. And like all human artifacts, they do not necessarily last forever. 
ORIGINS OF LANGUAGE 
Linguists estimate that there are approximately 7,000 languages used in the world today. 
That’s a lot of languages, but not as many as the 10,000 that are estimated to have existed 
thousands of years ago. What did those early languages sound like? Where did they come 
from? Although most cultures have some sort of story or myth about the origins of human 
language, we don’t really know much about how it evolved. 
Linguists disagree about how and when humans first started using language; most agree, 
however, that language probably began with the emergence of Homo sapiens in sub-Saharan 
Africa around 150,000 to 200,000 years ago. Those early humans took language with them 
when they migrated to other parts of the world, spreading it around the globe. 
There are two conflicting theories as to how language arose. Discontinuity theorists 
generally believe that language, being unique to humans, most likely appeared all at once, 
probably from a genetic mutation. It is, then, not related to other animals’ ways of com-
municating. Continuity theorists, on the other hand, believe that human language evolved 
from communication systems of our primate ancestors, most likely growing out of the 
social interactions of our human ancestors at the same time as the emergence of human 
symbolic culture: ritual practices, art, song, and tool making, all of which are facilitated 
by language. 
If language did not suddenly appear due to some genetic mutation, then how did it emerge? 
There are various theories, all still being debated. It may have evolved from the gestures used 
by our ancestors, from the vocal signals between mothers and babies, from song, from imita-
tion of animal cries or natural sounds, or from grunts and other vocalizations when working. 
Or it may have evolved from a combination of any of these. One interesting theory posits that 
language evolved when social groups of early humans grew so large that the manual groom-
ing of one another done in primate social groups became impossible. Primate groups use 
grooming to maintain cohesion and solidarity in the group. For early humans, vocal signals 
took the place of that grooming. In this theory, one of the earliest uses of language was gossip, 
which, according to Dunbar (1997), functions like manual grooming for these larger groups 
of humans, allowing them to maintain social cohesion. 
When those early humans began leaving Africa, they not only spread the human spe-
cies globally, they also spread human culture and language. We know very little about the 
language they spoke; after all, there are no written records from those migrations. Some 
linguists posit an original language, sometimes called Proto-world, with the many thou-
sands of languages spoken today and in the past evolving out of that one proto-language. 
A proto-language is a hypothesized older language from which other languages have 
descended. Other linguists doubt this theory, believing that human language most likely 
has more than one origin. That debate and the ones about how language developed are 
likely to continue for some time, as there is little evidence to support a definitive answer. 
The time frame involved in trying to determine the origins of language, hundreds of thou-
sands of years, means that we do not know much about any supposedly original language 
if one did exist. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
216 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
LANGUAGE SPREAD AND LANGUAGE FAMILIES 
We may not know much about possible languages from 100,000 years ago, but we do know 
something about languages spoken 5,000 years ago and how they spread. We talk about lan-
guages spreading, but of course it’s not so much languages that spread as the people who 
speak them migrate and take them into new environments that may or may not have speakers 
of other languages there. As they spread, languages invariably change, partly as a result of 
natural language change and partly as a result of speakers adapting to new environments and 
interacting with speakers of other languages. 
Linguists place languages into various language families. Language family here is used 
metaphorically to describe the relationship among certain languages: a parent language 
with daughter languages that have evolved from that parent language and that are, therefore, 
related. When linguists say that languages are related, often referred to as a genetic rela-
tionship, they mean that those languages share a common ancestor language. For example, 
French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Romanian, Galician, Provencal, and Catalan, collec-
tively known as Romance languages, are related in that they each evolved from Latin. Those 
relationships are fairly easy to trace as we have written records for hundreds, even thousands, 
of years. But what about when we have few or no written records, as is the case with lan-
guages spoken thousands of years ago? Can we reconstruct those familial relationships? Yes. 
In fact, linguists have done so for several language families. 
Indo-European language family 
The idea of a common ancestral language for languages of Europe had long been conceived 
of, but the work of Sir William Jones in 1786 provided evidence for it. As a judge in India 
for the British, Jones studied Sanskrit, an ancient language of India, after already having 
learned Latin and Ancient Greek. In the course of his study, he noticed many similarities 
between Sanskrit and Latin and Ancient Greek. Jones posited a common source for them and 
for many other languages of Europe, India, and parts of the Middle East. His theory sparked 
further scholarship, with the eventual conclusion by scholars that most of the languages of 
Europe, as well as several in Iran, Afghanistan, and India, are related, all part of the Indo-
European language family, having descended from a common language, what we now call 
Proto-Indo-European. 
So how did linguists come to this conclusion? Basically, they examined cognates from 
modern and past languages. Cognates are words that have a similar form (pronunciation or 
spelling) and meaning in two or more languages. Some cognates may result from borrowing 
or from historical accident. But when there are a lot of them, especially cognates for words 
that refer to common, everyday objects, linguists conclude that the languages have evolved 
from a common mother language. We can see this relatedness among several Indo-European 
languages by examining the cognates shown in Table 13.1. 
Not all the similarities are immediately evident. The Greek word for senile, for example, 
does not begin with /s/ but /h/; that’s because the [s] sound changed systematically to a [h] 
sound in Greek. You’ll notice also that the English words differ from the others too; we’ll 
discuss those differences later. 
Once it was concluded that there must have been an original language from which these 
and other languages descended, the question became this: Where was it spoken and by whom? 

 
   
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
217 
TABLE 13.1 Cognates in various Indo-European languages 
Sanskrit 
Ancient Greek 
Latin 
English 
pitar 
pater 
pater 
father 
bhrater 
phrater 
frater 
brother 
sanah 
henee 
senex 
senile 
padam 
poda 
pedem 
foot 
That question is still being debated, but the means used to answer it are interesting. Scholars 
examined the words that were common across most Indo-European languages as clues to its 
original speakers. Words denoting the physical landscape, such as those for plants and ani-
mals or the climate, give us some information about where they lived; words denoting rela-
tionships or cultural artifacts, such as words for tools or activities, give us information about 
how they lived. These scholars found cognates in many Indo-European languages for certain 
trees (birch, oak, and willow) but not others (palm trees); for certain animals (bear, wolf, 
horse, deer) but not others (camels or monkeys); for snow, winter, and cold (but not desert); 
and for certain artifacts and activities, such as wagons and wheels and sewing, weaving, 
and planting. From these language clues, scholars concluded that the speakers of Proto-Indo-
European lived a settled agricultural life in either Eastern Ukraine or Türkiye around 5,000 
to 7,000 years ago. From their original home, they spread in various waves of migration to 
Europe, Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and India, taking their languages with them. 
As they settled in different areas, they lost contact with the original group. Through this 
isolation, their languages changed, as all languages do. Some of this change arises from inter-
nal causes, changes in pronunciation for ease of articulation, for example. Others result from 
interaction with new environments that necessitate new ways of doing things and new words. 
Groups of speakers of those new languages may then migrate to new places themselves, 
beginning the process all over again. This is what happened with the parent language Proto-
Indo-European, as waves of speakers left and lost contact with the original group. As they 
spread, new languages emerged, all related through the original parent language but grouping 
into different smaller language families as time passed, as illustrated in Figure 13.1. 
You can see from this tree that many Indo-European languages are spoken outside 
of Europe. Most people are surprised to learn that Farsi and Pashto, spoken in Iran and 
Afghanistan, are Indo-European languages related to English and Italian and Polish. The 
same for Hindi and Urdu, spoken in India and Pakistan. The chart also shows that most mod-
ern Indo-European languages are not direct descendants of Proto-Indo-European. Instead, 
over thousands of years and many migrations, Proto-Indo-European branched into other 
language families: Germanic, Italic, Hellenic, Balto-Slavic, Indo-Iranian, Celtic, Albanian, 
and Armenian. Each of these families consists of several languages, with the exceptions of 
Albanian and Armenian, which are the sole survivors of their respective language families. 
How do we determine the members of a language family? One way is to look for regu-
lar sound correspondences, regular sound differences between languages. For example, if 
almost everywhere Language A uses /p/, Language B uses /f/, that would be a regular sound 
correspondence. These correspondences result not from changes to the pronunciation of one 
word but from changes that affect the pronunciation of sounds across the board. Through ana-
lyzing these correspondences, we can see that languages such as English and German, though 

Indo-European 
Armenian
Languages
Albanian 
Celtic 
Welsh 
Scots 
Irish 
Baltic 
Lithuanian 
Latvian 
Germanic 
Indo-Iranian 
Breton 
North 
West 
Italic 
Hellenic 
Slavic 
Sanskrit 
Persian 
Swedish 
English 
Latin 
Ancient 
Russian 
Hindi 
Farsi 
Danish 
German 
Greek 
Polish 
Urdu 
Pashto 
Norwegian 
Dutch 
French 
Slovak 
Bengali 
Kurdish 
Icelandic 
Frisian 
Spanish 
Greek 
Serbian 
Portugese 
Croatian 
Italian 
Czech 
Romanian 
Ukrainian 
 
  
 
 
 
 
218 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
FIGURE 13.1 Family tree for Indo-European languages 
Indo-European, differ in systematic ways from languages such as Italian or Portuguese, which 
are also Indo-European. 
As mentioned earlier, the Romance languages are descendants of Latin and thus part of the 
Italic language family. The Germanic languages (English, Dutch, Swedish, German, Danish, 
Norwegian, Icelandic, Yiddish) are not. Instead, they are descendants of Proto-Germanic, 
an Indo-European language whose speakers separated from the main group around 1500 BCE 
and gradually spread across much of Northern Europe. Over many years, Proto-Germanic 
consonant sounds diverged in systematic ways from those of other Indo-European languages 
such as Greek and Latin. Thus, we see that where Latin has certain consonant sounds, 
Germanic languages regularly use different sounds. Table 13.2 shows a few examples of this 
regular sound correspondence: 
The Germanic languages are not identical, of course. Each went through changes of its 
own, creating the different languages we hear today. 
Language families around the world 
Not all European languages are part of the Indo-European language family. Hungarian, Sami 
(spoken in northern parts of Finland and Sweden), and Estonian, for example, all belong to 
TABLE 13.2 Sound correspondence in Latin and English 
Latin 
English 
/k/ canis, cornu 
/h/ hound, horn 
/t/ (initial) tre 
/θ/ three, 
/t/ (medial) pater 
/ð/ father 
/d/ duo, decem 
/t/ two, ten 
/p/ piscis, pater 
/f/ fish, father 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
219 
a different language family, the Finno-Ugric family. And Basque, spoken in the Pyrenees 
mountains of southern France and Northern Spain, is not related to any other language in the 
world as far as linguists can tell. It is a language isolate, with no known linguistic relatives. 
And, of course, Indo-European is not the only language family in the world; it is not even 
the largest. Unfortunately, we do not know as much about some of the other families for a 
variety of reasons, a lack of written records from long ago, for one. Ethnologue: Languages 
of the world, an annual reference work that provides information about the world’s languages, 
lists 116 language families worldwide; what follows is a brief discussion of the major ones 
in terms of number of speakers and number of languages, based on data from Ethnologue: 
Languages of the world. 
The largest family group, in terms of number of languages, is the Niger-Congo family, 
which includes 1,500 languages, one-fifth of the world’s total number. In all, over 700 million 
people speak these languages, which are spread over much of Africa. In terms of the numbers 
of native speakers, the largest languages in the Niger-Congo family are Wolof, Ewe, Yoruba, 
Igbo, Swahili, and Zulu. The Austronesian family, with 1,300 languages, is the second larg-
est in terms of number of languages and is spoken in a widespread geographic area from 
Madagascar to Hawaii and in New Zealand, the Philippines, and the Malay peninsula. There 
are approximately 390 million speakers of these languages, among which are Hawaiian, Maori 
in New Zealand, Tagalog in the Philippines, Malagasy in Madagascar, and Malay in Malaysia. 
In terms of number of native speakers, Indo-European is the largest, with the Sino-Tibetan 
language family second. This latter family consists of most of the languages spoken in China 
(Mandarin, Cantonese, Hunan, and others), as well as Tibetan and Burmese, in all about 400 
languages. Together, approximately 4.6 billion people speak a language in one of these two 
language families. 
Hebrew, Arabic, Amharic, Hausa, and Somali are all part of the Afroasiatic family, 
which comprises 300 languages, both contemporary and ancient. Ancient Egyptian was an 
Afroasiatic language, as were Babylonian and Aramaic, all languages spoken long ago. Today 
there are around 450 million speakers of Afroasiatic languages, mostly in northern Africa and 
the Middle East. 
The situation in the Americas is complex and not fully understood yet. Some linguists esti-
mate there are 15 language families: Eskimo-Aleut, Algonquin, Athabaskan, and Iroquoian 
in North America and Oto-Manguean, Arawakan, Tupian, Quecha, Mayan, and Totnaca in 
Central and South America. No evidence for a larger family that includes them all has yet 
been found. 
The family tree model is useful in illustrating how languages are related, but it does not 
explain everything. One problem is where to put the many creoles around the world. As we 
saw in Chapter 12, creoles are languages that developed out of contact between two lan-
guages. English-based creoles, for example, are not really descendants of Old English the way 
Modern English is, so where do they fit in this model? And where do sign languages fit in? 
There’s no clear answer to those questions. 
A VERY BRIEF HISTORY OF ENGLISH 
As noted earlier, English is a Germanic language, but it is quite different from its cousins 
German, Swedish, Norwegian, Danish, and Dutch. So how did it become English? Linguists 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
220 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
divide its history into three major periods: Old English (449–1100 CE), Middle English 
(1100–1500), and Modern English (1500—present), the first two stages being marked by 
major invasions into the British Isles. 
The languages originally spoken in the British Isles were Celtic languages, members of 
an Indo-European language family distinct from Germanic. These original inhabitants spoke 
Cornish, Manx, Gaelic, and Welsh and continued to do so after the Romans invaded and then 
left in 79 CE. Except for a few place names, the language of these first Roman invaders left 
little mark on the languages spoken in the area. Many of these Celtic languages nearly disap-
peared, however, when the next invasion came. 
Old English 
In 449, several Germanic-speaking groups invaded Britain, this time coming to stay: the 
Angles, Saxons, and Jutes, who arrived from what is now Holland, Germany, and Denmark. 
In several waves over many years, these invaders settled in England, pushing the original 
inhabitants back to Wales and Scotland. Many terms for the land and people of Great Britain 
reflect both Celtic and Germanic origins: Britain comes from a Celtic word, while England 
evolved out of Angle-land, the land of the Angles. Aside from a few place names and other 
words, what became Old English borrowed very little from the indigenous Celtic languages. 
Because the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes spoke related languages, they could understand one 
another, and although they often fought among themselves, they also traded and intermarried. 
Eventually, a common language emerged, what we call Old English, which like any language 
consisted of several regional varieties. 
Old English changed over the centuries because of natural language change and further 
invasions. Norsemen, also called Vikings, began invading in the 8th to 10th centuries, even-
tually settling in the northeastern part of England. Again, intermarriage and trade brought 
the two groups into contact. The language spoken by the invaders, Old Norse, was also a 
Germanic language and similar to the English spoken by the Anglo-Saxons. Because they had 
enough elements in common, the two languages began to merge. We can see the borrowings 
from Old Norse in the English pronoun system (they, them, and their come from Old Norse); 
in place names such as Greenwich and Darby; and in words that begin with [sk] such as skill, 
sky, skin. Since the consonant cluster [sk] did not exist in Old English, we know these words 
came from Old Norse. Today, for example, we have two separate words, shirt and skirt, both 
of which derive from the same Proto-Germanic word for short garment. The former is of 
Anglo-Saxon origin, the latter Old Norse. 
If you wanted to learn to speak Old English today, you’d need to study it like a foreign lan-
guage; it is that different from Modern English. For one thing, it was highly inflected. As we 
noted in Chapter 3, Modern English has only eight inflectional morphemes. Old English had 
hundreds. It marked nouns for case, gender, and number, so that the word for ship was scip 
if it was the subject or direct object in a sentence, but scipes if it was possessive, and scipe if 
it was the indirect object. And there was an entirely different set of endings if it was plural: 
scipu, scipa, or scipum, each meaning ships. Adjectives and verbs were similarly inflected. 
Many of these inflectional morphemes began to disappear over time; exactly why is not 
clear. It may be partially due to the fact that Norse and Old English speakers lived side by side. 
Although the two languages shared many Germanic roots, their inflectional endings differed, 

 
   
 
 
 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
221 
so for ease of communication, people may have just left those endings off. In any case, many 
inflections began dropping out of English at this time, resulting in a more simplified morphol-
ogy that became even simpler after the next great invasion to affect the English language: the 
Norman Conquest in 1066. 
Middle English 
The year 1066 marked a turning point for both Old English and the people who spoke it. 
In that year, the Normans, a French-speaking group from Normandy, conquered England, 
with the Duke of Normandy, William, becoming King of England and distributing land to 
his French-speaking nobles. French now became the language of the court, the legal system, 
and the nobility. In fact, for a century after the Norman Conquest, the kings of England did 
not even speak the English language, though the common people, who had little contact with 
courtly life, continued to do so. 
Within 200 years, however, the kings and their nobles lost most of their lands in Normandy, 
a loss that eventually led to a break with their ties to France. By the end of the 14th century, 
English had again become the language of the land, spoken by nobles and commoners alike. It 
was, however, a different English than that spoken before the Normans arrived, one that was 
in many ways simplified but that now contained many new words. 
Those new words are one of the most striking differences between Old English and Middle 
English. Around 10,000 words are thought to have entered the language during this time, 
mostly words relating to the court, administration and law, the military, education, religion, 
fashion, and food. The simplification of morphology that began during the later Old English 
period continued, with more loss of inflection. One result of this loss was a more fixed word 
order. If inflections indicate which word in a sentence is the subject and which the object, 
word order can vary greatly, as it could in Old English. Without those inflections, word order 
becomes important. In Middle English, then, the subject–verb–object word order we are 
familiar with becomes more common. In Middle English and through early Modern English, 
we also see an increase in both the number and functions of prepositions, which now indicate 
the kinds of semantic relationships among words that previously had been indicated through 
inflection. 
English phonology changed as well. Several initial consonant clusters dropped the initial 
sound. So /hr/ in hrof became just /r/ in roof; /hl/ in hlaf became /l/ in loaf; and /kn/ in cnif 
became /n/ in knife. One other important change was the gradual loss of the final schwa [ə] in 
many words, a loss that continued into Modern English. 
Great Vowel Shift 
The biggest change in phonology occurred in the late Middle English and early Modern 
English periods. Between 1400 and 1600, English vowels gradually underwent the Great 
Vowel Shift. This shift applied only to long vowels, those vowels held longer in pronun-
ciation. In Middle English, there were seven of them: [i:], [e:], [ɛ:], [u:], [o:], [ɔ:], and [a:]. 
(Remember [:] indicates that the vowel is long.) As a result of the Great Vowel Shift, each of 
these vowels changed its place of articulation to a place higher in the mouth and thus came 
to be pronounced differently. (You might want to review the chart of Modern English vowel 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
222 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
TABLE 13.3 Great Vowel Shift 
Middle English 
Modern English 
stone 
[stɔ:n] 
[ston] 
sweet 
[swe:t] 
[swit] 
name 
[na:mə] 
[nem] 
food 
[fo:d] 
[fud] 
house 
[hu:s] 
[haws] 
geese 
[ge:s] 
[gis] 
mice 
[mi:s] 
[mays] 
sounds in Chapter 4.) So [e:] became [i], [ɛ:] became [e], [o:] became [u], and so on. And what 
happened to [i:] and [u:], which could go no higher because they were already high vowels? 
They became the diphthongs [ay] and [aw], respectively. Table 13.3 shows some of this shift. 
The Great Vowel Shift is a striking example of how phonological change is systematic, not 
random or individual. This shift applied to long vowels but not short vowels, and it applied 
across the board to all long vowels. It did not, however, occur in all dialects of English. Those 
spoken in Scotland, for example, still tend to maintain the earlier pronunciation of these 
vowels. 
How do you spell that again? 
English is well known for having inconsistent if not chaotic spelling. Part of the reason for this 
seeming chaos is the Great Vowel Shift. Through this shift, the pronunciation of thousands of 
words changed, but their spelling did not. Printing, which tends to standardize spelling, began 
in England before the shift occurred, and the spelling reflected the pre-shift pronunciation. 
Before the shift, for example, goose was spelled with two oos to reflect the long [o:] sound 
used there. When the long [o:] became a [u], the spelling stayed the same, but the pronun-
ciation changed. The shift also accounts for the strange differing pronunciations of related 
words. Words like crime/criminal or serene/serenity, which used to be pronounced with the 
same vowel sound, no longer are because the vowel in the first word was long and thus went 
through the shift, while that in the second was short and did not. 
Some other changes during Middle English also contributed to our inconsistent spelling. 
Words spelled with -ough, such as though, used to be pronounced with a velar fricative. 
That sound dropped out of the language during this period, but the spelling stayed. And as 
mentioned previously, consonants in initial consonant clusters and final schwa sounds also 
disappeared, leaving us, for example, spelling knife but saying [nayf]. No wonder we have 
spelling bees. 
Modern English 
With the Great Vowel Shift and other changes, we begin to see a language that more closely 
resembles the Modern English we speak today. Early Modern English is the English of 
Shakespeare, different from ours in many ways but still recognizable and intelligible. There 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
223 
is an amazing expansion in the vocabulary during this early period, especially from about 
1500–1800. English continued to borrow words from Latin and Ancient Greek but also began 
borrowing from languages across the globe as the British explored and colonized many parts 
of the world. New words entered the language from languages as different as Malay, Hindi, 
Algonquin, and Arabic, as we saw in Chapter 3. 
Inflectional endings continued their disappearing act, leaving us with only those eight we 
discussed in Chapter 3. The verb endings we sometimes see in Shakespeare, -est and -eth, 
dropped out over this period. The distinction between thou and you disappeared as well. 
Before this time, thou was generally used for one person and you for more than one. Though 
speakers of many regional varieties continued to use it, by the mid-17th century thou had 
pretty much disappeared, leaving only you in Standard English and leaving English speakers 
no easy way to distinguish singular and plural, for you came to mean both. With that loss, new 
forms cropped up. The y’all in southern varieties of the United States is perhaps the most well-
known, but we also find youse [yuz] in New York City and some parts of Ireland and increas-
ingly you guys in many areas. Each of these is considered informal, perhaps even wrong, but 
because they fill a need, they continue to be used. 
Continued change and global spread 
What we call Modern English has, of course, continued to change. One of the most impor-
tant changes is its global spread. With British colonization of parts of Africa, Asia, and the 
Americas from the 17th through the 20th centuries and the spread of American culture in 
the 20th and 21st centuries, English has gone around the world, changing in not only form 
but function as well. As a result, we now have a situation where there are multiple Englishes 
spoken not just in Britain and the United States, but in such disparate places as Nigeria, 
Singapore, Tanzania, and Papua New Guinea, among many others. It is estimated that one to 
two billion people worldwide speak English, though of course they do not all speak the same 
English. 
How do we make sense of these multiple World Englishes? Perhaps the most influential 
scheme of categorization, that developed by Kachru (1986), posits three circles, differentiated 
by when and how English was brought to an area and the functions it now serves. 
The inner circle refers to speakers of English in Great Britain, Ireland, the United States, 
Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. All except Great Britain and Ireland are the result of 
settler colonization in the 17th to 19th centuries, when people from Great Britain and Ireland 
came to new areas and settled, displacing most of the original inhabitants and their languages. 
In these countries, English became the native language of most of the population and the pri-
mary language of the country. 
The outer circle refers to areas that were colonized by the British but did not have the 
same influx of settlers that the inner circle did. In these countries, English is not the native 
language or home language of most of the population. Instead, it is a widely spoken second 
language used in the government, law, education, and national commerce. Or it may be one 
of the official languages of a country, as happened in many previously colonized countries 
in Africa and South Asia: Kenya, Nigeria, Uganda, Ghana, India, and Pakistan, among oth-
ers. The majority of people retain their own community languages and may use English as a 
lingua franca among different language groups. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
224 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
The expanding circle refers to those areas where English has little or no historical or 
governmental role, but it is still learned and used by many, in such countries as China, Nepal, 
South Korea, Russia, and Egypt. People learn it as a foreign language in school, often for a 
specific purpose such as tourism or international communication. This last function points 
to the evolution of English into a global lingua franca, a language used by speakers of many 
languages when interacting with speakers of other languages. 
This categorization is complicated by the changing situation on the ground. In an outer 
circle country such as Singapore, English is increasingly being learned as a native language 
and used as a home language, especially among the educated, thus confounding the defini-
tions of inner and outer circles. 
Another confounding factor is the increasing number of what are called New Englishes, 
new varieties of English and English-based creoles emerging in what was considered the outer 
or expanding circles. Most are Postcolonial Englishes, new forms of English that have evolved 
in areas that had been colonized by the British. Over time, as English came to be used by 
more of those living in these areas, the new varieties that emerged began to differ more and 
more from the language of Britain, often having been influenced by the indigenous languages 
spoken there. The new varieties that have emerged will continue to change, following their 
own paths as the social and cultural circumstances in which they are used change as well. The 
English spoken in Nigeria, for example, has its own rules for pronunciation and its own vocab-
ulary, some of which are shared with British English or American English but by no means all. 
English is currently used as an official language or a de facto official language in approxi-
mately 75 countries (Crystal, 2007). The question of ownership looms large in discussion of 
these World Englishes. Is English the language of those peoples who have historically used 
it, those in what is called the inner circle (Great Britain, Canada, the United States, Australia, 
New Zealand, etc.), or is it equally the language of those speakers of new varieties who have 
adopted it and begun to remake it for their own purposes? Although there are more speak-
ers in the latter category than in the former, some claim these New Englishes are not really 
English. Such claims ignore the reality of language change and spread. Each of those varieties 
has the right to be called English, if the speakers desire it, and deserves as much respect as the 
varieties spoken in Boston, Sydney, Toronto, or London. 
English is also used as a lingua franca in many activities worldwide; air traffic control, for 
example, takes place entirely in English. Computer technology is similarly discussed mostly 
in English. Some estimate that 80% of the world’s scientific journals are written in English. 
I can attest to the latter; when I lived in Poland in the 1990s, I helped edit the Polish Journal 
of Soil Science, written entirely in English, even though it was written and read by Polish 
speakers, many of whom did not speak English well. 
ORIGINS OF AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE 
Our discussion of language origins and families so far has focused solely on spoken languages. 
What about the origins of the many sign languages used around the world? Ethnologue: 
Languages of the world lists 130, though the exact number is not known. Among them 
are Chinese, Tibetan, South African, Indo-Pakistani, Czech, Tanzanian, and Russian Sign 
Languages. They are natural languages just as spoken languages are, but they are not neces-
sarily related to the spoken languages used in the same area. For example, although Spanish 

 
   
 
 
 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
225 
is the dominant language in both Mexico and Spain, the sign languages used in those two 
countries are unrelated. Sign languages do not develop out of a spoken language but rather as 
independent languages among groups who need them. Unfortunately, we don’t know much 
about the origins of most sign languages and their possible family relationships. 
We do, however, know a great deal about the origins of at least two of them: Nicaraguan 
Sign Language and American Sign Language (ASL). In the 1970s and 1980s, Nicaraguan Sign 
Language emerged naturally when deaf children in Nicaragua, who had been isolated from 
one another, were brought together for the first time in a school created especially for them. 
This sign language emerged not in the classroom, where teachers tried to teach them Spanish, 
but in the school yard and other areas where the children needed to communicate. Out of this 
need, they soon developed a sign language of their own, Nicaraguan Sign Language. 
American Sign Language, used in the United States and English-speaking parts of Canada, 
came about through a different route. It is, interestingly, not related to British Sign Language; 
in fact, the two languages are mutually unintelligible. It is instead related to French Sign 
Language, which developed, as often happens, in close connection with a school for deaf chil-
dren, in this case one founded by Abbe de L’Eppe in Paris in 1755. After opening his school, 
L’Eppe soon noticed that the children were already using a sign system to communicate with 
one another. These signs, with some further development by L’Eppe, became French Sign 
Language. Something similar happened in 1817 when Thomas Gallaudet and Laurent Clerc 
founded a school for the deaf in Hartford, Connecticut. American Sign Language developed 
out of both French Sign Language, which Gallaudet and Clerc brought to the school, and 
signs that the students had already been using, including Martha’s Vineyard Sign Language, 
mentioned in Chapter 12. ASL, which went on to become the dominant sign language in the 
United States, still shares much of its vocabulary with French Sign Language. 
LANGUAGE LOSS AND ENDANGERMENT 
The amount of diversity in the world’s languages, not to mention varieties of those languages, 
is staggering. That diversity is also, unfortunately, diminishing every day as more and more 
languages are disappearing. In Chapter 12 we discussed language shift in the United States, 
where most immigrant communities shift to speaking only English within two or three gener-
ations. That shift means the community language is lost. The language they spoke, however, 
is usually still spoken elsewhere in the world. My father’s immigrant Italian community, for 
example, became monolingual English within that time span, but the Italian language itself 
was not in danger of becoming extinct because it is still spoken in Italy and elsewhere. 
What happens, though, when all the speakers of a language shift completely to another 
language? Then you get language loss or language death, a phenomenon that is happen-
ing increasingly worldwide. A language dies when all of its speakers either shift to another 
language or else die off, so that there are no more people in the world who can speak, sign, 
or understand it. Many people think Latin is a dead language, but Latin is not really dead. It 
has just evolved into several different languages, so it is alive and being used by millions of 
French, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese speakers. 
Languages become endangered, on their way to disappearing, when one generation of 
speakers no longer uses their language with their children or when languages, especially those 
spoken by a small number of people, come to be used in fewer and fewer areas of life. There 

 
  
 
 
 
226 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
are various estimates of the number of endangered languages. According to Ethnologue: 
Languages of the world, over 3,000 languages are currently endangered: that’s 41% of the 
world’s languages. Some predict that by the end of the 21st century, 90% will be lost (Krauss, 
1992); others put the figure a bit lower. Whatever the prediction, all agree the situation is dire. 
According to the Foundation for Endangered Languages, 52% of the world’s languages are 
spoken by fewer than 10,000 people each, with another 28% spoken by fewer than 1,000 indi-
viduals. These languages are in danger of dying out within the foreseeable future. 
This loss affects different parts of the world differently. The vast majority of languages, 
around 96%, are spoken by small numbers of people, only 4% of the world’s population. 
That means that only a small fraction of the world’s 7,000 languages, around 4%, are spo-
ken by 96% of the world’s population. Those few widely spoken languages (Chinese, Hindi, 
English, Spanish, and Arabic, for example) are not in danger of becoming extinct, but the 
remaining languages are. The communities that speak these endangered languages tend to be 
small indigenous or minority communities, and it is those communities that carry most of the 
world’s linguistic diversity. The two areas where language loss is happening at the greatest 
rates today are North America and Australia, with the loss of half or more of their indigenous 
languages just between 1970 and 2005 (Maffi, 2011). 
Sign languages can also become endangered if users shift to a more dominant sign lan-
guage. That seems to be happening with Hawaiian Sign Language as more and more users 
shift to American Sign Language. Catalan, Icelandic, and Spanish Sign Languages are also 
currently endangered (Ethnologue: Languages of the world). 
Why should we care? 
Many linguists have likened the loss of linguistic diversity to the loss of biodiversity, the loss 
of species and ecosystems happening now. Both losses are irretrievable; once a language or a 
species is gone, it’s gone forever. Is that really such a problem? To my mind, yes. 
Knowledge loss 
What is lost when the world loses a language? For one thing, knowledge. Each language 
encodes cultural knowledge: values, beliefs, worldviews, and information about the natural 
world and how to live sustainably with it. For most indigenous languages, which make up 
80%–85% of the world’s languages (Maffi, 2011), this knowledge is encoded not in books 
or written material, but orally: in songs, myths, rituals, stories, poetry, art, and ceremonies 
of all sorts. One type of knowledge of special concern is what is called traditional ecological 
knowledge, knowledge these groups have about their natural environment, knowledge that 
may turn out to be key to solving the world’s environmental problems. If the community that 
loses its language is the only one that speaks it, that knowledge is lost forever. And since most 
endangered languages are unwritten, if they are lost, we will never know what has been lost. 
Social justice 
Even if such important knowledge did not exist, language loss is a social justice issue. As Crawford 
(1995) points out, “language death does not happen in privileged communities. It happens to the 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
227 
dispossessed and the disempowered, people who most need their cultural resources to survive” 
(p. 35). Language loss does not happen in isolation; it occurs as part of a general pattern of 
loss of culture, with loss of language making it more difficult for a community to tackle social 
problems such as poverty or substance abuse. For communities, language plays a key role in 
creating and maintaining social cohesion, especially when that cohesion is threatened by outside 
pressures. We saw in Chapter 12 that teaching children in their home languages in school leads 
to lower rates of school failure. Maffi (2011) notes that in British Columbia, Canada, youth in 
First Nations communities that continue to speak their native language have much lower rates of 
suicide than in those communities where the native language is dying out. 
Linguistic human rights 
Every community has the right to use and transmit its language without hindrance from oth-
ers, what are known as linguistic human rights. Although not always recognized by nation 
states, these rights are a fundamental part of human rights, those rights possessed by every 
person, regardless of status. The United Nations recognizes “the right for individuals and 
communities to maintain their own social, cultural and linguistic identities, without any dis-
crimination or pressure for assimilation” (Maffi, 2011, p. 7) Threats to a community’s lan-
guage are threats to those identities. The right to continue to use one’s language as a way to 
preserve one’s culture is one aspect of linguistic human rights. Yet as we will see, indigenous 
groups worldwide experience enormous pressure to assimilate economically, culturally, and 
linguistically to the dominant culture. 
So should it matter to those of us who are not speakers of an endangered language? Yes. 
One of the defining characteristics of our common humanity is language in all its variety. It 
is part of the diversity of life on Earth, and any diminishment of that diversity diminishes 
humanity as a whole. As Maffi (2011) puts it, “If linguistic diversity is part and parcel of the 
diversity of life in nature and culture, then any loss in linguistic diversity is a loss in the vital-
ity and resilience of the whole web of life” (p. 9). 
Biocultural diversity 
Just as there is an amazing diversity in the forms that life can take on Earth, there is an amazing 
diversity in worldviews, values, beliefs, knowledge, and art that languages encode. Biocultural, 
linguistic, and cultural diversity are all key to the survival of the human race. In biology, the 
strongest ecosystems are those which are the most diverse; the same holds true for language 
ecosystems, which preserve and sustain linguistic diversity for the future benefit of all human-
kind. And just as every species, no matter how seemingly insignificant to us as humans, can 
tell us something about life itself, every language, spoken or signed, prestigious or not, spoken 
by millions or not, can tell us something essential about life that we did not know before. 
Some people argue it’s no big deal to lose a language. They see languages as more or less 
interchangeable. In this view, each language may have different terms to label parts of our 
world, but those labels are only superficial differences. Whether we call something a flower 
or une fleur (French) or he puawai (Maori), it is still a flower. Others dispute this view, noting 
that language serves as a filter through which we learn about and see the world around us, 
so that we notice some parts of that world and not others and experience parts of that world 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
228 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
differently in different languages. It is not that languages determine our perception of the 
world, but they offer different filters, what Mühlhäusler (2001) calls “provisional interpreta-
tions.” Because the world is so complex, we need the perspectives and provisional interpreta-
tions provided by different languages to understand it. Thus, loss of any one language means 
a loss in human understanding of the world. 
Causes of language loss 
The causes of language loss are local and global, multiple and varied: natural, economic, 
social, and political. Local natural disasters can lead to the decimation of populations: floods, 
earthquakes, famines, or droughts can be especially devastating to linguistic communities 
with small populations. Most language loss is not the result of natural causes, however; it 
is caused by other humans, whether directly or indirectly. Although languages have always 
died, the rate of loss has increased dramatically in the last 500 years. Colonization of much 
of the world by European nations led to a mass extinction of languages, often by decimating 
the indigenous populations through disease or military conquest. In Brazil, fewer than 200 
of the approximately 1,000 languages spoken when Europeans first arrived are still vital 
today (Crystal, 2010). Contemporary cultural domination by major languages such as English, 
Chinese, French, or Hindi also contributes. Some have even called English a “killer language” 
because of its pernicious effect on linguistic diversity. 
Economic pressure can lead to language loss as many areas of the world join the global mar-
ket economy. Indigenous peoples and languages of the Amazon rain forest can serve as an illus-
trative example. Ever greater swaths of the rain forest are being cut down by those who seek to 
exploit it for economic gain. In some cases, indigenous peoples have been violently expelled 
from their ancestral lands to facilitate exploitation of the forest. As a result, they can no longer 
support themselves as they have in the past and are forced either to work as laborers or move to 
nearby cities. To survive, they must learn the dominant language, in this case Portuguese. Such 
changes make it hard for them to maintain their cultural identity and language. 
As people around the world increasingly migrate to cities from rural areas, urbanization 
is contributing to language loss. In cities, speaking the local dominant language, or a more 
global one like English, is often necessary for getting a job. Cities are also areas where groups 
speaking many different languages live and work together, necessitating a lingua franca. As 
people are forced to learn a new language to get by, they lose touch with their first language, 
often leading to its loss. 
Education, surprisingly, is one of the main causes of endangerment. As noted in Chapter 12, 
around the world, education increasingly takes place in only a few major world languages. 
Brenzinger (1998) notes that in Africa nearly all education past elementary schooling takes 
places in a language other than the student’s native language, a situation that encourages the 
idea that indigenous native languages are not suitable to modern life. Education also creates 
pressure to assimilate into the dominant culture, which usually means pressure to assimilate 
to the dominant language. I once taught a student from Nigeria who, until she took my course 
on endangered languages, had never thought it worrisome that she spoke only English, not 
the local language of her community, which was being spoken by fewer and fewer people her 
age. Speaking English was an important part of her identity, an identity that, unfortunately, 
included shame about her community’s language, another contributor to language loss. 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
229 
English in Nigeria, as in many parts of the world, is an important means to advancement and 
success; the same goes for Spanish or Portuguese in Latin America, Swahili or English in East 
Africa, French or English in parts of West Africa. These dominant languages are often used in 
public discourse, in the media, on the internet, in government and in courts, as well as in educa-
tion. Invariably, these languages come to be seen as necessary for the modern global economy 
and culture. And too often indigenous languages become stigmatized as primitive, not capable 
of carrying the knowledge necessary for economic or cultural advancement, and useful only for 
home life or religious ceremonies. Partly because of this and because the dominant language 
can lead to better jobs, parents may not pass on their own language to their children, instead 
encouraging them to learn the dominant language—a certain path to language extinction. 
Stemming the loss 
Language revitalization is a term that covers efforts to revive languages that are dead and to 
maintain those that are endangered. Increasingly, indigenous and local communities around 
the world have begun to do both. These communities are working to pass on their languages 
to the next generation and to gain recognition of their cultural and linguistic rights from 
national governments. Programs and initiatives to do so are varied, as are the contexts in 
which they occur. The following are some of the actions being taken. 
Raising awareness 
Many local communities and global organizations are working to raise awareness of the prob-
lem. New organizations have been created whose goal is not only to record information about 
endangered languages, but also to bring the issue of their pending loss to public attention. 
They encourage governments to create language policies that respect multilingualism, and 
they support local communities in their efforts. Local communities, the ones most affected, 
are the ones that must decide what should be done, but regional or national government sup-
port is also often necessary. Such support can be monetary or as part of a language policy 
that, for example, might allow elders, often the only ones who still speak a language fluently, 
to become certified as teachers without the requisite credentials. 
Connecting linguistic, cultural, and biological diversity 
Many advocates for linguistic diversity recognize that for most indigenous peoples, land, 
culture, and language are not separate entities, but an integrated whole that forms and nour-
ishes their identity as a distinct people. Too often, language loss goes hand in hand with the 
loss of a community’s culture and land. It is thus devastating on several fronts at once. These 
advocates aim to raise awareness of this connection so as to alleviate all three types of losses. 
Education 
Whether through formal schooling or informal learning, education can play a key role in 
revitalizing any language. If educational policy mandates schooling in the dominant language 
only, local languages will suffer. If, instead, policy mandates using the local language as an 

 
  
 
 
 
230 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
equal partner in the classroom, it increases the chances of that language remaining vital. 
Local control of education can also increase those chances. In the 1980s, the Maori in New 
Zealand created language nests, kohanga reo in Maori, to encourage the transmission of their 
language to the next generation. In these nests, preschool children learned the Maori language 
from elders in the community. Soon primary schools were created that did the same thing. 
Now there are secondary schools and universities that focus on Maori culture and teach in 
Maori. 
In North America, the Mohawk have borrowed the concept of language nests, using it 
to help revitalize their language. In Hawaii as a result of efforts by native Hawaiians, the 
Hawaiian language is being increasingly taught in schools so that more children become 
fluent in it. The University of Hawaii at Hilo uses Hawaiian as the medium of instruction 
for their college of Hawaiian language, which also works to revive Hawaiian culture. Many 
universities in the United States and elsewhere have established language academies to help 
indigenous leaders prepare the materials needed to teach their languages. 
Community activism 
Several indigenous groups have used various strategies in their efforts to revitalize their cul-
tures and languages. In New Zealand, the Maori have had some success in getting recogni-
tion from the dominant society of their rights, including language rights. Today, Maori is an 
official language in New Zealand, along with New Zealand Sign Language and English. In 
Paraguay, Guarani, the indigenous language spoken by over 90% of the population, gained 
official status in 1992 and is now widely accepted as an emblem of national identity (Crystal, 
2010). It is one of the few indigenous languages that is being learned by a large number of 
non-indigenous people. In Wales, community efforts have led to an increase in the number of 
speakers of Welsh for the first time in 100 years, with 19% of the population now speaking 
it (Ethnologue: Languages of the world). Welsh became officially equal to English as result 
of the Welsh Language Act of 1993. Welsh-medium primary schools now exist, and perhaps 
most importantly, the majority of Welsh-speaking parents are now raising their children to 
speak Welsh (Morgan, 2001). 
Documentation 
The need to document endangered languages is urgent. Many linguists have, in recent dec-
ades, taken on this task, trying to document as many endangered languages as possible before 
they are lost forever. Such documenting can at least preserve some aspects of a language and 
perhaps serve as a basis for revitalization in the future. For example, when descendants of 
speakers of Kaurna, an Australian Aboriginal language, became interested in reviving it, 
documentation existed that allowed them to start the revitalization process, even though no 
one had spoken Kaurna for almost a hundred years (Wurm, 1998). 
Much work has been done to stem the loss of languages, but the outlook globally remains 
dire. Crystal (2010) estimates that as of 2000, there were 51 languages with just one speaker 
left. The last speaker of Manx on the Isle of Man died in 1974, the last speaker of Kasabe in 
Cameroon in 1995, the last speaker of Ubykh in the Caucasus in 1992, all taking their lan-
guages with them. 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
231 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
• 
Human language probably originated with the rise of modern humans around 150,000– 
200,00 years ago and spread globally when humans began leaving Africa around 
60,000 years ago. 
• 
Language families are related languages that have descended from a common linguistic 
ancestor. Indo-European and Sino-Tibetan are the largest of these families in terms of 
number of speakers. 
• 
A proto-language is a language reconstructed by linguists by comparing regular sound 
correspondences in daughter languages. It is hypothesized to be the parent of all lan-
guages in a particular language family. 
• 
Proto-Indo-European is the parent of all Indo-European languages. The original speak-
ers of Proto-Indo-European are thought to have lived around 5,000 years ago and then 
spread throughout Europe to the Middle East and to India. The language they took with 
them changed and developed into several subfamilies. 
• 
The history of English is generally divided into three major stages: Old English, Middle 
English, and Modern English. Each differs from its preceding stage in pronunciation, 
morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. 
• 
As English has spread, many new varieties have developed, with their own pronuncia-
tions, morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. These varieties are collectively known as 
World Englishes. New Englishes are emerging in many postcolonial areas. 
• 
A large number of the languages used today are in danger of dying. This loss will have 
dire consequences not only for those whose language becomes extinct, but for all of us. 
• 
Efforts to stem this loss are continuing, with local communities working to revive or main-
tain their languages and cultures. Some have been successful, but the situation remains dire. 
KEY TERMS 
continuity/discontinuity theories of lan-
guage origin 
proto-language 
language family 
genetic relationships 
Indo-European language family 
Proto-Indo-European 
cognates 
regular sound correspondence 
Proto-Germanic 
language isolate 
Niger-Congo language family 
Austronesian language family 
Sino-Tibetan language family 
Afroasiatic language family 
Old English 
Middle English 
Modern English 
great vowel shift 
World Englishes 
global lingua franca 
New Englishes 
language loss/language endangerment 
endangered language 
linguistic human rights 
biocultural diversity 
language revitalization 
language nest 

 
  
 
 
 
 
232 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
EXPLORATIONS 
Exploration 1: Exploring linguistic diversity 
Langscape Magazine, an online publication, offers stories about linguistic and biocultural 
diversity. Go online to www.terralingua.org; choose an article of interest, read and sum-
marize it to share with your small group. Together identify what you have learned about the 
world’s languages and their connection to biodiversity. 
Exploration 2: Language origin stories 
Most cultures have stories about the origins of language and languages. The Tower of Babel 
from the Bible is one well-known one. Do you know of any others? If not, see if you can track 
down one from a culture other than your own. Share it in groups. 
Exploration 3: World Englishes 
There are many varieties of English besides the well-known ones of the United States, the 
British Isles, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and South Africa. Research one of these other 
varieties (Nigerian English, Singapore English, or one of your choosing) or one of the many 
creoles based on English (Tok Pisin, Jamaican Creole, Barbadian Creole, or one of your 
choosing; there are estimated to be 25 of them). What can you find out about its history and 
current status? Share your findings in small groups. 
Exploration 4: One endangered language 
A good online source for discovering more about languages and language families is 
Ethnologue: Languages of the world at www.ethnologue.com. Using Ethnologue or another 
online source such as www.sil.org/about/endangered-languages, investigate one endangered 
language. There is a map of endangered languages at www.sil.org/worldwide. How many 
speakers are there now? What is the prognosis for its survival? How has it become endan-
gered? Share your findings in small groups. 
Exploration 5: Exploring language families 
Using Ethnologue, www.ethnologue.com/family-index.asp, or other sources, investigate a 
language other than English, preferably a non-Indo-European one. What language family is 
it part of? What languages is it related to? How many people speak it? Where? Report to your 
group on what you have found out about its history. 
Exploration 5: English as a lingua franca 
Many social media sites allow us to communicate with people in other countries; do 
you ever do so? If yes, what language do you use when communicating with people 
whose first language is not English? What does that tell you about the spread of English 
worldwide? 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGUAGE BIRTH AND DEATH 
233 
FURTHER READING 
Crowley, T., & Bowern, C. (2010). An introduction to historical linguistics. Oxford University 
Press. 
Harrison, K. (2010). The last speakers. National Geographic. 
Jenkins, J. (2013). Global Englishes: A resource book for students (3rd ed.). Routledge. 
Nettle, D., & Romaine, S. (2000). Vanishing voices: The extinction of the world’s languages. 
Oxford University Press. 
The Linguists—Kanopy. http://linguistlist.org/topic/ebonics/. A fascinating video about two 
linguists documenting endangered languages. 
Van Gelderen, E. (2006). A history of the English language. John Benjamins. A good introduction 
to the history of English. 
Watkins, C. (1981). Indo-European and the Indo-Europeans. In The American Heritage 
dictionary of the English language (pp. 1496–1502). Houghton Mifflin. 
REFERENCES 
Brenzinger, M. (1998). Various ways of dying and different kinds of death: scholarly approaches 
to language endangerment on the African continent. In K. Matsumura (Ed.), Studies 
in endangered languages (Papers from the International Symposium on Endangered 
Languages, Tokyo, 18–20 November 1995, pp. 85–100). Hituzi Syobo. 
Crawford, J. (1995). Endangered Native American Languages: What is to be done and why? The 
Bilingual Research Journal, 19(1), 17–38. 
Crystal, D. (2007). English as a global language. Cambridge University Press. 
Crystal, D. (2010). Language death. Cambridge University Press. 
Dunbar, R. (1997). Grooming, gossip, and the evolution of language. Harvard University Press. 
Ethnologue: Languages of the world. www.ethnologue.com/. Retrieved May 2, 2020. 
Kachru, B. (1986). The alchemy of English. Oxford University Press. 
Krauss, M. (1992). The world’s languages in crisis. Language, 68, 4–10. 
Maffi, L. (2011). Linguistic diversity: What’s the fuss all about? Terralingua; Langscape, (II/8), 
3–12. 
Morgan, G. (2001). Welsh: A European case of language maintenance. In L. Hinton & K. Hale 
(Eds.), The green book of language revitalization in practice (pp. 107–113). Academic Press. 
Mühlhäusler, P. (2001). Babel revisited. In A. Fill & P. Mühlhäusler (Eds.), The ecolinguistics 
reader (pp. 159–164). Continuum. 
Wurm, S. (1998). Methods of language maintenance and revival, with selected cases of language 
endangerment in the world. In K. Matsumura (Ed.), Studies in endangered languages 
(Papers from the International Symposium on Endangered Languages, Tokyo, 18–20 
November 1995, pp. 191–211). Hituzi Syobo. 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 14 
Ecolinguistics 
Language and the environment 
First glance 
What is ecolinguistics? 
Language and its natural environment 
Metaphors for the natural world 
Eco-critical linguistics 
• Anthropocentrism: Human centrality, human exceptionalism 
• Greenwashing, euphemisms, erasure: How we make it all sound okay. 
INTRODUCTION 
We can start with a question that may seem a long way from the phonemes and phrase struc-
ture rules we examined earlier: “Do linguistic patterns, literally, affect the survival and well-
being of the human species as well as other species on Earth?” (Steffensen & Fill, 2014, 
p. 9). Though it may seem unrelated on the surface, it is a question that linguists, especially 
ecolinguists, have begun to ask in the last few decades. The field of ecolinguistics, a new 
branch of linguistics, examines how language is related to the environments in which it exists 
and how our language use is connected to how we act in the natural world, especially actions 
that contribute to the destruction of the environment. 
The environments that language exists in are many. Language exists in our minds, and it is 
this cognitive environment that we examined in Chapters 3 through 7 when we discussed the 
knowledge we call on whenever we use language. Language exists in a social environment, 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429269059-14 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECOLINGUISTICS 
235 
and it is this environment we examined in Chapters 8 through 12 when we discussed how we 
use language in everyday interactions, how we use it to signal and create our social identities, 
and how its use varies across those social identities. Language exists in a symbolic environ-
ment, the context in which languages and varieties interact; we examined this environment 
in Chapters 12 and 13 when we discussed multilingualism, language birth and death, and 
language loss, all key concerns for ecolinguistics. 
In this chapter we focus on an environment not usually addressed in mainstream linguis-
tics: the natural environment of language, what ecolinguists call its human ecology. It is this 
environment that ecolinguists are especially concerned with. Rather than a self-contained 
system, language for ecolinguists is ecologically embedded, always part of a larger ecosys-
tem that includes all of the environments mentioned earlier. After all, after we learn to use 
language, we still exist in the physical world. 
Mühlhäusler (2003) defines ecolinguistics as the study of how “humans communicate in, 
with and about the environment” (p. 35). Stibbe (2015) defines it as the field of linguistics 
that explores “patterns of language that influence how people both think about, and treat, the 
world,” including other humans and the planet of which we are a part (p. 1). He adds that eco-
linguistics examines how language influences the relationships of humans with each other, 
with other organisms, and with the ecosystems that all life depends on. 
LANGUAGE AND ITS NATURAL ENVIRONMENT 
Any examination of language and its relation to its natural environment is complicated by the 
fact that, as Sapir pointed out over 100 years ago, the very concepts of nature and landscape 
are socially constructed. Maffi (2001) enlarges on this idea when she notes, 
Landscapes are anthropogenic [created by humans] not only in the sense that they are 
physically modified by human intervention, but also because they are symbolically 
brought into the sphere of human communication by language: by the words, expres-
sions, stories, legends, songs, and verbal interactions that encode and convey human 
relationships with the environment and inscribe the history of those relationships onto 
the land. 
(p. 12) 
Metaphors for the natural world 
One important way landscape and nature are brought into the sphere of human communica-
tion is through metaphors. As noted in Chapter 3, metaphors are tools “for experiencing and 
perceiving the world,” ways of ordering and reordering human knowledge (Steffensen & Fill, 
2014, p. 2). Metaphors of nature are of special concern, for they reflect how we see nature and 
influence how we act in it. A common metaphor in English is that nature is a singular entity; 
we use the pronoun it for nature, not they, even though nature is not singular; it is “a multi-
plicity of things and living processes” (Williams, 1980, p. 69). This singular nature is also 
metaphorically talked about as something to be controlled, even conquered. We see this when 
we use terms like pest control, forest management, and genetic engineering, among others. 
Animals and land are spoken of as things to be controlled too: animals are domesticated or 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
236
  ECOLINGUISTICS 
hunted; land is cultivated; trees are harvested; coal is mined. Feminists point to the many 
metaphors of nature that are gendered: Mother Nature or Mother Earth, for example. And 
many metaphorical expressions about the land are similarly gendered: virgin territory, pen-
etrating the wilderness. Such metaphors cast both nature and women as properly under the 
control of men. Areas of nature that we cannot control are metaphorically discussed as some-
how acting on their own: nature takes revenge (you can’t fool mother nature), and it destroys 
buildings (natural disasters). These conventionalized metaphors can structure the way we 
think and act. If we see nature as something that exists for us to control, then we can do what 
we want to it. 
ECO-CRITICAL LINGUISTICS 
Eco-critical linguistics, like the critical discourse analysis (CDA) we discussed in Chapter 9, 
examines discourse all around us for hidden messages. To review, CDA analyzes discourse 
for ideologies, beliefs, and values embedded in it. Generally, CDA focuses on how discourse 
reproduces power relations and inequalities among social groups. Eco-critical linguistics 
enlarges that focus in two ways. First, it sees its work as speaking for those who literally can-
not speak for themselves: non-human animals, plants, other organisms, and future generations 
of humans and other living beings. Second, it examines the influence of our language use on 
the ways we see and interact with the environment; it asks how our discourse represents as 
normal and acceptable, even necessary, actions that may destroy life on our planet. Like CDA, 
eco-critical linguistics seeks to reveal those hidden messages that may influence us to act in 
certain ways, especially the ways we act in the natural world. In critical eco-linguistic theory, 
the way we as humans treat the natural world is influenced by our view of the world, and our 
view of the world is at least partially constructed through discourse. 
Halliday (2001) argues that just as languages can contain the ideologies of sexism or rac-
ism or classism, they can also contain ideologies that construct the world in ways that are 
detrimental to life on Earth. As an example, he points out the many ways that growth is repre-
sented as a positive thing throughout many discourses, what he calls growthism. Corollaries 
to this growthism (many is better than few, more is better than less, large is better than 
small, up is better than down) are represented as general principles of life. This is especially 
evident in the discourse of economics, in which growth is always presented as a good thing. 
Collocations reinforce this perspective with phrases like profits fell sharply (never gently) or 
markets are shrinking. That last example is an interesting one. I tried to find a synonym for 
shrinking that does not have a negative connotation; I couldn’t find one. That’s how prevalent 
growthism is in our language. Halliday’s point is that the ideology of growthism is built into 
our language, and that ideology can be dangerous because the implicit message, repeated over 
and over in multiple phrases, is that it is always good for economies and markets to grow, no 
matter the consequences for society or the environment. 
Similarly, in multiple ways, progress is presented as a good. Progress means we move 
forward (forward is good, backward bad). New industries or technological innovations are 
mapped onto this idea. They are represented as inherently good, even if their effect is to 
move us backward in terms of nature. These types of innovations are also represented as 
inevitable, just as progress itself is presented as inevitable: you can’t stop progress is a com-
mon response to complaints about new gadgets or technologies that do damage to the social 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECOLINGUISTICS 
237 
or natural ecology. And because these innovations are represented as progress, efforts to 
protect nature from being despoiled through their use are represented as blocking and fight-
ing progress. 
Technological progress is inevitable is an example of what Stibbe (2015) calls stories-
we-live-by, mental models of the world that exist across a culture at large rather than in just 
one individual’s mind. These are not stories in the traditional sense of a narrative, but rather 
discourses that convey particular worldviews. They are produced and reproduced in everyday 
discourse, though not necessarily overtly, and are often so invisibly embedded that they are 
not noticed as stories at all; instead, they are seen as just the way things are. Ecolinguists are 
interested in those stories and how they construct our view of nature and our place in it. They 
seek to analyze common and not-so-common discourses to reveal their hidden stories and 
to challenge those that lead to and justify actions destructive of the ecosystems that all life 
depends on. 
Anthropocentrism 
Anthropocentrism, a key story-we-live-by, includes the stories of human centrality and 
human exceptionalism. The story of human centrality places humans at the center of the 
world and represents the natural world in terms of its usefulness to humans, turning the land 
and the creatures that live on it into natural resources for our use. The story of human excep-
tionalism represents humans as radically different from other living things and as separate 
from the rest of nature. Both stories are woven into everyday discourse. 
We encounter these stories when we call humans stewards of the earth, a notion com-
mon in many religions, and one that implies that humans are the designated caretakers of 
nature, rather than a part of it. We also encounter them in the English lexical system, which 
encodes a distinction between humans and other life forms, even animals closely related 
to us. Thus, our pronoun system distinguishes between a human being (and perhaps also 
one of our pets), who is he or she, and any other living creature, who is an it. As Kimmerer 
(2013) notes, in English a tree is not a who but a what, an object to be used rather than 
a fellow living organism. In many North American indigenous languages, that’s not so: 
in Potawatomimowin, an Anishinaabe language, a tree is “a non-human forest person” 
(p. 144). Kimmerer goes on to note that “just about everything we use is the result of 
another’s life, but that simple reality is rarely acknowledged” in our discourse (p. 148). In 
fact, it is sometimes hard to even express that idea in English. How do we talk about trees, 
lakes, or rivers having rights? 
Our verb system similarly sets humans apart from other parts of nature: we use verbs such 
as think, believe, know, or plan almost exclusively for humans. Non-human animate beings, 
animals, and plants, for example, and all inanimate entities do not have agency in our dis-
course; they do not think or plan. We rarely talk of trees or forests as doing something, but as 
Halliday (2001) points out, they cleanse the atmosphere, stop flooding, and stabilize the soil, 
all important actions for life on Earth. 
Our way of talking about the environment is deeply anthropocentric. The term envi-
ronmental degradation, for example, implies degradation of environmental conditions 
that humans find useful but not of those conditions that bacteria or mosquitoes do. The 
terms we use for the land and the plants that live on it—barren, productive, virgin, rich, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
238
  ECOLINGUISTICS 
wasteland—describe the earth as useful or not only to us: weeds are plants we do not want; 
natural resources are those parts of the world that we can use for our purposes. Although 
in much of our discourse nature is represented as a resource to be used to provide for our 
sustenance (the bounty of nature) and other needs (nature as healer), as Odum (quoted in 
Mühlhäusler, 2003, p. 38) points out, nature is “not just a supply depot;” it is “the home . . . 
in which we must live.” 
The story of human exceptionality places humans as separate from the rest of nature, 
unlike other creatures on Earth. When we say things like both humans and animals, we 
are representing humans as not animals, though of course we are. Stibbe (2015) points out 
that in much of philosophy as well as linguistics, what makes us human is found in what 
makes us different from other animals rather than in what we share with them. Language 
is often presented as the quintessential phenomenon of human exceptionality, as when lin-
guists claim that language is unique to humans and that in understanding it, we are under-
standing what makes us humans. In most linguistics theory, humans are the only species 
with language—by definition. Until recently, little scholarship addressed the aspects of 
human language that are shared by non-human animal communication systems. Some eco-
linguists argue that rather than seeing human language as unrelated to animal communica-
tion, we should investigate the continuity between the two, as in the syntax of bird songs, 
for example. 
Ecolinguistics is interested not just in discourse about the environment but in any dis-
courses that might influence how we treat nature. Some discourses commonly examined 
include those of advertising, ecotourism, the animal product industry, and global agribusiness. 
Advertising regularly makes use of nature discourse and images to make products appear less 
damaging to the environment, a process known as greenwashing. Products are described 
as sustainable, natural, and environmentally sound, even when they are not. The use of all 
natural to describe foods that are made from genetically modified grain or are full of artificial 
flavors is one example. My personal favorite is a slogan for an Australian insecticide cited by 
Mühlhäusler (2003): kills all insects—safe for the environment (p. 137). Obviously, insects do 
not count as part of the environment. 
Advertising for ecotourism similarly greenwashes its effects. Ecotourism is touted as eco-
logically sound, with pictures of pristine beaches and claims of non-intrusive encounters with 
nature, a sustainable way to see the world. That may be true, but such advertising also con-
ceals its consumerist essence. From an eco-critical linguistics perspective, that consumerist 
essence is important to reveal, since overconsumption, whether at home or in one’s travels, is 
a key contributor to the dangers our planet faces. 
Stibbe (2015) critiques the discourse of the animal product industry, the industry which 
raises and slaughters animals for their flesh, what we call meat. His analysis shows how this 
discourse represents animals as objects, machines, and resources. The entire slaughter pro-
cess is presented as benign through various techniques: euphemisms such as housing for ani-
mal cages or carcasses for animal bodies, for example, or false comparisons such as likening 
breeding sows to machinery, which, of course, cannot feel pain. Slaughter itself euphemisti-
cally becomes meat production. 
Another technique common in this discourse is erasure. Erasure represents an area of 
life (people, experiences, identities, animals, nature, all sorts of things) as unimportant or 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECOLINGUISTICS 
239 
unworthy of mention or consideration. In the discourse of the animal product industry, for 
example, keeping animals in cages is called necessary to protect them from predators, but 
the most lethal predators, the people who slaughter them, are erased. In some environmental 
advocacy discourse, human agency is similarly erased. To say high levels of carbon dioxide 
contribute to climate change is true, but it represents carbon levels as causes when they are 
instead the result of human actions. What is erased are the institutions, corporations, and 
people who produce those high levels of carbon dioxide. 
Vandana Shiva, an Indian physicist and environmental activist, succinctly critiques the 
discourse of global agribusiness: “When patents are granted for seeds and plants, as in the 
case of basmati, theft is defined as creation and saving and sharing seed is defined as theft of 
intellectual property” (quoted in Alexander, 2009, p. 118). 
It’s not that any of these discourses directly determine how we see the world or force 
us to act in a certain way. Their common everyday use, however, may create a world view 
that encourages us to think and act in ways that exploit the natural world for our own 
purposes and, in the process, help destroy it. The discourse of human exceptionalism 
and centrality may well contribute not only to our growing destruction of non-human 
lifeforms, but also to the belief, shared by many, that such destruction is justified if it 
benefits humans. 
Although some linguists disagree about the appropriateness of doing so, for many eco-
linguists their work includes more than critiquing discourse that contributes to ecological 
destruction. It includes raising consciousness about that discourse. Eco-critical linguists, 
according to Stibbe (2015), work to “reveal the hidden stories that exist behind and between 
the lines” with the specific aim of questioning those stories to determine if they “encourage 
people to destroy or protect the ecosystems that life depends on” (p. 5). They help us realize 
that we have never been separate from nature nor have we controlled the non-human parts of 
it, but that we have always been inextricably bound up with those parts and with all of nature. 
As part of that effort, ecolinguists also seek to bring attention to discourses, such as nature 
poetry, that inspire us to care for the natural world and encourage us to allow all beings, not 
just humans, to survive and thrive. 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
• 
Ecolinguistics examines the relationship of language to its symbolic and natural environ-
ments, especially how language encodes human relationships to the natural environment. 
• 
Metaphors, especially metaphors about nature, offer insights into this relationship. 
• 
Eco-critical linguistics examines the underlying ideologies present in discourse to iden-
tify those that are potentially detrimental to the ecosystems on which life depends. 
• 
Discourses analyzed by ecologists includes those of advertising, agribusiness, ecotour-
ism, and the animal product industries. 
• 
Raising awareness of the potentially destructive effects of certain discourses and of the 
potentially beneficial effects of other discourses, such as nature poetry, is an important 
part of the work of ecolinguistics. 

 
 
 
 
240
  ECOLINGUISTICS 
KEY TERMS 
ecolinguistics 
cognitive, sociocultural, symbolic, and 
natural environments of language 
metaphors (see also Chapter 3) 
eco-critical linguistics 
critical discourse analysis (see also Chap-
ter 9) 
growthism 
stories-we-live-by 
anthropocentrism 
human centrality 
human exceptionality 
greenwashing 
erasure 
euphemism 
EXPLORATIONS 
Exploration 1 
The International Ecolinguistics Journal includes scholarly articles and creative works. It is 
accessible at https://www.ecolinguistics-association.org/Journal. Choose an article or crea-
tive work of interest to you. 
Writing prompt: If you’ve chosen a scholarly article, summarize it in a few paragraphs. 
Then add your response to the main claims of the article. If you’ve chosen a creative work, 
write a paragraph or two about your reactions to that work. 
Discussion prompt: If you’ve chosen a scholarly article, summarize it for your small 
group, being sure to include your response. If you’ve chosen a creative work, describe it (or 
read it aloud if a poem) to your small group, again being sure to include your reactions. As a 
group, discuss any commonalities or themes you identify across the articles or works. 
Exploration 2 
The Stories We Live By is a free online course in ecolinguistics by Arran Stibbe at the 
University of Gloucester. The unit on identity and men’s health magazines is especially inter-
esting. Access the course at https://www.storiesweliveby.org.uk/. You will need to register, 
but there is no cost. Go to “Part 6: Identities” and click on the handouts and video to hear 
Stibbe’s analysis of these magazines. 
Choose a lifestyle magazine of interest to you and do a similar analysis. Be sure to exam-
ine the advertisements, the cover, and the stories within. How does this magazine encourage 
you to be dissatisfied with yourself? What products are presented as a way of becoming a bet-
ter self? What discourse is used to encourage consumption, even overconsumption, of these 
products? How does this discourse connect to the degradation of the environment? 
Exploration 3 
Check out a website for ecotourist attractions or tours. What do you notice? 
Exploration 4 
There are many TED Talks about our place in nature vis-à-vis other organisms. I’ve included 
a few of them. Check them out, then share responses in your small groups. 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECOLINGUISTICS 
241 
Kelsey Leonard, Why lakes and rivers should have the same rights as humans https://www. 
youtube.com/watch?v=opdCfb8cCFw 
How trees talk to each other | Suzanne Simard  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Un2y 
BgIAxYs 
What animals are thinking and feeling, and why it should matter | Carl Safina  https://www. 
youtube.com/watch?v=-wkdH_wluhw 
FURTHER READING 
Fill, A., & Mühlhäusler, P. (Eds.). (2001). The ecolinguistics reader. Continuum. 
Kimmerer, R. (2013). Braiding sweetgrass: Indigenous wisdom, scientific knowledge, and the 
teachings of plants. Milkweed Editions. 
Stibbe, A. (2015). Ecolinguistics: Language, ecology, and the stories we live by. Routledge. 
REFERENCES 
Alexander, R. (2009). Framing discourse on the environment: A critical discourse approach. 
Routledge. 
Halliday, M. (2001). New ways of meaning: The challenge to applied linguistics. In A. Fill & 
P. Mühlhäusler (Eds.), The ecolinguistic reader: Language, ecology, and environment 
(pp. 175–202). Continuum. 
Kimmerer, R. (2013). Braiding sweetgrass: Indigenous wisdom, scientific knowledge, and the 
teachings of plants. Milkweed Editions. 
Maffi, L. (2001). Introduction. In L. Maffi (Ed.), On biocultural diversity: Linking language, 
knowledge, and the environment (pp. 1–50). Smithsonian Institution Press. 
Mühlhäusler, P. (2003). Language of environment, environment of language: A course in 
ecolinguistics. Battlebridge. 
Steffensen, S., & Fill, A. (2014). Ecolinguistics: The state of the art and future horizons. 
Language Sciences, 41(6), 6–25. 
Stibbe, A. (2015). Ecolinguistics: Language, ecology, and the stories we live by. Routledge. 
Williams, R. (1980). Problems in materialism and culture. Verso Editions & NLB. 

  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Index 
abbreviations 32 
accents: definition of 63; dialects and 21, 23; 
regional 63; stigmatization of 63–4, 150 
acoustic phonetics 53 
acronyms 32 
additive bilingualism 207 
adjective phrase (AdjP) 95 
adjectives, defining 30 
adverb movement 105 
adverb phrase (AdvP) 97 
adverbs, distinguishing from adjectives 30 
affective filter 203 
affective meaning 117 
affixes 33–37; table of derivational affixes in 
English 34 
affricates 60 
African American English (AAE) 8, 23, 32, 40, 
83, 150, 168–9; ask vs. axe 8, 83, 174; see also 
African American Language (AAL) 
African American Language (AAL): African 
American Women’s Language (AAWL) 
175; ask vs. axe 174; changing names of 
169; dispute over Ebonics 177–8; double 
negatives 174; in education and school 
systems 177–8; Great Migration 170; 
habitual invariant be 172; history of 170–1; 
linguistic discrimination and 178; local 
context and identity 176–7; as a marker of 
oppositional identity 170; micro-aggressions 
175–6; morphological structure of 171–3; 
Oakland School Board 177–8; phonological 
structure of 173–4; rhetorical strategies 
in 175; signifying 175; stigmatization and 
disparagement of 169–71, 178; use of be verb 
171; use of linguistic resources to construct 
identities 176–7; as valid, expressive, and rule 
governed 169; variation in 174–5; when used 
by courtroom witnesses 175; zero copula 172; 
see also African American English (AAE) 
Afroasiatic language family 219 
ain’t 21–23 
allomorphs 40, 83 
allophones: complementary distribution 77; 
definition of 75; free variation 80; rules for 
allophone distribution 79–80 
alveolar flap 53 
alveolar ridge 57 
alveolar sounds 57 
alveopalatal sounds 57–8 
ambiguity, lexical and structural 102–3 
American Sign Language (ASL): community 
bilingualism on Martha’s Vineyard 209; 
Gallaudet, Thomas 225; Hawaiian Sign 
Language as endangered 226; Nicaraguan 
Sign Language 225; origins of sign languages 
224–5; relationship to French Sign Language 
225 
androcentric generics 186–7 
Angles, Saxons, and Jutes, invasions into Britain 
220 
animal communication: birds and syntax 14, 
111; honeybees and tail-wagging dance 
14; variation in bird songs 21; Washoe the 
chimpanzee 14 
anthropocentrism 237 
antonyms: complementary 119–21; converseness 
119; definition of 119; gradable 119; marked 
and unmarked terms (markedness) 120; 
relational (converse) 119 
appropriateness, politeness and 144–5 

 
   
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
INDEX 
243 
approximants 60 
arbitrariness 11–12 
articulatory phonetics 53 
articulatory processes 80–82 
ask vs. axe, pronunciation of in AAL 8, 83 
assimilation 80 
asymmetrical multilingualism 196 
Austronesian language family 219 
auxiliary verb (AUX) 106 
back vowels 63 
backformation 33 
Baldwin, James 170 
bilabials 56 
bilingual education: maintenance programs 
206–7; transitional programs 206–7 
bilingualism: additive 207; subtractive 207; 
see also multilingualism 
biocultural diversity 227 
Black Masculine Language (BML): expressing 
resistance and Black male identity 188; 
rappers and Hip Hop language 188; use of 
invariant be 188 
blending 33 
borrowed words 31–2 
bound morphemes 37 
bound roots 38 
British English 8 
Brown, Claude 169 
case, inflecting nouns for 41–2 
Chicanx English (CE) 155 
Chomsky, Noam and generative grammar 112 
circumfixes 37 
cisgender, use of 190 
clause 108–9; see also embedded sentences 
Clerc, Laurent 225 
clicks 66–7 
clipping 33 
closed classes 29 
code switching 156 
cognates 216 
coined words 31 
collocation 118 
community bilingualism on Martha’s Vineyard 
209 
complementary distribution 77 
complementizer (COMP) 108 
compounding 32–3 
connotation 117 
consonant cluster reduction 82, 173 
consonants, manners of articulation 59–60 
consonants, places of articulation 56–58 
constituent structure see deep structure 
constituents: identifying 92–3; immediate 99 
continuity theorists 215 
contrastive distribution 76 
conventional indirectness 138 
conversation patterns: closing sequences 131–2; 
greetings 131; interlocutors 130; interruptions 
132–3; managing the floor 132; opening 
sequences 131–2; overlapping 132–3; pauses 
132–3; silence 133; topic-raising 132; turn-
taking 132; see also discourse; indirectness; 
politeness; pragmatics 
converseness 119 
conversion 35 
cooperative principle 136–7 
corpus linguistics 124–5 
covert prestige 162 
creoles and creolization: as complete languages 
198–9; examples of 199; origin and 
development of 198 
critical discourse analysis (CDA) 14–15, 236 
critical period for L2 acquisition 203 
critical sociolinguistics 14 
cultural transmission 12 
Deaf students’ educational rights 209 
deep structure: phrase structure rules 93, 97–8; 
surface structure and 92; 
see also syntax 
degree words 95 
deletion 81–2 
denotation 117 
dependent clause 109 
derivation 33 
derivational morphemes 38 
design features of language 10–13 
determiner (det) 29, 95 
diachronic perspective 31 
dialects: accents and 21; definition of 10; 
distinguishing from a language 10; as rule 
governed 23–4; varieties and 10 
diglossia 196 
diphthongs 62 
discontinuity theorists 215 
discourse: constructing social identity through 
language 149; definition of 130; see also 
conversation patterns; pragmatics 
discreteness 13 
displacement 12–13 
dissimilation 81 
domain 196 
double negatives 12, 22–3, 155, 174 
duality 13 
ease of articulation 80 
Ebonics 177–8 
ecolinguistics: aims of eco-critical linguists 
239; anthropocentrism 237; critical discourse 
analysis (CDA) 236; critiquing the discourse 
of global agribusiness 239; definitions 
of 234–5; discourse of the natural world 
236–9; ecotourism 238; erasure 238–9; 
euphemisms used by the animal product 

 
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
244 
INDEX 
industry 238; gendered metaphors of land 
236; greenwashing 238; human centrality 
and exceptionalism 237–8; human ecology of 
language 235; ideology of growthism 236–7; 
language and its natural environment 235; 
metaphors of nature 235–6; stories-we-live-by, 
definition of 237 
embedded sentences 108 
endangered languages see language loss 
English language history: Early Modern English, 
development of 222–3; expanding circle of 
224; Great Vowel Shift 221–2; inconsistent 
spelling in 222; inner circle of 223; invasions 
of Angles, Saxons, and Jutes 220; Middle 
English 220–2; Modern English 220, 222–4; 
New Englishes 224; Norman Conquest, effects 
of 221; Old English 220–1; outer circle of 223; 
World Englishes 223–4 
epenthesis 82 
eponyms 31 
erasure 238–9 
ethnolects 154–5 
Ethnologue: Languages of the world 219, 224, 
226 
etymological fallacy 35 
etymology 31 
euphemisms 118, 238 
expanding circle of English 224 
face 142–4 
figurative (non-literal) language 121–2 
Finno-Ugric language family 219 
first language (L1) acquisition: general principles 
of 17–19, 47–8; how children acquire 
morphology 47; how children acquire syntax 
110–11; learning allophones, phonemes, and 
allomorphs 85; linguistic competence 19; 
linguistic performance 19; natural class and 
67; similarity across languages 17; stages of 18 
flaps 59 
flattening 32 
foreign language acquisition see second language 
(L2) acquisition 
free morphemes 37 
free variation 80 
French Sign Language, relationship to ASL 225 
fricatives 60 
front and back vowels 63 
functional shift 35 
Gallaudet, Thomas 225 
genders, identities, and language use: African 
American Women’s Language (AAWL) 
188; androcentric generics 186–7; Black 
Masculine Language (BML) 188; deficit 
model 185; difference (two-cultures) model 
185; dominance model 185; gender as 
fluid, mutable, and performed 183; gender 
differences in voice pitch 186; gender 
nonconforming identities 190; grammatical 
gender 42–3, 186; heteronormativity 190; 
heterosexual marketplace 189–90; how 
languages encode gender 186–8; indexing 
gender identity 189; intersex, trans and 
queer identities 190; Lakoff, Robin 183; 
LGBTQIA 190; rapport style among women 
183; reexamining gender binary norms 190; 
report style among men 183; stereotypes 
about gendered communication styles 183–5; 
tag questions, functions of 184; use of the 
pronoun they 190; use of the terms trans and 
queer and cisgender 190; using linguistic 
resources to perform gender 185, 188–9; 
women’s and men’s speech styles 183–4 
General American 53 
generativity 92 
glides 60 
glottal sounds 58 
gradable antonyms 119 
grammar: arbitrary rules of 11–12; definition 
of 12; differentiating from syntax 91–2; 
unconscious rules of 20 
grammatical gender 41–3 
grammatical meaning 41 
Great Vowel Shift 221–2 
greenwashing 238 
greetings 131 
growthism, ideology of 236–7 
hard palate 57 
Hawaiian Sign Language, shift to ASL 226 
heteronormativity 190 
heterosexual marketplace 189–90 
hierarchical structure: tree diagrams and 45–6; 
in words 45; see also deep structure; syntax 
Hip Hop: Black Masculine Language (BML) and 
188; multilingualism and 200–1; reclaiming 
stigmatized identities through 201 
Hispanic English 155 
homographs 121 
homonyms 121 
homophones 121 
human centrality 237–8 
human exceptionalism 237–8 
human language, characteristics of 15 
hyponyms 120–1 
idiolects 150 
idioms 123 
illocution 135 
immediate constituents 99 
impoliteness 145 
independent clause 109 
indirectness: continuum of indirectness 138; 
conventional indirectness 138; definition of 
138; extreme indirectness 139; functions of 

 
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
INDEX 
245 
139–40; indirect speech acts 138; politeness 
and 139 
Indo-European language family 216–18 
infixes 37–8 
inflectional morphemes 38–41 
inner circle of English 223 
instrumental motivation 203 
integrative motivation 204 
interdental sounds 57 
interference in L2 acquisition 203 
International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) 53 
intersex 190 
intonation 65 
intrusive /r/ 153 
invariant be 172, 188 
Jones, Sir William 216 
Jordan, June 170 
Koch, Edward 174 
L2 (foreign) accent 208 
labiodental sounds 56 
labio-velar sounds 58 
Lakoff, Robin 183 
language contact 197–8 
language families 216–19; Afroasiatic 219; in 
the Americas 219; Austronesian 219; Indo-
European 216–18; Niger-Congo 219; Sino-
Tibetan family 219 
language loss: cultural domination by major 
world languages 228; documenting endangered 
languages 230; educational and economic 
factors in 228–9; endangered languages 225–6; 
Guarani language 230; Hawaiian language 
230; Hawaiian Sign Language 226; among 
indigenous groups 226; language death 225; 
language nests 230; language revitalization 
229–30; linguistic human rights 227; local 
and global causes of 228–9; loss of biocultural 
diversity 227; loss of linguistic diversity 227; 
loss of traditional ecological knowledge 226; 
Maori language 230; Mohawk language 230; 
as a social justice issue 226–7; Welsh language 
230 
language origins and development: African 
origins 215; classifying creoles 219; 
cognate words 216; continuity theorists 
215; discontinuity theorists 215; evolution 
from a proto-language 215; gossip and early 
language origins 215; history of English 
219–24; language change 16–17, 216; 
language isolate 219; language spread 216; 
languages sharing a genetic relationship 216; 
Proto-Germanic 218; Proto-Indo-European 
216; Proto-world 215; regular sound 
correspondences 217 
language planning 197 
language shift 199–200 
larynx 55 
leveling 152 
lexical ambiguity 102 
lexical categories (parts of speech) 29–30 
lexical synonymity 104 
lexicalization 31 
lexicon 31 
LGBTQIA 190 
linear structure see surface structure 
lingua franca 197 
linguistic appropriation 32 
linguistic determinism 201–2 
linguistic human rights 227 
linguistic modes of communication: signing 
15–16; speaking 15–16; writing 15–16 
linguistic prejudice 3, 24 
linguistic relativism 201–2 
linguistics: definition of 2; descriptive 
perspective on language 5, 12; 
interdisciplinary nature of 2; linguistic 
competence 19; linguistic diversity 1–2; 
linguistic performance 19; prescriptive 
perspective on language 5, 12; socially 
realistic approach to 3–4 
Linguistics Society of America 178 
liquids 60 
locution 135–6 
maintenance bilingual programs 206–7 
major U.S. regional dialect areas 153 
manner of articulation 55 
mansplaining 185 
marked and unmarked terms (markedness) 120 
Martin, Trayvon 175 
maxims of manner, quality, quantity, and 
relevance 136–7 
meaningfully distinct sounds 52 
metaphors of nature 235–6 
metathesis 82 
metonymy 122 
micro-aggressions 175–6 
minimal pairs 75–6 
Mock Spanish 156–7 
modals 106 
monitor in L2 acquisition 203 
monolingual mindset 206 
morphemes: allomorphs 40, 83; definition of 
36; derivational and inflectional 38–40; 
differentiating from syllables 36–7; 
monomorphemic words 36; multi-morphemic 
words 46; table of English inflectional 
morphemes 40; types of 37–40 
morphology 28–51; definition of 28; how 
children acquire morphology 47; in non-
English languages 44–5 
morphophonology 83–5 
Morrison, Toni 170 

 
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
246 
INDEX 
movement operations 104–7 
multilingualism: attitudes toward Spanish in 
the U.S. 207–8; creoles and creolization 
198–9; deciding which language to use 
196–7; definition of 195; in education 204–5; 
government eradication of indigenous 
languages 199; Hip Hop and 200–1; how 
nations become multilingual 195–6; 
individual multilingualism 195; L2 (foreign) 
accent 208; learning to be multilingual 202–4; 
monolingual mindset 206; monolingualism 
as the exception worldwide 195; Sapir-Whorf 
hypothesis 201–2; social meaning of 196; 
societal multilingualism 195; superdiversity 
200; teaching Deaf students 208; teaching 
students in their home language 206–7; 
transitional and maintenance education 
programs 206–7; see also bilingualism; 
second language (L2) acquisition 
mutual intelligibility 9 
nasal sounds 59, 80–1 
national varieties 152 
Native American Englishes 157–8 
Native American Languages Act of 1990 197 
natural classes 63 
negative face 143 
neologism 31 
New Englishes, spread and change 224 
Nicaraguan Sign Language 225 
Norman Conquest 221 
North American English 8, 152–3 
noun phrase (NP) 93–5 
nouns 29, 41–3, 95 
Oakland School Board 177–8 
obstruents 60 
onomatopoeia 11 
open classes 29 
oppositional identity 170 
outer circle of English 223 
overlapping 132–3 
part/whole relationship 121 
perlocution 135 
pharynx 54–6 
phonemes: allophones 75; contrastive 
distribution 76; definition of 75; examples 
of 75–7; identifying 77–80; minimal pairs 
75–6; morphophonology 83–5; phonetic and 
phonemic levels 74–5 
phonetics: accents 63–4; in American Sign 
Language (ASL) 66; articulatory phonetics 
53; articulatory properties 55; classifying 
language sounds 54–5; definition of 53; first 
language (L1) acquisition and 67; International 
Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) 53; natural class 
63; other languages and 66–7; phonetic 
environment 77; prosody 64–5; social 
meaning of sound variants 66; tone and tone 
languages 65; vocal tract 53–4 
phonology: definition of 74; phonetic and 
phonemic levels 74 
phrase structure rules 93, 97–8 
pidgins, origin and development of 198 
pitch 65 
place of articulation 55 
politeness: appropriateness and 144–5; cultural 
expectations of 144–5; definition of 142; face, 
negative and positive 142–4; functions of 
142; impoliteness 145; indirectness and 145; 
politeness, negative and positive 143; theories 
of 144 
polysemy 121 
pragmatics: context and identity 140; continuum 
of indirectness 138–9; cooperative principle 
136; definition of 133; face, positive and 
negative 142–4; identity work 141–2; 
illocution 135; indirectness 137–40; 
locution 135–6; maxims of manner, quality, 
quantity, and relevance 136–7; perlocution 
135; pragmatic intent 134–5; real-world 
knowledge 138; silence in conversations 133; 
social distance 143; speech acts 135; see also 
discourse; conversation patterns 
prefixes 33–4, 37 
prepositional phrase (PP) 96 
productivity 13 
proform 94 
pronoun (Pro) 96 
pronouns: gender identity and 43–4; table of 
English pronoun system 43; they, use of 190 
proper noun (PropN) 96 
prosodic features: duration/length 64; intonation 
65; pitch 65; stress 65; tone and tone languages 
65 
Proto-Germanic language family 218 
Proto-Indo-European 216 
proto-language 215 
Proto-world 215 
queer, use of 190 
rapport style among women 183 
recursion 101–2 
reduplication 33 
reference (referential meaning) 117 
regional variation 151–2 
register 140–1 
regular sound correspondences 217 
relational (or converse) antonyms 119 
relative clause 108 
relative pronoun 109 
report style among men 183 
Rez English and rez accent 158 
rhotic and non-rhotic varieties 151 

 
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
INDEX 
247 
roots 37 
rule governed: dialects as 23–4; language as 
19–20 
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis 201–2 
second language (L2) acquisition: affective filter 
203; critical period for 203; instrumental 
motivation 203; integrative motivation 204; 
interference from one’s first language 203; 
monitor 203; social factors in 204; target 
language 202 
semantic (thematic) roles 123–4 
semantic fields 123 
semantic relations 118–22 
semantic shift 35 
semanticity 11 
semantics: affective meaning 117; connotation 
117; definition of 117; denotation 117; 
reference (referential) meaning 117; sense 117; 
social meaning 117 
sibilants 81 
signifying 175 
Sino-Tibetan language family 219 
slurs 118–119 
sociolinguistics: code switching 156; competing 
ideologies about language 162; constructing 
social identity through language 149; critical 
discourse analysis 163; critical sociolinguistics 
150, 163; definition of 149; discourses 163; 
ethnolects 154–5; idiolects 150; local identity 
and language 163–4; local varieties and covert 
prestige 162; major U.S. regional dialect areas 
153; Mock Spanish 156–7; national varieties 
152; Native American Englishes 157–8; 
North American English 8, 152–3; regional 
variation 151–2; Rez English and rez accent 
158; sociolects 154; sociolinguistic variants 
150–1; standard language ideology 161–2; 
stigmatization of dialects 150; structured 
variation 151; translanguaging 156; variation 
in sign languages 158; variationist linguistics 
150 
soft palate (velum) 58 
Standard American English (SAE) 160, 169 
Standard English 8, 24, 158–60 
standard language: as the accepted societal norm 
10; competing ideologies about language 
162; covert prestige 162; definition of 10; 
development in England 160; development 
in France 159; development in the U.S. 
160; effect of literacy on standardization 
160; policing standards 161; process of 
standardization 158–60; Standard English 
8, 24; standard language ideology 161–2; 
standardization as an agent of inequality 161 
stems 38 
stops (plosives) 59 
stories-we-live-by 237 
stress 65 
structural ambiguity 102–3 
structure: definition of 19; phrase structure 
rules 93, 97–8; structural relationships among 
sentences 103; structural synonymity 104; see 
also syntax 
structured variation 151 
subject-auxiliary inversion 106 
subtractive bilingualism 207 
suffixes 33, 37 
superdiversity 200 
superordinate term 120 
syllables, differentiating from morphemes 36–7 
synchronic perspective 36 
synonyms: collocations 118; euphemisms 118, 
238; slurs 118–19 
syntactic operations: adverb movement 105; 
auxiliary verb (AUX) 106; clause 107; 
complement clause 108; embedded sentences 
107–9; movement operations 104–7; relative 
clause 108; subject-auxiliary inversion 106; 
yes/no question formation 105–7 
syntax: birds and 14, 111; constituents 
and constituent structure 92–4; deep 
(constituent) structure 92; definition of 92; 
dependent clause 109; differentiating from 
grammar 91–2; generative grammar 112; 
generativity 92; head, definition of 93; how 
children acquire syntax 110–11; immediate 
constituents 99; independent clause 109; in 
other languages 111–12; phrase structure 
rules 93, 97–8; recursion 101–2; structural 
ambiguity 102–3; structural synonymity 
104; surface (linear) structure 92; syntactic 
categories 94; tree diagrams of sentences 
92–3, 98; Universal Grammar (UG) 110; using 
syntax in writing 110; 
see also syntactic operations 
tag questions 183 
target language 202 
trans, use of 190 
transitional bilingual programs 206–7 
translanguaging 156 
tree diagrams 45–6, 92–3, 98 
Universal Grammar (UG) 110 
unvoiced sounds 55 
variants: sociolinguistic 150–1 
variation: in bird songs 21; constructing social 
identity through language 149; ethnolects 
154–5; in grammar and accent 21; major U.S. 
regional dialect areas 153; national varieties 
152; regional variation 151–2; Rez English and 
rez accent 158; rhotic and non-rhotic varieties 
151; in sign languages 158; social function 
of 21; sociolects 154; sociolinguistic variants 

 
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
248 
INDEX 
150–1; Standard English 8, 24; structured 
variation 151; see also sociolinguistics 
velar sounds 58 
velum (soft palate) 58 
verb phrase (VP) 93, 96 
verbs: definition of 30; inflectional  
endings 30 
vocal cords 54–5 
vocal tract 53–4 
voice 55 
voice pitch and gender differences 186 
voiced sounds 55 
voicing 55 
vowels 60–3; classification of 55; diphthongs 62; 
table of vowel sounds 62 
word formation processes 31 
World Englishes 223–4 
yes/no question formation 105–7 
zero copula 172 

