
 Evil Media 


 Evil Media 
 Matthew Fuller and Andrew Goffey 
 The MIT Press 
 Cambridge, Massachusetts 
 London, England 

 ©  2012   Matthew Fuller and Andrew Goffey  
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or 
mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) 
without permission in writing from the publisher. 
  
 MIT Press books may be purchased at special quantity discounts for business or sales promotional 
use. For information, please email special_sales@mitpress.mit.edu or write to Special Sales 
Department, The MIT Press, 55 Hayward Street, Cambridge, MA 02142. 
  
 This book was set in Stone Sans and Stone Serif by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited, Hong 
Kong. Printed and bound in the United States of America. 
   
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
  
 Fuller, Matthew. 
 Evil media / Matthew Fuller and Andrew Goffey. 
  p.  cm. 
 Includes bibliographical references and index. 
 ISBN 978-0-262-01785-5 (hardcover : alk. paper) 
 1. Information society.   2. Social media.   3. Social networks.   I. Goffey, Andrew.   II. Title.  
 HM851.F855   2012 
 006.7’54 — dc23 
 
2012002755 
  
 10   9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1 

 With thanks to our informants 


 Contents 
 Introduction   
 1
 Evil   
 2
 Book   
 7
 Grayness   
 11
 Sophistication   
 14
 Stratagem   
 19
 Intelligence   
 25
 Brainwashing   
 25
 Systemic Ambiguity   
 29
 Objectify Indeterminacy   
 32
 Leverage Anxiety   
 35
 Speak the Metalanguage of Metabolism   
 38
 Proliferate Psychological Operations   
 42
 Togetherness   
 47
 Social Engineering   
 47
 Collective Intelligence   
 49
 Be Everything But Available   
 52
 Economize Behavior, Scale Signals   
 54
 Stir Faith in Small Numbers   
 58
 Flirting Tips   
 62
 Mobilize Irritation   
 66
 Algorithms   
 69
 Enhance Queue Formation   
 69
 Know Your Sorts   
 71
 Invoke Recursion   
 75
 Abstract Captures   
 77

viii 
Contents
 Structures   
 83
 Structure Data   
 83
 Work Abstraction Layers   
 87
 Multiply Interfaces   
 89
 Let Datasets Advance   
 93
 Mine Data for Probabilities   
 96
 Leak Early, Leak Often   
 100
 Technicalities   
 105
 Workflow   
 105
 Express Regularly, But Not Too Regularly   
 110
 Look After Your Relations   
 114
 The Justifiable Ignorance of the Exception   
 117
 Encourage Error   
 121
 Productivity   
 125
 Keep It Personal   
 125
 All the World ’ s an Audition   
 128
 Mythologize Decision Making   
 132
 The Occult Virtue of the Project Plan   
 136
 Middle Management   
 140
 Excellence  
 147
 Metamodel, or Formalize, Virtue   
 147
 Lifelong Learning   
 151
 Be Artistic   
 155
 Role Play   
 158
 Psychic Ergonomics   
 162
 Optimize Stupidity Flow   
 166
 Notes   
 173
 Bibliography   
 201
 Index   
 217

 Introduction 
 Evil Media is an attempt to develop an understanding of contemporary media systems, 
techniques, and practices of mediation in an era of participation, of massive networks 
in which contests are waged as much between technical systems as between ideas or 
more ostensibly social forces, and in which such conflicts in turn ramify into new 
crazes, passions, projects, and plans. Much of what we will discuss are the  “ gray media ” 
most recognizable from the world of work and administration, affecting the habits of 
government, business, and culture, yet rarely recognized or explored as media in their 
own right. By gray media, we mean things such as databases, group-work software, 
project-planning methods, media forms, and technologies that are operative far from 
the more visible churn of messages about consumers, empowerment, or the question-
able wisdom of the information economy. 
 As Marshall McLuhan has argued, media are rather more pervasive than is com-
monly perceived, and the technologies that are encompassed by this broader view of 
media knot together some surprisingly disparate objects, practices, techniques, and 
knowledge. Part of the underlying argument of  Evil Media is that the presence of 
media in our lives, and the abstract social relations that they bear, are more diffuse 
and extensive than is usually imagined. Moreover, increasingly more diverse and 
numerous things, habits, and roles are becoming media or are being activated as 
mediation. 
 Although researchers schooled in the concepts and concerns of media studies have 
for a long time been prepared to question simplistic views of communication and 
have sought to convey the concrete, material  “ thickness ” of media processes in 
contemporary social life, they have often overlooked the dull opacity of devices and 
techniques not commonly viewed  as media or forms of mediation. In this book media-
tion, and the gaming of the disparate processes that make it up, becomes a general 
principle that extends from the basic building blocks of software to management 

2 
Introduction
methods, psychic techniques, linguistic factors, and the hidden cunning of the work 
of manipulation. Media here become less about the movement of signs that refer to 
other things but active as tangible, biddable things in their own right. A set of words 
in a report, article, or illicit data dump becomes significant in a different way when 
placed in a mechanism that allows or even solicits unfettered access, than when that 
set of words is lodged in a closed directory or laid out as a book; allowing such open 
access has direct and pragmatic effects on the reception of ideas, to mention just one 
scale at which they might be operative. That texts, for example, also have automated 
readers — such as search engines — does not necessarily imply that readers become 
automatons but suggests that a transit of dynamics flows between one sort of material 
kind and another. This insight is in some ways fundamentally cybernetic, but it further 
implies that the fine grain of affordances provided by different kinds of scales, pro-
cesses, objects, stuff, always complicates things, introducing subtle shifts susceptible 
of leading others (things, persons) astray. More is going on in processes of mediation 
than can possibly be handled by a set of rules (the hunger for which, in certain kinds 
of gray literature — documents of policy and procedure, self-improvement manuals, 
and so on — seems to know no bounds). 
 Rather than the dreamy promise of rules for success, then, this book takes the form 
of a series of stratagems, each of which is either aimed at giving a particular angle into 
a certain scale of operation or calls attention to a way of working. We ’ re interested in 
the unintended or secondary effects of media as much as in their ostensibly obvious 
consequences. At the same time, following Giorgio Agamben, such a stratagematic 
perspective rejects the presumption that the point of view of the spectator is the 
privileged vantage from which to understand the operations of media. Conventional 
media studies, not to mention ethics, are far too concerned with thinking things 
through from the spectator ’ s perspective. An evil media approach suggests that media-
tion entails the process of becoming activated, whether one consciously takes on the 
role of spectator or not. The following five short texts — on the ways in which media 
might be said to be evil, on the nature of the book, on grayness as a compositional 
form, on the technics of sophistication, and on the notion of the stratagem — set out 
the underlying concerns and issues with which the book as a whole operates. 
 Evil 
 “ Don ’ t be evil. ” Google ’ s well-known maxim,  1 reworked as something of a publicity 
device, finds broad resonance in other expressions of practical reason today — from the 
imperative to think good thoughts, to have positive feelings, and to show compassion 

Introduction 
3
and pity for others to the historically well-established tendency to qualify organized 
productive activity in moral terms. It is an injunction that thus displays, perhaps more 
clearly than any other, the theological residue of economic thinking and its associated 
sociotechnical practices, to say nothing of the fundamentalist propensities of contem-
porary forms of imperialism for which the incontestability of transcendent values 
offers a clever ruse for alliance building, chest beating, and even technological 
development.  2 The subject of the Manichaean puppetry of Hollywood, of military-
industrial-corporate governance, the tracking down and rooting out of evil, and the 
orchestration of support for geopolitical strategies of domination aligned with the 
 “ good ” adopts a rhetoric that is generally as excessive in its intensity as the malice 
against which it purports to mobilize.  3 The maxim  “ don ’ t be evil ” and its rather more 
bellicose sibling, the ultimatum to be with us or to be against us, both portend, with 
cartoon simplicity, the coming of a world in which every byte of information and 
every tap on a screen, every waking thought and action, are expunged of the deviant 
and devious propensities of contrary forms of vital energy. Propensities to think and 
to act in ways that do not conform to social commands are neutralized and pacified 
by the shaping of behavior through media forms that aspire to friction-free transpar-
ency. Any activity that fails the pragmatic test of globalized informatics is thereby 
proscribed, leaving itself open to condemnation as malicious, viral, terroristic, or more 
simply to disqualification through cheery indifference.  4 
 In this context, to propose the hypothesis of evil  media is something of a paradox. 
If a pervasive sense of dark foreboding is at work today — a sense of foreboding that 
helps to legitimate simplistic injunctions against malice in all its real or imagined 
forms — then this foreboding is at least in part due to the operations of mediation that 
help to propagate it. Not just in the obvious way that forms of media feature narra-
tives of the triumph of light over dark, good over evil, right over wrong (the mediation 
of evil), but in the more obscure and perhaps more enduringly visceral sense that the 
material construction of media ecologies themselves plays a critical role in disseminat-
ing the very feelings of dread, fear, and foreboding that give rise to preemptive judg-
ments in the first place. The all-pervasive extension of digital communication in 
particular contributes to the removal of a sense of the boundaries or of the territorial 
fixity that otherwise anchors experience in the relatively known and familiar. Mediation 
facilitates and amplifies the creation of troubling, ambiguous social processes, fragile 
networks of susceptible activity, opaque zones of nonknowledge — the evils of media. 
And while the idealization of globalized networks today continues a prevalent 
tradition of linking technology with aesthetic sensibilities,  5 this is perhaps done 
with little consideration of ethics other than through the simplifying problematic of 

4 
Introduction
representation, leaving us at a loss to grasp the axiology of media as such. Instead of 
shock and awe, or the sublime and lofty feeling of destiny that might be produced in 
a spectator riveted to a screen, what is interesting here are the mixed feelings of terror 
and wretchedness, delight and joy, produced for and by active cogs in sociotechnical 
machines.  6 
 Researchers have paid much attention to the importance of affect in contemporary 
capitalism in recent years, to its difference from identifiable emotion, and to the links 
between affective labor and the economic tendency toward more abstract forms of 
materiality and infrastructure. Less attention, however, has been paid to the precise 
ways in which the dimly sensed links between affective configurations and the broader, 
unstable networks of agents and mediators of which we are a part, with their difficult-
to-perceive boundaries and their correlative scope for producing troubling uncertain-
ties, are being assembled.  7 Media, in the very broad sense that can be given to the 
term via science and technology studies, management theory, or even speculative 
philosophy,  8 are irreducible elements in the composition and configuration of affect. 
Delight, terror, geeky enthusiasm, mildly hypnotic euphoria, ugly feelings, and para-
noid rage find their conditions in the objects and objective forms that make up their 
environment. The nagging insecurity when a phone does not ring or rings too often, 
the panic generated by unusual patterns of traffic of data, the raging fury of a mild-
mannered but well-encapsulated executive on the road to a meeting: such subjective 
dispositions are the outcome of specific sociotechnical configurations, conferring a 
plus or a minus, a tick or a cross, a yes or a no, or sometimes a more ambiguous sign, 
on the processes in play. 
 The transparency of the facilitation of activity that is produced when devices, 
practices, protocols and procedures, gadgets and applications, mesh and synchronize 
simultaneously creates vast black-boxed or obscurely grayed-out zones, taken for 
granted, more or less stabilizing and stabilized artifacts, that permit the abstract social 
relations characteristic of  “ frictionless ” communication to take root.  9 But how these 
zones of configured operations work, with what effects, with what latitude for maneu-
ver, with what  “ play ” in their gearing, is an open question, one with the scope for 
experimentation that contingency allows. Under the conditions of programmable 
control that digital mediation creates, the sophisticated infrastructures and practices 
of communication enter into the calculus of decision making of all sorts, not always 
as an explicit factor but more typically as an environmental variable with a hoped-
for or unnoticed stability that allows the objectives of decision making to proceed 
untroubled. 

Introduction 
5
 This book explores the hypothesis of evil media in an  “ extramoral ” sense. Our 
approach eschews the deadlocked, blackmailing logic of the supposedly irreducible 
moral oppositions that provide the Western production of  “ infernal alternatives ” (and 
the compulsive necessities they induce) with a helpful coefficient of guilty feeling: be 
good, don ’ t be evil, or (if you can ’ t avoid it) at least opt for the calculus of the lesser 
evil.  10 Far from considering media to be neutral means with regard to the ends they 
come into relation with, we consider media and mediation as creating a troubling 
opacity and thickness in the relations of which they are a part, with an  active capacity 
of their own to shape or manipulate the things or people with which they come into 
contact. At a time when  “ transparency ” receives suspiciously excessive praise, we seek 
to examine specific stratagematic logics of mediation as they are developed in a range 
of practices, devices, techniques, and technologies. That such things can be compo-
nent elements in both a slavish devotion  to and an effortless enslavement  of work 
within the confines of production for exchange is well known. Forming the object of 
countless forms of denunciation, media are frequently absolved and divested of any 
specific active qualities of their own by means of broad concepts such as that of 
 “ instrumental rationality ” or visions of preconfigured social agents to whose service 
such means are harnessed (class domination, liberal elites, vested interests). Viewing 
media as transparent to human intentions — albeit intentions that are often distorted 
or misrecognized through ideology — is a conception of mediators as intermediaries, 
which is built on a moral presupposition the construction of which it is unable to 
understand or sense its own active contribution to.  11 In this context, the phrase  “ evil 
media ” makes this troubling but often unacknowledged opacity palpable, situating at 
the heart of processes whose transparency is typically presumed an opacity that usually 
only surfaces when things go wrong.  12 It is a matter not so much of unveiling or 
making this opacity legible but of drawing useful effects from it. 
 But if we adopt the qualification  “ evil ” in our exploration, we do so as a convulsive 
response to the more pervasively onto-theological climate of global culture, wherein 
humanity substitutes itself for God and then acts out goodness in a servile obedience 
to its own commands — a lacerating operation of subjection, with which any endeavor 
to explore ethics beyond good and evil has to contend through an inevitably scorched 
humor. Nietzsche may have seen the zone beyond good and evil as the province of 
the superman, but the same Nietzsche glimpsed the superfluity of profoundly theo-
logical values in the practices of the sophists, providing a helpful pointer to a set of 
practices that might offer a productive way of escaping the endless moral injunctions 
and solicitations to be solely good.  13 Challenging the entrenched censoriousness of the 

6 
Introduction
One, the Good, and the True and opening up the path of nonbeing as the path one 
was supposed not to follow,  14 the sophists ’ attack on duality, a position both on this 
side of and beyond good and evil, practically invites the slander, malice, and cunning 
trickery, the evil imputed to them in turn. Suspect from the point of view of reason 
that is blind to its own conditions of operation, an amoral stance toward media and 
mediation that calls into question the  presumed moral superiority of those who seek 
 “ the truth ” is one that will find its interest in a consideration of the manipulation of 
symbols, and in an artful use of forms of communication and mediation.  
 Already we can sense the chaotic heterogeneity of the uses to which the term  “ evil ” 
can be put. But such a term is not to be invoked with impunity. One can but admire 
the humorous understatement of the philosopher Alfred North Whitehead in his 
remark that the  “ trick of evil, ” as he called it, is  “ to insist on birth at the wrong 
season. ” 
 The focus in this book on particular media systems and mediating processes does 
not establish for them any direct translation into the spectacular values of good and 
evil, but neither does it exonerate them as simply being means at the transparent 
service of ends. What it seeks to do is to use the habitual ways in which values 
are distributed and experiment with the possibilities this opens up: Why not consider 
the irreducibly constitutive role of machines, techniques, or technologies in the prob-
lematic axiology of power? Why assume that the moral diktats of representation 
exhaust mediating processes? Recurrent panics about the effects of media technologies 
on one ’ s ability to empathize or to think pose an interesting problem, but usually they 
get bogged down in pseudoscientific solutions that tend to miss both the point and 
the politics. Rather than being transparent to the intentions of use, any object affords 
specific opportunities in specific circumstances — a certain latitude or room for maneu-
ver, a dynamic or curve of development that allows for particular kinds of inflection 
or scope for variation. Knowing how to manipulate such objects or processes 
(while knowing yourself to be manipulated or manipulable in turn),  15 as well as the 
effects or consequences that the trickery or cunning of such manipulation produces, 
brings into play questions of timing, of the propitiousness of the opportune moment, 
as well as an appreciation of the relative instability of the relations into which 
such objects, processes, techniques, or technologies are a part. But knowledge of 
such — which perhaps has more the form of a practical wisdom, a virtue,  16 than a 
science — must still be cultivated and those objects explored. That is what we propose 
here. 
 Machiavelli placed a great deal of emphasis on fortune and other qualities of con-
tingency in the counsel he offered. With him, we can observe that one ’ s efforts in this 

Introduction 
7
regard can  “ flourish one day and come to grief the next, ” 17 pointing to the importance 
of a constant vigilance in stratagematic thought. 
 Book 
 For a globalizing culture that is more than prepared to give unilateral credence to the 
virtues of the digital, operations that involve the book as a significant media object 
are at risk of seeming anachronistic. Specific defenses of the book as a cultural form 
might appeal to antiquarians, to the profound traditions of library-based humanism, 
or to the possibility of sustained engagement with discursive objects, among other 
things; but given that the book is part of an ecology of media forms that is itself 
subject to rapid shifts and mutations, such defenses endow it with a status and a niche 
akin to the death-on-hold that is normally reserved for protected species. In any event, 
such defenses are easily defanged and brushed aside — by the rhetoric of digital democ-
ratization — as the all-too-predictable demurs and cavils of a backward-looking cultural 
elite anxious to retain its privileges and peculiarities, raising in turn the question of 
the value of the agency of the book in an era of pervasive digital networks. 
 Clearly, in the rapidly shifting ecology of contemporary media, the historically 
dominant place of the book is less than assured. Although writing has crossed numer-
ous thresholds in its tangled histories — aesthetic, scientific, political, amorous, orga-
nizational — it would be a mistake to consider the more obviously aesthetic qualities 
of writing as having preeminence. The more obscure and less glorious instances of 
writing and of books within the systems and networks of gray media — accounts, 
manuals, instruction books, policy guidelines, strategy documents — are historically as 
significant a resource and topic for analysis as the literary or scientific text and, 
although demure, are also equipped with a certain aesthetic. There are many types of 
writing — those connected to the bureaucratic world of the document, the memo, and 
the reminder — other than those that directly convey a sense of the sublime, conduct 
an infinite conversation, or offer the generativity of the open work, and these others 
also deserve careful attention as media forms and agents in their own right. 
 Theories of the text have done much to aid in the exploration of the silent, sur-
reptitious role of the mediations of writing and the writerly. But the vast mass of 
writing, originating historically in the keeping of accounts, the organizing of societies, 
the tallying and making of measures, has often escaped the attention of such theories, 
riveted as they are to culture as a repository of values resistant to economic confor-
mity. 18 What, then, of books that, while evidently important component parts of the 
material of culture, have not crossed a threshold of scientificity, literariness, aesthesis, 

8 
Introduction
or spirituality? What of the book as an active — if not necessarily stable — mediator in 
apparently more mundane processes? The book as what science and technology 
studies might call a  boundary object , 19 or the psychic ergonomist an  influencing machine ? 
If the book were considered within a generalized pragmatics of evil media as the bearer 
of sets of opportunities and affordances (of which textual play is merely a subset), 
then it might be considered an object that — to a greater or lesser extent — provides a 
way of exploring and exploiting potentially antagonistic practices. 
 A book, on this count, somewhat paradoxically seems able to sustain interactions 
between, and give the appearance of, consensus to very different groups. To qualify 
as such in the more technical sense of the boundary object, the book would have to 
offer a high degree of interpretive flexibility — you read it your way, I ’ ll read it mine —
 and operate as a way to structure working arrangements in a collective situation; it 
would have to entail the capacity to generate both standardized and ill-formed uses, 
such as those that occur when a semiliterate miller produces a cosmology from the 
Bible, decidedly not adopting the same kind of use as a literate monk at vespers.  20 
Here, misprision, freely varied constructive use, and a failure to follow due norms or 
standards all allow the book itself to gain agency rather than relinquish it to readers, 
thus becoming the center and organizing principle of multiple acts of interpretation 
or reference. 
 From a pragmatic point of view, a boundary object gives material shape to ambigu-
ity, which thereby ceases to be simply an issue of semantics in games of language. On 
the one hand, the object effects a kind of consensus — typically in institutional set-
tings — but on the other, that consensus does not erase or crush differences. Marking 
and negotiating the frontiers between different territories, whether conceptual or 
material, such objects, like the components that produce an  “ imagined community, ” 21 
would seem to envelop degrees of variation in their capacity to unify differences, never 
quite accomplishing the mental standardization of a meeting of minds, but achieving 
only resonances, coordination, and points and counterpoints of contact between 
groups (a bit like the consensus that an artful sophist produces).  22 The preconditions 
for antagonism and conflict between groups should be located in relation to the shift-
ing patterns of interaction accomplished in complex media ecologies. As those ecolo-
gies change, so the lines of stability between groups shift and falter:  “ All was chaos 
.   .   . and out of that bulk a mass formed — just as cheese is made out of milk — and 
worms appeared in it, and these were the angels. ” 23 
 Evil Media proposes a consideration and practice of the book as medium that brings 
it into productive connection with sociotechnical media of other kinds, under condi-
tions of heterogeneity and difference. In this context, manuals that purport to provide 

Introduction 
9
advice, short essays that codify sets of moves in the unfolding play of verbal jousting, 
guidance on tactics, or sets of instructions have offered it a way to explore and experi-
ment with the kind of agency, beyond the perpetual play of meaning or of textual 
 diff é rance , that such a practice of the book might hanker after. To learn the art of 
 “ always being right ” with Schopenhauer, for example, is to learn the maneuvers that 
are made, with or without wiles or premeditation, with the ductile material of lan-
guage. In focusing on habitual ways of doing in the art of arguing and on the slips 
and cracks in language that can be exploited in the temporal unfolding of discourse, 
Schopenhauer ’ s tract offers a polyvalent means of securing victory or gaining consent 
without needing to know anything ultimately about what the other is after.  24 Ultimately 
there is nothing to interpret in this art, because the set of stratagems that it offers 
only poses problems of meaning as a preliminary to a more efficacious problem of 
use: it is a machine for exerting influence, or  “ getting things done. ” 25 In Schopenhauer ’ s 
world, even if you do suspect some hidden intention or meaning behind the opera-
tions of your adversary, the aim is not to disclose it but to create disarray and confu-
sion, knocking your opponent off his or her guard, forcing his or her hand, destabilizing 
them and setting them spinning, perhaps into your arms. 
 The point we are making is the simple one that what a book says must also be 
understood in relation to what it does. The giving of advice and guidance, the laying 
out of sets of rules, the exploration of strategy and tactics of the kind that we can find 
in the writers we have mentioned, are eminently practical and indicative of the sur-
reptitious agency of the text. But a book will only retain its practical value if it can 
take into account and address the allies, the networks of agents formed in and by the 
myriad techniques, technologies, objects, and so on, that give form to social relations 
today. As Schopenhauer notes, winning hearts and minds is not something that can 
be accomplished by means of words alone. A sensibility to more than just words and 
the ruses they accomplish is required. Gadgets, devices, objects — media that draw 
together or push apart, that operate along with, order or disorder, remove and shift 
boundaries — are crucial elements in producing consensus, however artificial or arti-
factual such agreement or assent may be. And if, as has been claimed more recently, 
consent is indeed something that is engineered,  26 the sociotechnical twist we are pro-
posing here, when the ruses of power depend on the effective manipulation of black 
boxes and gray zones, will have to form a kind of reverse engineering for the fabrica-
tion of new moves in the negotiation and control of media systems. 
 To ensure its hegemony, unified, organized power entails books, documents, and 
even simply paper in its multiple forms, because these are dynamic, multivalent 
technologies that provide myriad affordances for the organization, distribution, and 

10 
Introduction
coordination of the explicitly or implicitly cooperative practices through which alli-
ances and networks are assembled. They produce tacit solidarity, knitting millions of 
people together in a manner not unlike the vast  “ idiotypic ” networks whose ongoing 
interactions provide an organism with its ability to resist infection. Problems arise for 
such networks when they lose their plastic, polymorphous versatility. Antagonisms 
and differences that cannot be tamed and pacified proliferate when networks of 
actions and reactions lose the material objects, the paper technologies, around which 
they cohere. Paper forms: Post-it notes, reminders in pigeonholes, reports, and minutes 
of meetings are embedded in formal or informal organizational practices and betoken 
types of cooperation and coordination that are lost or destroyed with certain strategic 
cost. It is not unreasonable to posit a similar kind of material effectiveness for the 
book itself, so often studied from the point of view of the meanings it yields. 
 The adventurous theory that the steady poisoning of the population of Rome by 
lead carried in the city ’ s drinking water ultimately caused the downfall of the 
empire offers a salutary lesson here in thinking about the variable role of nonhuman 
objects in the pragmatics of power. According to this view,  27 it was not the bluff 
and bluster of the twelve Caesars, or the rise of Christianity, or even the military 
onslaught of the barbarian hordes that was ultimately responsible for the collapse of 
the Roman Empire. Rather, the steady, drip-drip impact of an unperceived factor in 
the environment weakened the physiology of the population to such an extent that 
resistance to any threat became impossible. As with the viruses transported to the New 
World by the conquistadores, the construction (or destruction) of a hegemonic form 
is accomplished in alliance with unforeseen or unacknowledged environmental 
factors.  28 
 One need only refer to the leaked memos and exasperated journal articles of junior 
officers in the American military, pointing to the significant loss of information inher-
ent in the rapid mutations of an organizational ecology of media, for confirmation of 
the hypothesis advanced here.  29 Of course, any well-designed media form can give its 
audience the illusion of knowing more than they actually do, but in its alternately 
bullet-pointed concision or its spaghetti-connection complexity, digital presentation 
software develops this illusion to a color-coded extreme, even as the ironies of the 
admission that not every strategic problem of geopolitics is  “ bulletizable ” start to 
dawn. But the technology itself is inseparable from the practices of which it is a part, 
and it is in the way that aesthetic qualities conjoin with organizational practices, roles 
to play, appearances to manage, and so on, that the technology perhaps accomplishes 
its most powerful effects. Skim-read in the helicopter on the way to the board meeting, 
posted after the event as an e-mail attachment, the executive summary or the 

Introduction 
11
PowerPoint presentation offers a saving or compression of time through substitution 
for more time-consuming — and more traditional — briefing documents. Why concen-
trate now? If you have the slides, you have the knowledge. 
 Books, like every other kind of media form, have to be situated in the complex 
ecology of which they are a part, and it is from there that their relative merits can be 
evaluated. Machiavelli, like the theorists of science and technology studies after him, 
emphasized the importance of making alliances — it is usual to lay foundations before 
one becomes a prince — and one should always want to know how stable or reliable 
some new force might be. If consent, or its opposite, is to be engineered, then the 
wise engineer will have a sense of how reliable the materials he or she is working with 
actually are. Reading a book presents a wager to the reader as a medium to be so tested, 
writing one, a gamble on the moment of interpretation. 
 Grayness 
 Grayness marks the breakdown of clearly defined contrasts: a Monday morning feeling, 
a certain blankness that is not indifference or affectlessness but something approach-
ing what Roland Barthes theorized as the  “ neutral, ” a fading and withdrawal rather 
than an abolition of contrasts.  30 The gray zone — an expression coined by Primo 
Levi  31 — denotes a space of activity that is ethically ambiguous, with  “ ill-defined out-
lines ” and a  “ complex internal structure. ” In a gray zone, everyone is sullied. But gray 
is not always and everywhere a variable proportioning of black and white, for example; 
it can be equal proportions of red, green, and blue in the RGB color model. Gray can 
be warm or cool; in addition to neutral or achromatic, there is gunmetal gray. On a 
gray day, the horizon is often difficult to perceive through the haze. Without precise 
contrasts, grayness gives rise to an experience of the vague, to fuzzy experience. 
To escape the bland feelings that blend into the background like steam into clouds, a 
little clarity, definition, or even friction is required. Procedures, protocols, formal 
rationality: algorithms and routines can be used to attenuate difficult contrasts, or 
damp down surfeits of perceptual and affective intensity or information overload. 
Grayness is a quality that is easily overlooked, and that is what gives it its great 
attraction, an unremarkableness that can be of inestimable value in background 
operations. 
 In the novels of John le Carr é , the retired British intelligence officer George Smiley 
is generally presented in the unassuming tones of a person who would go unnoticed 
in the streets. If the intelligence officer is thus a kind of gray inversion rather than an 
eminence, his effectiveness must pertain to his prodigious memory and adroit way 

12 
Introduction
with the historico-political archive. Toiling away on intelligence files with the same 
fine-grained attention to detail that he would accord to the German literature that his 
scholarly ambitions once propelled him toward — as if the file were a text or vice versa, 
as in a gray zone it is difficult to tell — he applies himself with great, but measured and 
sensible, dedication to warding off the threats of communism. It is as if the great 
machinations of geopolitics, the strident declarations and grand oppositions they 
betoken, found the conditions for their appearance in a zone where nothing was really 
clear. Equally, in mist, fog, and the darkening cloud of atmospheric variation that 
announces a storm, grayness also yields drama and dynamism. Condensing into a 
precipitate, as  “ drops of experience ” 32 the meteorological movements of gray feelings 
they assemble point to the atmospheric qualities of affect, a changeable but often 
unnoticed background — unnoticed until an environmental shift occurs, a change of 
pressure or temperature. Grayness is an affective  and perceptual condition that is 
pervasive and all the more troubling for it because one never quite knows if a storm 
will break or the unremitting gloom will just continue indefinitely. 
 For historically understandable reasons, media studies has tended to focus on large-
scale agglomerations, the starkly evident forms that, for want of a better expression, 
the discipline calls  mass media : newspapers, radio, cinema, television, characterized as 
tendentious, one-way, but sometimes two-step, flows. More recently, with the growth 
of the Internet and the development of so-called participatory technologies, media 
studies has developed a taste for examining  social media . But neither mass media nor 
social media exhaust the ambit of media, any more than historically specific technolo-
gies and practices give us the standard by which to define, and hence to understand, 
processes and practices of mediation. So while it might be true to say, borrowing from 
Whitehead, that in matters of mediation,  “ civilization progresses by the number of 
operations it manages to carry out by habit, ” 33 it by no means follows that those 
operations should be exempt from analysis, exploration, and experimentation. 
 The unobtrusive grayness of so many types of media practice, from system admin-
istration to data gathering or the control and verification of all sorts of qualities and 
attributes, calls for a kind of suspicious attentiveness, the cultivation of a sensibility 
able to detect minor shifts of nuance, hints of a contrast where flatness would other-
wise be the rule. Not that gray media are the bearers of some sort of hidden meaning 
that might be brought to light (they need not be the object of a hermeneutics), but 
a certain recessiveness is often a crucial aspect of their efficacy, and that recessiveness 
is what makes them of practical interest here.  34 Outside the realm of systems design 
and administration, it is difficult to excite any interest in the finer details of database 
design, for example.  35 Ethically and politically, the  “ black boxing ” whereby mediating 

Introduction 
13
processes are stabilized to form part of the environment of habits — a sociotechnical 
habitat — involves a critical threshold of perception, one that enables the dependencies 
of objects, abstractions, representations, or systems to go unnoticed. But black boxing 
is perhaps too clear a term — boxes are rather too sharply edged to describe all kinds 
of operations or practices of mediation. Working away in the background too, science 
and technology studies in recent years has excelled in analyzing the myriad devices 
used to construct markets, for example, and has, in particular, generated a detailed 
analysis of the cyborg qualities of economics.  36 Such a context is important, since 
much of what passes for politics in the present era has already had to be parsed by a 
filter composed by a correspondence to ideas of good management and of the eco-
nomic. There ’ s a deferral, a passing off, from politics into fiscal reason, and from 
thence into problems of implementation, since nothing can be done for a political or 
 “ ideological ” reason. Such implementations are themselves mediated by abstractions, 
operative layers with different degrees of resolution and scale, overlapping each other, 
clearly obscure. The grayness of much media and mediation here points toward the 
sociotechnical conditions of contemporary democracy and the bleeding in of bureau-
cratic technologies into the operations of power.  37 
 It is nevertheless difficult to subtract oneself from the logic of representation that 
has proved so definitive for the way in which media are thought of and analyzed. The 
Cartesian heritage of modernity, in which this logic is so prevalent, and the  “ bifurca-
tion of nature ” of which Descartes ’ s writing is a symptom dissimulate what has been 
called a  “ gray ontology, ” an ontology that remains undeclared in an epistemology 
that focuses on clear and distinct ideas and transforms  things into  objects or  “ gray 
shadows of things ” submitted to the categories of knowledge.  38 Secreting an ontology 
of things that types them as submissive objects, the representations by which the ego 
gains a knowledge of the world involve a shading off into the background of the 
obscure and troublesome materiality of things. 
 If Primo Levi ’ s work points toward the distressing and shameful nature of the gray 
zone, Paul Klee ’ s pictorial invocation of a  “ gray point ” as a multivalent nucleus that 
oscillates between chaos and the emergence of an order is indicative of the nuanced 
and muted tensions that the processes and practices explored here are inhabited by.  39 
Problematic not just ethically but also aesthetically, the different valences and values 
of grayness (if not of a gray ontology per se) are explored here in terms of what is best 
called an ethico-aesthetic paradigm.  40 Gray immanence for gray media: there is an 
aesthetic that is indiscernible or inseparable from the technologies, techniques, prac-
tices, and devices that make up much of the abstract infrastructures of contemporary 
societies. Unobtrusive processes are working away in the background, giving shape to 

14 
Introduction
activities and events. Processing, in the sense of transforming (with the banal discre-
tion of the technocratic), is grayness par excellence, achieving a withdrawing or mini-
mization of perceptual and affective contrast, yielding the low-intensity presence of 
uniformity. Such muting of intensity characterizes much of what we are exploring 
here: forms of governance gain ground because no one sees them coming. 
 While gray media and the affective and perceptive sensibilities to which they give 
rise tend not to excite much commentary, they are often spectacular in their conse-
quences: the rolling disaster that is the large-scale IT project; the billions knocked off 
share prices through the convergences of automatic trading algorithms or added to 
them by the deft manipulation of a new accounting rule; the unfathomable opacity 
produced by a new protocol for corporate governance. But grayness demands that 
claims made for the centrality of the spectacle, as too the undue focus given to media 
messages, reception, or participation, be nuanced by an acknowledgment that the 
listlessness and boredom of the more sociotechnical aspects of mediation have far 
greater importance than one might have imagined.  “ In the beginning was boredom, 
commonly called chaos. ” 41 
 Sophistication 
 Being sophisticated is the fruit of a technosocial and geopolitical imperative as much 
as it is a description of a practical state of affairs such as the possession of a certain 
style or degree of savoir faire. For the purposes of communicating, making connec-
tions, having one ’ s finger on the pulse, inscribing oneself and one ’ s activities in the 
knowledge economy, it is difficult to avoid the necessity of organizing one ’ s thinking, 
speaking and doing in terms of their fit with highly complex, technologically advanced 
registers of discursive and nondiscursive machinery. It is not just a matter of vocabu-
lary, as if being sophisticated were simply a question of using clever words — although 
jargon can excite, bamboozle, and solidify alliances. Nor is it just a matter of being 
able to compete in the ramified race to be an early adopter or to acquire a high level 
of literacy in a new technology. To operate adeptly with things means getting a feeling 
for what makes them sophisticated in the first place. Sophistication does not rule out 
brute force and vulgarity, but it extends, complements, or substitutes for approaches 
based on bludgeoning persistence with a kind of durably efficacious calculus that 
entails crafting and more than a little finesse. 
 The assortment of stratagems contained within this book are themselves written 
under the sign of the imperative to be sophisticated. It is an injunction that is con-
veyed in the volubility of discursive interactions, the mutating structures of technical 

Introduction 
15
means, the ordering devices of everyday banality, a plethora of forms of mediation 
and of media forms. Spreadsheets, e-mails, smartphones, GPS, and the even more 
sublimated gray media of project plans, workflow algorithms, and the like: the com-
municative fabric of social relations is not straightforward. To make a telephone call 
is to become an element adjoined to a vast network of more or less effectively coor-
dinated and stabilized actors, from billing practices of service providers, through 
routers, switches, telecommunications protocols, satellite dishes, and the balance of 
geopolitical forces, down to knowing the modus operandi of successful forms of com-
munication and address. Such networks are part of our sociotechnical infrastructures, 
and operating effectively within them entails a kind of sociotechnical sensibility, an 
adroitness in the practice of social relations that articulate the pragmatic forces, 
actions, and actions on actions that bring them into being, stabilize them, and make 
them permeable to intentions. The abstract materiality of these infrastructures is labile 
and mutable and offers diverse opportunities for manipulation, modulation, and 
control. Hackers excel in exploiting the cracks in programmable systems, but a practi-
cal knowledge of how a pricing structure operates, for instance, can also let you run 
circles around your service provider, while it runs rings around you. Understanding 
the interplay of such manipulations, establishing the means of operating, evading, or 
going with them, becomes crucial, and doing so presupposes a heightened sensitivity 
to their operation. The myriad technical devices, formal protocols, and material struc-
tures with which our activities are more or less successfully calibrated,  42 and by which 
they are ordered and configured, should be viewed in terms of the displacement and 
condensation of quanta of power,  43 because while making a machine do something 
you don ’ t want to do yourself can save time, it also shifts the initiative and the opera-
tive focus of control. Understanding a data structure, for example, in the same way 
that an orator understands his or her audience — its sensitivities and concerns — is 
prerequisite to its adept manipulation. The utility of a tool or a device presupposes an 
assemblage of relations of which that utility is a part. Techniques and practices that 
work with gadgets, widgets, bureaucratic procedures, numerical protocols, aside from, 
and perhaps because of, their association with modern knowledge practices, are thus 
able to articulate and order, shape and transform, the fluctuating multiplicity of forces 
that are conjured up for the demands of specific kinds of activity — productive or 
otherwise. The question of how they are, or might be, so enabled is one that is pursued 
in the pages that follow. 
 Such practices are explored here under the imperative sign of sophistication 
in homage to the much maligned  “ masters of Ancient Greece ” (as Hegel once 
called them): the sophists. When talk gets to sophistication, and thinking turns to 

16 
Introduction
language and the virtuoso performativity of contemporary production, as it does in 
the work of autonomist thinkers such as Paolo Virno and Christian Marazzi,  44 what 
often gets forgotten is the ruseful cunning, the artful cleverness, and the challenge to 
presumptive moral judgment exemplified by the sophists. It is not Aristotle we should 
turn to for a better understanding of the artfulness of productivity or the political 
nature of communicative action, as Habermas puts it, but the sophists. These mischie-
vous technicians of the word — for whom being right or being just was something to 
achieve through an artful exploitation, performance after performance, of the oppor-
tunities and affordances offered by language in situ — acquired as a result something 
of a mixed reputation (bad faith, cynicism, and demagoguery, for starters).  45 
 While the contemporary economy is certainly one in which language, communica-
tion, and symbol manipulation, among other forms, occupy an important role in 
productive processes, the situation in which language becomes the primary form and 
material of production may be some way off. However, the voluble bulks of excited 
media commentary, the immense harvests of data generated by social networks, the 
centuries of low-res digital footage making up the archive of audiovisual surveillance 
practices, or, indeed, the billions of lines of computer code, the myriad forms and 
endlessly recessive caves of document storage full of records, policies, and procedures, 
all point toward the infrastructural place of language in its many varieties. The struc-
tural logic of semio-linguistic thinking that has been so popular in media and cultural 
studies is either too crude or too excessively refined a tool to dismantle some of this 
discursive machinery, and in its usual contentment with the formalized abstractions 
of structure, it misses the slippery, transverse, or sometimes all too blunt connections 
between language and things and the varying degrees of stability, coherence, and 
consistency that are to be found in the devices, technologies, techniques, and prac-
tices — in short, the  machinery of media. 
 The reference to sophistry here is not made as part of a historically exacting geneal-
ogy of the linguocentric, logocentric proclivities of the contemporary, but the link is 
more than a picturesque analogy. It is not just that recent explorations of the politics 
and ethics of communication, in their Aristotelian inheritance, imply an unthought 
stance with regard to sophistry.  46 Within the history of the development and study 
of media, early theories of propaganda and of the political role of the PR counsel, for 
example, replicate much of the position and presumed functioning of the sophist.  47 
Historically the critical response to such a position, on the basis of presuming the 
sovereignty of reason, likewise conforms to type by replicating the dichotomous 
arguments about autonomy and manipulation characteristic of much contemporary 
critical thinking: don ’ t be swayed by the song of the Sirens.  48 And yet, as the recurrent 

Introduction 
17
criticisms of politicians for their hypocrisy and cant (by journalists who themselves 
hope to excel in the manipulation of opinions) or of mumbo jumbo (by commenta-
tors in the name of a presumed common sense) show, such positions, in their own 
artfulness, owe more than they might care to think to the garrulous ability to 
exploit, twist, and stretch out arguments and the meaning of words for pragmatic 
effect. Let people make up their own minds, proclaims the hack, in an appeal to 
the sentiments of his audience as artful as any of the hypocrisy practiced by his 
opponent. 
 The understanding of, and response to, the injunction to be sophisticated that is 
proposed here takes particular inspiration from a writer like Schopenhauer, who rec-
ognized that rationality by itself was too fragile. In  The Art of Always Being Right , he 
offered stratagematic counsel to the reader looking for ways to win arguments in the 
face of an adversary who would do anything to win, regardless of the strength of his 
real position. A range of stratagems flesh out his advice that attack is the best form of 
defense, and they give rise to a humorous reframing of dialectics as sophisticated and 
badly intentioned dueling. The counsel that Schopenhauer offers is reminiscent of the 
advice offered by the seventeenth-century Jesuit Balthasar Graci á n and, in a rather 
different context, by Machiavelli, especially in  The Prince . Like these earlier writers, 
Schopenhauer tends to be somewhat ambiguous. Graci á n ’ s art concerns parsimony of 
effort, obligation, and appearance, the playing of a long game, but it is also one of 
positioning, of maneuver in relation to other forces such as luck, norms, rules, and 
apparition.  49 This is not so much the stance of trickery as one of maintaining the grace 
to avoid being hampered by overcommitment of resources, principle, or information. 
Machiavelli ’ s position is doubled too, often interpreted as being a stage whisper, a leak 
about the games played by princes as much as an advisory document. But it also has 
the character of the manual, a means of getting to the nub of problems by engineering 
them. 
 In any case, before the ambiguous attempts at domesticating the unconstrained 
performance of language, at codifying sophistry through genial inventions like that 
of disciplines such as rhetoric and principles such as the Aristotelian one of noncon-
tradiction, what is at work is a sort of accursed share of language. Historically, through 
the tools and techniques that it has developed — logic, rationality, principles, and less 
explicit forms of codification — philosophy has been quite successful in transforming 
this unruly matter of language into faults, cracks, and disturbances in the matter of 
communication, or, indeed, the glitches, bugs, and paradoxes that haunt and form 
mediations of all kinds. In short, into everything that makes up what, from a tran-
scendental point of view, has been thought of as the radical evil that ought to be 

18 
Introduction
expunged from language and communication more generally.  50 More virtuoso than 
virtuous, sophistry ’ s beyond-good-and-evil ethics can be captured in the loquacious 
idea of speaking for the pleasure of speaking, a sumptuary, wasteful form of expendi-
ture in which power, skill, and expertise accrue to the incalculable joys of utterance 
unconstrained by the normative presuppositions of right language use.  51 
 But an obvious objection arises to the value of the inspiration we are drawing here 
from the likes of Gorgias, Callicles, Protagoras, and Antiphon. It is that sophistry is a 
practice or set of practices that operate with natural language only. It is the hopeless 
ambiguity of natural languages, their propensity toward the proliferation of hom-
onyms (Cassin ’ s  “ radical evil ” ), calling for endless procedures of disambiguation (did 
you mean  x or  y ? etc.), that impelled the development of formal logics of various sorts 
in the first place. Indeed, Tarski ’ s comments about the evil of natural language is a 
precise expression of this concern.  52 Yet in logic, mathematics, computer science, and 
so on, processes of formalization generate their own inconsistencies and incoherence, 
and the history of efforts to implement formalisms in programming languages, system 
protocols, and technologies of all kinds equally is by no means seamless or without 
fault lines of its own, albeit of a kind that provide the pretext to endless upgrades, 
patches, rewrites, and technology shifts. A software engineer cannot avoid making 
assumptions about how an application or a tool will be used, and such assumptions 
are ripe for exploitation in more ways and more senses than one.  53 
 So it is not just through rhetoric, grammar lessons, and discursive conventions but 
also through formal logics, technical protocols, social proprieties, and the like that 
the babbling sonic matter of speech, the transcursivity of glyphs, and the hypnotic 
allure of electronic light are codified, linearized, rationalized, finalized, rendered 
useful. We thus have ample justification for considering technology to be sophisticated 
in the way that we are suggesting here. However, lacking a fully affirmed sense of 
artful cunning and produced on the basis of external finalities, sophisticated com-
munication today rarely yields the innocent joy that reduces the adversary ’ s position 
to the rubble of convulsive laughter. What it does yield, though, are voluminous 
mounds, layers, piles of used-up, dead linguistic matter congealing like hair gathered 
in a bath plug, data that are the digital equivalent of rotting offal, linguistic remains 
of the bodily functions of expression and the gray affective (dis)ordering of endlessly 
procedural and procedured communication. Being sophisticated today is about operat-
ing with media forms, techniques, and technologies that are excessively, absurdly, 
finalized as to purpose and utility, but whose seductive faces of apparent, personalized 
seamlessness, whose coded and codified bureaucratic allure, when regarded from the 
right angle, present multiple occasions ( kairos ) for crafty — and well-crafted — exploita-

Introduction 
19
tion, provided that their sleek affectation to affectlessness is probed for the energy it 
absorbs. Alternately, when the rules of engagement go awry, when the organization 
encounters an event not in the handbook of procedures, or when chance itself 
becomes the manifest rule, a certain finesse may be found in collapsing, going berserk, 
or heading to the nearest exit without stopping to collect one ’ s belongings. 
 Stratagem 
 The effectiveness of a device or gadget, administrative practice or form of thinking, is 
often understood or explained through an uneasy conjunction of technical and sci-
entific categories, particularly when it comes to considering work or the ambient 
elements of the knowledge economy, its infrastructure or media of choice. Technological 
innovations are so routinely figured as applications of the disinterested categories of 
scientific knowledge that any critical consideration of them will prefer to assume that 
the founding knowledge is itself faulty, evidence of the workings of ideology, rather 
than address the technique or technology in its own right. But although it would 
be naive to assume either that all forms of scientific knowledge are what they purport 
to be or that science cannot explain some aspects of the technologies built in its name, 
sniffing out the practical, experimental possibilities that alternative hypotheses about 
the operations of technoscience and its artifacts provide has to have some significance 
here. 
 The distinction and hierarchy between the epistemic and the technical that this 
habit of thought testifies to is itself not new. In ancient Greece the proscription against 
sophistry resulted in part from a systematic discrimination against technique in favor 
of the epistemic values of knowledge, a proscription and discrimination that have 
resonated throughout the centuries. Our exploration of evil media displays something 
of a preference for considering media and mediation in terms of an understanding of 
technique that sees it as not fully subordinate to knowledge, as having an active value 
of its own. The way we frame our discussion of media and mediation — as stratagems
 — seeks to draw attention to aspects of such practices that cannot be, or are all 
too easily, explained or justified as a scientific application of technical principles, as 
an emanation from some global macro-actor or as the verifiable expression of some 
other kind of conceptual abstraction. Much of what is proposed here does not have 
the pursuit of truth as its telos, even if it often avails itself of a claim to truth telling. 
So while the book is not exclusively about technology or about technique, and while 
the notion of the stratagem through which the discussion is developed is not itself 
technical,  Evil Media offers a practical exploration of ways of operating or doing, of 

20 
Introduction
the shape and scope of particular kinds of action and the consequences that can be 
drawn from them. 
 Stratagems do not point to unproblematic neutrality in the operations of the 
mediation they describe (among other things, this would take us back to a standard 
distribution of values between humans and machines, machines as ends to uniquely 
human specified goals). As already suggested, if neutrality there be, it is in the sense 
of a grayness in which qualitative patterns of contrast are muted or recessive, rather 
than simply nonexistent. The affordances or opportunities a stratagematic operation 
lends itself to give a shape to the broader actions or activities of which they are a 
part. The introduction of waiting-time targets in a hospital, for example, or the use 
of some other set of key performance indicators will prompt an institution to shift 
resources to avert the risks of a league-table slip, the use of a pricing mechanism 
will turn a student into a consumer, a vector in the application of market logic, 
all of which can be understood as accidental side effects which nevertheless have 
their uses. 
 Science and technology studies might provide an idea of what is involved here. 
Bruno Latour ’ s statement that  “ there are only trials of strength, weakness, more simply 
there are only trials ” 54 has to be understood not in respect of some pregiven set of 
entities — humans, for example — who would then enter into contest with each other. 
It is, as others have noted, a strong statement about things themselves,  55 and one that 
can, without too much difficulty, be given something of a stratagematic twist. Indeed, 
STS, in some of its early forms, displayed something of a Machiavellian inspiration, 
one that this book has also adopted and developed in its own way. The point here is 
that when we consider the pragmatics of power, then strength (or weakness) is a func-
tion of the allies one has at one ’ s disposal, and virtue or wisdom is something that is 
exercised in relation to the alliances one has managed to build.  “ Machiavelli knew 
perfectly well that the alliances binding towns and crowns are shifting and uncertain. 
But we are considering much more shifting and uncertain alliances between brains, 
microbes, electrons and fuels, than those necessary to bind together towns and 
crowns. ” 56 Of course, one might want to contest this as a view of the way in which 
scientific knowledge is produced, but that is not the focus of this book; we are more 
interested in the murkier realms of media and media practices where the injunctions 
conveyed and the alliances they involve are shifting and ambiguous. The delegation 
of actions to the abstract materiality of contemporary media infrastructures is not 
unequivocal or without consequence for the exercise of power.  57 
 As phenomena such as  “ lock-in ” demonstrate, significant advantages accrue from 
these processes of building (or breaking) alliances.  58 Browser wars, the bundling of 
software, and proprietary control over source code represent some rather obvious and 

Introduction 
21
conscious forms of strategizing in the economic sphere, in a way that might be con-
sidered analogous to the propagation of drug addiction among specific communities, 
along with the capacity for pacification and control. 
 But even such obvious forms of strategizing have their problems: the intensive 
targeting of youth by corporations eager for them to consume with alacrity can create 
blowback when the precise economic conditions for such consumption disappear; the 
very ease with which digital data can be collected produces significant problems of 
intelligibility for humans; the securitization of certain kinds of market operation gen-
erates wildly risky, opaque sets of liabilities; and so on. We might hypothesize, then, 
that some kinds of stratagem, figured in a pseudo-economic calculus — a hedonic or, 
better, malefic calculus — have a rapidly diminishing marginal utility. If a stratagem 
obtains its efficacy in part through the emotive or affective energy it succeeds (unbe-
knownst to itself) in mobilizing, reinvestment or displacement of that energy else-
where will require greater outlay to achieve the same effect.  59 
 As has been mentioned, the approach to media we are exploring here entails the 
cultivation of a certain kind of ethico-aesthetic sensibility that seeks to appreciate the 
ways in which objects — such as digital artifacts and practices, knowledge management, 
software design or audit, even theories and knowledge — can be manipulated and 
experimented with in view of the differential production of power dynamics shifting 
away from an ethics and aesthetics that implicitly or explicitly adopt the point of view 
of the spectator.  60 Agamben has underlined the disaster that such an adoption consti-
tutes from the aesthetic point of view, and Alain Badiou has argued that in the field 
of ethics, such a position results in a logic of nihilism and the kind of quasi – a priori 
injunctions against evil of the sort we have already considered. We seek to inhabit the 
position of the productive dynamic of power here, albeit in such a way as to acknowl-
edge the problematically open-ended, experimental position that this places us in. 
Stratagems in this respect, rather than simple recipes to be followed, might better be 
understood as  operative constructs in the sense that they have to be taken up, used, 
worked with, although with a certain care or cunning lest they fail, collapse, or blow 
up in one ’ s face.  61 
 Stratagems do not cohere into a system; otherwise they could be treated as theorems 
or redistributed in terms of the time-honored distinction between strategy and tactics. 
Even if that were possible, it is not really desirable, because of the operation of 
reduction — this being explicable in terms of that — it allows. Rather, stratagems are 
better set out in terms of an extensive, open-ended listing through which they and 
their virtues might be enumerated and explored on their own count. What is more, 
they also display a certain undecidability because inevitably a stratagem does not 
describe or prescribe an action that is certain in its outcome. Cultivating a sensibility 

22 
Introduction
is thus not the operation of an aesthete but a practical element of the approach 
adopted here, a jogging out of habit-forming stabilities. As Foucault underlines in his 
discussion of the  “ gray, meticulous and patiently documentary ” quality of Nietzschean 
genealogy, a certain attention to slight nuances of detail, to  “ disparity ” — those attenu-
ated or recessive contrasts — is crucial to the proper operation of evaluation.  62 Apropos 
of an algorithm, a technical invention, the informal mediating practices of a manager, 
say, this means an attentiveness to the precise latitude of operation within which that 
algorithm, invention, or practice will achieve the desired effect, what Graci á n might 
have called  agudeza — acuity, sharpness, wit. Like the politician who, observing the 
rules of contemporary oration, overdoses on the rule of three or on the pregnant pause 
when speaking in public, the pragmatics of a stratagem always risk misfiring,  63 espe-
cially when treated as a simple code requiring no artfulness or ingenuity in its deploy-
ment. Applying a rule or following a protocol does, of course, have a value, but the 
desire to form part of a mechanism to which such following testifies is itself a strat-
agematically helpful misunderstanding of the shifting operations of relations of force. 
Naturally leaks, queues, recursive structures, not to mention the time-honored prac-
tices of psychological operations or intelligence gathering, may be interpreted as 
component elements of a potentially formalizable system, and they are often thought 
so in certain conspiracies. However, to treat them as such has its risks, not the least 
of which is to overstate and hence underestimate their effectiveness. Similarly, to see 
tactics at play (where we see stratagems) is equally to run the risk of tacitly assuming, 
by contrast, the underlying coherence of a strategy, missing the critical operations of 
circumstance and the contingencies of the opportune moment.  64 
 In an unclear but doubtless determinable relationship to sophistry, Schopenhauer ’ s 
exploration of the  “ art of always being right ” (he mischievously claimed for it the 
status of dialectic, rereading Aristotle against Hegel) entailed the elaboration of a series 
of stratagems for working with the propensities of argumentative language to fool, 
lead astray, trip up.  65 A stratagem in this context was not just a power play but a 
deliberate attempt at exploiting natural language and the opportunities that the tem-
poral unfolding of discourse provides. Working on the other ’ s susceptibility to entice-
ment and entrapment by language and profiting at every moment from the advantage 
it might confer, the risk was always that one might oneself get taken in, hooked by 
one ’ s own verbal dexterity, missing the sucker punch. However, as has already been 
remarked, this approach to, and cataloging of, stratagems had the relative luxury of 
operating within a highly restricted media ecology, in which one might plausibly 
claim that power operated in relation to forms of communicative action that depended 
largely on speech and writing. Such is not really the case today, when speech and 

Introduction 
23
writing are continuously remediated through ever longer chains or networks of people, 
devices, and protocols, in which  “ debate ” occurs only in a limited subset of situations. 
So while the general principle of a stratagematic analysis remains in place, the task 
now is made more difficult by the proliferation of media, the range of materials and 
kinds of languages or semiotic systems at play. In any case, verbal jousting  à la 
Schopenhauer is rather too evidently a spectator sport these days, such that if one 
seeks to capture the value of thinking with the stratagematic approach here, it will 
have to be away from the lights and noise of the front-of-house theatrics, in the 
 “ articulation work ” that makes the fireworks possible. As we also learn from likes of 
Machiavelli and Graci á n, a certain discrete unobtrusiveness is often the best way to 
shine. 
 The stratagematic mode of writing, then, offers a way of exploring the opportunities 
and affordances of media and mediation. The counsel it offers is regrettably not a set 
of recipes for success, even if we have a liking for the algorithmic or phantasmic ten-
dencies of certain publications in the broad field of media operations.  66 Here again 
the approach takes something of its inspiration from Machiavelli, whose name has, 
in the Western political tradition, become a byword for naked advocacy of the values 
of deception. And yet, as the most studious of recent commentaries have suggested, 
there is a sense in which his writings actually take up a practice of  dissimulation , an 
ironic approach that consists in dropping hints, helping readers to sharpen their own 
skills in the assessment of appearances:  “ dissimulation about deception, ” rather than 
its advocacy pure and simple.  67 But it may be too late to go back, to reconstruct the 
real Machiavelli underneath the many-layered versions and imaginary constructions 
of generations of scholars, politicians, and fabulators; and a potential for flattery and 
aggrandizement arises from the thought that one might be imitating such a figure 
from the past. As Erica Benner puts it,  “ He is well aware that modern princes and 
republics frequently mimic the names, maxims, and other appearances of antiquity 
in the hope of lending an aura of greatness to imprudent or  disonesto deeds, ” a view 
that should itself be taken as a shrouded warning with current value, as  “ it is unlikely 
that Machiavelli wants his contemporaries to imitate ancient political works in this 
shallow way. ” 68 The lesson here is clear: anything other than a thoroughly authentic 
relation to the past, to the real Machiavelli, is a mistake. But the imaginary, fantasized, 
or crudely naturalized Machiavellis have value too, because beings of fiction have a 
value that is not to be underestimated, not the least of which is to point toward 
the pragmatic value of deception about dissimulation. The stratagem negotiates, plays 
with, and yields to the seductive values of the imaginary and the real in equal measure 
and as such provides an opening to evil media. 


 Intelligence 
 Brainwashing 
 And if the lambs say among themselves:  “ these birds of prey are evil; and whoever is least like 
a bird of prey, but rather its opposite, a lamb — would he not be good? ” there is no reason to find 
fault with this institution of an ideal, except perhaps that the birds of prey might view it a little 
ironically. 
 — Friedrich Nietzsche,  On the Genealogy of Morality 
 Evil media have a history. We have alluded to some elements of this past in the intro-
duction, but such histories need not extend centuries into deep time or sport the 
names of famed scholars and diplomats; they may also exist in the shallow history of 
electronic media and echo emptily to the fame of nameless operatives. An example 
of such is brainwashing, characterized by indoctrination, mind control, the manipula-
tion of thought patterns and brains, characterized as clumps of rewireable stuff. An 
imaginative construction from the Cold War era, brainwashing is always something 
that others do, your enemy does. The other, you convince yourself, is an enemy of 
autonomous rationality, a purveyor of cheap and manipulative ideologies, an ill-willed 
manipulator of the free-thinking individual. And if the other, in this way, is bad, 
malevolent, or evil, then we, you conclude, must be good. 
 Any orientation in the field of study of evil media necessarily pays homage to 
brainwashing. Arising as a polemical phenomenon in an era of acute paranoia, it fixes 
in our imaginary the panicky affect of the loss of autonomy to some malevolent other 
forever bent on subliminally directing our thoughts to alien ends. More dramatic and 
obviously politicized than the various bodies of media-effects research that were 
popular at the same time,  1 brainwashing tries to convince us of the existence of a 
geopolitical threat that would at the same time launder our thoughts and wipe clean 
this already too mischievous muscle. 

26 
Intelligence
 But in the now tarnished hall of mirrors of the Cold War, the strategic accusation 
of brainwashing belies the many layers of manipulation and deception to which a 
public — and those who saw themselves as gaming them — trained to accept the cred-
ibility of an appeal to science in the face of totalitarian ideology was subject. Just as 
exposing the conjurer ’ s tricks does not necessarily spoil an illusion, examining the 
effectiveness of brainwashing techniques and polemic does not preclude the continu-
ing exploitation of the creative possibilities of low-level manipulation and mind 
control: on the condition that we understand the manipulative suggestions of the 
brainwashing process as so many germs of thought with which to infect their hosts. 
As with hypnosis and sophistry, what is put into play with brainwashing, when we 
review its emergence and strategic operation, is an ensemble of forces that no one can 
pretend to master, short of being taken in by their own dissembling. 
 Shorn of its luridly sensationalist trappings, the polemical and strategic unity of 
brainwashing as a phenomenon discloses some of the epistemo-technical ruses of 
modern reason. Brainwashing not only links a set of practices and techniques but also 
and inseparably offers a tacit commentary on, and an image of, those same practices 
and techniques and their relationship to the mechanisms by which they may be 
proved. The real effectiveness of brainwashing as a historical construct lies in the way 
that it dissociates science from politics within the kingdom of representation, situating 
good science on one side and the malevolent manipulation of science and reason on 
the other side of a heavily politicized divide. 
 This dissociation testifies to one of the simple and time-honored rules proposed 
by Schopenhauer:  “ The discovery of objective truth must be separated from the art 
of winning acceptance for propositions. ” 2 The specific stratagems that one must follow 
in observing this rule, of course, are as varied as the practices, techniques, and 
technologies in question, but  that the rule is followed is a practical imperative, one 
that is usefully contrasted with the categorical imperative of Kantian morality, with 
its universalizing test for actions that respect the autonomy of humanity as an 
end. Purporting always to be right is crucial, especially in an economy in which 
cognition, knowledge, and science are central. For the sake of appearances, it is your 
 duty to pretend to truth: respect for the spectacle of purely autonomous rationality 
demands it. 3 
 Following Schopenhauer ’ s lead, any study of brainwashing keen to press its tech-
niques into the service of some other form of mind control must accept as a prereq-
uisite that the initial presentation of brainwashing as the malign external perversion 
of otherwise sound science tells only part of the story. Indeed, the symmetries in the 
narration of brainwashing are too obvious to ignore: the mind is manipulated against 

Intelligence 
27
its will by an external force; science is perverted against its essence by an external 
force (as if scientists themselves never invented fantastic trials of strength in their 
undertakings). A more interesting image of brainwashing emerges from taking the 
opposite view: not of a cynical manipulation of science but of its erection into an all 
too credible ideal. Why would the NKVD officer manipulating a prisoner using the 
concepts of Pavlovian psychology be any different from the CIA operative drawing 
on the Freudian concept of transference to rationalize his own practices? Or experi-
mental treatment using an erstwhile  “ lie serum ” be any less scientific than the con-
siderably more widespread belief in the efficacy of frontal lobotomies?  4 Borrowing 
from the sophisticated musings of Jean-Fran ç ois Lyotard, we might say that when the 
scientist waves his magic wand,  “ It is not the addressee who is seduced by the addres-
sor. The addressor, the referent, and the sense are no less subject than the addressee 
to the seduction exerted. ” 5 
 The theatrical spectacle of people not fully in control of their mental processes did 
not emerge for the first time at the show trials of the Stalinist purges, with the confes-
sions of Zinoviev and company. The asylum in the hospital at Salp ê tri è re in Paris 
formed the setting for Jean-Martin Charcot, a real P. T. Barnum of nineteenth-century 
science, to display his hysterics in the service of scientific inquiry. The context is dif-
ferent, the mechanism and the ends, too, but Charcot ’ s hysterics performed for audi-
ences (the real one in the Tuesday lectures, the virtual one in the photographs of the  
Iconographie ) as did Stalin ’ s opponents.  6 The difference, of course, is that the neurolo-
gist Charcot ’ s showmanship created a science (psychoanalysis), while Stalin ’ s created 
an intelligence agency (the CIA). This sort of technological  epideixis , this showing (and 
showing off), in both instances had a remarkable impact: a heightened sensitivity to 
the presumed remarkable powers of science and technique. 
 Some interesting symmetries connect these different situations: Charcot makes his 
patients perform so that offstage the genius can reinforce his scientific credibility; 
Stalin makes his victims perform so that offstage the Kremlin can reinforce its political 
power. The journalists and intelligence experts weave together a narrative making 
Stalin a performer in a new theater of images so that the genius offstage — actually, we 
don ’ t want to overemphasize these similarities or make the situations appear more 
clear-cut than they really are. It ’ s not quite certain who is performing, who is acting 
or acting out, and for whom. When brainwashing was invented, was the real monster, 
the evil deus ex machina pulling the strings, Stalin? Or was it Allen Dulles, whispering 
in Truman ’ s ear? The journalist Edward Hunter, breaking the news about brainwashing 
in Red China?  7 Or perhaps it was just the television set in the corner all along? The 
point is that in Salp ê tri è re, as in the United States after World War II, an apparatus 

28 
Intelligence
that produces something as  “ self-evident ” fact is required. A whole chain of events, a 
whole network of actors, is required to give brainwashing the amplifying power that 
it possessed as part of a moral panic. The polemical phenomenon  “ brainwashing ” 
doesn ’ t emerge in a void, the result of some purely ideological fantasy, any more than 
it refers unproblematically to a set of unequivocal facts. 
 In the immediate aftermath of World War II, the strategic situation between the 
Soviet Union and the West resembles nothing if not the epistemic hell of the analytic 
situation of transference and countertransference: What does Stalin want? What does 
Truman want? If he says  x , it ’ s because he wants me to believe  y , but he knows that 
I know that he wants me to believe  y , so there must be a  z . Every suggestion spirals 
into a sump of strategically deployed signs. Perhaps it is not so surprising that one 
might invent a theory (game theory)  8 that effectively formalizes and rationalizes this 
endless, double-handed interpretative delirium — and equally unsurprising that this 
kind of formalism then makes it into the scientific study of unconscious processes.  9 
But least incongruous of all perhaps is the growing awareness of no longer quite being 
in control of one ’ s thought processes. In this context, the real genius of the heteroclite 
construct  “ brainwashing ” lies in the remarkable diversionary tactics it inaugurates for 
wayward psyches: capture and displace the attention of your audience so that it 
focuses on what is happening somewhere else, on the other side of the Iron Curtain, 
or the other side of the room, where the television innocently beams away. 
 The shimmering multiplication of images, reflections, and refractions aside, the 
accusation of brainwashing stabilizes around a credulous staging of the authority and 
power of science. The Manhattan Project had already detonated its own payload of 
scientific power, and  Sputnik was about to project an image of technoscientific advance 
into the stratosphere; and in the absence of the other (the so-called Red Menace is a 
weakly imaginative construct that fills a void), the very real ignorance at play at the 
dawn of the postwar era readily appeals to psychology to somehow crystallize and 
stabilize the  “ intuitions ” of those at the controls of strategic policy. In a way, the 
intelligence agencies could do little else: in the absence of a real object of study, or of 
those  “ reliable witnesses ” that are the hallmark of any science that has managed to 
turn its artifactual, experimental constructions into conductors of the real, one could 
only ever appeal to a speculative construction, and a fetish of scientific method.  10 
 The crucial point about brainwashing, then, is not that it needs to be grounded in 
some set of references to science or technology. It is the appeal to science and technol-
ogy to explain brainwashing (and hopefully manipulate to one ’ s own ends) that gives 
this polemical phenomenon the ability to assemble hearts, minds, and federal budgets. 
And like any kind of weaving together, such operations prompt other movements, in 

Intelligence 
29
this case providing something of a rationale for torture, given the way that CIA inves-
tigations into brainwashing quickly became a laboratory for studying interrogation 
techniques.  11 At a historical point when such large-scale sureties as the Cold War have 
not so much collapsed as been dissolved, the permeation of such dynamics into new 
lines of alliance is worth scenting out. Everyone feels happier if he believes he has 
science and not just ideological manipulation on his side: the populace at large, the 
torturers, the policy wonks, the politicians. And if you can ’ t directly control the 
thought patterns of these others, you can at least suggest through inference that if 
the other is bad, then I must be good, or at least realistic. 
 Systemic Ambiguity 
 With most species of orchids, it is not the fittest but the most deceptive ones that survive.  12 
 In a world in which a primary economic horizon is one of war in its various modali-
ties (conflict with the irreducible other, the perpetual struggle of all against all, or 
asymmetric warfare), the kind of practical criticism traditionally carried out by intel-
ligence and counterintelligence operatives becomes a vital necessity. As has recently 
been noted, the surprise conjunction of literary criticism and geopolitical strategizing 
represented by Cold War intelligence practices at senior levels of the CIA and its fore-
runners allowed for an attentiveness to, and cultivation of, ambiguity that presented 
an invaluable means for monitoring, evaluating, manipulating, and deceiving the 
other. 13 Ambiguity, along with the mental conflict it discloses and creates, is at once 
a diagnostic tool, to the extent that it symptomatizes potentially antagonistic or 
threatening intentions, and a critical weapon, to the extent that it creates doubts, 
uncertainties, and the possibilities for divergences in the field of action in which it is 
at work. For the assiduous operative holed up in an office in Langley, Virginia, in 
Ludovisi in Rome, or in St. James ’ s in London, applying the same scrupulous attention 
to textual detail and the nuances of phrase in a covert operation such as HT/Lingual 
as would once have been applied to a poem by Ezra Pound or a letter composed to 
e.   e. cummings appears as a geopolitical imperative and defense of imperiled imperial 
values. 
 The movement is from the file to the document to the text and from there, through 
close reading, to the other and their intentions. With suitably muted ambiguity, 
William Empson argued that  “ the fundamental situation, whether it deserves to be 
called ambiguous or not, is that a word or a grammatical structure is effective in several 
ways at once. ” 14 Acknowledging the claims of his critics, that almost anything could 

30 
Intelligence
be considered ambiguous given the expansive understanding of the notion that  The 
Seven Types of Ambiguity exhibits, Empson defends his position on the grounds that 
its more encompassing vision would be better able to find causes for  “ so straddling a 
commotion and so broad a calm ” as a reader is moved to.  15 Enter New Criticism and 
the strategy of close reading. Enter James Jesus Angleton and the newly minted posi-
tion of the CIA ’ s head of counterintelligence. 
 For the gray eminence determined to exercise the strategic calculus of statecraft, it 
takes but a small permutation of the terms involved in Empson ’ s claim that  “ the 
machinations of ambiguity are among the very roots of poetry ” to find an artful beauty 
in deception and dissimulation.  16 However, for literary critics and intelligence opera-
tives working in the nascent era of mass media, with the still unchallenged cultural 
hegemony of the book and an education in literature as yet untroubled by the ten-
sions to which the presence of so-called minorities would expose the canon, the kind 
of ambiguity to which their eyes and ears were sensitive could be seen to arise from 
the intentionality and mental conflict of individuals immersed in a single language, 
and what is more, a language that could be considered the bearer of largely consensual, 
but somewhat threatened, cultural values. While for Empson the concern was one of 
bringing language  “ under control, ” 17 exploring and exploiting the covert action of 
ambiguity, practicing New Criticism CIA-style depended on the idea that cracks and 
faults in the use of language symptomatize an intention that is often undisclosed, 
betraying a form of mental conflict, the disclosure of which matters for the sake of 
national security. Little matter that the intention could be a much-fantasized threat 
to world-historical destiny; ambiguities (manifest as a detail effective in several ways 
at once, alternate meanings resolved into one, unconnected meanings given simulta-
neously, combined meanings indicating a complicated state of mind, fortunate confu-
sion, irrelevance provoking interpretation, full contradiction) are indicators of 
deception and thus indicative of a forthcoming action that must be thwarted, turned, 
or inhibited, influenced by the production of material that selectively guides. The 
conviction of Angleton ’ s practical criticism is that the other is always the bearer of a 
hidden message that close reading can disclose, and if it cannot, if ambiguity cannot 
be resolved, then other techniques are available for disclosing or producing hidden 
truths. 18 Naturally, if the other isn ’ t behaving deceptively before the adoption of 
countermeasures, you can be sure that he will afterward, as the myriad forms of blow-
back attest. 
 Parallel to Angleton ’ s rise began the long career of the computer in the unveiling, 
encrypting, and sifting of signals intelligence. Perhaps one might see his emphasis on 
literary skill as a preemption of its negation in the machining of language (analogous 

Intelligence 
31
to the way that, in media theory, photography is often said to have purified painting). 
As such, the world today is also one of scripts, of databases, of data structures and 
algorithms, a world of machines as much as of texts or documents. Equivocal language 
includes not only the semantic richnesses of Shakespearean diction and the stutter-
phonics of Gertrude Stein but also the aridity and obsessively repetitive ordering of 
assembly language and the fastidious deductive hierarchies of first-order predicate 
calculus. Likewise the intentional action of an individual is only a limit case of a more 
general and dispersed array of forms of agency, of kinds that are always agonistic: 
humans talking to machines, machines talking to humans, machines talking to 
machines, and so on. In such circumstances, ambiguity is more helpfully understood 
as something that arises not from conflicted or covertly oppositional intentions but 
from the jarring and clashing, the mutating modulations of systems and mediations, 
in which problematic zones of indeterminacy arise because no system is ever truly 
 “ closed. ” It is never quite possible to eradicate the interaction of formal systems with 
natural languages — whether that be in the  “ object ” languages that formalisms seek to 
ground and explicate or in the now mundane interactions between programmed 
machines and their human users. When systems interact, the patterns of behavior 
that they exhibit, their potential for mutual misinterpretation, grow from something 
arising between them, a crack, a fault, or a translation failure, which then becomes a 
critical factor composing their subsequent internal states and mutual change. Gilles 
Deleuze, borrowing from Leibniz, the genial philosopher of mathematical systems, 
theorizes the central role of  “ ambiguous signs ” in their relationship with the bifurca-
tions that emerge around the singular points of a system.  “ We are, he says, no longer 
faced with an individuated world constituted by means of already fixed singularities, 
organized into convergent series. .   .   . We are now faced with the aleatory point of 
singular points, with the ambiguous sign of singularities. ” 19 
 But far from reducing the opportunities for manipulation and deception, the new 
situation of systemic ambiguity opens up and extends the scope of intelligence and 
counterintelligence operations for the astute media operative. Of course, under such 
circumstances, maintaining the prerogatives of a dominant imperial center becomes 
a considerable challenge, which is perhaps one reason to be thankful that many of 
the tools and techniques for detecting and tracking the ambiguities that portend 
mental conflict  and social antagonism can be provisionally conferred on the algo-
rithms and data structures of dataveillance and forensic computing technologies.  20 
Nevertheless, in a period in which it is difficult to trace patterns of conflict and the 
emergence of antagonisms back to a single binary opposition with any degree of 
plausibility, the gray zones of gray media call for new forms of investigation and a 

32 
Intelligence
nuanced approach to the kinds of tensions and patterns of interference that arise. 
If the operatives of the Cold War could reserve for themselves the position of gray 
eminence, the distant adviser to the executive power, the new spaces of collectively 
intelligent networks and the asymmetrical relations these put in place demand instead 
the more difficult position of gray immanence. 
 Objectify Indeterminacy 
 Understanding that ambiguity is as dispersed as the forms of mediation that make up 
agency and that confer a consistency on the links and connections of power is crucial 
to developing an adequate stratagematic calculus. The best course of action in many 
circumstances is to condense these links and to focus on the ways that they sometimes 
converge in and on individuals, since the proverbial hypothesis of the weakest link 
in the chain is often valid. But it is too easy to mistake the patterns of behavior of 
nodes in a network for the intentions of a subject: pattern recognition provides a 
comfortable resolution to the problems that systemic ambiguity poses. However, if all 
that is yielded vis- à -vis others is the undisclosed intentions of subjects, then the col-
lective, the machinic, the workings, may be missed — risking turning the ambiguities 
of the other to the balance sheet of the moral account. 
 In the most banal of interactions, systemic ambiguity typically manifests itself as 
 “ user error. ” 21 The erroneous ways of the user, like the bugs that our immersion in 
natural languages produce when brought into conjunction with formal systems, testify 
to the evil that an open semantics, a semantics that cannot be parsed in a finite series 
of deductively closed steps, bears within it.  22 The explicitness of the rules according 
to which formal systems operate, in this way, work to pass judgment on the transpar-
ency of the actions and statements that those systems are brought to bear on: whether 
that occurs in the form of the quantifiable cataloging of actions in an audit trail, the 
policy and procedures painstakingly and minutely enumerated in the documents of 
corporate governance, or the more mundane actions involved in producing an elec-
tronic document.  23 The script that is followed in a call center confers a metric on the 
movements of persuasion and influence in a conversation, providing an external 
measure on the pleasures, operations, and meanings of speech, and works its way into 
the mental devices used to parse language. The caller takes a new tack, and the prag-
matics of the speech situation twist subtly:  “ Have a nice day ” now means that the 
supervisor can stop listening in on the conversation. Actions that might once have 
been performed as if they were second nature, judgments that may once have been 
formulated as a routine element of local knowledge, are accomplished haltingly; the 

Intelligence 
33
uncertainties that emerge where one system decodes and recodes another generate 
patterns of behavior that conflict and bulge with the newly framed norm. 
 User error increases to the extent that divergences from the norm increase: it may 
be the symptom of a conflicted mentality, easy to blame on stupidity and a failure to 
internalize new norms of production (What do you mean you haven ’ t read the 
manual?), but may also be a sign of the tense bifurcations brought into play in a shift-
ing ecology of media forms. Beyond a certain threshold, persistent user error may be 
cast as deviance, motivational deficit, a lack of adhesion to the creed expressed in the 
mission statement, a failure to meet the requirements specified in the job description, 
a failure of the education system, a weakness in the labor market. (You just can ’ t get 
the staff these days .   .   .) 
 The resolution of systemic ambiguity through the attribution of user error is itself 
fraught with anxiety. It is difficult to escape the assumption that the  “ shape of actions ” 
taking form in media systems must ultimately be understood in terms of what com-
puters still cannot do,  24 implying that a human element ultimately takes responsibility 
for the warps and shifts in a technosocial environment. Likewise it proves difficult to 
conceptualize formal and natural systems without introducing some hierarchy between 
them. The  “ 3C ” thinking (command, control, communication) that pervades the 
architectures of corporate accountability offers the classic double-edged sword here: 
to be in charge of, and take responsibility for, a system equally means accepting a 
level of responsibility for its failure; if your staff really are that stupid, the suspicion 
may arise that you are a cretin, too. But equally (and the recurrent  “ surprise ” problems 
in the financial markets offer the most obvious example here) the most catastrophic 
stupidity arises from the sedulous dedication to conform one ’ s actions and judgments 
to the letter of what complex technological support systems tell you. Once again, 
legacy systems from an earlier era of conflict provide useful pointers. The case of Kim 
Philby, the British-Soviet double agent frequently thought of as the  “ perfect ” spy, 
shows that it is in the most exemplary, least ambiguous behavior, the most dedicated 
adherence to norms and the most admirable professionalism, that the greatest danger 
lies, ultimately giving rise to the recurrent concern  “ who — or what — is running 
whom? ” In a world where the problem has changed and ambiguity has become sys-
temic, potent ambiguity lies perhaps in the willed closing of any gap between user 
and algorithm. 
 Somewhat late in the day, management theory discovered that ambiguity can 
have a useful strategic function within organizations. As a  “ strategy in organizational 
communication, ” ambiguity fosters  “ unified diversity ” (what the ancient Greeks 
would have called  homologia , meaning:  “ We don ’ t agree, but it sounds like we do ” ), 

34 
Intelligence
maintains positions of privilege, promotes plausible deniability, and facilitates orga-
nizational change. Now, quite aside from giving the scheming executive an efficiency-
based rationale for his or her power games — and the invaluable addition of an extra 
equivocation in his or her action (something rarely considered in communication and 
organization theory), management theory focuses somewhat exclusively on written 
and oral communication, precluding a more complete appreciation of the operative ’ s 
palette.  25 Indeed, the research focus on linguistic communication can itself have useful 
strategic outcomes, since it removes attention from the shifting environment in which 
that communication operates. 
 But systemic ambiguity suggests that it is in the subtly shifting composition of the 
technosocial environment that the efficacious operations of uncertainty, equivoca-
tion, hesitation, and other forms of deviation and deception occur. For digital tech-
nologies, the introduction of a new piece of software produces a new enunciative 
situation, a style of statements and the engendering of particular forms of interaction. 
Not unreasonably, the perplexed user, at a loss to deal with a machine that does not 
easily disclose its intentions (it rarely says  “ work harder ” or  “ think less ” ), frequently 
raises the question of what the machine wants, and in an extension of transferential 
dynamic,  “ repairs ” the gaps in the discourse of the machine, ceding authority to a 
machine, which is thus assumed to somehow know better.  26 But as critics of both 
analysis and artificial intelligence have suggested, in such situations, giving the appear-
ance of thinking that the other has some profound knowledge is itself a ruse, a game. 
 It is not surprising, then, in a complex ecology of human and nonhuman agents 
in which unstable mediators mediate unstable media, that systemic ambiguity is 
resolved by the injection of redundancy into one or other of the systems in a relation: 
the disambiguation of language through the insistence that one word must mean one 
thing at a time to both partners in a dialogue, for example, or the codification of the 
end user ’ s relation to a software application through overly explicit instructions. 
But too prompt a resolution of ambiguity precludes an understanding of the machina-
tions that it accomplishes. For philosophy, that meant a decisive misunderstanding 
of the ways in which consensus could be formed or consent engineered, leaving the 
politicking of language to continue in its sophisticated ways to the dismay of critical 
rationality. Stabilizing the place of digital artifacts as known, determinate quantities 
similarly blocks off an exploration of the transformative possibilities they might 
introduce. 
 Crucially, systemic ambiguity is as much about the  production of signs as it is about 
their deciphering. Becoming able to read the shifting balance and distribution of forces 
in fluctuating patterns of uncertain signs is one thing. Being able to produce such 
signs, to turn them to your advantage, is another. Granted, the introduction of a new 

Intelligence 
35
technology in the workplace or the home often gives unintentional rise to the ambi-
guities inherent in uncertain translations from one language, technology, or coding 
system to another. In these circumstances, actions that might otherwise be interpreted 
as a malevolent power play can easily be recast as something else. A workforce can be 
reskilled or modernized by exploiting the hesitations that arise over the interpretation 
of a new system (get rid of these expensive, technophobic old-timers). Equally, a more 
adaptable, more flexible generation, anxious about the cultural privileges that accrue 
to older media systems, might be persuaded to find in the imperfect translation from 
one system to another a failing and a weakness of a code or language that lacks the 
familiarity of the easy acquisition. What appears truly difficult in such circumstances 
is to maintain and affirm the ambiguity as such. This is because the risk associated 
with operating with and within the ambiguous is the risk associated with the instabil-
ity and reversibility of power relations as such.  27 Uncertainty can communicate a 
perceptible lack of power and an inability to act decisively. Prolonging the indetermi-
nacy that ambiguous signs express means, almost by definition, increasing the likeli-
hood of contestation. When one system does not succeed in subordinating another, 
the translation failures that symptomatize this fault or disturbance, whether glossed 
as user error, bugs, bad design, or system unavailability (or indeed something more 
insidious), point to aberrations in the mediation process and a trial of strength gone 
wrong. 28 
 Leverage Anxiety 
 In a world of ruseful cunning and manipulation, nothing is straightforwardly unam-
biguous or unproblematic; everything is pliable, biddable, suggestible. The question 
of the tools one uses, the forces one has at one ’ s disposal, and the ways in which these 
can be made to work to one ’ s advantage is thus permanently open, including the sleek 
facades and seamless, transparent interfaces that seem to tell another story. In the 
multiple fields of knowledge production, the exercise of strategic or stratagematic 
intelligence requires an attentiveness to what would otherwise remain irredeemably 
obscure epistemological discussion, hairsplitting conceptual distinctions, even throw-
away comments and off-the-cuff remarks. Chairman Mao knew this only too well, 
pointing out that in the field of politics, trouble is an excellent thing:  “ There is great 
chaos under heaven — the situation is excellent. ” 29 Even the emergence of a contro-
versy in a scientific field can furnish crucial indicators for otherwise imperceptible 
shifts, geopolitical impasses, and social problems, offering a toehold for the astute 
media operative. In this way, the faults and disturbances marking our mental universes 
offer the same kinds of opportunities for exploitation as do bugs in the algorithmic 

36 
Intelligence
universes of software, and one stratagem is always in the position of being able to 
turn another to its own account.  30 
 The domain of the psy disciplines — once a favored epistemo-technical resource for 
PR gurus, cold warriors, and wizened imperialists, and drawn on pell-mell in the 
development of strategic ambiguity — yet again proves a crucial resource for following 
the shifting configurations and shadowy actions of mediums. While  “ spychoanalysis ” 
would have been a good name for the fantasized practices of mind control, part of 
the genius of psychoanalysis was to have linked what it does as a set of therapeutic 
practices to a conception of knowledge and truth that would exonerate the field of 
any suggestive wrongdoing. Its promise to uncover hidden truths, its use of the 
concept of the transference to break down the unconscious resistances of the patient 
and mitigate against the possibly distorting effects of what is usually thought of as 
suggestion, and more generally to detect and disclose things that a patient could not 
or would not admit, has, one will admit, a certain strategic allure. For the squeamish, 
psychoanalysis certainly has a more seductive quality than torture, at least if it is a 
question of getting people to speak. More refined than the salivating hounds of behav-
iorism, in the context of social power and geopolitical conflict, the theatrical mise-
en-sc è ne of its conceptual framework, psychoanalysis ’ s learned allusions to ancient 
Greek culture also give added value and a hefty payout of cultural capital with which 
to speculate and scheme. As with the resonant connections between counterintelli-
gence practice and literary criticism discussed earlier, mapping furtive and clandestine 
dynamics into textual structures and theatrical scripts offers an ornamental handle on 
the resolution of geopolitical problems. The stratagematic value of concepts of analysis 
is worth exploring here, then, even if now only diminishing returns are to be gained 
from slipping a little Freud into one ’ s daily briefing. 
 The double reference to knowledge and to therapy within analysis exemplifies the 
possibility of a flip-flopping move that can be used with impunity to avoid unwelcome 
accusations of trickery and manipulation. On the one hand, the therapeutic claim —
 we ’ re only trying to help alleviate the suffering of psychological disorders — can be 
used to sanction any manner of improper suggestiveness in practice. On the other, 
the knowledge claim — that in analysis patients disclose the truth of their suffering —
 may countervail the criticism that the analyst puts ideas into the patient ’ s head, 
constructing the problems that analysis then claims to resolve. Unlike behaviorism, 
which quite openly acknowledged its debts to the model of reflex action by siphoning 
off the excess produced in expectation of reward, the implications of the suggestive 
stimulations of reflex action were historically cast aside on the royal road to the 
unconscious.  31 

Intelligence 
37
 Thus one might say that in spite of the well-meaning therapeutic intent of analysis, 
its appeal to science offers a cover, an alibi, an air of benevolent neutrality and cultural 
sophistication, a confident feeling of being in the right, to what others might see as 
a technique of influence.  32 We have already seen the value of this in the polemical 
construction of brainwashing. So when Jung, breaking with Freud, remarks that in the 
transference, that imprimatur of scientificity, the analyst can appear as a devil, a god, 
or a sorcerer,  33 it is not difficult to laugh such things off as the obsessions of a mytho-
maniac. (The archetype? Not a scientific concept, I ’ m afraid.) But when we add to the 
balance sheet the systemic downgrading of fear in favor of an endogenous logic of 
anxiety, 34 and factor in the findings of recent work on the psychology of torture (dif-
ficult to attribute those anxieties to the subject in question),  35 we cannot help thinking 
that Jung might have had a point. Perhaps the reconstruction of the unconscious 
might have been at the service of other forces than those of pure science all along? 
Maintaining plausible deniability for the hex you ’ ve placed on the terrified libido is 
made considerably easier if you can excise in advance any connections that the uncon-
scious might have with the outside world. 
 Part of the opposition that psychoanalysts, stalwarts of the Cold War of the psyche, 
have toward initiatives developing elsewhere — psychopharmacology, cognitive science, 
and neurobiology, for example — stems from the complications that they bring into 
the dynamic of transference (whose operative structural fantasies are rather homolo-
gous to brainwashing and mind control): what strange, active, and possibly empower-
ing effects might an anxiolytic or an antidepressant have on a patient ’ s unconscious 
resistances to the outing of the truth? The medium of psychoanalysis is speech, but 
a powerfully motivated forgetting must be at work to make us ignore the possibility 
that the psyche is constructed through other media, too. Irony fading, the analyst 
comments that, in one such effect,  “ Addiction opens a field where no single word of 
the subject is reliable and where he escapes analysis altogether. ” 36 Fearing the spiking 
of the psyche, the analyst insists on the exclusion of any other agents than the 
medium of language. 
 What we are getting at is that a certain doctrinal (or theoretical — the difference is 
slight here) rigidity renders a practice open to the classic counterintelligence scam and 
ruse of power: the turning of an agent. Given the wilderness of mirrors in which 
analysis finds itself, a strong possibility exists of no longer knowing who or what is 
running whom: we can ask in all seriousness whether Anna O., right at the inception 
of the analytic movement, was humoring Breuer and Freud all along? In any case, one 
cannot ignore the hypothesis that the unconscious might be  simulated in particular 
situations any longer.  37 What becomes of your intelligence-gathering operations if the 

38 
Intelligence
other you think you are controlling is ironically conforming to your demands or 
imitating you in a game of sly civility?  38 
 One can always find a use for someone or something that so adamantly holds to 
doctrinal purity and the universality of its judgments, maintaining a haughty disdain 
for anything even moderately pragmatic: the fabrication of a terrain predisposed to 
certain kinds of affective configuration (anxiety, a disposition considered to be uni-
versal); a willing ignorance of the myriad other mediators by which an unconscious 
might be constructed; the belief and expectation that politicians, strategists, and mar-
keteers will respect the autonomy of the scientist. Analysis, we might say, prepares the 
ground for depressed, anxiety-prone subjects and offers a remarkable set of tools for 
welding subjects to their symptoms. All the misery of the world, miraculously trans-
formed into the exasperated comments of the parent to the child: You ’ ll see, just wait 
until you ’ re an adult .   .   . 
 So what was it that Jung glimpsed? Devils, demons, gods, sorcerers: mythic images 
going beyond the family, sure, but also something properly  frightening . Castration 
anxiety? Perhaps. To the great benefit of already well-stabilized forces, analysis didn ’ t 
really want to have that much to do with fear. Freud himself sometimes seems to say 
that by virtue of its connection with external objects, fear is unanalyzable.  39 Anxiety, 
by contrast, is not only susceptible to analysis but performs socially useful work in 
preparing us for the kinds of shocks that frightening situations create. Anxiety may 
in some circumstances deliver a high stratagematic yield. But if this distinction seems 
uncertain to us, we cannot ignore the inestimable value of focusing on what happens 
 inside a subject, as part of the more general process by which zones of secrecy, culpa-
bility, and shame can be fabricated. With the cognitive sophisticating of behaviorism 
through algorithmic models giving this approach a new lease on life, the days of the 
use of analysis in the games of intrigue and intelligence may be numbered. Indeed, 
the color-coded lure of mapping brain activity seems to imply that nothing can ever 
be kept truly secret any longer, as if the experimental setup were simply transcribing 
deviant neural activity with perfect transparency and had no power to intimidate of 
its own.  40 Techniques for turning the other to your cause are always welcome, because 
even if, deep down, they are afraid of you, it ’ s always good to have people who can 
keep a secret on your side.  41 
 Speak the Metalanguage of Metabolism 
 The invention of psychopharmacology, following Loewi ’ s experiments in the 1920s 
demonstrating the chemical basis for the transmission of neural messages (while not 

Intelligence 
39
definitively ruling out the previously reigning hypothesis of electrical transmission), 
and the commercial sale of psychotropic drugs such as chlorpromazine and the inven-
tion of benzodiazepines in the 1950s, along with the publication of manuals such as 
the ever-expanding  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , has had a 
powerful effect on the constellation of forces making up  “ the social. ” If the irrational 
exuberance of psychosurgeons demonstrated that social relations and the imperatives 
of the state could sometimes be fabricated or repaired with ice picks and scalpels,  42 
favored tools of the lobotomist, the pop-cultural mythologization of mother ’ s little 
helper, the barbiturate, not only confirms, as McLuhan has it, that the medium is the 
message,  43 but also acts as an index of complex shifts in the ecology of media as 
nervous systems, metabolisms, and the capacity to cope and to compensate become 
integrated, unevenly, into it. Drugs, as mediators, initiators, and attractors of changes 
in bodies, as means of coping with relations between bodies and other elements in 
media ecologies, become handleable as media. Indeed, as under certain interpretative 
regimes the body is but a vehicle for the circulation of information, what else could 
drugs be imagined to be? 
 The development of psychopharmacology and its steady infection of the social 
generates new media spaces, new media with their own messages. These new media 
are no longer simply electronic technologies working at a distance in extended space 
but chemical technologies creating distances in intensive space, keying social relations 
into the biochemical strata of organic material, targeting and mobilizing populations 
of neurons, not through the electronic messaging systems of mass media but through 
the facilitation of neuronal transmission systems, meshing with the loops and hits of 
online connectivity, catalyzing circulation through the topologies of networks linking 
synapses, minds, emotions, technoscience, geopolitics, creating gray media for gray 
matter and vice versa. While no simple one-to-one mapping may exist between the 
use of pharmaceutical substances and widespread patterns of thought, in matters of 
mind control, we should at least be receptive to the idea that new substances generate 
new stratagems. 
 Research programs originating early in the post – World War II era already testify 
to an interest in the manipulative potential of psychopharmaceuticals.  44 And the 
question marks that still hang over the funding of Timothy Leary ’ s research, not 
to mention the propping up of a charismatic leader (John F. Kennedy) by amphet-
amines, that famous smile holding back the strung-out grinding of teeth, are good 
indicators of the strange connections that become possible when active substances 
become a significant component of the clandestine relations and alliances of the 
polity. 

40 
Intelligence
 Psychopharmacology alters the distribution, and thus the balance, of forces politi-
cal, technical, and chemical, factoring in new agents for consideration in the strategic 
calculus of populations. Downplaying the strictly monitored conditions of the s é ance, 
the couch, and the fifty-minute hour in the ongoing battle for hearts and minds, since 
they are frankly too time-consuming, and embracing instead the gaseous dispersion 
and nebulous clouding of chemical media allows for unsupervised processes of self-
medication that bring about the confusion of therapy, governance, and pleasure (albeit 
at the admitted cost of having to find uses for new kinds of  “ small [saleable] addic-
tions ” ), 45 even if such measures require in turn a shift into the multidimensional 
spaces of nonlinear thinking. The slow metabolizing of power through a new alliance 
with chemistry and a corresponding molecularization of conflict, where negotiations 
are now contracted through the prescriptive regimen of the dose or the illicit one of 
the hit, requires an acceptance that bonds (both chemical and social) can be covalent 
as much as they can be ionic, in spite of the ionic ’ s oppositional attractions.  46 
Recognizing the pharmacological dimension of media implies an acceptance, then, of 
a troublesome shift in the characteristic operations of domination and control, to say 
nothing of communication, the problematics of which then play out at a molecular 
level. 
 The mathematical certainties of the causal chains of physics and the precision 
engineering of lock-and-key biological specificity might convince the untutored that 
the identification of the neuronal apparatus productive of affect could henceforth be 
played like a keyboard.  47 But if the hopeful hyping of drug design plays on a well-
entrenched and neatly rationalized model of pharmaceutical practice, in reality, the 
chemical orchestration of inhibition and disinhibition and the corresponding dynam-
ics of control requires much greater forms of artfulness. More specifically, it calls for 
a reckoning with the significant difficulties in making determinism — a useful hypoth-
esis for the laboratory and a resonant aspiration for marketing — scale up and into the 
variegated territories of the social. 
 It is here, in the social, that the trials and tribulations of the weaponization of 
chemical agents help demonstrate some of the new possibilities, risks, and limits of 
control. The cartoon capers of government agents and scientists finding ways to break 
down enemy combatants using cigarettes laced with marijuana is one thing (as 
are the bigger-budget giggles of the exploding cigar as highly targeted assassination 
device),  48 but developing precision delivery systems for chemical weapons is 
quite another: the Moscow Theater siege in 2002, for example, was neither a well-
orchestrated nor a precise military operation.  49 Controlling the impact of something 
that has to be dispersed by aerosol, as a mist in the atmosphere or through thermal 

Intelligence 
41
bomblets (as is the case with BZ),  50 plays havoc with attempts to make the determinist 
logic of linear causality work beyond the level of the individual body. Material inter-
vention at the level of gray matter was supposed to offer this. Doping up or doping 
down neuronal receptors is a tricky proposition once the subject is out in the open, 
and the user must overcome both the blood-brain barrier problem and the targeted-
recipient problem. In an interrogation room, you can strap a suspect down and tease 
up a tender vein, but for battlefield ops and crowd control (CS gas and tear-jerking 
lacrimogens notwithstanding), the aerosol effect either disperses chemicals too quickly 
or concentrates them too indiscriminately. This creates obvious public relations prob-
lems and makes the development of tried and tested battlefield doctrine a complex 
task.  51 The propensity of unstable and unpredictable mediators to generate uncontrol-
lable forms of blowback here presents a world historical, and possibly biohistorical, 
challenge for crisis management.  52 
 Psychopharmacology is not exactly chemical warfare, however (even if pharma-
ceutical companies eagerly play on both sides of the military – civilian divide), and the 
displacements that pharmaceutical products accomplish in the ongoing production 
of the psyche still offer a latitude for maneuver worth exploiting. It may just be that 
psychopharmacology, especially in the gray area between (failed) covert military and 
(successful) overt civilian guises, offers the possibility of a more intelligently negoti-
ated alliance with chemical agents. The use of pill technology for self-administered 
domestic consumption, for example, as opposed to the unpredictable mediations of 
weaponization, or the complex localized institutional apparatuses of lobotomy or ECT, 
allows for more accurate delivery (even if it does depend on a less tightly controlled 
chain of mediators). A pill embodies a strategy with much more tangible reliability 
than the shaky practices of quacks, headshrinkers, and other shamans, to say nothing 
of the eye-watering intrusiveness of the transorbital ice pick. 
 The definite preference that the psychopharmacological machine displays for the 
production of short-term effects is as critical here as is the media form, and can be of 
great value, especially if tied into other apparatuses reliant on the up – down, high – low 
movements typical of machinic junkies (even the stock exchange needs a stimulus 
package from time to time).  53 
 While the poor adaptation of double-blind clinical tests — which allow for the mar-
ketization of drugs — to the evaluation of long-term effects may compound the prob-
lems of blowback over time, the molecules on which such tests focus are actually 
highly effective recruitment devices. Kingmakers of a new kind, they have sealed the 
ascendancy of a new macropolitical actor, the pharmaceutical giant, and while they 
may not possess the diagnostic power of a good doctor or psychoanalyst, in a highly 

42 
Intelligence
pragmatic way, they do not require that a new recruit reveal the truth about himself 
or herself. The massive success of diazepam (from the family of benzodiazepines) — the 
most widely prescribed drug in the United States between 1962 and 1981, according 
to some sources — is exemplary in this regard.  54 While the curative effects of such a 
substance might blur the difference between a symptom and a cause, the molecule 
has no real need for secrecy, guilt, or shame. Look how quickly user groups set them-
selves up on the Internet — doctor – patient confidentiality doesn ’ t enter into the equa-
tion. Anyway, anxiety offers a useful cover story for dealing with harmful or fearful 
incursions from the outside world, and in the worst-case scenario, under conditions 
of addiction (or influence, but for different reasons), as we saw earlier, the subject is 
easily discredited as an unreliable witness. 
 More significantly, perhaps, one of the invaluable side effects of benzodiazepines, 
cyclopyrrolones, dopamines, and SSRIs (such as Fluoxetine, i.e., Prozac) is to have 
accelerated the process of reforming and recomposing the very field in which and on 
which they operate. From an initial position where they complemented the medium 
of speech in the talking cure, pharmaceuticals have ended up taking over completely. 
Cognitive behavioral therapy would not exist if not for the reorganizing effects of 
drugs on research in psychology, creating the possibility of positing a comforting, if 
not exactly sophisticated, physiological basis for mental disorder.  55 But equally, liqui-
dating the  “ dependency on authority ” effects characteristic of therapeutic speech, the 
biochemical end of deference creates an ambiguous situation. While existential dramas 
of anxiety are replaced by effects of disinhibition that can, it is true, minimize the 
lacerating effects of the group superego (a distinct advantage when trying to operate 
in the amoral zone of strategy), a complete shift of affective investments with group 
identities is forming around the molecule.  56 Harnessing complex metabolic patterns 
and turning agents when the theatrical tragedy of the primal scene has been vaporized 
becomes a multimedia operation, and in the peculiarly interstitial spaces that are 
created when linearity does not scale up, negotiation, ruse, and cunning are open even 
to the most wilted of addicts.  57 
 Proliferate Psychological Operations 
 There ’ s no food in your gut, your sex is being had by someone else, your leaders are betraying 
you, your equipment is breaking. Bombing will begin in twenty-four hours. All those that have 
not left the area place themselves in danger. As you turn your back to your front door to go to 
a day of honest work, a family of strangers has moved in and displaced you. 

Intelligence 
43
 Ostensibly, psyops, psychological operations, are an aspect of media that lacks 
virtue. It is often without the virtues of finesse, nor can it display the extremes of piti-
lessness or dishonor that can sometimes appear as audacious or necessary. Dropped 
from the air as shoddily threatening or exhortatory leaflets,  “ revealed ” by other media 
as anonymous fakes, operating at arm ’ s length as misattributed documents, radio 
programs, or Web sites, psyops forms a part of public relations that operates by 
novel means. Some of the best known of these are hoaxes, but another quality is core 
to the objects produced by psyops units. This, in short, is that they appear to be of 
deliberate shoddiness. Rudimentary drawings, sloganeering text, and ludicrous offers 
of brotherhood and peace are all brought to the fore. They insult the intelligence of 
their recipients, the enemy, and aim to trigger in them a significant margin of over-
confidence. While on the surface, black propaganda hopes to extend the production 
of doubt, the encouragement of turncoats, or estrangement from familiar sources 
of information, it also functions to lure recipients into the idea that their enemies, 
the senders, are more stupid than had previously been thought. This margin operates 
in two ways. First, an overconfidence is achieved in the heart of the enemy. This 
encourages them to act without sufficient care and diligence, to rush. Second, the 
implied lack of sophistication also suggests that enemies understand their opponents 
as being less capable of thought. In most cases, psyops material is disregarded as 
something equivalent to the leaflets of pizza delivery companies or of palm readers 
dumped through the letterbox. In periods of crisis brought about by stupidity, social 
turmoil, or war, however, when the leavings of psy-warriors may be seen as a crucial 
and rare insight into the mind of the enemy, they may be tightly held on to by 
recipients. 
 A different approach to psychological operations comes through various techniques 
that aim to enhance the self-esteem, willingness to experiment, and collective partici-
pation of the recipient subject. The manuals produced in the 1980s by the CIA for use 
in supporting illegal anticommunist militia are useful to read in this regard. One 
manual aimed at Nicaraguan citizens, the famous  “ Freedom Fighter ’ s Manual, ” 58 sets 
out in cartoon form some of the basic forms of sabotage (dropping or losing equip-
ment, letting resources or time go astray). It does so, however, without considering 
sabotage as one of the fine arts.  59 The manual merely presents a set of techniques of 
sabotage without presenting their psychological dimension, a dimension that could 
lead to the extrapolation of new kinds of sabotage. The psychological dimension is, 
however, fully present in another manual produced by the CIA,  “ Psychological 
Operations in Guerrilla Warfare. ” 60 This publication aims to steer death squads toward 

44 
Intelligence
a more community service orientation, with extensive guidance on appearing to be 
accountable to the desires of the population and on turning combatants into a kind 
of fighting focus group as a basic unit of liberation. The techniques of group dynamics 
and self-empowerment through discussion, leading to decision making guided by the 
cadre, are presented alongside some basic techniques of guerrilla fighting. In this 
document, the correct moral and political development of the armed propagandist is 
crucial both in understanding the struggle and in interacting with members of the 
wider population. In such a way, psyops moves on from being a medial equivalent of 
the  ribeaudequin , 61 the medieval war machines consisting of giant wheeled metal rep-
resentations of the faces of terrifying creatures, from which massive blades jutted 
forward to be thrust into the enemy. (These extremely unwieldy weapons were almost 
useless, but all the more terrifying for the flagrancy of the carelessness they displayed.) 
It passes on to the development of psyches and further into the process of their con-
structive self-actuation. 
 The wider question of enhancing the active capacities of the subject of psychologi-
cal operations and using those capacities as the basis for wider collective phenomena 
provides the foundation for a number of historically significant currents. Perhaps most 
salient in a psychological sense is the current declared by experiments that attempt 
to break the passivity of contemporary processes of subjectification, particularly in 
regard to the experiences of media. This is to say that while numerous tendencies 
throughout history work to incorporate psychological, emotional, or spiritual dimen-
sions into medial processes, explicit programs of this kind are more recent and even 
come with a rejection of mediation as a pretext. An early announcement from the 
Situationist International declares that  “ the most pertinent revolutionary experiments 
in culture have sought to break the spectator ’ s psychological identification with the 
hero so as to draw him into activity. ” 62 There is a curse on passivity, vagueness, the 
inability to commit, on pleasure in submission and time wasting, in this and related 
texts, an operationalization of psychology to produce desires in excess of capitalist 
possibility. Whether organized by teams of situationists led by an appointed director  63 
or through  “ collective action to detect, express and realize, ” 64 new desires in which 
individuated psychological structures or formations are not of as much interest as the 
creation of conditions in which such elements are dynamized through the design 
and implementation of specific mise-en-sc è ne,  “ d é cor, ” 65 or events. Psychological 
operations in this sense exist as the  “ setting up, on the basis of more or less clearly 
recognized desires, a temporary field of activity favorable to those desires ” 66 as a means 
for the dialectical development of new desires as a basis for the reconstruction of 
reality. Here psychological operations become recursive. 

Intelligence 
45
 This panoply of means — from the injection of information in deliberately shoddy 
formats; through to white, gray, or black propaganda; toward an increasing emphasis 
on the psychological dimension of the morale of the combatant and citizen as crucial; 
not simply as the key resource or means in the operation on reality but as a site of 
reality construction itself — traces a differential understanding of intelligence, running 
between ostensive stupidity, a narrative of empowerment, and the unleashing of 
desire as sites where the psyche is invented and, in turn, invents its own theater of 
operations. 


 Togetherness 
 Social Engineering 
 It can be difficult to get people to cooperate. It can be difficult to get technological 
artifacts to cooperate. To excel at the hackerly skill of social engineering,  “ you have 
to understand how people think and to see where that intersects with technology. ” 1 
 In this sense, social engineering — as the means of blagging your way through a rule 
set and its lackeys and their equipment — is always one of the crucial components of 
accounts of army, prison, or camp life, the means for a bit of unfettering, a little back 
channel. In such cases, social engineering is the essential lubricant of a disciplinary 
society or a total institution, although calling it engineering is a little grandiose; others 
may call it a work-around or persuasion. How, though, does its position shift in a 
context whose governance is actuated by scripts? Whether read by people at the other 
end of a phone line or run as software, the script is crucial in getting everyone and 
everything to play a role, and in the way that is required. As Herbert Simon notes, 
 “ Administration is not unlike play-acting. .   .   . The effectiveness of the administrative 
process will vary with the effectiveness of the organization and the effectiveness with 
which its members play their parts. ” 2 
 We can also understand social engineering as the reverse of the problem set by John 
Searle ’ s famous Chinese room argument. Here the philosopher of language proposes 
that a computer that produces ostensibly intelligent results may not have any under-
standing of what it processes but may simply possess an adequate rule book for symbol 
manipulation. His argument is against the approach to artificial intelligence known 
as computationalism, the proposition that computers have mental states sufficiently 
analogous to those of a properly formatted human to be considered a phenomenologi-
cally registerable  “ mind. ” As Mark Bishop notes, this position can be held by any form 
of AI research, not simply those clinging to the transubstantiation of minds into 

48 
Togetherness
sequences of symbols but also the more apparently affable connectionist and  “ bottom-
up ” schools.  3 
 But what if there is a complication in the Chinese room? The operator sits in a box 
converting symbols in one language to their apparent equivalents in another by fol-
lowing the instructions. The operator does not need to understand the statements 
being made. What would occur if something outside the box started to use the system 
of symbols, not to generate a direct translation from one language to another, or to 
prove or disprove something about the nature of thought or computation, but to play 
with the system — perhaps to introduce some other qualities of the translator into the 
workings? By making certain conjunctions of symbols, it could be hoped that state-
ments in something akin to a language understood by the translating worker might 
be arrived at. At this point, the person inside the box may be induced to laugh, get 
annoyed, rush, or answer in what they imagine to be a joke, or respond to a cry for 
help to something happening outside the box. In the original formulation of the 
Turing machine, the  “ state of mind ” of the computer, the operative carrying out the 
work of symbolic transactions is bracketed out by the rule book or the  “ note of instruc-
tions, ” allowing them to act properly as a machine until they are indeed abstractable 
as such. Social engineering often relies on gaining access to this state of mind or trick-
ing it into being. 
 As Searle writes in the mode of a thought experiment rather than in the empirical 
mode we use in this book, one thing that he downplays is the labor of the operator. 
The translator might get bored, might start to imagine a reading or become suicidal. 
The position is similar to that of soldiers stationed in nuclear silos, where command 
imagines that they should be bunkered together in pairs in case one should become 
crazed, refuse to fire, or start imagining the desirability of the end of the world, or 
even of communication. Perhaps the former is thought more likely than the latter, 
since it is assumed there will be no persuasion between the pair. The translator, like 
a call center worker, should certainly be subject to recording for training and quality 
control purposes. It is this empirical detail that makes access to the contents of the 
room potentially open to manipulation. 
 Social engineering proliferates with every black box, the putatively stable contents 
of which include an operative that makes it possible to turn the box inside out or to 
work both or either to a satisfactory degree of accuracy. Sometimes it suffices simply 
to ask people to do something they are trained to do, or want to do, or just because 
they don ’ t have anything else to do, in order for them to do it. Here the right tone 
of voice, the use of jargon, references to keywords, and an understanding of the 
working atmosphere are all useful scene setters. As Stanley Milgram, one of the most 

Togetherness 
49
admirable adopters of psychological experimentation in the wild, discovered, some-
times all it takes is a white coat, a clipboard, and the right tone of voice to assume an 
effective position of authority.  4 While the naturalness of acquiescence should be 
assumed as a matter of politeness, etiquette demands the assumption of confirmation 
bias, the registration of the occurrence of what is expected. 
 The Chinese room, Milgram ’ s test of obedience, and the Turing test are cases in 
which control, agency, and intelligence are functionally partitioned by the use of a 
sealed container and the introduction of a means of communication between inside 
and out. Arrayed around the container are different factors — curiosity, translation, 
eagerness to please — angled toward the activities inside the box. In the initial models 
of such classic cases, social engineering is a one-to-one operation, involving the use 
of a craft skill of context-aware persuasion, but they also presage something that is 
repeatable and capable of being conducted on a mass scale. 
 The requirement for social engineering arises because of information asymmetry. 
The thinking person intersecting with technology, the operator, the call center worker, 
the recipient of spam, the funding agency, all require certain lexical and technical 
operations to be carried out: proofs, persuasions, special pleadings, emergencies, 
threats of the consequences of failure, potential breakthroughs, the chance of great 
wealth or the chance to disburse a little bit of justice, to throw some light on things, 
to get through the day without too many errors of transcoding. Such asymmetry has 
its precedents. In his model of the stabilization of energy levels between two otherwise 
isolated chambers, James Clark Maxwell posited an operative, later called a  “ demon, ” 
which controlled a valve between them. The demon ’ s job was to control the passage 
of molecules between the chambers, releasing more energetic molecules from one into 
the other, confirming — or contradicting — the second law of thermodynamics and the 
increase in entropy. The physicist Leo Szilard ’ s contribution to the discussion on the 
demon was to note that the demon itself uses energy and thus also contributes to 
entropy.  5 Labor involves some kind of agency, and a capacity for disruption, variance, 
and improvement, all of which can sometimes be achieved by determinedly sticking 
to the rules of operation. Social engineering here is the skill of ensuring that inside 
the box, the instructions, from one source or another, are being followed correctly, 
no matter what they are. 
 Collective Intelligence 
 Collective intelligence is a means of forming a polity from a naturally occurring 
resource with variable degrees of purity. Various methods have been applied to its 

50 
Togetherness
refinement and even synthesis. While collective intelligence has earlier manifestations 
as a no ö sphere or general intellect, few means of harnessing it at either massive scale 
or fine granularity existed until the conjunction of computation and media in 
networks. 6 
 On the face of it,  “ crowdsourcing ” — one of the characteristic means of such har-
nessing — is so obvious an offer, so legible in its grammar, that it becomes an almost 
perfectly transparent contract.  7 Its first aspect consists in the provision of thought, 
work, and content, at no cost, to a central repository that may sort it or provide 
mechanisms for such sifting. Its second is in its coextensivity with, and reliance on, 
the mechanisms that establish the possibility for such provision. These may be net-
works, languages, technical standards, forms of modularization of tasks, and the 
enthusiasm for participation that they mobilize. Third, it is differentiable on the basis 
of the mechanisms of ownership that it acknowledges and amplifies, a quality that in 
turn shapes the operations of the first two aspects. 
 Crowdsourcing shows its particular interest in relation to property. In  The Control 
Revolution , James Beniger notes that the General Electric Corporation of the 1890s had 
a new information processor,  “ built of the collective cognitive power of hundreds of 
individual human beings. ” 8 The idea of collective intelligence here relies on the paid 
time of employees, a rather burdensome model for the present era. In the same way 
that financial crises, under certain conditions nameable only as natural, encourage 
the privatization of profit and the socialization of risk, the way in which such spread-
ing or condensing occurs in problem solving characterizes the specific form of collec-
tive intelligence that emerges. 
 Collective intelligence operating through the conjunction of computation and 
media in large-scale networks takes on a number of different forms, several of which 
have been developed in specific relation to the development of software. We can 
broadly characterize them as either  permissive (characteristic of the BSD licenses that 
allow publication, distribution, and modification of code while not restricting whether 
versions that have been modified must stay open) or  recursive (characteristic of the 
licenses promoted by the Free Software Foundation, in which any further versions of 
the software must maintain the rights to use, read, distribute, and modify the source 
code).  9 
 Since the development of software through such licenses, the fine modularity 
characteristic of their problem solving, and the impressive use such systems have made 
of networks as means of coordination, further means of organizing cognitive power 
along related lines have emerged; crowdsourcing appears as one of the key terms used 
to frame this shaping of collective intelligence. 

Togetherness 
51
 The specificity of crowdsourcing lies in the construction of specific kinds of distrib-
uted labor networks that generate results for entities that have the capacity to set and 
adjudicate  “ challenges. ” It establishes a  “ new pool of cheap labor: everyday people 
using their spare cycles to create content, solve problems, even do corporate R & D. ” 10 
The challenges may range from designing difficult chemical processes to participating 
in low-value data-processing tasks. Here the  “ spare cycles ” of computers and of brains 
are conflated; work can be done by people with marginal economic value, by busier 
people in the margins of their days, or by networked computers when not in direct 
use. Like stuffing envelopes, seamstressing, or telecottaging, crowdsourcing represents 
a means of leveraging the slightest moments of wakefulness left in a body into tran-
substantiation as value. Peaks and troughs in demand can both be accommodated by 
working on the basis of a surplus. Such work can further be characterized in one of 
two ways: 
 Funneled  In closed crowdsourcing, the result is yielded to an entity that selects what 
it requires, if anything, from what is submitted, which may or may not provide 
rewards or incentives on that basis. Often this may consist of an agency mediating 
for companies that pose technical problems and set a reward for solutions or tasks 
actuated. Such systems are original in the way they may establish themselves as a 
service, not a product, and in so doing yield multiple levels of secondary products. 
An example of such would be a service that allows universities to upload student essays 
to see if they contain passages that match those from previously published work or 
previously submitted essays. With each upload, the value of the database increases, 
and thus students are working for themselves, for the university, and for the company 
compiling the database and selling the service. 
 Facilitated  Much of the energy generated by new networked forms of labor has gone 
into the imaginative configuration and tweaking of end user license agreements for 
services that allow you to work, to access the products of work, and offer the means 
whereby entities can  “ share knowledge efficiently in the course of online conversation 
without doing anything beyond having conversation ” and that  “ could generate real 
power in scientific and business communities. ” 11 
 The incorporation of collective intelligence in networks bears certain similarities to 
the use of worker-generated improvements in production often known as Toyotism.  12 
Typical of some forms of production of the 1980s and 1990s, new techniques of stock 
control, logistics, and communication combined with flattened markets to build high 
degrees of customization of products, in which users specified their requirements 
more. Such forms of production also valorized the ability of workers to improve and 

52 
Togetherness
speed up the production process through decentralizing the management of their work 
process (but not of the end results) to smaller, platoon-sized work teams. Such teams, 
incentivized by rewards and improved status, were able to yield better results, by 
internalizing production norms within themselves, liberating management from the 
need to carry out much of its historical disciplinary work. Elsewhere  “ quality circles ” 
became means of airing problems and harvesting workers ’ insights into the operation 
of procedures. 
 Crowdsourcing differs crucially from this earlier phase in the ways that the current 
means of extracting, working, and distributing collective intelligence operate through 
computational and networked digital media. This is not so much an authoritarian or 
disciplinary means of making the brains run on time as a means of finding new gram-
mars and techniques by which new things can collectively be generated and older 
things can painlessly be transducted into new contexts. This context should be under-
stood in relation to other tendencies, namely, that the ability of capitalism to control 
the commodification of culture is in slow crisis, as epitomized in various forms of file 
sharing, and an equal but nonreciprocal crisis in which culture ’ s ability to escape direct 
commodification is challenged by its implementation as tools to encourage, sustain, 
and format participation in social networks. In such a context, the figurations of col-
lective intelligence are to be found as much in the anatomies of small conjunctions 
of synapses and gadgets as among the turbid dreams of a global mind. 
 Be Everything But Available 
 In the novel  Zoo, or Letters Not about Love , the formalist writer Viktor Shklovsky fills 
page after page with a diastolic correspondence, which, while rarely echoed by the 
other side of the epistolary heartbeat, is drenched in the immolating rapture of love. 13 
His letters to Alya provide traces of a hunger that consumes him, eats up all the mental 
currency of attention that he has in his pockets. This is a love, however, for a woman 
who — besides stipulating that he must not write to her about love — will not pick up 
the phone. Living in an era before the automated answer, Shklovsky feels the world 
reorganized. One of the many ways this is so is through the conjunctions of different 
spaces, but also of different emotional and linguistic intensities, squeezed along a 
copper wire. One of those spaces is absence. While the novel has numerous registers, 
devices, and ruses by which love is figured, one dimension that is rarely noticed is the 
story ’ s mathematical content. Five times over the course of this short book, Shklovsky 
alludes to non-Euclidean geometry as exemplifying the world turned upside down by 
the magnificence of love. Although he does not name it, the figure he uses is the core 

Togetherness 
53
to Nicholas Lobachevsky ’ s hyperbolic geometry, with its possibility of infinite parallel 
lines arrayed around and surging through a single point.  14 Every experience of the 
world, every waking state, turns into an anticipation of, and hunger for, the beloved. 
The sensation of his adoration of her is compared to the moment in which a fine 
woolen scarf is drawn through a gold ring: every aspect of the fabric of the universe 
composed of lines converges on this one wondrous point and passes out through the 
other side, recomposed. 
 Shklovsky ’ s problem is that the loved one may not feel reducible to this point of 
convergence — or may feel that it passes slightly to the side of her, a miss. In this 
condensation of the two figures of the loved one, the one who will not answer the 
ringing mechanism, who will not become a node, and the one who connects to every-
thing, who recomposes the universe by simply being in it, we can see that network 
analysis is staged and prefigured: the loved one is the superhub of reality. 
 One of the conditions of love is the warping of time, the speed at which an 
endless embrace seems to pass, and the slow monotony of time spent unwillingly 
apart. However, another spatial effect of passion provides a recension of the evolution 
of networks and must also be used. That is the capacity for abundance, of being 
everything. Elsa Triolet, who plays the role of Alya in the novel, inadvertently 
takes on and trumps the role of the emperor as described in Kenneth Dean and 
Brian Massumi ’ s  First and Last Emperors , 15 to rule by being everywhere — to be every-
thing, to saturate the lover ’ s universe — and to be nowhere, unreachable, detained in 
the bath, in dalliances with fancy cars or dances with men decorated with earrings or 
a repulsive Englishness, with a million other things. The pain of the lover lies in 
the fact that the loved one is everything but yet is absent, following a different 
trajectory. 
 Writing on evolution, Henri Bergson compares the trajectory of a single life-form, 
the process of speciation and the development of a genus, with the trajectory of frag-
ments from an exploding shell. The blast recapitulates its branching through a hier-
archy of entities. Each species — one cluster. Each organism — only ever capable of being 
one fragment. Each mutation — one spin from true. Nature, however, has the capacity 
to encompass all — shell, explosion, and shrapnel — and is in no way bound to make 
the sacrifice of differentiation.  16 A special madness of love is an encounter with the 
condensation of all of nature in one being and a recognition of all one ’ s prepersonal 
power unfolding in that universe, recognizing it not as a totality but as something 
that is also mutually unfolding. The figure of the fully graphed centralized network, 
the sum of all possible events or connections, is also that of the loved one, the uni-
verse. This is the tragedy of the single life, of mortality, when it is brought into contact 

54 
Togetherness
with the reality of rejection or the apparent impossibility of not living an infinite 
number of lives simultaneously. 
 Just as  “ the probability of a global epidemic depends on the number and configura-
tion of initial infectives, ” 17 the problem of the lover, as faced by Shklovsky, is to satu-
rate the imaginary of the recipient of the letters that are not about love with burning, 
enticing, or subtle reminders of the lover and the rapture the loved one might share 
in. Each ruse in the letters becomes a means of bending flat inattentiveness or bemused 
dismissal, of opening up a gateway to the universe of love, to the full force of its 
explosion. Each simple point swells in anticipation that it might be the one to draw 
the loved one in. The letter writer must hope for an absence of symmetry between 
the point of attraction, which is small, an observation, a joke, a copula of wordings, 
and the massively expanding universe that the lover anticipates being joined in. The 
writer ’ s work is not to manipulate language to induce the reader into shedding per-
ceptual habits, freeing the elements of the world from their mundane associations, 
but to suffuse the world with the inevitability of the reciprocation of love. 
 But more trivial passions can also be turned to account. We are told that in the 
interval between the saturation of connection of the superhub and the happiness of 
the isolate (the one who stays in the bath and refuses to pick up the telephone), new 
opportunities emerge for the harnessing of value.  18 In a market made smoother by the 
ease of connections between nodes, what was once detritus finds its buyer, a meager 
supply finds its true users, and amateurs of all sorts find their devoted fans. Every 
needle finds its necessary haystack. To put it another way, there is less excess that 
cannot be leveraged to a point of consumption. A difficulty presents itself, however: 
in making themselves available, the agents of these minor passions are compelled to 
compete with the proliferation of ruses, cons, games, lines, seductions, and choices of 
trajectory of all of those others who are also operating in this modality of space. The 
abundance of pretenders to superhub status can obliterate the possibility of choosing 
rather than submitting to the spatiality of absence. A great, roiling abundance of 
minor gateways, slight triggers into patches of the universe, get their hustle on under 
every stone and each mouse click. After all, one does not want to be reduced to a dot. 
 Economize Behavior, Scale Signals 
 The view that, after World War II, economics became a  “ cyborg science ” 19 (by virtue 
of the inextricable connections between the developments of computer science, cyber-
netics, and economic theory) opens up a novel perspective for exploring the links 
between gadgets and the financialization of everyday life. And if (as has been claimed) 

Togetherness 
55
the economy increasingly operates through language and the large-scale production 
of forms of credulity, a better understanding of the role of communications media in 
enabling that process seems worthwhile.  20 
 It turns out that the kind of language through which this process of financialization 
operates is not really that of poetic eloquence or even that of prosaic discourse but a 
peculiarly behavioral brew made up of signals: basic forms of stimulus and response 
requiring little in the way of semantic elaboration. A discourse, if one can call it such, 
of minimal, time- and motion-optimized gestures, Skinner-boxing with the shadows 
of the hand-eye-brain — neuronal short circuits — a machinic discourse operating at the 
level of pulse-quickening nervous reactions, actuated by jittery, algebraic fingers and 
thumbs. It is a material elaborated for the purposes of just doing it, for acting without 
the need to have ideas. That is its great strength, because the result is impervious to 
reasoned critique: one doesn ’ t need to think too much to point and click. 
 The slave trade and the extension of colonial powers into the East and the con-
comitant growth in trade of alcohol, sugar, opiates, and so on, made a dramatic pre-
cursor to the relatively stable organization of more and more areas of life under the 
rationality of the market. The extension of investment and extractive accumulation 
to areas previously not considered in economic terms can only occur to the extent 
that behavior in those areas can be formed by the habituated activity of stimulus –
 response shaping subjectivity into patterns of getting and using. Whims, fads, and 
fashions may be scoffed at by those with the defensive shield of a well-armored ego, 
but habits operate at a level to which egos are secondary: prereflexive behavior is a 
propitious domain in which to establish the relative stability of economic practice. 
 One could criticize the claims that behavioral economics makes in its statements 
of scientific fact, but nothing is ever quite so clear-cut in the world of economic theory, 
where fantasy, hallucination, wishful thinking, and a sometimes disingenuous aping 
of the experimental sciences are often the order of the day. It would be interesting to 
look at economic theories not so much as representations but as component parts in 
the production of particular forms of subjectivity.  21 In this respect, the recently popular 
field of behavioral economics might be considered not so much a theory  about as a 
symptom  of and a means of extending the impact of the permeation of market sub-
jectivity into many areas of everyday life, a permeation of, and permeability to, 
behavior that can then be theorized in economistic terms.  22 A properly reflexive theory 
of behavioral economics would actually have to learn something from ethology 
(which advances a much more nuanced understanding of behavior than is usually 
allowed) to consider more directly its own role in the construction of animal activity.  23 
Behavioral economics could then take some useful lessons from media studies, which 

56 
Togetherness
excels in exploring the manipulative production of subjectivity. In fact, from the 
moment that economists start talking about signaling, asymmetries of information, 
and so on, the media are inherently involved — and even more so when ambiguity 
becomes central.  24 
 The discovery among primatologists that the display of alpha-male behavior among 
groups of primates reflects the presuppositions of the experimental constructs of 
researchers, who thereby produce what they claim merely to investigate, brings etho-
logical research into proximity with the findings of some recent critics of Freud, who 
argue that patients in some of the master ’ s famous case studies simulated their symp-
toms so as to meet the clinical expectations of the august doctor.  25 This being the case, 
a comprehensive consideration of economics from a behavioral point of view might 
do better to turn its attention to the ways in which particular constellations of 
exchange are effectively configured to produce actors whose behavior develops in 
expectant response to the delirious presuppositions of market-based overproduction. 
Jean Baudrillard once called this  “ ironic conformity. ” 26 If markets produce agents who 
are irrationally exuberant, this occurs perhaps because the markets themselves are 
exuberantly irrational,  27 a point that one might be less than willing to acknowledge 
at a time when rearguard operations are being mounted everywhere to save founding 
economic dogmas.  28 The crucial issue here, though, is that for all its talk of  “ educat-
ing ” people into more sensible economic behavior, behavioral economics points up 
the opportunities for the manipulation and control of subjectivities through sugges-
tive operations of nudging, opportunities that for the same reason gesture toward just 
how little the artfully constructed mathematical models of the dismal science reveal. 
 According to the desired user scenario, you sit and you tap, you point, you click, 
you scroll, you drag, you drop, you flick. Walking into traffic on a crowded street, you 
busily thumb a text message into your phone (not for nothing do the Germans call 
cellphones  “ handies ” ). Speaking into thin air, you find yourself laughing out loud, 
alone. Actually, you are cackling, but no one pays you any attention, as they too are 
absorbed, distracted by high-res screens, gaming away on their handsets, posting data 
for dating, texting, tweeting, buying, selling, considering stock options as they follow 
the real-time 24/7 cycle. Buying. Selling. Buying. Selling. Pixelated stimuli yield finger-
jabbing or caressing, screen-stroking responses as sophisticated media technologies 
cozy up to users modeled as simplified units of virtual reflex action. Stroking, clicking, 
and ticking represent action translated into the simplest of behavior, desemanticized 
and all but voided of gestural quality. Sophisticated technology requires users to be 
enrolled into an economy of minimal movement (except for gestural interfaces at the 
scale of games).  29 Icon-powered interfaces offer a regime of mazes and boxes operating 

Togetherness 
57
at the level of the digit: thumbs up, thumbs down, the pleasures of the early adopters 
of psychically ergonomic new technologies shaping, en masse, the fortunes of hi-tech 
stocks and shares. Whoever said knowledge economy? From the point of view of the 
dexterous designs of digital media, Generation App operates in a manner more akin 
to a large-scale, highly distributed, mildly Pavlovian experiment. Maybe the experi-
ment isn ’ t deliberately designed to test a theory, but it at least has the benefit of being 
supported by a range of software-testing techniques, from registering keystrokes, 
through macro recordings, to iris scanning and webcam triggering: techniques that 
support, amplify, and confirm the production of the user as a behavioral unit and 
provide quantifiable test data to allow for this production to be optimized, whether 
or not anything is watching.  30 
 When combined with the tools of cognitive science and psychology, software-based 
media forms offer a powerful set of devices for translating a range of background 
practices of everyday life into the new but deceptively familiar world of pointing and 
clicking, dragging and dropping, cutting and pasting. The point, click, swipe, and 
spread world at your fingertips is already a world of language, a world of  “ signaletic ” 
materials input machinically and generated programmatically. Its stimulus – response 
patterns can be monitored and modeled obsessively, linked to statistical analysis pack-
ages, data mining, and pattern-matching techniques. They configure the nervous 
tensions of the end user into productive conjunction with new motor skills; the dex-
terity of thumbs and fingers are valorized for the production of more informational 
goods (and bads). It is a logic into which one comments, texts, tweets, likes, and 
dislikes one ’ s way garrulously, anticipating the next device or killer app, seeking bigger 
hits of machine interactivity. It ’ s not that one marginalizes the risky unpredictability 
of an interaction with a person, but that a seam is opened up into an intermediate 
condition between them. The broader significance of all the information that is con-
sumed may not be readily known (who would even care?), but the reassuring familiar-
ity of a glowing interface provides the comforting feeling that even if one is not in 
control, one at least has something to do. 
 But how do these micro-scale interactions turn macro? In the broader economy, 
wherein markets are made up of the millions of transactions of everyday life, and not 
just the operations of formal financial institutions, market devices are not just finan-
cial instruments, ratings procedures, or statistical models. They can also be online 
conversations, simple semiotic signals (correlating the stock market with homeland 
security ratings), and — in the logic we are mapping here — applications on gadgets with 
a high level of dispersal throughout everyday life, configured for the perpetual produc-
tion and consumption of rumor, of data and information, of news. Market volatilities 

58 
Togetherness
can be aligned and made to resonate with the paranoia and tension of the early 
morning commute, doubtful correlations that can be made between high-speed, high-
volume market transactions, hastily tapped out texts or tweets, and the abbreviated 
highlights of a real-time news feed. Ambiguities are amplified or attenuated; confi-
dence is bolstered or busted. Information convulses rather than flows. Market devices 
become operational at a behavioral level, permeating the psyche, when individuals 
reconfigure themselves as part of extended, society-wide data structures, when a prac-
ticed flick of the wrist allows a switch from e-mail to spreadsheet to bank account to 
news feed. 
 It is perhaps uncertain just how far behavior has been transformed into economics, 
and it is true to say that the conjunctions of mediators that we are sketching out here 
operate at best as highly unstable, fragile assemblages of elements. But that is hardly 
the point; the ritual appeal to science is de rigueur, and empirical states of fact obtrude 
but tangentially on the marketing value of hyperbole. Perhaps the cleverness of behav-
ioral economics lies in the way that its statistical bent (correlations, not causes) has 
the potential to operate productively itself. The discovery, for example, that students 
at an expensive university experience a placebo effect from expensive aspirin offers a 
perfect rationale for the marketing strategies of the pharmaceutical corporation.  31 
Giving the imprimatur of a scientific theory to pricing structures to entice or deter, 
for example, helpfully occludes the ethical ambiguities of manipulating as means at 
the service of the reinforcing or production of inequalities. 
 In fact, the financialization of everyday life will not be complete until everything 
has been translated into the semiotics of market signals. Capital movements, circuits 
of valorization, speculative bubbles — these depend not on highly literate disquisitions 
but on abbreviated snippets of information, rumor, anxiety, cognitively minimal, 
emotively maximal states, adopted by multitudes of agents. Gut feelings, bullishness, 
bearishness. This is where early adopters of theory, avid consumers of the latest news 
from the front line of modernization — politicians, spin doctors, marketing gurus, 
consultants, HR managers, journalists, and policy wonks — will all be able to play 
their part. We will all learn how to send signals. Politicians send signals to markets, 
consumers send signals to producers, prices are signals for everyone, all behavior is a 
derivative. 
 Stir Faith in Small Numbers 
 Small numbers can be decisive. One is reminded of the power of the few sufficiently 
many times to make the assertion suspicious. Look at how many members the 

Togetherness 
59
Bolshevik Party had in 1917, how many al-Qaeda operatives it took to bring down 
the World Trade Center, and how few people it takes to run the basic technical opera-
tions of Wikipedia. Parables and commonplaces abound with the power of tiny incre-
ments yielding a radical difference. Guerrilla warfare relies on the disproportionate 
effects that may be gained by the war of the flea and on the combination of precision, 
imperceptibility, and unpredictability of small forces accurately deployed.  32 The func-
tion of sainthood as an exemplary status of being relies on the rare yet presumable 
attainability of the ascetic holy life in a world of temptation. The effects of small 
numbers are pressed on us as exemplars of the instability of global systems and the 
power of the individual to effect real social change. Fantastic effects are yielded in 
such accounts through minimal but well-chosen or accidental acts that ripple through 
volatile systems. One should seek out the simple and then distrust it. 
 An important critical response to such accounts is to look for the background 
mechanisms, the popular support, subsidiary operators and alliances, technical pre-
conditions, and conceptual structuration of things, that make a certain result more 
likely. The springtime of blossoming events has its own nameless natural history, but 
one that has only a loose relation to a proper phylogeny or to principles of identity 
by which it can be named or called to order. But equally, if a seeming miracle from 
nowhere is required, these background operators are the elements that must remain 
cloaked or established in such a way as to appear tangential. The stability of a system 
can no longer be said to be accurately reliant on its nesting within larger systems that 
guarantee it. 
 Another response is to turn to Poisson distributions (models of the probability of 
events whose averages are known) and discussions of the true nature of randomness, 
mathematical models of the ability of microscopically slight differences to effect sig-
nificant results.  33 To this model one must add the factorial nature of recursive effects. 
Recursion again becomes a key everywhere life is experienced as a sea or stagnant pool 
composed of overlapping ripples, waveforms that are impossible to dismantle when 
they are both so dynamic and so tantalizingly modelable, seemingly predictable. But 
in becoming so natural, this fluidity of reciprocally enhancing constraints seems ripe 
for disaster and — coded as complex dynamic systems — makes the invocation of such 
disasters seem so pliant and biddable. 
 The experience of living in conditions determined by large numbers, of homoge-
neous populations of chance, while being ideologically entrained to focus on the 
opportunity of small numbers — whether the opportunity of winning the lottery or 
being immediately and inexplicably recognized for one ’ s innate and unique talent in 
a televisual extravaganza — is not one that seems to have been predominant over the 

60 
Togetherness
course of human history. However, it is an experience that contemporary media, cul-
tural imaginaries, and the economic ideologies of self-affirmation and opportunity 
seem particularly proficient at generating as a state of ever-extensible hope. 
 We have yet to answer the question of whether, given the emphasis on the power 
of small numbers in the contemporary imaginary, the media systems that arise during 
the period of its popularity are configured in a manner that might tend to accentuate 
the effectivity of the small. The fantastic yields of computer viruses, worms, and bugs 
are often proffered as a state to aspire to, in which the smallest of operators reaches 
a magnificent climax for millions within days of being launched.  34 The yearning to 
be the bearer of such a difference, to be able to sense participation in such a moment, 
in turn drives the sales of sugary narratives that seek only to confirm such events as 
a possibility. 35 Redemption by an encounter with the nonlinear sublime replaces strat-
egy in many minds, but as such it is also something from which stratagems can be 
derived. 
 Small numbers work because they do not exist in a friction-free environment. 
Whether such an environment is, at least rhetorically, said to exist at the level of a 
market, a conceptual smooth space, the noiseless environment of information theory, 
or a technology that implements it, such a condition tends to be difficult to identify. 
As such, the micropolitical event is able to use small differentiations in opportunity, 
event texture, speed, and the conjunction of forces and chances. Machiavelli uses the 
metaphor of a wildly flooding river to describe the propensities of fortune and recom-
mends preparation and adaptation as ways of modifying and coping with the behavior 
of an aleatory world, and audacity as a means of bringing a mythically feminized luck 
to the point of subdual and consummation.  36 Somehow, in the present day, coupling 
preparation with audacity seems to translate into the expectation that minuscule 
variation, the righteous gesture, the personal disaggregation from the norm, the pres-
ence of a video or a document in a database, may be all it takes for something to 
change for the better. 
 The yearning for the significance of small gestures comes in part from a dismay at 
the effects of the large or monolithic. A citizen may hope to do something utterly 
innocuous, seemingly trivial, but in doing so to incidentally render the world perfect. 
Such expansive hopes are shared by those who buy lottery tickets, stir viral froths 
online, or determine that it is best to think positively. The idea of the small gesture 
that proliferates may be the Straussian  “ noble lie ” of micropolitics or, in the case that 
it tends toward negligible results, its inverse.  37 It is a mode of belief, however, as we 
will suggest shortly, that is deeply suited to the naturally quantitative environments 

Togetherness 
61
of networked and computational digital media, a mode of belief that also plays out 
at different scales. 
 Compared to the model of politics or socialization in which a degree of equal com-
mitment to the cause, or of playing one ’ s part in the wider social machinery, in which 
macrosociological categories entail strict orders of implementation and satisfaction at 
lower levels, such a model implies the possibility of the slippage of scale. But it also 
implies an important inverse. An action at the macroscale, that of states, intergovern-
mental bodies, standards-setting organizations, corporations, armies, or other molar 
entities, may ultimately dwindle to nothing, the full force of its signal decaying in the 
endless circuits it traverses and in the minor modifications and impossibilities it may 
succumb to as it tangles with the complications of the microscale. 
 In a further inversion, we can locate the reverse of this aspect of the micropolitical 
imaginary in the developing field of risk management in public and corporate gover-
nance. First-order risks, such as malfunctions, direct failures of task, or loss of property 
or revenue blur in relation to second-order risks such as loss of reputation and brand 
damage.  38 Maintaining good process at every stage and scale of a work cycle represents 
a means of minimizing the chance of minor problems turning into massive ones 
without any intervening passage points of escalation. The legendary yield that marks 
the transition from nowhere to everywhere — from mundane normalcy to utter col-
lapse, from the pain of conformity to revolution, from unknown to stardom, from a 
sluggardly to an inspired economy — appears now to some to be as reliable as a train 
timetable, given the right throw of the dice. 
 As the preceding chain of switching perspectives and scales suggests, the problem-
atic has no upper or lower bound. Nor does a condition of more or less contact with 
others of the same or different kinds or scales, whether structurally reinforcing or not, 
remove an entity from the condition of a probabilistic exposure to abrupt forms of 
change.  39 
 One root of the awareness of the power of extremely small numbers comes in turn 
from computation ’ s capacity to process many numbers. The relatively recent ability 
to work with the massively scaled computation of phenomena in complex geometries, 
to simulate nonlinear dynamic systems, and to engage in advanced forms of modeling 
renders such phenomena visible, apparently tractable, and open to interpretation and 
use. The ability to find hitherto unnoticeable or unproduceable disproportionate 
effects through the ability to sort through an exponentially larger amount of possible 
combinations inspires the possibility that any slight modification of behavior may 
yield spectacular results. In turn, the ability of programs to interpret, interact with, 

62 
Togetherness
and actively inhabit such possibility spaces brings them closer to the surface of daily 
awareness. 
 The computational reinstantiation and acceleration of the power of small numbers 
resonate with their often promulgated relation to networks and their elaboration of a 
form that is at once continuous yet composed of discrete parts, with no limit of scale. 
The eagerness to discover networks as a form with ubiquitous explanatory powers 
(despite the limited nature of their topological qualities) reaffirms the power of small 
numbers and the ability to traverse scales while at the same time finding a means of 
explaining the function of such relations, a means of turning it into something rec-
ognizable. One way of doing this is to make sure that networks are well integrated 
into other structures, such as hierarchies. 
 An affinity for the power of small things comes about most potently because of the 
recognition that at certain scales they can make the most crucial difference — the pos-
session of a visa, word of a loophole, access to food, conditions that can be difficult, 
if not impossible, to arrange. These are trivial things, the matters of everyday life, the 
absence of which may yield death or its double, attrition. But this is a finality that 
stays within its own scale or place in the hierarchy of abstraction layers and thus, 
unless it is accidentally taken up elsewhere or benefits from the propitious generosity 
of an error, stays within its own proper domain, ending the process. In such cases, 
audacity and preparation speak different languages and cannot refer to each other. 
 Flirting Tips 
 There are no mechanically reliable paths to love, yet there is no shortage of contenders 
for the title of the most reliable technique in its pursuit. And while  The Prince asserts 
that it is, in general, better to be feared than loved, certain cases arise in which excep-
tions prove the rule. It would be easy to suggest that the more scientifically or pre-
paredly that suitors array themselves, the greater their tendency to cretinization in 
the handling of such ineffable stuff; but one should not be blind to the possibility 
that — if promulgated in the right manner — such measures may maintain, if not 
deepen, the quality of mystery so keenly associated with romance. As with many of 
the stratagems presented here, the aim is not to present any one method as appropri-
ate in specific situations, or as limited to certain actors, but to develop a sense of the 
range of explicitly sophisticated techniques in circulation and articulate their major 
tendencies. As an indicator of the relevance of this domain for stratagematic thought, 
little in the surviving literature of ancient sophistry broaches the topic. These early 
technicians propounded views and composed arguments on most other subjects, so 

Togetherness 
63
we can safely work on the basis that they viewed love as fundamentally of a sympa-
thetic nature, one so readily visible in its sophistication that to expound on it would 
be superfluous or would perhaps dilute the uniqueness of their expertise. 
 We live in times of a rather different kind. Like creativity and innovation, love 
appears today as something both immeasurable and bountiful, omnipresent and mys-
terious, amenable to policy and to both personal and governmental strategy. It is 
everyone ’ s right and within everyone ’ s capacity to perform love. In certain conditions, 
it may even be a duty. 
 At the same time as contemporary media establish new conditions for the arrange-
ment of love, it also increasingly finds its echo in the proliferation of algorithmic 
approaches to romantic pursuits. These approaches offer particularly potent materials 
in which to find stratagematic activity. Algorithms require data to handle, and the 
tendency is toward increasingly fine-grained formats that are easier to process to meet 
this requirement. 
 Early ethnographic work on phone sex showed that a constrained range of signs, 
triggers, and responses is highly efficient at eliciting correct responses.  40 It is simply a 
step further to database such systems with basic response selectors choosing and 
delivering appropriate audio. Are you a screamer, a breather, a talker, or silent? Do 
you like to listen? Equally driven by the aggregation of particles of data, to each of 
which they add their own analytical twist, are matchmaking sites and services. These 
collect, correlate, and recommend potential partners or provide users with reasons to 
avoid them. Elements that are considered meaningful, such as gender, sexuality, sense 
of humor, caste, solvency, children, sect, hobbies, or user-authored categories and 
headlines, are listed in a table. Each characteristic is held separately in algebraic paren-
thesis. There is no limit to the number of kinds of data that can be held in this way. 
External to the parentheses, any number of functions or operations can be added. 
They can be used to represent people or to generate patterns that customers can iden-
tify with, advisory personae. An early recipient of cybernetic expertise, marriage 
bureaus, dating agencies, and contact sites share fundamental approaches in probabi-
listic determination.  41 Many will offer a unique spin on their analysis, the manipula-
tion of hidden factors to find results that users didn ’ t even know they were looking 
for. While eroticism spends too much time lingering and malingering to be fully effi-
cient, romance is a matter of closing down the variables, optimizing an algorithmic 
function. Such sites therefore differ from the large swaths of the Internet consisting 
of pornographic landfill, the approach of which is largely to grow and occupy space. 
Similar multiply-and-conquer tactics include the massive volume of romantic advice 
available online in the form of dating tips and self-improvement or flirtation pointers. 

64 
Togetherness
Owing to the special nature of the data they handle, in which their users are also on 
view, some of the techniques deployed in other contexts are largely unsuitable for 
deployment here; recommendation systems based on the habits of previous customers 
would be among these, although such practices are not unheard of for more obviously 
commercial sexual transactions. 
 The highly abbreviated form of much Internet  “ content ” is readily amenable to a 
regular churn of tidbits of advice that can be read for a few minutes while avoiding 
work or seeking an emollient to irritation. Women are advised on ways in which they 
can meld with their partner; on how to send signals, keep a relationship alive, look 
appropriate, have sex in a manner popularized in other media formats; on how to 
read a man for power, fertility, kindness, and compatibility while maintaining oppor-
tunity maximization. No stage of a relationship is left unadvised; makeup tips for 
postbreakup good looks are a great way of combining advertorial with advice. Men 
are instructed on how most effectively to recognize their fundamental predatory 
nature; to remember factoids about the relative nerve mass of genitals to lips, salival 
hormone transfer and trust inducement; to register and rank obscure indicators of 
interest; how not to appear teleologically inclined or to be daringly straightforward 
in the management of behaviors toward desired outcomes, but, where seduction is 
concerned, to always operate with staged damage-limitation action points. It ’ s impor-
tant to know how to gaze caringly and how to build muscle bulk where it counts in 
a dance of escalation and de-escalation. Back online, the narcolepsy of affirmative 
thinking is reduced to the lacing of data fields with enough triggers to yield a result 
through the effective execution of what is, after all, an algorithmic process. 
 Schopenhauer ’ s thirty-eighth stratagem for winning an argument, the last one he 
proposes — being confessedly the most useless — is to  “ become personal, insulting, 
rude. ” 42 The question of whether the multitude of chat-up techniques, pickup artists, 
and dating tips ever becomes anything more than impersonal is moot, but the ques-
tion of how to win at getting personal is crucial in the algorithmicization of romantic 
behaviors. The crucial aspect here is to lift actions out of the ensemble of behaviors 
of which they are a part, to detach movements, words, gestures, hormones, clothing, 
from a wider set of relations and to filter them in relation to a set of prepared and 
preferentially ordered triggers. This process of detachment allows bodily operations 
and linguistic behaviors to be interpreted and handled by the same set of tools: to be 
treated as media. So when a pickup instruction commends the sequence  “ gaze, 
approach, talk, turn, touch, synchronize ” 43 as a means of homing in on and attracting 
a potential lifetime playmate from a well-stocked zone of other targets, the algorithmic 
dimension of such a set of instructions does two things: establish a procedure that 

Togetherness 
65
can be used to shore up doubt and cowardice in the face of humiliation; and set 
a series of stages by which the data yielded by the target can be interpreted and 
responded to. Such an approach arms Cupid with a machine gun, leaving you to rescue 
the most heavily wounded with ease. 
 Pickup techniques are a more precarious freestyle version of the production line of 
speed-dating mechanisms in which a procedural armature is used to govern staged 
contacts between participants to protect, mollify, and encourage them in haggling for, 
or avoiding the attentions of, prospective sweethearts. As with all stratagematic 
approaches, speed dating encourages gaming, and numerous theorists have proposed 
means by which various cognitive abstraction layers analyze features such as scent, 
genetic differentiation, relative finger length, social dominance, and the ability to 
remove limited beliefs and replace them with unstoppable confidence. Rhetorical 
rather than biological gambits may also be in play, according to some accounts, and 
the ability to align the two abstraction layers is generally considered to provide 
optimal results. 
 One of the means of promoting the conditions in which this can occur is by cir-
culating information about the latest research on the physiological bases of sexuality 
and mate choice. This is a process profoundly suited to media activity. The generation 
of factoids in media systems predisposed to their delivery is enhanced by the selection 
of research paradigms with a visible capacity for the robust production of explanation 
in short sentences. Simple causes get results. Sociobiology and its derivates are a reli-
able source of resources by which the inner game of biology and the outer game of 
rhetoric can be combined.  44 Psychology, in turn, provides a useful set of tools for 
intermediation between the two layers. The whole ensemble, when turned into fac-
toids, instructions for soul-merge, or highly motile explanations, may advantageously 
provide simultaneous feed for peoples ’ feelings of inadequacy and guides to a path to 
power that conveniently also require dedicated self-gratification. 
 A tricky maneuver here, then, is also how to mobilize different modes of intelli-
gence as part of such stratagematic operations rather than as means of withdrawal 
from them. It is not simply that maze-solving abilities confer the ability to attract 
more voluptuous and fertile mates but that, in certain models of romance, intelligence 
itself also becomes a tool for displays of fitness.  45 The mind ’ s ability to respond to the 
exponential demands both to recognize and to respond to manipulation, to mesh 
with and invent tools and techniques, and to generate means of displaying such wit 
and powers of interpretation, or to manifest the means of appearing to do so in 
an arms race of generative overinterpretation, offers a crucial coefficient for one ’ s 
biological adaptation. The interpretation of the display of intelligence as a function 

66 
Togetherness
of evolutionary success always risks simply recognizing only that which has settled 
out from the churn of events and lifetimes as appearing providentially so. What does 
not yet appear as intelligent perhaps here has an edge. 
 Mobilize Irritation 
 Irritability is a characteristic of all living organisms. Whether it is recognized as the 
capacity to move toward sunlight in plants, to creep toward a higher sugar gradient 
in bacteria, to respond to the traces left by conspecifics in ants, or to move away from 
a source of pain in mammals, the ability to adapt, even if only in minor increments, 
to a  “ positive ” or  “ negative ” stimulus is one means of identifying what lives and what 
does not. Irritability here means the capacity to adapt to a stimulus or a condition, 
but it may not be so easily resolved, as one may encounter a stimulus that does not 
have any direct means of being sated, neutralized, or avoided. Here irritation, rather 
than irritability, is perhaps a characteristic differentiation between animals with more 
or less sophisticated cognitive capacities. Irritation is the internalized sense or under-
standing of irritability, of being mobilized by something. This is not an occurrence on 
the grand scale but something minor, which occurs via the tickling of interests, detach-
ing moments, senses, bodily feeling, attention. Nor can an irritation usually be said 
to be simply a wronging or a transgression or a violation of a body. Irritation may 
occur at the moment of the dehiscence of any of the scales of consciousness running 
from will to affect as they switch into an itchy attentiveness to something they do 
not intend but nevertheless find tricky to avoid. This is not to say that this moment 
of switching is by any means absolute; in general it cannot be, and as such, the situ-
ation does not resolve. As stressed attention flickers from one trigger to another, a 
state of futile partial engrossment in not quite achieving anything, like a priority 
inversion, opens the organism up to further irritation. Thus we see the annoyance of 
irritation, a source of its longevity as a phenomenon, and its usefulness as a point of 
entry to contemporary media, where it is an almost foundational condition. 
 Participatory social network software emerged after the dot-com crash at the begin-
ning of the last decade. Most of the sites with high degrees of capitalization, saddled 
with having to generate expensive content, bombed. This event was often lauded as 
a reclaiming of the Internet for people rather than products as new services based on 
user-generated content came to the fore. These new services emphasized communica-
tion, community, and relationship building. The new model was to facilitate users to 
leverage the possibility of contact with one another and to support such communitar-

Togetherness 
67
ian action with incidental data-mining and advertising. Communication between 
people became more important than straightforward consumption. But these new sites 
also found a way to build on another result of the dot-com crash and the iterations 
of the far wider financial abyss of debt and obligation on which Western societies have 
built themselves. As Bifo has noted in  The Soul at Work , the link between financial 
depression and its cognate other may be more than a simply nominal parallel.  46 
Nervousness, time wasting, irritation, the ability to draw out or to dither the moment 
when unwanted but obligatory activities start, to combine idleness with something 
partially purposive, the sanctuary of the small gesture that has an even smaller 
result — all find their refuge, moment of forgetting, and therapeutic postponement in 
browsing, networking, fiddling. Indeed, numerous blogs and surf clubs undergo a 
purging of irony by an exultant harvesting and sorting, turning lives of clickwork into 
a yield. 
 As many forms of work now require the operative to be seated in front of a com-
puter with access to the Internet, and many family homes are equipped with one or 
more terminals, and given also that phones now slip access into every pocket of inter-
mediate time, the sites of boredom, obligation, and avoidance are multiple. This is 
not the boredom of blandness, of staring into space, at curtains or walls of nothing 
in particular so beloved of philosophers and artists as the moment when subconscious 
creation has a tendency to find itself getting done, but an itchy, iterative kind of 
boredom, an irritation against doing something pointless, onerous, and endless. 
Symptoms of this irritation can momentarily be alleviated by clicking on a link, 
casting an eye on some porn, twitching on some game, catching up on the news, 
making a status update. As Olga Goriunova notes in her study of the Russian  “ mate-
lit ” platform udaff.com, which specializes in brutally written stories of sex, drugs, and 
violence by and for a population of  “ office plankton, ” a quick burst of transgression 
and black humor can act as the necessary pick-me-up to get through the day.  47 
However, while transgression and adrenalin are probably a high point in the broader 
tendency toward irritation, what is key is the possibility to instantly vary the degree 
of urgency, irritancy, and stuporousness of the material one treats. To be able to switch 
in an instant from something imperative but pointless to something genuinely mean-
ingless but unforced, and then to something mildly attention catching and trivial, 
does not correspond to a flattening of nuance in interpersonal relationships or cul-
ture — it opens up, rather, a massive palette of irrelevance and pointlessness to be 
explored. Distraction without indulgence proposes snacking as a way of avoiding 
being eaten. 

68 
Togetherness
 But irritability — as a characteristic abstractable from all living systems — offers, as a 
point of transition, certain movements to be expected, predictions to be acted on. 
Deep addiction to games and the Internet is a relatively minor condition in terms of 
scale compared to the epidemic of productive fidgeting that leaves logs, cookies, click 
trails, and identities in its wake. Here there is no state of information overload, or 
even one of absolute redundancy, but a sifting of options on the basis of the avoidance 
of resentment and obligation. Exhaustion is key to all aesthetics of combinatoriality 
within finite worlds.  48 Within the functionally infinite and untiring world of compu-
tational media, exhaustion is enhanced with choice. 

 Algorithms 
 Enhance Queue Formation 
 Economics is sometimes described as the discipline concerned with establishing the 
correct means of allocating scarce resources. In the context of digital abundance at 
least, what is often scarce is scarcity itself. Thus, paying attention to the mechanisms 
for the deferral of access, of gratification, for the arrangement of finitude, is repaid 
many times over. 
 In Vladimir Sorokin ’ s narrative of the dialogue taking place in a line of people 
waiting to buy a pair of shoes, a Soviet queue in the early eighties, stretching several 
city blocks and lasting over a night, allocation of the purchase opportunity is made 
on the basis of timed arrival in the queue. As Sorokin states in his afterword to  The 
Queue :  “ It was after the victory of the collective body that the phenomenon of the 
queue appeared in Russia with all its classic attributes: numeration (the person ’ s 
number in line was usually written on the hand); the periodic roll call and ruthless 
elimination of anyone who stepped away for a moment; a strict hierarchy (those 
standing behind were supposed to obey those standing in front); the quantity of goods 
allotted per person (this was also decided collectively), etc. ” 1 
 The details may vary (the seller, for instance, may have set the amount of goods 
allotted), but Sorokin ’ s description of resource allocation expressed as a set of rules 
perfectly describes the migration of software imperatives into everyday life and does 
so in a context in which systems of management have already preempted, made 
advances on, and prepared such integration. Indeed, as a written book, Sorokin ’ s text 
relies on a linear organization of letters and words into orthogonally organized space, 
in itself a form of attention queue, which it manipulates to produce its own kind of 
multivalence. The waiting line triggers stories, couplings, dodges, and free association, 
all traced in the dialogue between, which loops, backtracks, jumps ahead, takes long 

70 
Algorithms
detours, slopes off, goes back to bed, never quite climaxes, while the line of text con-
tinues on its way. 
 Running through several of the stratagems collected in this book is an idea that 
is derived from the computational theory of mind — and expanded from its seat in 
the  “ central processor ” of the brain, into the realm of expanded cognition into objects, 
the social, and systems — that you can  “ arrange your syntax and the semantics 
comes for free. ” 2 In computationalism, this is the idea that if a device that is suffi-
ciently structurally analogous to a mind is assembled, then it will inevitably and 
unavoidably start to interact with the world: it will begin to cogitate. In political 
thinking, this is equivalent to the idea that if the appropriate decision-making 
structure is established, all the decisions it arrives at will, for reasons depending 
on the type of structure sought, be correct, just, or, at worst, the least bad. Whether 
the chosen structure is a workers ’ council, a representative democracy, the  “ benev-
olent dictator ” beloved of software development narratives, or some other form, the 
emphasis is on the rule of law as that of process. Here a differentiation between 
ends and means is rendered superfluous, because the means are considered to be 
transcendent. 
 One virtue of this approach is that it foregrounds the formalism as generative, as 
yielding something other than itself. This should be contrasted with the sleights of 
hand that attempt to frame a hidden structuration as a freedom from ordering (as is 
characteristic of standard neoliberal accounts). Making the formalism visible suggests 
the possibility that it may be evaluated or learned from and indeed changed. Where 
we need to pay attention is in those cases where what lies outside the model and what 
ought to be subject to it have difficulty in conforming to it. 
 In certain territories, queuing has been raised to the level of a surrogate for culture. 
In such places, the ability to interiorize and repeat a respect for proper participation 
in queue formation, such as the principle of first come, first served, or that of ladies 
first, of no pushing in, of either standing in an ordered line or appearing to memorize 
the order of arrival of fellow queuers to the point of queue formation, guarantees — to 
a certain degree of probability — that such a person satisfies the qualities required for 
the award of citizenship. Such rules of formation are often characterized as modes of 
discipline that may apply in different queue contexts.  3 Conversely, some models 
of behavior emphasize the usefulness, in certain contexts, of relative deregulation 
in queue discipline. Jockeying activity among car drivers at a junction, or in the capri-
ciousness of  “ chess players ” moving for advantage across lanes, is inherently pleasur-
able, and a display of skill, as well as action that speeds up overall traffic flow. Cultural 
assumptions of this sort about queuing being indicative of good moral character may, 

Algorithms 
71
however, reveal a limited appreciation of the rich variety and subtle textures of 
queuing or waiting-line models. 
 Contributing to such a history, the development of supermarkets is partly a history 
of queue design. While the back-end work of the structure is that of logistics, the front 
end is one that couples desire with sequencing and the planning, preparing, ordering, 
and execution of discrete events. One of the most impressive early architectures was 
that of Clarence Saunders ’ s Piggly Wiggly stores of the early twentieth century. Manned 
by a single operative seated at a till by the exit, from the entrance via turnstile, these 
stores provided a single lane through which people could progress through a winding, 
one-way maze of attractively packaged, ready-to-purchase goods.  4 Customers were 
queued and positioned to view the widest range of products as they moved, pushing 
shopping carts, themselves then a contemporary innovation, toward the checkout. 
Here, ideally at least, the unilateral nature of the consumption line recapitulates that 
of production. In other cases, privileging the network as a mode of desire and of 
organization, different forms of nonlinear queue architecture are appropriate and 
come to the fore. 
 As the generic characteristics of waiting-line systems expand to encompass a 
vast cosmology of types, qualities, and contexts, the ontology of queues is established 
as a baseline fundament of opportunity. To return to Sorokin and his description 
of the archetypes of the queue and its articulation of this ontology: the sequential 
numeration of comrades participating in the Soviet queue equates to the concrete 
abstractions of arrivals and input processes described by the deep logistical imaginary 
of operations research; the queue ’ s periodic roll call and strict hierarchy describe 
a coupled form of queue discipline; and the quantity of goods allotted per person 
at the shop or stall describes key aspects of a particular service mechanism. Although 
a disparate range of societies, when coded in ideological terms, exhibit queue 
formation, one need not argue that the queue amounts to a universal vocabulary 
of form to recognize its usefulness. It is, rather, in the fine and gentle art of 
ordering, waiting, and allocation architectures that such forms articulate their 
value. 
 Know Your Sorts 
 Sorting takes a sequence of entities and permutates that sequence to arrive at a result 
that renders it more useful. As a stratagematic force in its own right, therefore, sorting 
should be understood both as something that yields results, in the form of a ranking, 
and as something that generates its own terms of composition, shifting relations 

72 
Algorithms
between things that are sorted in ways that imply multiple kinds of use and 
attention. 
 Among other qualities, permutation, the process of shifting and sifting the order 
of things, has an aesthetics of its own, which renders it distinct from the conceptual 
lockdown of nominally Platonic essentialism favored in certain kinds of mathemati-
cally grounded accounts of software. Such an aesthetics establishes a vivid dynamic 
of interplay between algorithms, the machinic context of hardware and software 
resources, and the data that are being handled, all of which make demands on the 
others and combine to render each permutational process individual. Further itera-
tions and enfoldings of sorting in other media — such as social processes — make sorting 
particularly interesting. In such a context, knowing your sorts, gaining a sense of the 
aesthetic dimensions of ordering, is crucial. But aside from the way in which it engages 
the sensorial aspect of being, sorting has a profound and intricate relationship to 
systems of ordering. Among these, sorting is distinct from categorization, to which it 
is naturally affiliated. Categorization may be the result of a sort, and categories may 
also be sorted, but we are concerned here with the permutational moment and the 
kinds of power it produces and invokes. 
 As a distinct field of thought, computer science usefully maintains intellectual and 
technical reserve in relation to its application, its wider place in the world. As such it 
maintains relations of pretended universality, in that everything finds its place in 
computation but also equally establishes its separateness. In such a context of techni-
cal neutrality, sorts are evaluated in terms of the optimal use of resources both for 
processing code and for handling data during runtime, and in terms of the speed of 
execution in relation to different sorting problems. In the field, questions of optimality 
or optimization of this kind may be complicated by those of the efficiencies of man-
agement, but since most sorting algorithms are readily available within standard 
libraries, such forms of interference tend not to coincide. 
 Within the computational articulation of sorts, material is typically handled via an 
alphanumeric key, a pointer, that maintains a relation to the records, numbers, or 
other single or clustered entities that the key in turn is able to treat as satellites. 
What is sorted, then, is not at first the  “ primary ” data, such as a record or file, or 
what it may refer to, such as an event or a person. What sorting first acts on are the 
numeric values by which those events or persons are handled. Once the values are 
organized, sorting can concatenate out. As such, a general literacy of sorting is to be 
recommended. 
 Arguments against instrumental reason,  5 averring that it is one more form of knowl-
edge that subordinates means to ends, are usefully transformed by other forms of 

Algorithms 
73
sorting in which not the numeric handler but rather the data themselves are under-
stood to have an intrinsic and indexical relation to things in the world.  “ Social 
sorting, ” as it is termed by scholars in critical surveillance studies,  6 adopts a mode of 
sorting in which mechanisms for managing entitlement, control, and protection are 
deployed to maximize efficiency, convenience, and speed. Opponents of sorting tend 
to concern themselves not with the underlying logic of such rules but with the 
moments at which they become inefficient, inconvenient, and slow. They may also 
attend to the way in which vague social classifiers such as race are mobilized to provide 
surety and the opportunity for the randomized, unjust, or unaccountable exercise of 
power. The likelihood of racial category providing insight into someone ’ s level of 
criminality is roughly equivalent to such analysis being made on the basis of shared 
name. That this is so does not preclude either association being made. 
 Imagine the quandary of an eight-year-old boy who has the same name as a person 
who is for some reason on a terror watch list, and is therefore subject to body searches 
before boarding any plane.  7 The boy ’ s problem arises because he is being sorted on 
the basis of a referencing system that specifies an alphanumeric identifier — his name —
 which, due to social convention and a resulting limited name space, is most likely 
held by more than one person. It is perhaps better to name children with strong 
passwords that are unlikely to be duplicated or easily memorized. Alternately it is 
possible to identify citizens on the basis of unique identifiers, such as passport numbers 
and identification cards, which provide an easily exploitable sense of security. These 
may be triangulated with probabilistically unique identifiers such as biometrics, nomi-
nally unchanging and accessible features that can be turned into a record that can in 
turn be assigned an alphanumeric code. 
 The primary method of sorting in computing is by comparison. In such cases, data 
are sorted in relation to other data, for instance, whether a datum has a lesser or greater 
numeric value.  8 Sorting by comparison implies that the range of data to be sorted is 
generally not known in advance or does not need to be. In cases where the range is 
known, algorithms such as bucket sort, radix sort, and pigeonhole sort, among others, 
work with effective addressing schemas to allocate results. Differences between these 
can be accounted for at the level of speed, for instance, when using a search engine 
to query for a common search term whose results are preranked, compared to those 
that are rarer or unprecedented and thus need to be generated on the fly. 
 Comparison essentially involves allocating a position on the basis of a greater-than 
or less-than calculation. While it is tempting to assume that simply because something 
is sorted by comparison, it is reduced to a place within a schema of greater or lesser 
rank, this assumption would overestimate its effects and possibly misrecognize the 

74 
Algorithms
importance of the process of being sorted as significant in itself before a place in such 
an array is determined. Ranking can be an extremely useful effect in combination with 
a queuing system or resource allocation process as a way of entraining what is ranked. 
Ranking regimes that are active through the differential ordering of interacting entities 
of different scales are inherently interesting. As an example, the ranking of academics 
by numerous interacting rank-based mechanisms (such as those of scholars, depart-
ments, institutions, articles, citations, journals) confirms the benefit of such approaches 
in terms of simplifying the evaluation of research into a quantifiable metric. The ease 
with which such a system can be interpreted and summarized allows for all positions 
within it to adapt to and canalize the required behavior. The fine tuning of results 
can be achieved by more obscure means of handling, such as those evinced by social 
networks. 
 All forms of sorting require the use of resources. In resource-constrained environ-
ments, when choosing which sort may be adopted, testing which sort may be applied 
or to which one is subject, or estimating the employment of a sort of any kind as 
useful, it is advisable to evaluate its implications in terms of calculation and process-
ing. Because sorts imply such costs, they are often identified as implying a deliberate 
sacrifice of resources, especially time, on the altar of rather obscure gods. As an impor-
tant dimension of the experience of sorting, this sacrifice is something itself to take 
into account. Here the deployment of sorts can act usefully as a form of immobiliza-
tion, an occlusion of the identification of the beneficiaries of the sorting process, or 
for the generation of support for new resource requirements. While in some cases, the 
least number of comparisons should be aimed at for the sake of efficiency, each oppor-
tunity for ordering is one that should also be taken as a test of the worth of ordering 
in itself and should therefore be evaluated carefully. 
 An example of the unpredictable results of the introduction of sorting practices is 
to be found in the work of postal delivery. By its very nature, the work requires numer-
ous stages of sorting. The number and range of address to be delivered to are generally 
known and fixed into the  “ frame ” used to position the run of things to be delivered 
during their preparation in the sorting office. One exemplary factor that complicates 
the work is often the uneven physical distribution of the addresses. A street may be 
laid out in a higgledy-piggledy fashion, various plots of land having perhaps been 
developed at different times, being of different sizes, or arrayed nonuniformly owing 
to natural features. Working out the optimal route may further be complicated by 
many factors (such as the slope of the ground or the presence of parcels in the delivery 
load). Thus every person delivering post experiences their own daily version of the 
Traveling Salesman ’ s Problem. 9 This problem is usually understood to be resolvable 

Algorithms 
75
only in exponentially calculable time but is solved here by the tacit knowledge and 
the labor of the postal worker who knows and sorts the route. Attempts to automate 
the process of sorting and route planning in ways that marginalize or contradict this 
local and habitual knowledge — on the undisclosed assumption that such knowledge 
lacks the quantifiable virtue of the explicit and so can easily be confused with stupid-
ity — raise a number of problems that are exploitable as stratagems but mitigate against 
an optimal postal service.  10 The case of the trickiness of the postal sort reminds us 
that the virtue of a stratagem must not be mistaken for an illusory efficiency. It also 
makes evident, however, that certain problems of sorting can be offloaded by such 
means. The efficient circulation of an illusion is something to be appreciated. 
 Invoke Recursion 
 Recursion is one of the special pleasures of programmers, the use of a procedure that 
involves a series of discrete steps, one of which is the relaunch of the procedure. This 
relaunching, which aids both concision and economy, does not have to be simply 
stacked one inside the other. Recursion may involve the launch of another procedure 
that in turn launches the first one — such as a piece of software working its way through 
Web sites by following one link, then another, at each point splitting into a copy of 
itself that carries out the same behavior, deleting itself once an end point in the chain 
of links has been reached. 
 As a technique, recursion is typically handled by a loop, a sequence of instructions 
in which a program performs a set of operations, looping back to repeat them again 
until a specific condition is satisfied. But recursion may also be something far more 
systematic and pleasing — a characteristic feature of some entity or other, definable in 
terms of the kind of recursive mathematical function that programmers are taught to 
exploit. First of all, recursion is not inevitably a reinstantiation of the same.  11 It may 
consist of a derivable pattern of activity, of self-similarity, but in a condition in which 
each recursive event is different, in terms of its scale, location in time, the complica-
tions it may entail, and its place in relation to its nesting within other recursions or 
to those in which it is in turn nested. As such, recursion may be used to organize 
heterogeneous material into a singular pattern. 
 Control requires recursion, and this is its innovative answer to the ancient question 
put to Socrates in Plato ’ s  The Republic (and then repeated by Juvenal): Quis custodiet 
ipsos custodes? Who watches the watchmen? To which the answer was: their own 
deluded sense of duty — checks and balances. The recursiveness of control mechanisms 
in evil media creates a situation in which no upper layer exists that would be required 

76 
Algorithms
to use its merely moral strength to fight the seductions of corruption, since it is always 
topped out by another cycle of recursion. That recursion has this quality means that 
it requires meticulous handling for it not to spill out in unrecuperable ways, generat-
ing patterns in excess of the tacit norms of its exercise. As formalizations increasingly 
spread out from programmable systems into those that exhibit greater degrees of 
unpredictability, the usefulness of implementing recursive forms increases. One 
notable recent example is the use of eye-tracking devices to monitor, control, and 
derive information from the eye movements of those watching CCTV feeds.  12 
 But control as such also invites simple forms of deviation, falling out of the condi-
tions of one loop, as a means of resistance. Recursions need to be correctly stacked 
for the multilevel  “ business ontology ” 13 that structures the innards and horizons of 
contemporary life to be fully encompassing with appropriate inevitability. It is an 
ontology of (predictable) unpredictability and modularity, structured by a hungrily 
flexible grammar generating cohesion and instability out of potential future profit or 
a perpetual state of getting by until the moment of opportunity arises to take on one ’ s 
rightful mantle of star, celebrity, entrepreneur, or gambler. 
 The answer to the question of who controls control is, then, that when control 
controls controlling, control is formally dexterous enough to conjugate itself, end-
lessly. Control becomes an automatism that has acquired such solid entrenchment in 
the perceptual, affective, and conceptual habits of experience that it acquires an 
agency all its own. This creates a situation in which control is cyclically deferred, with 
no identifiable center, and at the same time is able to enact itself at multiscalar levels 
with absolute specificity and requisite variety. At this point, resistance to control 
becomes not something of interest simply to underlings or those who are used to 
acting as the appendages of their devices but to anyone who needs to take the initia-
tive of using disturbance or carving out a little creative autonomy. Needless to say, 
the anonymous algorithmic perfection of such an admirably constructed world does 
not yet exist, except in tendency. But as a concrete abstraction unfolding with hands-
free autonomy into the various locales of the real, it offers much to desire. 
 Such organization, however, does not arise from a revolutionary rationalism, an 
imperative to establish media systems as a  “ clean slate, ” 14 to ground all future opera-
tions on a foundational scission with the past and start anew under perfect conditions. 
Rather, the imperative is to work with the messiness, intractability, and chaos that 
pertain. What needs to be established is the framework that enables all this activity 
to take place — such is the strategy of cloud computing and social network facilitation, 
for instance. It is a strategy that works well to supplement or triangulate the perils of 
audit, in which quantitatively fixed terms of required achievement simply become 

Algorithms 
77
fixtures to be worked around. Here the work-around is already anticipated, tracked, 
and installed as the next target, and the recursion plays out in the cybernetic dance 
of target finding and avoidance. 
 If topology involves a means of recognizing the invariance of forms in space, recur-
sion is a means of establishing invariance over time. The characteristic problems of 
topology, homotopy, and continuous functions become manifest here in relational 
terms that are articulated through the arrangement of staging sequences and processes. 
Recursion as a stratagem is thus immediately distinguishable from one that aims at 
all too simple domination, but it is a stratagem that also compels its use in a moderate 
manner. Calculus — originally invented to track  “ the motions of the planets, the 
comets, the moon and the sea ” 15 — is a tool for tracing recursions across time, but it 
thus also provides a means for describing the cyclical movements of a world, one that 
it is wise to be able to step out from, as well as being able to bend oneself and others 
toward. 
 The efficacy of recursion as a stratagematic technique derives from the way in which 
it draws on particular kinds of patterning that already exist in things, people, pro-
cesses, and organizations themselves. Yet the risks that recursion poses derive from 
the inevitably incomplete characterization that a recursive function provides: extend-
ing a process through recursion can generate arbitrary forms of continuity that rapidly 
diverge and loop off in directions initially unforeseen. The formal and the empirical 
do not mesh: poorly implemented recursion may even have the propensity to rapidly 
generate extreme phenomena. 
 Abstract Captures 
 Designing a piece of software or a programmable digital artifact of any kind entails a 
process of abstraction: capturing the logic of what an application, a gadget, a system, 
or a device is supposed to do within a set of algorithms, and understanding how those 
algorithms will behave, is a preeminent technical skill of software engineers. 
Appropriately precise technical knowledge amounts here to a detailed understanding 
of the states of the algorithm, program, or system. A programmer will want to know 
that an algorithm will terminate and not just loop forever, reach a position of catatonic 
stasis, or collapse as the result of incremental leaks in memory. 
 The ability to abstract is not, however, to be understood as primarily a matter 
of individual psychology, as if in the world of the computer programmer there came 
first a concrete world, then the process of cognition, and finally the algorithm as 
the abstracted result. Abstraction is a real, transindividual process,  16 present in social 

78 
Algorithms
practices, languages, and technologies, as much as in the design discussions and mod-
eling diagrams of the development team. We are infected and birthed by abstractions 
and have become immune to, and unaware of, some of their effects, sometimes inten-
tionally so (as with abstraction layers). Equally layers of abstraction are embedded in 
flowcharts, naming conventions (the  “ end user ” ), design tools, programming libraries, 
assembly languages, and so on, which mean that a programmer doesn ’ t have to be 
able to talk directly to a machine in terms of the minutiae of processes of bit shifting. 
And lengthy, more or less routinized, chains of translation also give tractable, program-
mable shape to the design requirements for an application. 
 Abstraction operating on abstraction, this complex set of processes involved in 
specifying, segmenting, structuring, and parsing quantities considered as data or 
instruction underlines the strangely material qualities of the communicative poten-
tials modeled in computational formalism. While such processes can be captured more 
or less readily in the notational formatting of algorithms and data structures, the 
realities on which those algorithms and data structures operate must themselves be 
organized so that they interface smoothly with them. Simulating real-world processes 
is made considerably easier if the real world already operates like a machine, with a 
precisely specifiable set of degrees of freedom accorded to the processes in question. 
A user interface is a carefully and restrictively controlled entity that allows a variable, 
albeit fairly minimal, latitude of enunciative freedom to the user on the basis of a 
precise set of parameters. Design techniques can be and are used to ensure that a 
machine is addressed in a way that the machine will understand, rather than any 
other. 
 With its frequent propensity for figuring cognitive operations in computational 
terms, psychology is a discipline apt to promote the kind of algorithmic subjectivity 
that interfaces most appropriately with machines. Consider, for example, the stepwise 
operation of the finite-state machine as it works in a regular-expression engine. (When 
a regex engine parses a string of characters as a regular expression, it compares input 
characters with regular-expression characters on a sequential, one-at-a-time basis. If 
the regular expression to be matched is  aa but the input string is  ba , the engine returns 
a  “ no match ” result after the first comparison. If the input string is  ac , the  “ no match ” 
result is returned after the second comparison, and so on.)  17 This highly pernickety, 
stepwise operation is characteristic of the logic of the finite-state machine, but it 
equally infiltrates everyday practices: the short-listing meeting for selecting candidates 
for a job interview, for example, or the border guards profiling visitors to the West 
from anywhere it has recently bought democracy to. You do it yourself when you 
check your eligibility for personal finance (unless you visit a pawnshop, where a dif-

Algorithms 
79
ferent chain of negotiations is adopted). Some psychologists call this process of pattern 
matching  intuition . It is what organizational decision makers are praised for; it is an 
automatism of great virtue,  18 one that exemplifies the pervasive quality of the real 
abstractions operative in social life. 
 But if we can think of computational media forms as expressing such abstractions, 
they can in turn represent a means for further extending the zones within which to 
realize them and give them effective purchase. In some ways, this possibility is inher-
ent in the epistemic claims made on behalf of the Turing machine, Turing ’ s proof that 
any computable function could be simulated by an appropriately configured machine, 
with its laborious, step-by-step movements of a notional tape (itself a variant of the 
logic of the finite-state machine).  19 As a device endowed with the universal ability to 
simulate, the Turing machine acts as an article of faith, yielding the conviction that 
any computable machine process can — whatever the problem — be translated into and 
modeled in Turing terms.  20 Some argue that this establishes a new way of exploring 
processes of value extraction in the economy. At the least, it gives a suggestive set of 
theoretical resonances to the practical operations of the knowledge economy — “ Can 
it be modeled as a Turing machine? ” coming to mean  “ Can knowledge of how to do 
this be extracted from the workers who know how to do it? ” 21 
 But Turing machines are characterized by a certain inflexibility for practical pur-
poses, for the technical reason that their operations are characterized in terms of the 
minute operations of shifting of bits. How to specify, and hence discern and extract, 
the appropriately algorithmic qualities of a regular, semiregular, or regulated process 
is not something one would do directly in terms of a Turing machine per se — in just 
the same way that one would not measure a coastline with a meter ruler. Hence we 
see the pragmatic virtues of abstraction layers, which obviate the need to think 
computationally in terms of machine addressable processes. But the flip side of 
this issue is that a great many computational processes rapidly become incredibly 
opaque, because ignorance, a selective forgetting, is a crucial element of abstraction. 
Consequently, as real-world tasks get translated into finite algorithmic operations, the 
possibility that a program will generate ballooningly complex sets of machine states, 
as is the case with the pattern matching of regular-expression engines, for example, 
becomes a significant likelihood, because of the multifaceted, many-layered ignorance 
that abstraction produces. 
 Trying to match an extremely complicated expression, requiring all sorts of back-
tracking through previously matched sets of data, will flood computational memory 
with possible matches, the programmatic equivalent of the neurotic indecision pro-
duced by excess memories. Technically this is a problem of computational complexity 

80 
Algorithms
(the very problem that the finite-state machine was originally used to analyze), but it 
is not just a technical matter:  algorithmic complexity attacks , which, to provoke the 
breakdown of a system, exploit the resource-intensive nature of multiplication of state 
that some computational processes entail, show that management of state is a real-
world problem with significant implications. Such attacks derive not from the break-
down of a formalism but from its excess, from a deliberately engineered overproduction 
of what the formalism allows, so as to generate processing problems in excess of the 
material resources that can be allocated for their solution. Control begets control as 
abstraction begets abstraction. 
 In this respect, the concept of the  abstract -state machine and the  “ specification 
languages ” to which it gives rise is of particular, and not solely technical, interest. The 
abstract-state machine offers a formal notation that purports to have a capacity to 
 capture and model logics in motion. Along with the associated technique of evolution-
ary algebra, the abstract-state machine represents an important attempt at introducing 
dynamism into logic, where mathematics might still often be tempted to consider 
static entities. As Yuri Gurevich points out,  “ Mathematical structures (graphs, groups, 
topological spaces, etc.) do not change in time whereas computer science objects 
(databases, machines) often do. ” 22 The strictures of computer science and mathematics 
here point toward the possibilities of developing engineering practices that are able 
to  capture ever more complex, changeable real-life processes, the kinds of processes 
that, where simulated in machines, generate precisely the ballooning state and the 
difficulty of its control so effectively exploited in complexity attacks. 
 The theory of abstract-state machines offers a bridge into the process whereby 
cultural practices, machine apparatuses, flows of work, and processes of communica-
tion are — or can be — translated into programmatically tractable finite-state machines. 
To put it slightly differently, the abstract-state machine offers a more tractable means 
for putting the generalized desire to simulate and automate into practice:  “ Can one 
generalize Turing machines so that any algorithm, never mind how abstract, can be 
modeled by a generalized machine very closely and faithfully? ” Unlike the Turing 
model, the theory of abstract-state machines is, as one commentator put it, a  “ wide 
spectrum method ” to  “ bridge the gap between the two ends of system development: 
the human understanding and formulation of real-world problems; [and] the deploy-
ment of their algorithmic solutions by code-executing machines on changing plat-
forms. ” 23 Capturing a set of material operations inevitably requires these two ends of 
the spectrum, but doing so is a lengthy and costly process: imagine specifying the 
steps involved in making a phone call in terms of bit-shift operations, in the Boolean 

Algorithms 
81
logic of binary code. Making that process easier obviously extends the range of opera-
tions that can be encompassed in a programmable technology. 
 The success of a corporate operation of capture (will this device be adopted, will it 
provide a seamless user experience, or will the user ’ s fingers bridle at the operations 
they must accomplish?) is in part a question of intrusiveness. Clunky mediators are 
simply too visible. A device or application that captures the attention, the energy, the 
 time , of a user most successfully is in all likelihood the device or application that 
obtrudes least in the practices of which it is a part (note that where the obtrusiveness 
cannot be mitigated, it is best to recode this obtrusiveness as display, decoration, or 
ornamentation). Getting work to flow smoothly is a media design imperative for life-
style strategies, and a political option to boot, particularly when it comes to remediat-
ing work.  24 The flexibilization and osmotic dispersion of work processes throughout 
life (a strong tendency in ubiquitous computing) is accompanied by a transformation 
of the logics of computational architectures in the direction of greater and greater 
mobility: mainframe, terminal, desktop, client – server, thin client, mobile, wireless, 
distributed, virtualized, cloud .   .   . But with this proliferation and dispersion, devices 
and applications are called on to present more, and more certain, configurational 
flexibility, as well as the capacity to handle greater degrees of complexity. The mission-
critical role of software in the operation of machines, a car, a plane, or a drone, for 
example, in a risk- and litigation-averse society entails the minute and mathematically 
accurate specification of the behavior of a device or application, as well as exhaustive 
testing. 
 Producing an accurate specification of the desirably flexible operation of devices or 
applications is itself a highly ramified process. The chain of translation that connects 
the whims of an executive dreaming up a killer app to the outsourced coding of low-
level assembly language optimizations of its first version is long, and while many of 
the links in this chain are made explicitly, much depends on shared, but tacit, knowl-
edge. Naturally this offers plenty of scope for ignorance and plausible deniability, and 
the latitude for deviation along the chain is considerable, a fact that goes some way 
to explaining why — like the development of drugs by pharmaceutical companies —
 processes of media design operate by the introduction of incremental, infinitesimal 
quantities of difference, margins of variation in the imitative capacities of computa-
tional code. 
 It is prudent here to accept the simple fact of the matter: a certain degree of obfus-
cation characterizes the process whereby mediators, at different layers of abstraction, 
chain or agglomerate together in the production of a connection (which then typically 

82 
Algorithms
appears transparent). The obvious tendency is to focus on what remains invariant, at 
the cost of a failure to see what happens in the middle (see, for example, the  “ refine-
ments ” that a middle manager brings to the directives of senior management in a 
large organization), especially when the result is in your favor. Equally, as a device for 
managing abstraction, for controlling the smooth transition from the wishful thinking 
of vaporware, the hawking of dreams and fantasies of total digital mastery to the 
drudgery of optimizing the machine address of assembly language, the abstract-
state machine indicates the eminently practical role that an attentive reworking of 
fundamental concepts of computer science can have for regulating even the most 
microscopic of transitions of a digital media system. 

 Structures 
 Structure Data 
 The concept of the algorithm has been pressed into service in recent years for thinking 
through processes that would not at first blush be considered to have any of the fea-
tures that computer scientists normally associate with their core area of expertise: the 
dynamics of particular kinds of cultural forms, social networking, or brand behavior, 
for example. Extended in this way, the algorithm, as an idea, thus becomes an  “ ana-
lyzer ” of social relations, particularly for processes that do not appear to have any 
obvious, explicit implementation in computational systems as such. 
 The algorithmic qualities of particular kinds of social relation, gray media objects 
and the interfaces they have with the everyday world, are readily evident in a number 
of fields. The filtering of social-housing hopefuls, nightclub bouncers operating a door 
policy, putting together a burger, or sorting a mate all attest to the algorithmicity of 
social life, as do the routine work-arounds used to deal with poor software. And the 
algorithm has a particularly seductive quality: the effectiveness of a finite set of steps 
for solving problems, along with the tacit assumption that the specification of an 
algorithm can change, points to a certain desired formal level of control. 
 Sociologists, media and cultural theorists, and the like have paid considerably less 
attention to the near-indispensable correlate of the algorithm, that without which —
 actual, explicit, and formal or virtual, implicit, and informal — an algorithm would 
have little to work with: the data structure, or, more simply put, a way of storing and 
arranging data. Part of the interest of considering things algorithmically has to do 
with their imitability, their replicability (in the sense that an algorithm extracts an 
identical, often apparently optimized set of steps from a process), and the inexorability 
of their finite progress toward a termination point. Imitate. Replicate. Terminate. 
Optimally. An algorithm is sometimes considered the sum of logic and control. But 

84 
Structures
equally, a program may be considered the sum of algorithms and data structures. If a 
controllable universe is a sum of programs, a  summa programmae , then data structures 
are essential to the effective operation of processes of control and as such represent 
an equivalently important stratagematic analyzer of social relations, perhaps even 
more so. 
 Other stratagems in this book have drawn on the complex interplay of the formal 
and the empirical evident with the diffusion of programmable mediation throughout 
culture, and have attended in particular to the tacitly prescriptive nature of specific 
media forms (e.g., the process of regularizing expression, which forms a way of ensur-
ing the existence of parseable, structured pattern). The requirement that data be 
structured extends this interplay into the more general abstract architecture of social 
and cultural practices organized by, for, and as information. If algorithms work most 
efficiently with well-designed data structures, then the organization of people and 
things in a manner commensurate with these structural forms will facilitate the 
smooth flow and control of data. 
 Consider the most basic operation of an algorithm, one for sorting, say, as discussed 
in the previous essay, in the stratagem  “ Know Your Sorts. ” Sorting algorithms 
are typically used to arrange lists of data such as numbers, names, credit codes, or 
other intimacies. Many programming languages natively provide the  array data 
structure, which allows you to store collections of elements in one contiguous set of 
spaces in memory (so you might declare an array of type  integer or  float , for example). 
If your sorting algorithm was for sorting whole numbers, you might pass it an array 
of integers to work with. However, the array might not be the best data structure to 
use in a specific case. Arrays allocate memory in advance, so you need to be able 
to say how big your list will be. What if you don ’ t know how big the list is going 
to be, or if its size will change? It would be like renting a warehouse for a business 
without any clear idea of the amount of stock you need to hold. Too big, and you 
have excessive overheads. Too small, and your stock has no home. Instead you might 
choose to use a  linked list , which is a bit like an array except that it can grow or shrink 
as needs require, and does not require the advance allocation of contiguous blocks of 
memory. 
 The point is that data structures help optimize the operations of algorithms by 
providing a way of organizing memory — computational, living, or material memory —
 so as to extract the data located in them as rapidly and effectively as possible (arrays 
are quicker than linked lists, for example). Different kinds of data structure provide 
different ways of organizing that memory, ways that are more or less appropriate to 
the task in question. This is as true of a task performed by humans as by machines. 

Structures 
85
The legendarily astonishing levels of productivity achieved by Alexei Stakhanov, for 
example, depended on the organization of the working environment in a manner 
optimal for the hero and his collective. Conversely, restructuring an environment 
without consideration for the underlying implementation of data extraction processes 
thwarts productivity: virtualize an office into a paperless universe without due con-
sideration for the operations that depend on visually easy-to-identify stacks of papers 
and files or face-to-face conversations (now distributed across an intranet, say), and 
the speed of data retrieval will plummet. As quasi-cybernetic computational entities, 
formally and informally specified data structures and the operations that can be per-
formed on them become critical mediators, and the space of lived experience is riddled 
with a complex mix of virtual and actual affordances and opportunities (which are 
less well-known or evident to generations habituated to working on earlier forms of 
materiality). 
 A data structure forms a sort of intermediate level, an abstraction mechanism, in 
the process of addressing machine memory.  1 An operating system will ultimately take 
responsibility for how memory is allocated, but a data structure offers a way of 
abstracting from things to organize them for processing most effectively, without the 
programmer needing to know the specific details of how a particular type of machine 
organizes memory allocation. This process of abstraction from the specifics of machine 
addressable memory is extended by the notion of the abstract data type (ADT), which 
defines purely theoretical kinds of data structures and the operations that can specifi-
cally be performed on them: containers, double-ended queues, multimaps, priority 
lists, heaps, and trees are represent forms of abstract data type. The implementation 
of an ADT entails a form of black boxing, in the sense that nested within the ADT, a 
range of different data structures may be operating, the details of which will be hidden. 
Equally, different implementations of the same abstract type could entail different 
data structures. I use a diary; you use a personal organizer. I pile my papers on the 
desk. You put yours in a filing cabinet. I use memory sticks, you use a networked drive, 
but we are both working on and retrieving data. 
 The development of thinking about data and data structures, about abstraction and 
abstraction mechanisms in computing science, offers precious indicators for the well-
crafted development of control.  2 The creation of ever newer layers of abstraction, 
greater degrees of distance from concrete machine addressable memory,  3 and hence 
creative of forms of mediation is the general direction of movement. These layers 
of abstraction have their own operatives and experts to be nurtured: management 
consultants, facilitators, and knowledge engineers who have a particular interest in 
shaping new abstract data types. 

86 
Structures
 Because abstraction might be understood as a kind of selective forgetting, however, 
data structuring can produce difficulties, a particular kind of ignorance about imple-
mentation details, which lead humans to a kind of infernal alternative: either refash-
ion yourself to meet the imperious demands of more and different types of data, or 
consign yourself to data oblivion. Alternately, life may be enhanced as a set of more 
or less well-linked data structures that, with each synchronizing beat of the ever-more-
rapid CPU clock, can undergo process and sort, filter, and queue problems at ever-
improved rates. The effectiveness of the popular self-help book  Getting Things Done , 
for example, derives from the way that its techniques enable individuals to deal 
with — or rather process — much more data, provided that they treat them as  data , with 
lists (just like Lisp) and memory pointers (just like C++).  4 The algorithm it puts into 
play, not unlike a Petri net,  5 with these associated data structures can cope with unpre-
dictable eventuality, provided that it can be assimilated into the abstract constraining 
structure required to ensure the continued throughput, the continued, continual, 
never-ending  flow of data. Part of the attraction of such schemas is that they allow 
one to navigate contemporary life in its raw format. 
 It is not difficult to realize how important it is to insinuate oneself into the virtual 
abstract data type of the person: try to work with the glut of e-mail that is a charac-
teristic feature of many lives, without appropriate configuration (file hierarchies, etc.), 
and life quickly sinks under a welter of unread and unknown obligations. Here hell 
is not — as Sartre thought — other people but an unstructured inbox. The ongoing 
exteriorization of memory, initiative, structure, and spontaneity in gadgets, applica-
tions, devices, and networks requires and induces this structuring of data, both in the 
explicit computational sense and in the implicit architectures of everyday life.  6 
 Subjectively, an ineffective response to the data structure requirements of data 
processing can manifest itself as burnout, the desire to downsize, bucolic fantasies 
about the countryside, a nostalgia for work the way it used to be. More generally it 
has been proposed as having an affinity with the rise of stress-related illnesses and 
mental health problems — although there are plenty of layers useful to obfuscate such 
direct cause. 7 The quasi-imperative need to  abstract oneself , to become commensurate 
with sophisticated algorithmic operations on data offers an effectively blameless, 
perfectly deniable means for upgrading populations toward the production and over-
production of information. Implementation details can be, and are, ignored, and the 
intelligent media operative can only accede to such a foreknowledge of the importance 
of data structure and the complex set of relations between the different layers of 
abstraction that these kinds of mediators introduce with prudence. 

Structures 
87
 Work Abstraction Layers 
 A number of stratagems emphasize the benefits and uses of noise, confusion, and the 
generative powers of mistakes. The key role of time in establishing any process of 
veridiction in computation and the generation of possibilities for delay, attenuation, 
and exhaustion, as well as impossible speed, has also been noted. Other stratagems 
tend toward the use of facilitation and empowerment, or the encouragement of cre-
ativity and the provision of an escape hatch giving access to the ineffable. Entropy, 
exuberance, and chance are crucial, but the switch between clarity and chaos and back 
is also essential as a means of articulating the full range of dynamic forms in organiza-
tion, personality, and process. As such, the stratagematic use of clear demarcations 
and boundaries is not to be neglected in evil media. 
 The specificity of a boundary should be understood as both mobilizing and stabiliz-
ing behaviors, as both an affordance and an obstacle, and as taking on the role of 
impassive and objective fact. In either mode, the tendency of a boundary is to draw 
processes of gaming toward it: the boundary is inviting as something to mobilize in 
additional layers of derivation, operations that may in turn act as handlers, prompts, 
and blockages or fuel minor fritterings of energy of no consequence. Such boundaries 
may be operative in security, in permissions structures, in the activity of a specific 
molecule in instructing and calming the nervous system, or in establishing the 
sequence of events and operands at various scales within a program. Boundaries in 
turn work, like blinkers, to decrease the cognitive load of operations. 
 A specifically interesting kind of boundary is one known as an abstraction layer. 
These are boundaries of conception and transmission in the layers of a program 
that are staged as a means of filtering the quantity or complexity of information 
required for a particular decision to be made or state to be reached. Historically they 
derive from differentiating the logical or functional description of a system from 
its physical form.  8 This process of differentiation continues through the development 
of operating systems, languages, interfaces, applications, class libraries, and so on, all 
of which in some way reduce the need to engage with the processes and means 
by which they are implemented, or provide an appropriate degree of detail for the 
specific task. 
 An example, in some operating systems, would be the relation between an icon 
and the file that it represents. At the layer of the GUI, the file is clicked on to be 
opened before it can be entered at another layer, that of execution or editing. Such 
a file may also be operated on by means of algorithms, themselves operating via 

88 
Structures
another layer — articulation in code — which allow them to be parsed or processed 
without being opened by a user, an apparition that in turn exists at another layer of 
abstraction. 
 An abstraction layer might call for a task to be completed, a square to be drawn, 
or a statement to be composed, without specifying the means required. As such, this 
kind of abstraction layer suggests a universalizable managerial imperative, in that it 
does not necessarily matter which process, register, object, instance, or person carries 
out the work so long as it is done. Abstraction thus implies a measure of operation 
that is  “ hands-off. ” 
 Abstraction in this sense allows an effective joining of the formal and empirical 
dimensions of media operation, developing suggestible techniques for the use of high-
level formalizations both with and against the grain of other forms of composition. 
As such, it is easy to see that abstraction layers are themselves inherently medial. They 
are worked when answering the voice on the other end of the phone (it ’ s a voice rather 
than the entity it may provide interface to) or become clear through the agency of 
the microphone that remains clipped to the lapel of the muttering politician when 
he retreats from an encounter with a specimen of the public into his car to reveal the 
thoughts he deposits in the ear of an assistant. Abstraction layers imply a relation to 
other entities, moves of presence or nonpresence, and the interplay of performances 
of openness, closure, and answerability. 
 Abstraction layers also perform in ways that integrate well into flexible hierarchies 
that may be collapsed and expanded as necessary, and in this they rearticulate the 
technics of contemporary power in a way that again demonstrates the exemplary value 
of software as an object for understanding its operations. The ostensive art of liberal 
governance is threefold. First, freedom of interpretation, maneuver, and operation 
within a bounded set of conditions forms a crucial part of the technics of politics. 
This can be exemplified in the idea that a bank account is a device that may be used 
to perform an abstraction on a building: so long as the rent comes in from tenants, 
or the mortgage is paid, the place is still working regardless of the specific implemen-
tation details. Second, the provision of conditions for free development of certain 
layers involves a dependency on the complex and possibly disturbing activity of other 
layers and as such, relations between layers requires filtering in order to avoid leakage.  9 
Third, in consequence, it is important to register how abstraction layers arise naturally, 
based on need, such as may occur when an aspect of a system or assemblage migrates 
across implementations. The more that different functions of a process, society, or 
software can be integrated by one layer or implementation, the wider it circulates and 
coalesces. The more generality an abstraction is capable of, the greater its degree of 

Structures 
89
usefulness; and the greater its tenacity in self-stabilization, the more activity is arrayed 
around it. 
 Abstraction layers can be inadequately implemented. And here we see the possibil-
ity of inverting the condition of the boundary that draws activity to it, repulsing use. 
The abstraction layer that is more complicated than what it handles, for instance, a 
telephone answering system that acts as a lengthy, multilayer denial-of-service attack 
on  “ clients, ” is among the class of such systems. Rather more sophisticated and prag-
matic is the recognition that abstractions often require extensions and work-arounds. 
Clean, powerful abstractions that hide their implementation to the point where they 
achieve what passes for transparency invite such supplements. More regularly, an 
abstraction layer may leak, bringing aspects of lower layers up the chain of abstrac-
tions, defeating its generality. At this point, skill in the stratagematic coupling of 
formalisms with empirical work becomes readily apparent, and such work-arounds 
may require the development of bespoke, domain-specific responses. 
 Multiply Interfaces 
 To secure their freedoms, members of advanced societies maintain relations with 
multiple kinds of agencies and entities. By the same token, it is important to encour-
age, filter, or maintain such dependencies, and to regulate one ’ s own freedom from 
them. Thus the interface to such systems becomes a matter of crucial importance, one 
that invites consideration of multiple kinds of handler. 
 Every life event — such as a change of address, citizenship, residence permit, death, 
change of job or legal partner — is a moment when people tend to yield large amounts 
of fresh data for several systems simultaneously. Many will imply negotiating access 
to a decision-making mechanism or to a resource. All will require handling, sorting, 
evaluating, and processing. Each triggers the possibility for procedures of inertia, 
transparent function, delay, or the risk of loss of contact or of records, but they can 
be used more convincingly and usefully. 
 The bureaucratic world described by Kafka, in its scenes of slow, abiding menace 
and confusion, is composed at the speed of paper. The rolling of an eyeball over 
text, the scratch and glide of an underling ’ s fountain pen as documents are copied 
in triplicate, clacking typewriters measured in words per minute, the footfall of a 
courier moving documents from one office to another or that of a messenger deliver-
ing a summons, the time to arrive at a decision: the duration is that of waiting, of 
slow inscription by hand, of the invisibility of a decision-making process as it 
occurs through inscrutable ritual and the minds of the participants. Contemporary 

90 
Structures
management systems that still involve the human in decision-making processes essen-
tially operate at this speed. Paper-speed management, whether it has been made 
electronic or not, subsists on systems of forms in which requests and reports are made 
and reviewed in more or less standardized ways and approved or denied at a speed 
that at best resembles that of an organization ’ s internal postal system or the time it 
takes to assemble the interorganizational thought on a decision. In many cases, it 
matters little that much of this communication is carried out through electronic 
means; the bottleneck in decision making is the human component. 
 In  The Social Life of Information , 10 John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid commend the 
humane nature of this arrangement, the way that it allows for the filtering of deci-
sions, a slowing down of computational processes that might otherwise be mis-
matched to their tasks, and its production of an intermediate space in which knowledge 
may be developed and recouped. This speed is slow enough to remain inhabitable by 
Bartleby the Scrivener,  11 a clerk who, in Melville ’ s story, sagely withdraws from work 
through the utter diminution of his needs. Those who are not capable of such frugality 
will require other ways of working. Among humans, numerous techniques have arisen 
for this purpose. The activity known as speed-reading, for instance, largely consists of 
overriding the subliminal vocalizations involved in reading, so as to bypass the throat 
in favor of direct connections between the eyes and the brain. Many such forms of 
training involve the production of intuition through the automation of behaviors —
 whether they are physical responses, as in dance or sport, or calculative, as in trading. 
Rather than engaging with such forms of training for every kind of decision, it is 
important to develop standardized, readily intuitive materials and systems for working 
with ideas, objects, properties, and behaviors. These can usefully be grouped under 
the term  “ interface. ” 
 The relation between an interface and the ideas, information, and processes it 
makes available and transforms is a crucial one. People work with arrangements of 
information, categories, tools, equipment, document systems, as well as other media, 
and since  “ an idea or something that has been learned can also be considered as 
having material-objective force in its consequences and mediations, ” 12 the under-
standing of the material nature of ideas, and their relation to medial activity such as 
reading, navigation, and calculating, has become commonplace. It may even be pos-
sible to achieve useful effects by circulating the idea that ideas have different kinds of 
objecthood at metaphysical, social, operational, and neurological levels, with charac-
teristics that can be articulated and modified at each of these scales with concomitant 
degrees of variety or invariance. 

Structures 
91
 The speed of interaction required by a paper-based bureaucracy accords ideas an 
important scale to work on. This is something to be recognized especially in their 
circulation as a form of speculative property and in their direct correlation with the 
status of the object as something alienable, describable, and ownable (with the addi-
tional possible qualities of being reproducible and improvable). We have attained only 
a rudimentary stage in this development, lacking philosophical rigor in fitting all the 
noumenal forms of ideality into clear relation to the four or five (depending on loca-
tion) basic states of intellectual property, trademark, patent, copyright, moral right, 
and trade secret. Considerable questions remain about the ways in which every form 
of intellection can fully be incorporated into existing IP frameworks to leverage their 
full capacity for innovation, or whether further forms of property require invention. 
How states of doubt, curiosity, desire, or melancholy might be rendered compliant 
with the requirements of the World Intellectual Property Organization or other agen-
cies remains an open field for regulatory invention. The recent enthusiasm for a 
philosophy of affect, constructing an articulable bridge between affect, sensation, 
emotion, and other forms of ideas such as reason or linguistic tractability and descrip-
tion, may be a useful early move in this direction. 
 Before such a system — a model that would at least allow transactions in ideas to 
gain all the benefits of the market — becomes available, it is important to consider 
those systems that either do not require an obligatory point of passage through a 
human bottleneck or tend to reduce their number and variability in favor of a com-
putational assay of the situation. In this case, numerous advantages present them-
selves, including those of the grounds for a great variety of choice, absolute certitude 
of decision, and great speed. 
 In terms of knowledge management, a good example of an interface is the user-
generated encyclopedia Wikipedia. This site provides many things, among them a 
means for ideas to combine. Such combination occurs as aggregation, testing, and 
propagation. Ideas aggregate because they are gathered in one state and location. They 
test each other because the site ’ s users subject ideas and their expressions to the norms 
of the project, and they propagate ideas, since the explanation of one topic naturally 
requires the explanation of many others. The Wikipedia interface is produced by a 
range of partially transformable rules, resources, tools, behaviors, and its status as a 
resource that motivates and facilitates contributions. In the same way that boundaries 
to medieval cities, the city gates — usually managed by trade guilds — became the foci 
of the greatest business, of trading, sneaking, adulterating, and rumormongering, the 
interface, like an abstraction layer, is a point that gathers activity to it. Wikipedia, 

92 
Structures
however, is an interface to itself, its process and its contents. When these relations 
and the way they are governed by interface are opened to the outside, a joint project 
can be developed. Users come to the site to feed it as well as to read it, to proliferate 
disputes and interests. The site operates, like many other things, as a system of rela-
tions, of relations between relations, and the means to work with and operate on those 
relations. As such it requires new forms of sophistry. 
 To keep the kinds of relations it works with simple, Wikipedia operates by using a 
small set of rhetorical rules, conventions such as the observation of an imagined 
and codified neutral point of view, the prohibition of interpretation and original 
research, and a number of procedural conventions known mainly to committed 
volunteers.  13 For many organizations, quality and service can be highly problematic 
 “ externalities. ” 14 The advantage of peer production methods such as those developed 
by Wikipedia is that they specifically work to internalize such externalities by 
expanding the question of quality and service out to users. The quality of the material 
available through the site remains at a roughly consistent level because of the 
thousands of acts of addition and normalization carried out on it every day. This 
approach, primarily effective at the level of small-scale incremental improvements or 
other changes, is characterized by Eric Raymond ’ s declaration that in open-source 
software,  “ Many eyeballs make all bugs shallow. ” 15 Irrespective of the acuity of 
this law, these thousands of acts of daily normalization can effectively be compared 
to those carried out by entering data into databases, with the exception that the 
norms of Wikipedia are, as well as consisting of data, themselves also relational: they 
make references, definitions, descriptions, inclusions, exclusions, quantifications, and 
so on. 
 We can compare this approach to that of a standard utility company, the provider 
of water, network, banking, pensions, or electricity. The interface here is designed to 
operate at the lowest functional level of quality, with staff operating to scripts pre-
sented to them on-screen by  “ wizards ” and according to strict levels of permission to 
minimize the time demands on more highly paid decision makers or advisers.  16 Once 
the marginal benefit of outsourcing transaction costs in coordination and stress to 
users via the use of human-mediated telephone interfaces becomes vanishingly small, 
what we are left with is the opportunity for some novel forms of manipulation. Such 
forms are not those of the market, with its often overly simple means of apportioning 
attention via monetary value, or those of the degradation of interaction via interfaces 
that de-skill and disempower the operatives of human voice interfaces to transaction 
systems. These potentially highly fruitful operations work precisely on the more 
abstract, but utterly concrete, level of relations. 

Structures 
93
 One move in this direction has been to remove layers of intermediation between 
users and services that they can be encouraged to collaborate on to deliver, as a way 
of sharing the costs of change, such as when an operating system is shipped without 
adequate functionality, for example.  17 The relations between digital objects, users, 
networks, and processes are inhibited by such systems and motivate forms of figuring 
out and working round when they occur. 
 Another move that emphasizes the shift to relations but concentrates them in one 
domain is the proliferation of the relational database. Here every entity is, in part, its 
own interface as well as its own  “ thing ” and is mobilized and made useful by its 
composition within systems of relations. The relational database, in its original incar-
nation in the work of Edgar Codd, was also a way of shifting power in the handling 
of data from the program, or the writer of programs, to the user of data.  18 
 It is worth noting in this account of relationality, and its gauging, filtering, and 
production through interfaces, that in his discussion of fortune or luck, Machiavelli 
advises that no single approach can be adopted at all times. A particular stratagem 
may  “ flourish one day and come to grief the next. ” 19 The prosperity of stratagems is 
ephemeral, dependent on local, timely, conditions. Insofar as is possible, these must 
be made, and the path to doing so is through the creation, development, and manipu-
lation of relations. 
 As with fortune ’ s effect on operators, so too with relations. Thousands of software 
projects and Web sites remain as only the husks of imagined participation: some 
because they are useless, others because their users have yet to be invented, still others 
because of the capricious operations of fortune. Simply creating a toolbox is not 
enough. 
 Let Datasets Advance 
 In the  “ bureaucracy of statistics, ” few objects are grayer than the dataset. Soliciting 
punctiliousness through the technical prerequisites of the precise specification of rules, 
definitions, and data types and formats, the humble dataset is an unlikely candidate 
for consideration as a critical component in the shifting constellations of power 
relations in modern society. However, the standardized specification of elements of 
information considered pertinent for describing anything from an insurance claim to 
the treatment of a metastasized tumor, the internal state of a human body in locomo-
tion to the behavioral traits of potentially criminal activity, packaged in a recognized, 
machine-readable format ( “ dataset ” was once an IBM term for a file),  20 can become 
an important strategic agent in its own right, playing a role that more often than 

94 
Structures
not goes unnoticed in the many gray components of institutions, knowledges, and 
technologies. 
 Datasets are in widespread use as the raw material of statistical analysis, wherein a 
range of standard techniques used in statistics to describe patterns of distribution of 
data, and the considerably more sophisticated techniques of data mining, are applied 
to the values that make up such datasets. For its nominal addressee (the statistician, 
the data miner, the computer scientist), the dataset is but a representation (before 
analysis, a somewhat opaque one) of some state of affairs or other, cast in the language 
of discrete, continuous, and binary attributes (alive = 1, dead = 0). As such, the dataset 
provides a technical extension and refinement of the bureaucracy that plays such an 
important part in exercising surveillance and control over populations. Ian Hacking 
has suggested that as a historically significant element in the development of contem-
porary forms of governance, the bureaucracy of statistics provides a way of  “ determin-
ing classifications in which people must think of themselves and of the actions that 
are open to them. ” 21 
 It is not so much the possibilities of statistical analysis to adduce a representation 
of the self that interests us here (even if doubts regarding the purchase that such 
analysis offers for gaining scientific knowledge are not irrelevant). Of greater interest 
is the way that possibilities for control and manipulation shift when one starts to 
consider the role that the dataset might have as an active medium in its own right, 
and more specifically in the way that it determines the classifications by which 
 machines must think humans and determine the actions that are open to them. As long 
as data move at similar speeds to discourse as conveyed through paper-based message 
systems (an archive, in Foucauldian terms), we are correct to explore the efficacy of 
the kind of statistical knowledge enveloped in datasets as a component part of discur-
sive strategies. But with the growth of forms of machine readability, under which data 
in various forms become a significant parameter in programmable operations, some-
thing of a shift occurs.  22 Under such circumstances, machine classification — in con-
junction with the bureaucratic labor of more humanly devised taxonomies — starts to 
operate in quite decisive forms of  “ action on action. ” 
 From the quantitative viewpoint of media hardware, as with other aspects of the 
devices available for use in strategies of contemporary governance, the significant 
cheapening of computer memory and the increasing processor speeds and bandwidth 
of Internet traffic conjoin with database systems and powerfully flexible forms of 
markup language (the various dialects of XML in particular) to make the collecting 
and processing of information, in forms readily amenable to statistical analysis and 
computational processing, a viable option for a great many kinds of activity. However, 

Structures 
95
from a qualitative point of view, the incremental, continuous nature of these shifts in 
processing power, bandwidth, and speed can obscure the new layers of connection 
and configuration that become possible. 
 Consider, for example, the difference between a routine checkup at your local doc-
tor ’ s office and the continuous monitoring of the same physiological data using bio-
sensors. In the case of the office visit, every six months the doctor measures your heart 
rate, blood pressure, and so on. The doctor asks if are you getting much exercise, how 
well you are sleeping, and other general questions about your state of health. In the 
second case, connected to a device to collect signals from sensors attached to your 
body, a transmitter (perhaps your phone) aggregates and packages those data, serializes 
the information and sends it to a centralized repository. No doctor, but the possibility 
of real-time data processing that evaluates your state of well-being — possibly making 
some judgments on your behalf, particularly if the kinds of activities you engage in 
are monitored, too — and then makes the data available to insurers, your employer, 
your partner, perhaps commercial sponsors of the system who provide it in return for 
certain services or levels of access. 
 When data gathering and processing in the absence of human mediators are accom-
plished in this way (without the possibility that humans offer for unforeseen  “ follow-
up ” questions) and clinical judgment can be made by machine as part of a decision 
support mechanism (invalidate that insurance policy) or directly implemented as 
machinic decision (immobilize the car), when the bureaucracy of statistics migrates 
into practices, machines, and devices across the social, the dataset is susceptible to 
becoming an agency that no longer merely molds citizens but rather spins not their 
words but their activities continuously by changing the shape of the environment in 
which they act, innocuously, felicitously, abruptly. Such is the discretion of machines. 
 A stratagematic reading of the Internet of things and the growth of ubiquitous 
computing with which it is associated thus links the humble dataset directly to the 
parametric control of machines: in this context, the refrigerator that stores a list of 
regular foodstuffs, their cost, shelf life, nutritional information, and so on. It will pos-
sibly provide helpful advice about when to go to the supermarket (better still, when 
to place an order, or perhaps streaming loyalty rewards to its manufacturer when 
presets are used) and exemplifies the great virtues of a precise appreciation of the 
relevant variables of everyday action and the preemptive possibilities that well-crafted 
processing of datasets provide. Of course, the seamless, fluid integration of data-
driven machinery into everyday life is something of a fable. It has, for its flip side, 
unanswered questions about the devising of appropriate kinds of formal ontologies 
(the term adopted to characterize the markup languages that will allow machines to 

96 
Structures
communicate with each other and with users in this new world), the coordination of 
standards and agreements over protocols. 
 More specifically, as an object itself, which must be defined, shaped, and deployed, 
as an actor with the capacity to mediate in an ensemble of human and nonhuman 
processes, the dataset raises the possibility of new dissymmetries, new divergences, 
new gaps and fault lines of which it is itself an agent: just defining a dataset is a col-
lective task in its own right, knowledge by committee. The technocratic dream of 
seamless flow, in which objects are exhaustively specified by the ends to which they 
are devoted, ignores the new opportunities for experimentation, deviance, and impro-
visation such objects provide. We have no need to go as far as futuristic extrapolations 
to appreciate the room for maneuver that too coarse a specification of relevant vari-
ables provides, for example. At the scale of the organization,  “ key performance indica-
tors ” offer the crafty management team, or canny individuals happy to play with a 
new system of appearances, plenty of scope to shape themselves as successful, high 
performing, or simply honest and dutiful, and here the dataset combines usefully with 
the opportunities of audit. At the more labile scale of the smart device or intelligent 
machine, the slips and cracks that emerge when a gadget shapes or restricts one ’ s scope 
for action in unexpected ways call for an attentiveness to configuration and a percep-
tion attuned to the glitches and idiosyncrasies of machine-coded action. Operating 
transversally across different scales of reality, the generative activity of the dataset is 
never completely assured in its outcomes, producing new forms of uncertainty and 
indeterminacy even as it accomplishes its allotted tasks of automation and control. 
 Mine Data for Probabilities 
 The loose ensemble of techniques and technologies concerned with processes of 
knowledge engineering and management has received a huge adrenalin shot in recent 
years with the development of increasingly sophisticated practices of the analysis of 
statistical information or unstructured data usually considered under the rubric of  data 
mining . The ease with which information can be collected under conditions of digital 
communication, and the decrease in cost of storing or warehousing it in large quanti-
ties, makes it possible to amass large datasets on which sophisticated forms of statisti-
cal inference can be performed, making a range of forms of multivariate statistical 
methods (such as k-means clustering, artificial neural networks, principal components 
analysis), as well as other techniques for processing and analyzing more than one data 
variable at a time, into a potentially invaluable set of tools in developing refined forms 
of manipulation and influence. 

Structures 
97
 What is one to do with all the apparently meaningless information that years of 
sales into the high street and mall offer? How can you better turn terabytes of data 
about the online browsing habits of your customers to your advantage? And what 
about the masses of information about the locations, durations, and destinations of 
a population ’ s mobile telephone calls or their journeys around a capital city ’ s public 
transport network? Notwithstanding the civilian concern with snooping, electronic 
eavesdropping, and personal privacy, the search for and machine recognition of  pat-
terns in large ensembles of data or the extrapolative prediction of trends allow for a 
more informed shaping of the relationship between production (of decisions, informa-
tion, commands, goods) and consumption (or reception, execution, or comprehen-
sion) in ways that were difficult to imagine even a decade ago or could perhaps only 
have been imagined as variants of the uncanny predictive capacities of missile guid-
ance systems. 
 If the dataset offers a prescriptive model of the relevant data variables to collect to 
produce a representation of a particular state of affairs (presuming to a large extent 
that one knows, in advance, what the pertinent variables are for developing a viable 
representation), this is not necessarily the case in a data warehouse where vast quanti-
ties of information may have been amassed as a by-product of the routine accounting 
of business operations. Does a correlation exist between the kind of cheese somebody 
purchases at the supermarket and a preference for oven cleaner or political news? Am 
I more likely to go to the meat counter if I shop late on a Thursday night or first thing 
on a Saturday morning, and what, at either time, can be linked to such a purchase? 
The seduction of data mining is that of finding exploitable patterns in vast quantities 
of data, modeling probabilities, predicting trends, anticipating next moves, extracting 
 “ truth from trash. ” 23 
 Civil libertarians only get half the story right in their well-meant concern with the 
vast extension in scope of data gathering and mining. From some points of view, the 
growing volume of personal data available does indeed look likely to threaten a totali-
tarian encroachment on basic human rights. But it should also be considered as an 
important element in optimizing the functioning of market processes. In this respect, 
consideration of data mining would lead to an exploration of the rather less well-
understood use of patterns and pattern recognition as an element in the process of 
the modeling and production of subjectivity, as a component in the selection and 
extraction of new forms of the supply of subjectivity for the demand of markets.  24 
It is far easier to facilitate, rather than directly control, people if they can be modeled 
in acceptable ways. By examining patterns of behavior, purchasing decisions, affiliation 
networks, and so on (or so the theory goes), it becomes possible to create a better fit 

98 
Structures
between what consumers want (consumers of goods and services, law and order, policy 
decisions, political creeds) and what producers can and will supply. In part this rep-
resents what some political economists think of as the  “ linguistic ” or  “ communica-
tional ” turn in the economy today, the hyper-rapid production of goods and services 
on a just-in-time basis.  25 From this point of view, being able to accurately predict future 
customer preferences from past preferences allows vendors to avoid problems such as 
the ruinous buildup of stocks of things that people won ’ t want. Information produced 
as a by-product of everyday activities, or solicited through the development of low-
budget, lo-fi apps for social media addicts, presents a shift in the rationalization of 
market activity — watching an advertisement on television is a bit hit and miss for the 
targeted leisure-time work of the consumer,  26 since one can always turn off or turn 
over if one isn ’ t turned on. Yielding up information as grist to the mill of the correla-
tion machine, by contrast, works all the better when it doesn ’ t require any additional 
extra effort or special attentiveness. 
 The use of myriad forms of data in this way for data-mining purposes represents, 
among other things, a vast process of the  semioticization  of behavior, a recasting of 
jittery point-and-click navigation during a work break or the idle messing around with 
half-baked applications on a social media site as the expression of a set of consumer 
preferences. For the data miner, that target is always already a consumer, always 
already being mapped as if sharing a belief in the legitimacy of a political system, and 
so on. Recast in this way, extracted or abstracted from the particular sets of relations 
that perhaps made them an act of spite (the teenage daughter buying songs with the 
father ’ s credit card), revenge or deception (logging on under your partner ’ s name to 
surf some particularly nefarious porn sites), boredom (browsing on a phone under the 
table during a sales presentation), or other kinds, correlations can then be established 
with a more or less sophisticated set of basic demographic information to provide a 
picture of the user ’ s interests. This set of correlations — the residue of desires, hopes, 
fears, and the mundane tasks and activities of everyday life — can then be used to 
optimize decision making. 
 As a statistical process, the aim here is not so much to find causes as to make cor-
relations, statistical correspondences, to model probabilities the better to shape pur-
chasing decisions, opinions, beliefs, and so on, to ensure that what people want 
coincides with what is on offer.  27 
 Data mining for probabilities obviously benefits from the cultural prestige attached 
in the West to matters hi-tech and from the fuzzy boundaries between science and 
the technology it draws on. But there are subtle differences in the way that algorithms 
from computing and cognitive science are used when they shift out of the research 

Structures 
99
laboratories of universities and into the back rooms of corporations, banks, insurance 
companies, and agencies of the state. The obscurity of such differences and the equivo-
cations they make possible can be turned to one ’ s favor, giving a nuance of scientific 
value to otherwise remarkably conservative practices. 
 The difference between using specific kinds of pattern recognition algorithms for 
scientific purposes (as in, say, the use of neural networks to try to understand how 
evolutionarily simple forms of intelligence emerge) and the use of the same to predict 
the consumption preferences of people in specific demographic groupings, or stock 
market prices, might appear slight. But when one experiments with a neural network, 
genetic algorithm, or a random Boolean network to understand the possibilities of the 
convergence on a solution, the  “ optimization ” that the algorithms demonstrate in 
finding solutions to a problem is an optimization within a notional model of a bio-
logical system whose relation to reality is not necessarily evident. For example, the 
use of such models to explore the operations of the immune system generates interest-
ing avenues for further research, not definitive answers to questions. But when model-
ing with such algorithms to find mathematically optimized solutions to problems 
forms part of a model that guides economic or strategic decisions, the ground has 
shifted. The solution functions not to generate  more questions but to stop questions 
being asked, to close the deal, to provide a form of objective evidence for a decision 
to take. The way in which the rhetoric and technics of scientific objectivity operate 
here is valuable, giving stability to markets that operate in fragile conditions, foreclos-
ing any probing that might shake the confidence such markets are generally presumed 
to require. Scientific merits aside, the take-up of David Li ’ s  “ Gaussian copula ” to assess 
collateralized debt obligations was a marvelous tool to help to discredit the mere 
common sense that says what goes up must come down.  28 
 Considered from a stratagematic point of view, the key to the functioning of data 
mining is revealed in the delicate repurposing of algorithms as they move out of the 
laboratory and into the real world. Everything is already understood, predefined; one 
is always already a consumer; what one wants is only a function, a combinatorial 
variant of what is already on offer, the corporation deciding in advance the reality 
within which the consumer will then exercise his or her sovereignty. Subjects here are 
not produced through the process known as  “ interpellation ” or other more or less 
crude representations; instead the ideological messages contained in interactive media 
are a smoke screen for the indirect shaping of the self through production decisions, 
investment shifts, campaign funding allocations, repurposing of Web sites, the genera-
tion of new business models: operative environmental constraints that run through 
subjective forms. 

100 
Structures
 The idea that today ’ s economy is a knowledge economy gets a lot of play, but one 
could just as easily argue that economically speaking, ignorance is really the most 
important value to trade on. Only going as far as you are enabled by the assumptions 
that you want to confirm — or as far as the demand for stability plausibly allows — is a 
way to ensure that giving the public what it wants correlates, more or less, with what 
you want to give it. Finding out more about your subjects than what you need to base 
your decisions on is a risky, potentially distracting affair, the likely source of niggling 
ethical anxieties. So employing methods that demonstrate that you actually need to 
ask new, more complicated questions about the forces you want to capture is likely to 
be problematic — and a poor sales pitch to boot. 
 Leak Early, Leak Often 
 We have countless models of the kinds of narratives available to us when telling tales, 
templates such as the unlikely hero, unrequitable love, the averted disaster. While 
narratives have been studied and cataloged for millennia, the means by which stories 
become known have not benefited from quite as much attention. We have no general 
taxonomy of the leak. It is, however, one of the crucial means for the dissemination 
of every kind of narrative, and from straightforward falsehood to near truth, the style 
with which it is delivered requires meticulous thought. But we are concerned here not 
with the right moment to use such a maneuver but with the kinds of ways in which 
leaks arise and render themselves amenable. 
 If the interpretation of ambiguity in the sifting of documents, behaviors, and clues 
provides a mode for operations that occur within a world of shifting, clotting, and 
liquefying films of chiaroscuro, the shuffling of translucent layers that prompt the 
opportunity for a reskilled literary workforce to go to town on the operations of real-
politik, obversely a certain bluntness inheres in the dumping of things to be inter-
preted from one domain into another. The leak is the emission liberated from its 
proper place by an act of omission, or neglect of right containment. As such, it tells 
something of the truth and in doing so provides a certain kind of reliability. 
 The following is offered not as an exhaustive set of all leaks but more as a rough 
diagram to those that may be encountered in an average day in the office. Needless 
to say, one kind may effectively be used to mask another, or a concatenation of leaks 
may be profitably effected. 
 One form of leak often used in government and other areas such as game design 
or film production occurs in advance to be able to be denied as a draft. A specimen 
such as a document describing a potential policy is made available so as to be quickly 

Structures 
101
briefed against. Just as a technical prototype may surface to mobilize advance user 
feedback, the alpha version of anything is always a form of decoy. 
 Such a leak can usefully be understood to mobilize and disable the power of net-
worked critical reception, in that what emerges as the actual of the document has 
already been filtered and managed in the leak stage, that of preappearance or tactical 
virtuality. Thus rather than preemption being a means by which the present captures 
the future, the future, that of a splendid product, mobilizes the present for its 
purposes. 
 Related forms that deal with the revealing and handling of materials before they 
can actually said to have occurred include the offer of exclusive, off-the-record infor-
mation briefed in advance to manipulate, dampen, or heighten its reception and to 
entrain its recipients. Obversely, one may encounter the nonembargoed publication, 
or information released in a form that flattens its content or buries itself in a larger 
document set or system of encoding. 
 Accident is often the most propitious form of leak. A slip of the tongue, a drunken 
gambit, or an unwitting cc are the reliable tools of the practitioner with time, but such 
a leak may also take the form of a lost briefcase, document, or memory device. Such 
a leak can be intentional or accidental, and in many cases it hardly matters which, 
since the condition of the possibility of a leak must be understood to be designed into 
a system. The doctrine of network-centric warfare, for instance, in its assumption that 
all members of the services are fully incorporated into a secure mind-set, pushes infor-
mation out to the minions at the periphery of the organization, ensuring permeability. 
Over time we may see that an intentional leak is rather more than likely to contain 
information at variance with the understanding of leaked material to be naturally 
transparent and truthful. Agents may be turned, documents may become labyrinths, 
accidents may be had by another source. 
 But a related kind of leak is not the accident but the elimination, the trash that 
takes itself out: insufficiently harsh deletions; waste dumps; secondhand trades in 
magnetic memory; tingles running through discarded hard drives; papers, due to be 
shredded or burned that make it as far as the dump and the freedom formed by decay 
or by a pair of sharp eyes forming a gateway to the black market. 
 A particularly risky (but often judicious) form of leak is generated by a whistle-
blower motivated by the possibility of exposing an injustice. The degree of automation 
that may be brought to bear on such an operation is disputable, but as long as a steady, 
albeit attenuated, number of people remain enthused with ideas about a better world 
or correct modes of operation, certain aspects of the use of this kind of leak can be 
guaranteed. 

102 
Structures
 It is not possible to assume that by the time people reach a point where they are 
able to safely handle difficult material, they are inured to its implications. A voluntary 
leak by a principled operative committed to transparency may also require certain 
kinds of theater to find itself adequately obscured. Equally, ensuring that normal 
operations may — when useful — be leaked means that the interplay between what 
appears as an injustice, and what does not, may usefully be manipulated. It is always 
useful to be accidentally exposed as doing what is right, but in a modest, accomplished 
manner. In this way, the sheer humbleness of pious behavior can be released to the 
surface; one thinks here of princesses whose secret visits to tend to the needy are 
preceded by discreet phone calls to the vultures with large lenses. 
 The nonleak of staged exclusivity is the stock in trade of celebrity gossip, its lower-
budget versions being standard journalism or the nods and winks of the workplace. 
In this case still, the leak finds its form: mumbles from a trusted informant; remarks 
traded for favors; transfers back to the paid insider; breaches of a walled garden, not 
through the masonry, but in the plants. Here leaks have a relation to differentials of 
pressure or to suction, to alimentation, rubbings, or slipperiness. The greasing of 
palms, the mobilization of suckers, zones of asymmetric titillation, righteousness and 
fear, coupling furiously with leak anxiety, an anxiety always rendering itself immobile 
through the imaginary of perfect security. This phantasm, of security as a state of 
perfection moves across to a further variant: unlawfully obtained data laundered 
through a third party. The unlawful here means simply the unrighteous rather than 
the illegal, direct trespass, the induction of leaks by milking machines, tapping phones, 
accessing directories, recording keystrokes, watching for patterns, locations, transgres-
sions, some breach of hygiene, haunting the voicemail of the dead. 
 All these kinds of leaks are doubled by the widespread practice of ostensive leaking. 
A document reannounces something that has already been decided but may have lost 
momentum or needs reviving to show that some kind of initiative, any kind of initia-
tive, is occurring. Such material stands in a close relation to the economy of the 
production of policies in some organizations in which management exudes docu-
ments, just as thought is secreted by its appropriate organ. Like the dismal leak in 
its doldrums, a press release from no one to nothing, it is ignored, buried, layered 
into other statements to the point where it is not simply superfluous but never 
happened. 
 The leak operates by means of establishing relations between different registers of 
the inside and the outside, between those who already know, those who might pos-
sibly know if they had the time, those who should have been told, the scandalized, 
doomed, or grateful recipient of truth, and those who do not need to know or would 

Structures 
103
rather not, among others. Thus the particular style of the leak establishes resonances 
between all these figures, each of whom may adopt one or more of the available posi-
tions according to the nature of the leak and their possible operations on and through 
it. Naturally the position of the knower is one also held by various forms of storage 
device, such as archives, which hold the leak until a moment when it may become 
historically appropriate to activate it in certain conjunctions. The existence of the leak 
as a mode of storage brings it into relation with the measure of time. That a leak is 
initiated does not mean that it actually happens, or that it has been received by an 
apparatus capable of distinguishing it from any other noise. The leak can be under-
stood as a speech act with an unwilling speaker, but it can also remain simply as a 
gray anticipation, a document waiting nowhere for the eyes of no one, held in abey-
ance by a forensic disinterest. Such a leak is like every other document, an anonymous 
squirt into the ocean, but one that dreams of becoming the center of a whirlpool. 
 The leak, then, is an attempt to capture and mobilize the dynamics of unintended 
consequences, to enter into the domain of the accident, the double agent, confusion, 
and to render it fruitful. The leak, however, is never simply bivalent. For some, 
everything cries out for it, trying, if only by dint of time, to edge its way past the 
demon of the chamber of equivalence in which it is trapped, hungry for a connection, 
the accident of knowledge, for that or the chance to turn to dust, unnoticed and 
indifferent. 


 Technicalities 
 Workflow 
 One of the many different  “ systemic ” ways of addressing the shape of practices in the 
world of production, workflow recommends itself to a study of evil media because of 
the peculiar place that the ensemble of tools, techniques, and technologies that make 
it up occupy in the creation of the abstract spaces of the contemporary economy. 
 Defined as the  “ automation of a business process, in whole or part, during which 
documents, information or tasks are passed from one participant to another for action, 
according to a set of procedural rules, ” 1 workflow has the requisite aura of scientificity 
about it. However, once this aura is put aside and its status as a set of techniques is 
restored, workflow appears as a means of extracting control from the coordination 
and cooperation required to undertake particular forms of work, to distribute the 
information needed to perform particular acts of work, to make decisions about the 
allocation of resources, and so on. Disjoining work in this way from the irritating 
initiatives that people take when trying to execute complex tasks or the misplaced 
ideas that they might form if they came across the wrong piece of information in the 
workplace is what, precisely, allows work to  “ flow. ” 
 Commenting on the benefits of globalization, Thomas L. Friedman has argued that 
workflow software is one of the ten causes of what he calls the flattening of the world. 
A  “ quiet revolution that no-one knew was happening, ” 2 in Friedman ’ s account, work-
flow effectively permits the extension of production into a global, and hence twenty-
four-hours-a-day, seven-days-a-week, set of processes. In the virtual factory, everything 
from making animated movies to booking a dentist ’ s appointment to applying for a 
mortgage becomes fluid, malleable, and geographically nonspecific work, directable 
or divertible at will. In the global imaginary, workflow is endowed with a magical 
capacity with far-reaching effects, an enchanting power that any strategist should 
want to understand in its own right. 

106 
Technicalities
 As with many of the other forms of media technics we are cataloging here, workflow 
is often understood in terms of a strictly formal nomenclature, and more specifically —
 following the contemporary imperative to  design the social relations into which people 
are inserted — as a set of  patterns. Experts in the workflow community typically catego-
rize general and recurring patterns of work activity in terms of how these patterns 
bear on  control over the work process, the distribution and availability of  data , the 
specification and allocation of human and nonhuman  resources and the handling of 
 exceptions . We will examine some concrete examples of these patterns in due course. 
For the moment, it should be noted that as much as workflow forms a set of techniques 
for modeling work, it also forms an unparalleled tool for understanding the imple-
mentation of structures of domination and control within the workplace, a quasi-
scientific notation for the distribution and redistribution of cognition and agency. 
 While general and recurring patterns of working activity may well be annotated 
using a variety of formalisms, workflow appears strangely refractory to unequivocal 
definition. Indeed, the seemingly uncontrollable extension of the term in contempo-
rary accounts might suggest that as a result of the rapid diffusion of new media tech-
nologies throughout the pores of society, work has managed to seep into almost 
everything we do. When Friedman discusses it, workflow is incarnated in everything 
from the personal computer, the protocols used to define the exchange of information 
in e-mail (SMTP), or the operations of browsers (HTTP requests) through to more 
expansive notational standards such as XML, SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol, 
used to exchange  “ structured ” information over the Internet), and even the AJAX 
coding that Web designers use to make interactions with Web pages less bureaucratic. 
And this is before one even begins to consider dedicated workware (Lotus Notes for 
example) or the proprietary packages that the large corporations of NASDAQ offer to 
help the intelligent consultant fluidify all too solid forms of working practice. There 
are also dedicated modeling tools (UML activity diagrams, for example) and even 
languages for workflow — the Web Services Business Process Execution Language 
(expressing an unusual level of agreement and cooperation between normally com-
petitive tech corporations),  3 and YAWL (Yet Another Workflow Language, the open-
source alternative). 
 While this displacement away from the mundane activity of producing  “ digital 
content ” (which, in Friedman ’ s libidinally inflected turn of phrase, we now  “ shoot ” 
around the office) 4 occludes the relations of force that workflow expresses, as well as 
the more material forms of working activity, giving the impression that work has 
become a sort of spontaneous emission of an indeterminate flow,  5 it highlights a 
significant point: the routinization of work within a formalized set of digital patterns 

Technicalities 
107
depends on a whole weft of technologies, techniques, protocols, sets of know-how, 
and practices. For work activity to be redistributed as a global set of flows, myriad 
other media forms are also necessary: simple sketches in a notebook; the more complex 
charts of process mapping; the formalized codifications of modeling tools and lan-
guages already noted; the computer science abstractions of Petri nets or event-driven 
process chains. If workflow is really abstract, that is, an abstraction that has a material 
effectiveness and is embodied in actual practices,  6 its abstraction results from the 
coordinated activities of a new set of agents, allies in the ongoing sanitization and 
routinization of production. However, as will become apparent, it is best not to make 
too obvious the dependence of command-and-control structures on these other agents, 
as it tends to spoil the illusion of work as an eternal flow of life itself. 
 The image of a flow — from Newton ’ s method of fluxions, to the chemist ’ s evalua-
tion of rates of change in catalytic processes, to Molly Bloom ’ s mental blurt, to 
Wilhelm Reich ’ s streaming libido — provides the shield of a warm feeling, somatic 
memories of amniotic fluid, nocturnal emissions, and peaceful states of creativity. 
But no flow happens without breaks producing the intervals between which a flow 
is engendered: far from a flat surface, the world must be possessed of more and 
more differences in gradients for anything to flow at all. A flat surface produces 
stagnation. 
 Real flow-producing differences in gradient are helpfully absent from the formalized 
patterns of activity modeled by workflow software. Understood as both a real process 
(modeling a workflow is itself a coordinated, cooperative activity) and a real product 
(a modeled workflow is incarnated in actual working situations), a workflow is never-
theless a formalized idealization and abstraction from real activity. From the point of 
view of the exercise of command and control, this dual quality is both a workflow ’ s 
greatest strength and its greatest weakness. It is its strength because figuring work as 
formal sequences of activity allows many aspects of rationalized, routinized work to 
be safely ignored, moved off the books, rendered irrelevant as a datum. For instance, 
in a world where corporations rely heavily on brand, anything that prevents the com-
municator or visionary in your operation from staying  “ on message ” is a potentially 
disadvantageous distraction. It is not helpful (the technicians themselves would admit 
this) to know about alienation in the workplace,  7 whether that be due to scripted 
communication from call centers in India, hived-off, mass-produced computer code 
in Russia, burger flipping in a fast-food joint, or frothing the milk in a coffee shop. 
It is likely that in the process of patiently fabricating spontaneous workflows, sensitive 
souls may have qualms about outsourcing and de-skilling: it is better to be able 
to model a purely formal work design pattern than to have to draw attention to 

108 
Technicalities
the informal details that might permit a practice to be designated in its concrete 
specifics. 
 Examples of the benefits of this formal nomenclature are not difficult to find. In 
the streamlined activities of paramedics, for example, the simultaneous activities of 
 “ checking for pulse ” and  “ checking for insurance ” on an emergency call form a  parallel 
split . Repeated calls from a team leader to come back from lunch early become a  per-
sistent trigger . A process that depends on several workers to accomplish effectively 
because a whole series of checks is required before the process can kick off again 
becomes a  blocking discriminator . A  structured synchronizing merge occurs in the benefits 
office when a clerical officer calls the police and cancels a benefit at the same time.  8 
 Coordinating different aspects of workflow can often become difficult with a 
semantically neutral terminology of this sort. Control-flow operations and data-flow 
operations often have to be combined, for example. Consider the difficulties that arise 
when a control-flow sequence  “ turn down loan application ” is combined with an 
incorrect data-flow data visibility distribution, resulting in a loan applicant learning 
that ethnicity  is a factor in the decision-making process. 
 The remediation of work in these abstract terms has other advantages. Refigured 
as abstractable business processes, work is more readily tractable to configuration and 
control within digitally enhanced forms of  “ supply chain management. ” Standardized, 
decontextualized, ideally simplified, and divested of any of the specificities that would 
tie it to a geographic locale, work that flows requires less skill to accomplish and 
becomes highly mobile. An extensive body of research on the sociology of work 
permits us to understand some of what is entailed in these processes that are some-
times discussed in terms of the notion of de-skilling,  9  and they allow us to understand 
better why Friedman was correct to consider workflow in the broader, less technically 
precise sense, not as formalism but as ensemble of technologies: these technologies 
are themselves the coded stock of knowledge of a range of clerical and communica-
tional activities. 10 We are not saying that the personal computer or hypertext transfer 
protocol is the product of the knowledge transduced from clerks to machines. We are 
suggesting that without the processes of what might be called  “ knowledge transfer, ” 
as analyzed by Harry Braverman, much of what now counts in the production and 
configuration of workflow would be unthinkable. However, these are issues to be 
considered elsewhere. 
 In addition to the strategically advantageous uses of workflow, it is important also 
to look at some of its disadvantages. In the global imaginary, workflow presents the 
fantastic image of work as a kind of  “ seamless ” communication.  11 What precisely is 
meant by this term is not always clear, although the dictionary definition of  “ seam-

Technicalities 
109
less ” as lacking any obvious or apparent joins suggests that it has something of the 
conjurer ’ s trick about it. The perceptibility of a seam, an edge, or a join might risk 
making apparent something that should not be. At the least, an asperity, a snag, a 
fault in the smooth surfaces along which globalized work is designed, risks causing an 
eddy, a momentary hesitation, a thought, in the automated flow of activity. 
 The fantastic virtue of workflow formalism as an ensemble of patterns for generic 
and recurrent activity, as we have seen already, is that it is precisely that: generic, 
perfectly ignorant of the specificities of any activity. In a sense, then, workflow formal-
ism communicates directly with the economic conception of labor as abstract quantity 
cashed out in specific roles designating a position in the production process (rather 
than specific qualities inhering in individuals). To this abstract quantity corresponds 
a purely formal proposition in an axiomatic system, a formal proposition that may or 
may not in turn correspond to the strategic allocation of resources within one or many 
workflow patterns. 
 The problem is that any (conceptually) global process or putatively universal 
concept can only be actualized locally, in a specific situation, and doing so means 
having to negotiate  “ implementation details. ” And the negotiation of implementation 
details means learning how to handle flows that are not so readily or obviously final-
ized as productive work and hence can leak from or cause blockages: counterflows, 
hemorrhages, coagulations, subterranean streams, stickiness. Generically, work is 
designed to flow with as little thought for execution of the task as possible: if a worker 
 thinks about the script she follows in the call center, she won ’ t be able to read her 
lines. In a sense, a set of processes that has been formalized in terms of a series of 
generally recurrent activities is incapable of understanding how antagonism toward it 
might arise. 
 Alienation, we can imagine, is reasonably well understood: dehumanizing work 
leads to a higher turnover of staff, but that can be strategically functional and can 
safely be ignored, because as long as workers feel alienated, you can be sure that they 
still have a real investment in the work process as such (historically, alienation is 
figured as the alienation of a subject from his or her essence). Antagonism, by contrast, 
creeps up from inside, accumulates invisibly, never quite localizable because each locus 
and each activity in the system is generic, perfectly ignorant of singularity. 
 Of particular interest, then, are the ways in which workflow seeks to handle  excep-
tions . An exception might loosely be defined as an  “ undesirable event ” that occurs 
during the execution of the workflow process. The precise real status of an exception 
is rarely of interest in the modeling of generic processes; they are, after all, undesirable. 
The intrinsic nature of an event (why did this triple-A-rated subprime mortgage pool 

110 
Technicalities
fail) is not considered on its own terms; indeed, it cannot be (such singular occurrences 
are too fine grained to be considered in their specifics). As with the process of excep-
tion handling in more obviously computational processes (such as software design), 
the point is to allow the primary process to continue running and to minimize recov-
ery cost. Modelers typically have to classify exceptions in one way or another to make 
them tractable to handling in a generic system. One set of researchers distinguishes 
five types of exception:  work item failure (the computer crashed, the night goggles 
failed),  deadline expiry (the date this processed meat should not be used after),  resource 
unavailability (before the process starts: I couldn ’ t make it to work today; during 
process execution: my flu symptoms made working impossible),  external trigger (the 
legal freezing of someone ’ s assets puts account payments on hold),  constraint violation 
(a subcontractor turns out not to meet the terms of employment required by the 
contracting corporation, e.g., the subcontractor was undisguisedly employing child 
labor). 
 However, the literature indicates clearly that exception handling is poorly under-
stood, more often than not requiring a modeler ’ s intuitions about how a process might 
go wrong, rather than a more solid grounding in  “ scientific ” fact. Workflow is, as 
commentators have pointed out, an  idealization of real-world activity, of work.  12 In 
practice, when something goes wrong at work, which the system cannot anticipate, 
forms of coordination and cooperation that were deemed irrelevant to the execution 
of work come into play. However, with the globalizing extension of workflow to  every-
thing , so that it has no outside, the fatal flaw is that undesirable events will provoke 
rather more extensive kinds of collapse. 
 Express Regularly, But Not Too Regularly 
 A regular expression is a formal notation for a pattern of symbols combined in a 
string.  13 The term often arises in linguistics, but restated in terms of finite-state 
machines, the regular expression becomes a device for parsing strings of symbols (as 
input) and determining a match — or not (as output, or terminal state.)  14 Regular 
expressions are modeled in a range of programming languages and technologies and 
are an important component of software engineering for digital media, where their 
use in pattern matching is of enormous value for the processing of language. Developed 
from tools designed to expedite the practice of working with a command-line inter-
face, the practical use of regular-expression technologies is now associated with the 
logistical issue of dealing with large amounts of  unstructured text: that of searching for 
and replacing words in documents, for example, or searching for and performing 

Technicalities 
111
operations on large numbers of files within a directory. Regular-expression technology 
forms a significant, although usually discrete, element of core Internet technologies: 
browsers, document readers, packet sniffers, and so on. The presence of regular-
expression notation in the RFC documents by which Internet computing standards 
are generated and disseminated also demonstrates the structuring and coordinating 
role the regular expression has beyond its implementation in specific technologies.  15 
 The  regularization of expression, by contrast, is a broader tendency evident in prac-
tices of the organization of people and things  as and  for data in computational culture, 
following the general principle that structured data are more tractable to processing 
than unstructured data.  16 Numerous more or less formal means for the regularization 
of expression, for producing the  incipience of tractable and abstractable, reproducible 
structure, are available: the formal, tabular principles organizing the layout of Web 
sites in HTML, the displacement of linguistic commonplaces in the production of 
communication by the use of forms,  17 or more broadly the structured, sequenced 
scripting of communication (call centers, NLP,  “ clean language, ” etc.).  18 In this sense, 
regularizing expression, which might be considered an aspect of the disciplinary opera-
tions of formalism,  19 offers a way of translating preexisting social relations and actions, 
such as  “ thumbs up, ”  “ like, ”  “ friend, ”  “ select, ” into the syntax of machines and 
inventing new ones bearing the force of that syntax, presenting the possibility of 
managing communication through uniform, finite, and preferably automatic steps. 
In turn, the image of free forms of cognition such as intuition are also brought into 
combination with such measures, suggesting the plausibility of redescribing intuition 
as a kind of pattern matching by psychologists who rely on the predominance of regu-
larized expression in organized communication practices.  20 
 While a regular expression is a precisely specifiable pattern, regularizing expression 
is the specification that there  be pattern, that there be an ongoing production of 
redundancy.  21 The two are inseparable, in the prosaic sense that there can be no pat-
terns to  match without there being  patterns to match. It is a standard dictum for 
programmers and sophists alike to know who you are addressing: for the programmer, 
the more one knows about the  “ data ” to be given to a machine, the better. The obvious 
next step is to ensure that machines get data in exactly the form that they want. So, 
less prosaically, regularized expression points to the fact that for machines to address 
humans and things in  their languages, humans and things must address machines in 
 their languages. This need not always result simply in the lock-in of formalisms dis-
cussed earlier. One possible and often fortuitous result of this ambiguous situation is 
that a zone of indiscernibility (and hence undecidability) is created, where one doesn ’ t 
quite know who is speaking whose language. One is transformed into the other in a 

112 
Technicalities
kind of double-crossing of language. Obscure though it may be, this uncertain zone 
creates possibilities of interference — in both the technical and folk senses of the 
word — wherein the transactions between formal and natural are negotiated, allowing 
for the diverting and looting of sense. 
 As ordering devices of a more or less formal nature, regular expressions belong to 
a broader strategy for the regulated transformation of signs and symbols. Regularizing 
expression concerns the treatment of people and things ( “ prehensible ” events, as 
discussed by Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts)  22 so as to extract syntactically well-
formed strings of symbols, to a greater or lesser degree of machine compatibility. From 
things to strings, this forms part of a kind of sociotechnical governance that bears on 
the logistical reorganization of situations of enunciation, a rescripting of enunciation 
wherein speech or writing can be translated into scrolling, pointing, clicking, and data 
entry. Through the invention of programming languages, compilers, the mundane 
panoply of list boxes, tick boxes, data fields, radio buttons, or the more emotively 
named button-vocabulary of social networking, as well as through specified ortho-
graphic rules (your password must be at least eight characters long) and regulated 
transformations (strip out white space, remove commas), what you can machinically 
enunciate must correspond with the arrangements of the data structure. The event of 
communication — the fact  that one speaks , that signs are emitted — is traduced and 
remains hidden behind what the software parses of what is said.  23 In point of fact, the 
user need not really say much, since it is the form of expression, not its content, that 
satisfices. 
 The computer is a medium, and software is an entity that occurs, in part, at a lin-
guistic scale. For this reason, observers are more perceptive than they might think in 
their view that work involving symbol manipulation is an important characteristic of 
the contemporary economy. But this category does useful work only if such manipula-
tion is taken in its most capaciously sophisticated sense. Shifting numbers around on 
a spreadsheet, making trades, cutting and pasting doctoral research into government 
documents: all these things count as symbol manipulation — and some of them may 
be more economically productive than others. But manipulating people, processes, 
and things as symbols and ciphers opens up questions about the production of infor-
mation (the extraction and abstraction of signs) and about the injection of sophistic 
politicking into the economy of communication. A certain relief can be gained from 
the fact that one never quite has clean hands when one manipulates symbols, but a 
special kind of cunning is needed to make the obdurate insistence — in truth, the 
sociotechnical  prescription — of expressing regularly actually work.  24 

Technicalities 
113
 Treating people and things as bearers of incipiently regular expressions creates the 
possibility of extracting strings (usually ASCII or Unicode) from them that can be 
processed according to the rules of a relatively simple syntax, one that is traversable 
by finite automatons. By this virtual reordering of communication into regular, well-
formed, machine-parseable chunks, natural language statements can be manipulated 
into something susceptible to algorithmic treatment, something that a machine can 
understand — even if you cannot — which contributes to the emergence of a new regime 
of signs,  25 the translation of deictic operators (here I am, there you are), and the prag-
matic ability of language to do things with words translated into preformatted com-
putational structures. When one thinks programmatically, something everyone does 
once in negotiation with the opaque materiality of machines, natural language is not 
much help. But the existence or otherwise of a regime of signs specific to this shift 
per se is not what is of sole importance here: what  is of interest is what happens in 
the process of translation itself. 
 By translating and transforming natural language into a form more commensurate 
with algorithmic treatment, the regularization of expression entails discarding crucial 
elements of the pragmatics of language, those aspects of language use that, although 
completely conventional, meant that one could do things with words. The commands 
that a computer allows to be issued to it do not have quite the same latitude of nego-
tiation or the possibility of infelicity: failure to respond correctly to the signals issued 
by the machine, its array of insistent messages, conveyed in bleeps, status changes, 
screen updates, color or icon modulations, will yield a refusal to cooperate. So as one 
completes data fields, ticks checkboxes, and makes a selection from a dropdown list, 
or mouses around a visual field laid out in terms of precisely rastered coordinates, or 
when one breaks a search string down into separate lexical items and chooses to capi-
talize or not, to look only for items that match the exact string or not, to allow plurals 
or not (and so on), a process of subjection to the machine takes place. The latitude 
one had for a little virtuoso play within one ’ s interactions, the opportunity for the 
humor or irony that allows one to ask for something without it being issued as a 
command, is transformed by the computational recoding of the commonplaces of 
language. 
 Such subjection is not inherently a bad thing. In some circumstances, it saves the 
tiresome bother of thinking.  26 In any case, the conceit that one necessarily speaks 
more freely to humans than machines is something that doesn ’ t bear up to close 
scrutiny, given that discourse is just as likely to speak us as the other way around; but 
regularizing expression does facilitate a certain kind of highly structured forgetting. It 

114 
Technicalities
is not just that the implicatures of interaction, and the kinds of games they allow you 
to play, can be, and are, discarded.  27 It is that when the disciplinary regularizing of 
expression occurs, a critical shift in attention takes place. In a conversation, a dialogue, 
perhaps even an interrogation, a constant process of repair, or its staging, is going on, 
facilitated in part by the anticipations and expectations of role. In situations of regu-
larized expression, one of the participants will never really admit to being wrong: the 
logic of user error dictates that only one side repairs the holes, gaps, or non sequiturs 
in the flow of machinic discourse, although the autocompletion of data fields or the 
use of predictive texting algorithms is increasingly called on to help out.  28 Of course, 
should one place too great an insistence on user repair, generate too many errors, or 
insist on too rigidly formal or prolix a process of machine enunciation, the interaction 
will have to be redesigned: under such circumstances, tricks like personalization, var-
iegated security permissions and user profiling can be adopted to facilitate a more 
constrained production of regularized statements, thus making less formal processes 
of communication more amenable to treatment in formal informational terms.  29 
 Look After Your Relations 
 A propitious but underdocumented feature of relational databases, or databases of any 
sort, is that they tend to be received as fundamentally boring. Such a view is not 
without its merits — inciting failures of attention is also a crucial means of veiling 
things of most interest — but let us propose another possibility here, that of drawing 
participants into a system. While not exactly making databases immediately gratify-
ing, such a result can often be achieved via the popular approach of facilitation at the 
front end, data mining at the rear, as well as other opportunities. Relational databases 
have become such a crucial part of the conceptual and material infrastructure of the 
present that it is difficult to imagine many contemporary media systems without their 
existence as a foundation. 
 In a short series of key papers in which he established the basis for the relational 
database management system, Edgar Codd developed a sophisticated understanding 
of all entities in a tabular system as dynamic, in states of possible or actual combina-
tion. 30 Such combination was rendered possible either through the analytical fragmen-
tation of entities into predicates or qualities articulable as data or, without undergoing 
any preliminary fragmentation, by creating the conditions for  “ born digital ” materials 
to be generated in such conditions. Such work establishes the conditions for data not 
simply to be stored but also to be structured, and Codd ’ s work went on to establish 
such states of combination as fundamental, but finite, entities to be handled in them-

Technicalities 
115
selves. The development of a field of reality, the material stuff of which is to 
one degree or another interpretable and manipulable as elements in a table, allows 
for the amassing of relations between the entities in that table. Importantly, guided 
by a keen insight into the importance of bringing data handling out of the hands of 
specialists, Codd also shifted database design toward the realm of natural rather than 
procedural formal languages. Data banks were to be useful to people other than stock 
controllers or technicians. Gradually, as data entry, deletion, modification, sorting, 
and query grew (perhaps by one or more remove) into the habits of daily life, such 
entities also began to populate the everyday. Because of their high degree of abstrac-
tion as structure-building structures, relational databases are immensely useful as 
stratagematic breeding grounds and as such work as part of what we can understand 
as the abstract infrastructure of flexibilization and of the increasing interpretability 
of processes and resources. Such interpretability should never be mistaken for trans-
parency, however, and all kinds of users would be wise to recognize and to work 
with this. 
 Relations managed and induced by such systems have, in different jurisdictions, 
become subject to various kinds of interest, being seen as property in legal terms, as 
often distinct from the raw data that they manage.  31 Rent is to be derived from rela-
tions rather than the terms or objects of such relations. As such, the management of 
relations between relations is a means of capturing and mobilizing permutational 
force. The value of relational databases for such purposes can be understood by their 
basic qualities. 
 Within databases, the tractability of data and relations depends in no small part 
on the degree of normalization of data and the structures it is entered into. 
Normalization means the treatment of each piece of data and each relation as a sepa-
rate entity. It involves stripping away unnecessary hierarchies or other structures 
within data. This means that as data are updated, deleted, or inserted, they do not 
carry any dependencies on other data or structures (such as nesting within a set of 
parent – child nodes). Normalization implies a neutrality as to the relative importance 
of one datum as compared to another. What it thus allows is for a query to be formu-
lated through any point in the network of relations mapped by the table. Nonnor-
malized data offer one kind of resistance, in that they require nested sets of 
dependencies. A red round thing may be a cricket ball or an apple, and neither may 
exactly be round, but once they are normalized and interpretable as simply exemplars 
of bearers of one or more of the categorizations  red ,  round , and  thing , they lose their 
specificity. The quality of irreducibility is transferred from the entity described to the 
categories into which its qualities are organized. 

116 
Technicalities
 Relational databases have, in principle, infinite capacities of scalability and, due to 
their capacity of abstraction, of requisite variety, although to affirm such a capacity is 
to test luck as much as logic. Built on the ability of a Turing machine to make possible 
the computation of any formalizable statement, databases make possible the organiza-
tion of populations of normalized statements. That data are normalized has no bearing 
on whether what they handle is in turn formalized. This is why databases are so crucial 
in establishing links between rules structures and the outside world. This capacity for 
logical ordering enables the induction of combinatoriality and sorting for things 
outside the database, as well as within it; the introduction of new kinds of entities 
that are natively  “ artificial ” 32 ; the production of new rules for relations; and the har-
vesting of relations generated by the population of databases by live data-generating 
processes. 
 The now traditional use of databases has had a substantial impact on organization. 
This can primarily be understood in two ways. First, they allow for fast assessment of 
the states of entities in an organization (for instance, in the logistical needs of an 
airline: an assessment of numbers, location, states and timings of planes, crew, pas-
sengers, with factors such as states of repair or crew flying hours made tractable but 
discrete). A related capacity is, given a database already populated with entities and 
factors, the affordance of the simulation or prognosis of future events: to use sets of 
relations to model, given a relatively stable set or entities and factors, what is likely 
to occur given their recombination under different conditions. 
 As more and more data flow through and into databases, something other than the 
logistical imagination is able to grow. Data mining allows for the identification of 
unforeseen relations and factors. Concentrations of data establish new centers of 
gravity as they couple with sorting systems, giving shape to an understanding and a 
politics based on probabilities. This may give rise to multiple kinds of masking of 
hidden factors beneath a shimmer of data abstracted from their relation to other scales 
of reality. On the other hand, relational databases make tractable, sortable, and usable 
relations that are not otherwise apparent. On the face of it, most databases are best 
understood as describing sets, operating through the working methods of predicate 
logic in that they allow the selection, differentiation, union, analysis, and possible 
projection of the attributes of a relation,  33 but we can also recognize that a relational 
database is a topological machine. Any table of related data, a nomograph or even a 
bus timetable, establishing links between a finite number of stable, discrete, and inter-
connected entities, constitutes a topological machine. They establish networks of 
relations, the points of intersection between data and what those data link to and 
trigger. Where they differ is that in many cases, topology tends to describe a network 
from a position outside that network (it would require a higher-dimensional topology 

Technicalities 
117
to incorporate the topological generation of topologies). Relational databases, on the 
other hand, work through systems of relations to establish, confirm, or discover 
relations. 
 A database understood through such a network model can usually be entered at 
any point, via predicates (or attributes), by relation, or by entity, and sorted on that 
basis. In this way, every element can be sorted by its actual relations, consisting of its 
categorical, relationally derived relation or nonrelation to all others. As databases 
increasingly face toward users configured as consumers, the tailoring of access to such 
ways of working often represents a key feature. For instance, try to find a way of 
searching for all books of a certain price (rather than another term, such as the author ’ s 
name) on an online bookseller. While sellers offer a parade of desire from one title to 
the next, to sort titles by other means remains unavailable. Ways into the network of 
relations are constrained. A hierarchy is simply another way of using a network, 
arranging the links in a manner in which they only flow one way. Access to the 
knowledge of a topology is thus a tricky matter. While topological machines should 
only allow the privileged gaze of the overview to those with the correct access setting, 
this is only to read them as conforming to traditional models of power. 
 One way in which they encourage us to develop an understanding of other forma-
tions of power is through a capability inherent to such databases themselves: the 
production of relations and of disassociations. The aggregation of vast  “ banks ” of data, 
to work with a term that described databases at their birth, sees all the kinds of experi-
mentation, consolidation, and the power to convince that characterize banks that 
specialize in money. Whereas a taxonomy of the modes of aggregation, circulation, 
speculation, and dissipation of capital is constantly under way, it is at present left 
solely to the stratagematic imagination to work this out in practice in the case of data. 
A means by which this imagination stimulates itself is in the ability to cross-reference 
data from different sources,  34 and to aggregate databases using common standards, 
effectively consolidating them into one body. Such strategies are relevant across all 
sectors, but there is yet little rigorous work on their effective yields in control and 
prediction, and hence little advance restraint on them or their consequences. With 
such encouragement, work must be carried out empirically in the laboratory of the 
world. 
 The Justifiable Ignorance of the Exception 
 In the fraught and largely uncharted interplay between the empirical and the formal, 
it is difficult, if not impossible, to produce a definitive list of exceptions to algorithmic 
rule. Exceptions occupy a potentially troubling zone of nonknowledge and represent 

118 
Technicalities
a significant threat to the smooth operations of friction-free, fluid, and transparent 
formal-material media processes. In the technical sense, exceptions arise when a piece 
of code — perhaps a class in an object-oriented programming language — encounters an 
abnormal condition that it cannot handle, when an event occurs that lies outside the 
expected range of possibilities that code is expected to cope with. But we also have a 
broader sense of what an exception is, touching on philosophical, political, and poetic 
reflection,  35 which might usefully be factored in to the technics, because almost by 
definition, the zone that exceptions occupy is not well understood. As such, trafficking 
with this zone remains fruitfully — although riskily — obscure. 
 The German political theorist Carl Schmitt encapsulates the more speculative brand 
of thinking about exceptions when he says:  “ The exception is more interesting than 
the rule. The rule proves nothing; the exception proves everything: It confirms not 
only the rule but also its existence, which derives only from the exception. ” 36 Now, if 
Schmitt ’ s observation gives this set of sociotechnical considerations a speculative twist, 
then all the better: one should never imagine that technology doesn ’ t release some 
form of cogitation.  37 Alfred Jarry speaks even more directly to the need for consider-
ations of this nature in his characterization of  ’ pataphysics as the science of the par-
ticular:  “ Despite the common opinion that the only science is that of the general 
[ ’ pataphysics] will examine the laws which govern exceptions. ” 38 An exception in this 
broader framework might be considered something that infringes the deductive, the 
nomothetic or the formal-logical principles of knowledge, a point at which language 
falters and stumbles in its ability to pick things out.  39 
 For as long as it remains covered by a general (and perhaps even  principled ) igno-
rance — for reasons that Jarry helps us understand — the domain of exceptions allows 
operations to be pursued unhindered, implicitly, despite (or perhaps because of) the 
fact that in the technical domain, techniques have been developed for the  handling 
of exceptions, which ward off the systemic collapse that infractions to the law of code 
threaten.  40 In this way, in its technical sense as something that must be handled pro-
grammatically, the exception offers a neat way of deranging the scanners interested 
in the limits of code, or exceptions in the second sense. 
 When designing a software system, a general and widely accepted principle is that 
one should always code  defensively . In the assumptions that the designer or developer 
will make about the environment in which an application will operate, prudence 
dictates that one always design and develop as if the worst might happen. The designer 
of digitally mediated communications conceives of the world as an unremittingly 
hostile place; believes users, at baseline, to be irredeemably moronic (always validate 
user input, in case they don ’ t know how to talk to computers); and considers other 

Technicalities 
119
software to be unreliable and unstable at best (one doesn ’ t  assume that the database 
a Web site connects to is  necessarily available). While numerous principles govern the 
imperative of writing  “ secure ” code, the authors of one popular guide suggest that one 
should consider the maxim  “ all input is evil. ” 41 In this regard, the invention of excep-
tion handling — particularly important in, but not originating with, object-oriented 
programming — offers one way to deal with the nefarious contingencies of an incom-
pletely predictable environment, an environment in which the jurisdiction of code is 
incomplete, because knowledge is incomplete. 
 Coders often distinguish between bugs, errors, and exceptions. A bug is a mistake 
of some sort made when writing code. An error is typically thought of as something 
resulting from the actions of a user — and requires that one have, in anticipation, a 
low opinion of that user ’ s abilities. Exceptions, by contrast, represent a sort of principle 
of predictable unpredictability, the generic shape of the way that the unforeseen or 
the contingent makes an incursion into the algorithmic flow of control between seg-
ments of code. When something happens that lies outside the normal expectations 
of a piece of code — a Web site makes a request to a database, for example, or a client 
computer requests a URL — an exception handler might be used to  “ throw ” an excep-
tion, meaning that the flow of control in the execution of the program is directed 
somewhere else so that the software can continue running without crashing (often 
with a message to the user to state what has happened:  “ 404, server not found ” ). The 
distinction between errors and exceptions is a fuzzy one, not least because a user error 
might give rise to an exception. Typical advice, though, is to handle the idiocy of a 
user within other coding structures (warn the user not to input anything evil into the 
software). 
 As an initial approximation, exceptions are what a developer remains happy to be 
relatively ignorant about. The  outside of a piece of software is by definition the bearer 
of infinitely many events about which the software can know nothing. Only a minus-
cule fraction of these possibilities will matter to the programmer, who knows that a 
particular software application may only ever know of an attack on an information 
infrastructure if a database is unavailable or a server fails to respond to a query. 
What exception handling does, though, is  delegate responsibility for dealing with the 
problem, by passing it from one section of code — one object, often — to another, and 
ultimately to a block of code dedicated to exception handling. 
 The point about doing this is that it offers a way of preserving the general archi-
tecture of the software and of maintaining the  “ need-to-know ” principle, and division 
of labor, that application development requires. For perhaps the dominant form of 
software development today, as too for some kinds of philosophy, the world is made 

120 
Technicalities
up of a potentially infinite series of relatively self-contained, sealed objects, objects 
whose commerce with what is exterior to them takes place under highly specified 
conditions. Object-oriented programming is organized in terms of a regulated inter-
play of concealment and exposure, interactions at the surface and a need-to-know 
principle: to programmatically use an object designed by someone else, I don ’ t need 
to know anything about what goes on inside it (a principle sometimes referred to as 
 encapsulation ); I just need to know about the  “ public ” methods that allow me access 
to what it can do. Encapsulation — or information hiding — allows a public face of 
certainty to coexist with a privately uncertain implementation of the workings of an 
object, or what are known as  “ difficult design decisions. ” To put it more technically: 
encapsulation separates the  “ contractual interface of an abstraction and its implemen-
tation. ” 42 The boss who, using the correct abstraction layer, says,  “ I don ’ t care how 
you get the job done, just get it done, ” thinks of his or her organization in object-
oriented terms, benefiting from a strict insistence on the formal, abstract specification 
of roles and responsibilities to justify ignorance of the day-to-day. 
 Oddly enough, in this world, exceptions are no exception: like everything else, they 
are objects, entities that can be passed around (one  throws an exception in this way, 
rather than throwing a fit) without infringing the black-boxing encapsulation rule of 
the segmentation or division of object labor: I don ’ t care how you get the job done. 
One might think of this process as one of delegation, a little like the way in which 
complaints might be dealt with in an organization: they can occur anywhere, but an 
obedient object will say,  “ I don ’ t know anything about that, you ’ d better talk to the 
boss, ” or  “ I ’ ll have to ask my supervisor, ” or  “ Go to our Web site, ” as work to rule is 
played out as a form of obedience. Exception handling is designed to ensure that 
objects retain the stable and (more or less) precisely defined role they are given to 
play, which should not be upset by anything from the outside, anything that their 
role has not supplied the methods to handle. The point is to keep control of the flow. 
In this respect, exception handling is a form of pacification or stabilization, the art of 
which lies not so much in how the problem is eventually dealt with but in the signals 
that the exception handler generates about what has happened (the point about 
encapsulation is to ensure that only the right people get to rummage around in the 
secret insides of objects: messaging is a way to do this). 
 This highly effective abstraction of the exception from the complex, heterogeneous 
diversity of the empirical and the basic principles of how exceptions are then handled 
demonstrate the crucial lesson that formal-material mediation offers for a stratagem 
for the effective handling of the unknown  as unknown. Translating the anomalous 
conditions of the empirical into the rule-governed algorithms of the formal, the 

Technicalities 
121
abstractive virtue of exception handling lies in its ability to keep the unknown brack-
eted off through a sociotechnical principle of ignorance: well-programmed routines, 
a well-defined division of labor, and a formal protocol for exchanging messages 
between objects or defining their interaction keep the outside world at bay. By turning 
an exception into an object, one can apply the same principles to it as other objects 
(the exception inherits from other classes, one can extend it by adding methods, and 
so on).  43 
 A full discussion of the technicalities of exception handling falls outside the scope 
of this stratagem. Sociotechnicalities, however, are a different matter. If — following 
the principle that artifacts, machines, things themselves, have a cognitive life of 
sorts — we imagine a digital system to embody an intelligence all its own, the socio-
technicality to be exploited here derives from the highly restricted, intransigent filter-
ing out of all but the barest formal-material essentials of the outside world. Given that 
programmable objects are objects that operate on the principle of a highly regulated, 
rigidly defined contractual interface with other objects, then exception handling 
demonstrates that the outside world becomes one gigantic object, whose inner work-
ings become not just strangely but also desirably secret. Let us call this the justifiable 
ignorance of the exception. 
 Encourage Error 
 It is a mistake to believe that computation simply introduces a new, finer, more 
demanding form of control. This is undoubtedly part of its catalog of features, but 
like the justifiable ignorance of the exception, there is much also to admire in its 
capacity for recklessness and indifference. It is generally understood that an error is 
something that falls outside logic. This is not to claim that it is impossible to make 
errors of logic, but that the aim of logic is to reduce errors internal to it. The proposi-
tion that this stratagem exploits rests on the idea that a more profound interrelation 
conjoins the two. 
 One of the advantages of error when it enters the domain of computational gray 
media is that it no longer represents simply interpretation, miscomprehension, inac-
curacy, or at best an intuitive fuzziness, but becomes productive. This happens only 
in part because computation has now fundamentally leaked beyond the first ranks 
of technicians who nurtured the mainframes, then out of the boxes on the desktop, 
then into billions of embedded gadgets and sensors, and thus into the world. At 
another scale, error occurs at the level of logic, which — although it is abundant in its 
capacity for internal rigor and intolerance of incorrectness — no longer imagines itself 

122 
Technicalities
a totality.  44 Computation has begun to recognize its tangledness with other aspects of 
culture, recognizing them as providing a means for  “ a new and improved physis. ” 45 
The nature, the idiosyncratic patterns of growth and conjugation, of computing 
changes in these mixings. 
 Error is not simply productive in terms of simple mistakes or misconstruals of a 
matter of fact, such as those that might, under a regimen of exuberant charitability, 
be understood to be of a kind liable to lead to the launch of a war. Neither is it some-
thing entirely congruent with the ideal of chance, though they might at moments 
intertwine. What we also need to account for here in stratagematic terms is the inter-
tangling of rule sets, error produced by an appropriate dose of reason. These may occur 
within a program as the inability to finish a cycle, but they can perhaps most classi-
cally be exemplified by the establishment of a priority inversion. 
 A priority inversion is a type of problem in which the ordering of resource alloca-
tions between the tasks in a program creates interferences.  46 Within any piece of 
software, certain tasks are more important than others. They may be relied on to keep 
a computer running or to provide fast interaction to a user. Each task is dynamically 
ranked in order of priority. A priority inversion can occur when a lower-priority task 
 “ hijacks ” a resource needed for a higher one. In the time that the priority takes to be 
reordered, a third task may take over the resource, leaving the first task incomplete, 
risking a crash, delaying critical processes, or generating a novel condition. Related 
problems occur when two or more updates are made concurrently to a date in a data-
base, operating system, or other software. Unless a means exists for adjudicating prior-
ity, the system deadlocks. With many multiples of users carrying out different processes 
on the same or linked pieces of data in an environment of multithreaded, multicore 
processors, the degree of complication of the mechanisms that govern locking and 
unlocking data and apportioning priority of access can be profound. 
 An example of such an event in the generation of another form of medial physis 
can be found in the following story. A man is convicted of repeated violence against 
another, against whom he may still hold a grudge. Upon his release from prison, he 
is prohibited from going near the other ’ s home or place of work. He is tagged with a 
GPS-based device that alerts the target and the police each time he enters the specified 
area, or if the system is tampered with in a way that results in his disappearing from 
view of the satellite. The geology of the area is characterized by steep valleys, and 
because of the cold climate, the buildings are traditionally constructed with thick 
walls. These conditions create substantial GPS  “ shadows. ” Each time the man enters 
such a shadow, the other is alerted that he may be attacked, and the police are impelled 
to respond by attending to the place where the signal was last registered. In such a 

Technicalities 
123
situation, nonevents that may occur several times a day generate an emergency 
response. The problem is generated neither by the intentions of the man, nor the 
precautions taken, nor necessarily the technology per se, but by its interactions with 
its location. Intending to free the victim from the fear of attack, the system instead 
results in his constant susceptibility to inordinate crisis. 
 Regardless of the specificities of this particular case, we should ask how this kind 
of function can be understood, and what kinds of affordances it establishes. It is pos-
sible to imagine proposed solutions to this general problem coming from law, engi-
neering, policing, the introduction of weapons, psychiatry, vigilantism or popular 
justice, architecture and other areas of expertise. This is an argument for collaboration 
between disciplines or agencies. But in stratagematic terms, it is also useful to explore 
the direct conditions such mixtures of forces, capacities, and materials produce. Each 
new form of structuration and mediation of the world generates its own kind of col-
lateral damage. Here it is useful to turn to work in situated cognition, best exemplified 
in robotics, to think through the quality of error as productive rather than solely as 
an impediment to good function. 
 The  “ subsumption architecture ” robotics characteristic of the work of Rodney 
Brooks and his collaborators, such as Luc Steels and Pattie Maes, builds up effective 
and useful behavior in robots by linking a series of finite-state machines to govern 
specific states. 47 These simple circuits decide whether or not it is appropriate to move 
forward, to turn, to locate and lift and object, to stop, or to carry out some other 
function. As Brooks and Lynn Andrea Stein state,  “ There is no end to a computation 
or final result; all is continuously being computed and recomputed, and actions in 
the world are the  ‘ outputs ’ of the system. ” 48 They avoid the problem characteristic of 
earlier waves of artificial intelligence, which emphasized signal processing by basing 
decisions and behaviors on the results of such behaviors in interactions with the 
world. This leads to a robust architecture in which useful results are achieved directly 
by  “ using the world as its own best model, ” 49 rather than being modeled in advance. 
A robot can thus be judged on the basis of its actual behaviors rather than on any 
more complex model of its intentions or the range and quality of the abstractions it 
employs. Aggregations of simple behaviors allow robots to operate in noisily compli-
cated domains, to operate via trial and error. 
 It is here that a stratagematic intelligence again differs from a strategic one. While 
the strategic point of view would understand error as only a delay on the way to a 
trial yielding the correct result, the stratagematic is also able to recognize the produc-
tive yield of error, not as the lack of expected result but as the proof of a capacity of 
displacement (as of water volume), interaction, and generativity in the world. 

124 
Technicalities
 Another way in which such phenomena occur is in the playback of recorded music. 
As the population of CD players gradually ages and falls apart after the decline of their 
short supremacy, they wear out in ways that generate an idiosyncratic sound. In the 
last years of their dominance, their mechanisms, the motor to rotate the disc, the 
drive to move the read-head, begin to gently accompany the music that they deliver 
with their own modest trills, sussurations, and whirs. Error accompanies proper func-
tion not as its opposite but as its exploratory double, probing for ways of being in the 
world after straightforward function has passed on. It is in the sensing, mobilization, 
and use of this excessive capacity that media exceed their functionalist bounds, 
through their own excessive functionality. 
 Technical error here allies with the tyranny and arbitrariness, the stern and gran-
diose stupidity, of European thought that is venerated by Nietzsche as a means of 
generating strength, inciting curiosity, and breeding  “ subtle agility. ” 50 Where such 
error differs, however, is that we do not need to look for something — such as the 
human subject — that is kept beyond an abstraction boundary as the recipient of dero-
gations and futile tasks in the understanding that such cruelty generates an ascetic 
gain, reciprocal rage, or thick spine of desire as a form of training or asymmetric 
response. To understand or to validate error, we do not automatically need this addi-
tional layer of interpretation, whether of symbols or of disciplined beings. Error has 
its own kind of craftiness. A means of alternation between knowing and inhabiting 
its physis, recognizing the inevitability of its occurrence, its coextensivity with and 
generation by reason, and its escape from mere rationality: in all of these qualities 
error establishes the arts of stratagematic media. 

 Productivity 
 Keep It Personal 
 A basic scenario sketched out across the range of stratagems we have explored here is 
one in which some technique, technology, tool, device, practice, chemical, concept, 
or other such thing operates to shape and configure the possibilities of a situation, 
influencing the way in which it can change, the dynamics operative within it. Such 
mediators are not necessarily transparent and are often far from stable, and this gives 
them some latitude for experimentation and a considerable coefficient of ambiguity 
that opens them up to the wandering of fortune. 
 The concept of tacit knowledge, as it has been deployed within the theory and 
practice of management, seems to play an exemplary role in facilitating the kinds 
of cunning that we have been exploring here, and provides a crucial indicator of 
the tensions that systems or networks of mediators are subject to.  1 Developed by 
the scientist-turned-philosopher Michael Polanyi in his book  Personal Knowledge , the 
characterization of a type of knowing as tacit — that is, difficult, even impossible, to 
verbalize — gives scope to its recasting in terms of a sort of inarticulable  “ connoisseur-
ship ” that offers an exceptional resource for flattery, especially when brought into 
contrast with the abstract and impersonal structures of the kind of critical philosophy 
that Polanyi opposed. While flattery of the powerful was not Polanyi ’ s goal (his under-
taking was to explore crucial aspects of the development of scientific knowledge that 
critical philosophy could not), such ideas become more malleable when (mis)applied 
in the expediently instrumental realm of the corporate.  2 
 Indeed, from this point of view, one distinct advantage that Polanyi ’ s conception 
of the tacit can offer is a satisfying sense that the ineffable nous of leaders is the source 
of their expertise (and elevated position), that a rounded personality whose apprecia-
tion of the bouquet of a fine wine harmonizes richly with an intuition that the market 

126 
Productivity
will appreciate a move to downsize or restructure, and that a hefty bonus is a legitimate 
reward for all this inarticulable personal capital. A concept of knowing as tacit or 
personal cashed out as a refined connoisseurship or down-to-earth geek insight (the 
specific qualities are irrelevant) harmonizes here with a rhetoric of intellectual capital 
and market overbidding for  “ excellence. ” Recent work on the brain, a substance rich 
in genetically endowed connections, might yet provide a color-coded scan to prove 
the point.  3 
 Further, by appealing to the necessary inarticulacy of a process of imitation in 
which an apprentice follows the gestures of the master, picking up along the way a 
range of gestures that even the master didn ’ t know he was making, Polanyi ’ s concep-
tion of the tacit also captures a sense of the embedding of knowledge in practices, 
where knowing  how is as important as, if not more important than, knowing  that. 
 Likewise, in these mute processes of imitation, it points to something of the 
dynamic of authority and hierarchy in an organizational practice. Doing what someone 
tells you to do because they are presumed to know better, even if they are unable to 
explain why, finds a flattering explanation through the notion of tacit knowledge. At 
the least, an alibi is provided for a leader who, unable to argue the toss, bullies his 
inferiors into submission and is hailed for  “ being a forceful personality. ” In the refrac-
toriness of making doing amenable to propositional articulation, even the slightest 
gesture can be imagined as crucial to the cognitive capital of an organization, the 
generic qualities of work processes ornamented through the ineffable uniqueness of 
the personal touch. As managers increasingly become leaders, their every gesture is 
invested in and mused over for the secret of success it might contain. 
 The historical links of the tacit with attempts to explain how science works also 
suggest a continuity between scientific endeavor and the more dubitably objective 
practices of the world of commerce: the quantimetrics of scientific management find 
a positive reason for their limitations in the mute shapings of gesture. 
 But as a device for shaping knowledge management strategies, the tacit acts as a 
vector for drawing human factors together, for promoting the intimacy and warmth 
of communication and cooperation among elements of an organization. If knowledge 
is personal, it can only be mediated through personal input. And when knowledge 
has been acquired through the subconscious processes of the tacit, as with the appren-
tice learning by imitative doing, work gains a feeling of continuity, a feeling that, 
helpfully, directs attention away from deeper ruptures, gaps, and breaks with the past. 
 However, a thin and highly uncertain line separates the ineffable from the inadmis-
sible and the inarticulable from the nonexistent, and some management theorists have 
not been slow to realize that the concept of tacit knowledge can easily play into the 

Productivity 
127
hands of hucksters, charlatans, and con men: bullshitters of all stripes.  4 After all, if 
your most prized possession — your knowledge — cannot be articulated explicitly or, 
more practically, turned into a formalism, who ’ s to say whether or not you really know 
what you claim to know? How might one separate craft from the crafty? The popular 
rejoinder  “ It ’ s too complicated to explain ” might not be an exemplar of personal 
knowledge per se, but the speed with which it is proffered as a threat to the overly 
inquisitive is indicative of the curious affordances that even the mildly ineffable pro-
vides for diversionary tactics and sleight of hand. The fragile rewards of status are also 
easily threatened if employees lower in the pecking order are thought of as connois-
seurs. Artisans, yes, at a pinch, but connoisseurship has to be a much rarer talent.  5 
Naturally the ready application of knowledge-engineering practices that can ignore 
the more valuable skills some workers might possess, because they don ’ t know how 
to explain them, also has its value. And more obviously, in a situation in which orga-
nizations are delocalized, production is networked, and work made to flow, strategies 
based on the explicit and the codifiable are more desirable than those that might 
promote solidarity and bodily cooperation among the workforce. Indeed, when an 
organization ’ s effective domination and control of a situation depend on disseminat-
ing and sharing knowledge for its continued viability, the ineffability of the tacit offers 
a somewhat more equivocal set of prospects. 
 This much becomes obvious when one considers that the aim of processes of 
knowledge management is to extract knowledge from a workforce so as to congeal 
that knowledge into replicable commodity form (as in outsourcing practices, for 
example). From this point of view, knowledge management requires the extraction 
and algorithmic codification of patterns of knowledge and activity. Whether it is the 
knowledge of the weavers encoded in the Jacquard loom, the outsourcing of legal and 
accounting services, or the marketizing of consumer preferences, a process of making 
the implicit explicit forms a crucial element in the economic construction of work per 
se (and perhaps a more general cultural condition). At this point, the tacit becomes 
something of a hindrance, calling for expensive processes of knowledge extraction 
and codification, a more detailed understanding (or, alternately, a willing ignorance) 
about the way in which work is accomplished.  6 
 There are other directions in which an understanding of tacit knowledge might be 
advanced in the interests of the more effective management of knowledge within an 
organization. A crucial element of the personal, according to Polanyi, lies in what the 
 “ intellectual domination ” of a situation bestows on an individual. In the field of sci-
entific knowledge, granted, this unarticulated capacity to appreciate what is at stake 
in an experiment, a controversy, seems indispensable. But in the less certain realm of 

128 
Productivity
activities such as work, where an incontrovertible scientific outcome is less important 
than maintaining market profile, deflating dissent, or simply suppressing disorder, 
 “ intellectual domination of a situation ” points toward a different kind of know-how. 
Here a concept such as the habitus, proposed by Pierre Bourdieu, might offer us a 
slightly more lucid appreciation of the equivocal limits of the ineffable: like tacit 
knowledges, the knowing that is encoded in the habitus is inseparably corporeal and, 
at least when Bourdieu investigates the socially differentiated field of  “ distinction, ” 
can correspond to a refined, connoisseurial flair, a nose for something, a kind of intu-
ition on the limits of the explicit and the codifiable. It is a  “ matrix of perceptions, 
appreciations, and actions. ” 7 But unlike tacit knowledge, the knowing that is embod-
ied in the habitus is most definitely codified and articulable. It is through the habitus 
that strategies of domination and control are accomplished: the imitation of the ges-
tures of the master in a process of learning is equally about learning to inhabit a 
corporeal scheme that maintains a structure of domination. If this knowing is not 
articulated, though, it is because it can only be so at the cost of calling into question 
the social structures that it supports. 
 A great future might just lie ahead for the concept of the tacit and the clouds of 
dust that it manages to kick up. But if the current propensity for transparency, effi-
ciency, and all-in stakeholder participation holds (exemplified in the enthusiasm for 
360-degree appraisal), and knowledge managers take a more inquisitive stance toward 
the polymorphous functioning of the personal, practices of knowledge engineering 
might confer a less flattering allure on many instances of the unspoken. 
 All the World ’ s an Audition 
 To breed an animal with the right to make promises is one of the transition points 
Nietzsche establishes as tending toward the contemporary human.  8 To breed an animal 
with the ability to sign contracts and conform to a meshwork of audit trails is the 
program of much of today ’ s software as it shapes and gives form to the contemporary 
imaginary of control. When speaking about such systems, to use the word  “ control ” 
as such is a misnomer. It smacks too much of despotism and neurosis; what is wanted 
instead is to make sure people have a feeling of belonging. The universal aim is 
to perform a cleansing detox on social relations, to take part in a fitness-enhancing 
 “ dressage of the brain. ” 9 One of the means of doing so is to displace any relationships 
that might give rise to tension into automated systems, thus allowing humans to 
concentrate on what really gives them pleasure and fulfillment — relying on media and 
other actuation systems to get the job done. If promises are a mnemonic that sustains 

Productivity 
129
the self as reliable, regular, and automatic, audit is a means of sustaining the systemic 
context in which the self unfolds. 
 While virtue inheres in the common hypocrisy of proclaiming the benefits of open-
ness while practicing the creation of boundaries, to restrain our creative palette to 
such overly contrasting tones is to deny the possibilities of subtlety and ambiguity. 
Equally, to focus solely on the means of systematization of relations, relying on dis-
tributed formatting of events by empowering people with your tools and protocols, 
to displace the conduct of effectiveness from a concentrated source into a system 
of circulation, vocabularies, and devices, is to miss some of the simpler pleasures of 
singular acts of creation or destruction available to a canonical authority. Such an 
approach may be right for contexts that are stable enough not to be disrupted by 
hunger, invasion, or other crises and can rely on the possibility of consensus. Not only 
are these contexts rare, but in that homogeneity incites the alien, they are often in 
turn most open for use. To develop systems of audit, distributed management, and 
self-evaluation is a third and complementary tendency. 
 In the 1940s, it was possible to imagine the emergence of a new class, that of the 
managers who had come to dominate planned and wartime economies and found in 
various forms of fascism, Marxism-Leninism, and the New Deal particular ideological 
inflections or flavors to suit their purposes.  10 Today the world is far more interesting, 
and what we find instead is the growth of managerialism as a set of techniques that 
sets itself up not simply as the domain of a specific class but as a common treasury 
for all: with many subfields proliferating from traffic management to anger manage-
ment, all of which recommend themselves as distinct schools but equally allow a trade 
in metaphor from one managerial domain to another. The circulation and develop-
ment of these techniques starts with the desire for efficiency, new levels of synergy 
between the atoms of the organization or project. They have no ends but outcomes 
and the infinitesimally fine-grained milling of relations between people, quality, 
process, and product. 
 Making explicit the means by which people are checked or may check themselves 
allows the generator of the system of checks to withdraw from direct interaction 
but still receive benefits from the visible hand of organization.  11 Such techniques allow 
the honesty and aspirations of others to become a most valuable tool for evil media. 
Through fields, tick boxes, appraisals, targets, reports, rankings, personal development 
plans, all are given the chance to experience what they really are in transparent terms. 
Audit mechanisms such as these are a neutral means by which people are empowered 
to connect their life narratives to wider social forces such as markets and pseudo-
markets, strategic objectives, research assessment, customer satisfaction, good practice, 

130 
Productivity
and the success of the firm or society.  12 The synergy achieved by such means allows 
citizens to apprise themselves of their own achievements, but also — and this is impor-
tant — to use their own cunning in cleaving more closely to targets and objectives.  13 
In this way, audit favors as virtuous those who assimilate themselves to its require-
ments. Whether they are adventurous or timid, profligate or frugal, full of conspiracy 
or yearning for obedience, all can find this virtuousness echoed in themselves and so 
make themselves available for evaluation, encouragement, and trimming. 
 Bear in mind, however, that the virtue of the audit finds its own true believers. Not 
being accustomed to coming close to power, and judging too readily on the basis of 
appearances and presentations, the true believer is scandalized by a few small stones 
tumbled along in the running river of power. As Machiavelli reminds us,  “ Everyone 
is in a position to watch, few are in a position to come into close touch. ” 14 Proof of 
what comes into intimacy with power is as highly prized by idle speculators as plan-
etary trivia is to astrologers. For this reason, it is important to recognize that the power 
of audit leaks out and begins to organize all walks of life. Every organization will 
require records to be kept according to certain formulas, but in a society where power 
is distributed in a proper manner, even the minutiae of leaked expenses claims seem 
a closer guide to the soul than whether a man launches the invasion of another 
country. As such, once unleashed, the audit becomes a new domain for the establish-
ment of truth. 
 And there lies a crucial problem. In Louis Althusser ’ s reading of  The Prince , the ruler 
may choose to operate by means of law and by the more bestial power of coercive 
force. 15 If a ruler relies solely on either, he will be short lived, but operating above and 
between them is the cunning of deception. In the time of Machiavelli, courting and 
encountering the emergence of the idea of the modern from one of the few unadorned 
rooms in the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence, it was possible to state that deception was 
recognizable as the opposite of law. The grotesque aesthetic of cunning or fraud, 
however, was necessary as a second-order operation of evaluation, of strategy as a force 
of thought in itself, and as a pragmatics of conjuncture necessary at the least for the 
recognition of the operations of others. Later, game theory arises as a vast manifold 
of truth tables drawn up by the multilayered coiterations of force, law, and deception. 
Both of these cases, the new prince and the wilderness-of-mirrors realism of game 
theory, rely on another layer of interpretation, that of the project: founding, maintain-
ing, or expanding a state or extrapolating the conditions of an existing one into every 
possible future. To navigate the interpretive proliferation of this layer, the wily opera-
tor uses a hierarchy of evaluating events: against the project, the ends or outcomes; 

Productivity 
131
at the level of cunning, the selection of whether to adopt means that are  “ good ” or 
 “ bad ” ; and at the level of active implementation, the choice of tactics and techniques; 
all of these in relation to the relations between other actors, forces, conditions, and 
resources. And here we can see that the software management of audit is useful, 
because it natively consists of the management of relations and, as such, naturalizes 
their invention and effects. 
 Whether for governor or governed, the audit promises a perfectly discrete form of 
micromanagement, a taking in hand and measuring of the most minute of gestures 
against statistically established or externally required norms. The very ease with which 
one can implement an audit trail within a database — and, with minimal technological 
extension, in the mundane software-based tools of everyday life, in social networks, 
for example — fuels the proliferation of audit and establishes the conditions for its 
extension to more and more kinds of social relation. 
 Tracking interaction with a database (a technological form that is prerequisite to 
the vast majority of corporate gray media) may be accomplished at extremely fine 
levels of granularity: which user, during which session, on which day, from which 
location, modified this record or that? Using simple SQL statements, wrapped up in 
some appropriate form of  “ middleware ” technology, one can both trigger and monitor 
specific audit  “ events. ” What is more, one can do so without even the need for any 
specific kind of form filling or box ticking, despite the salutatory effects of the point-
less time consumption of this form of labor and the liberating chances of mistakes 
and defaults it sets in play. 
 Gray media, such as that embodied in software, is often referred to as a form of 
law, in that, crudely speaking, it codifies behaviors between itself and other entities, 
with its effects proliferating outward into standardized behaviors.  16 In this context, 
the three layers of project, strategy, and implementation often find themselves flat-
tened. And here the risk of that training or domestication implied by the ability to 
make promises becomes perceptible. If part of the project of statistics was to establish 
a means for the state to trace the contours and speculate on the inner workings of the 
beast that it governs,  17 and thus to remain separate from it while knowing it, the 
proliferation of audit risks bringing the idealizations of normativity, of quality, of 
standardization and the vengeful banal morality of the normed, into immanent rela-
tion not only with what audit handles but with its handlers, too. Here we see the 
necessity of the difference between theorematic and stratagematic thinking. A theo-
rematic approach to evil media means unwavering compliance to laws and axioms 
laid out in advance, something that may end up biting the brush of the most cunning 

132 
Productivity
fox. A stratagematic approach, however, allows cunning to detach itself a little more 
from the flattening effect of universal audit, the salutatory effect of which is a certain 
freedom to maintain operations. 
 Mythologize Decision Making 
 Historically considered, the archetypal decision support system is probably not the 
spreadsheet or the database, the coin or the cards, but the book. The Bible, for 
Christians. Machiavelli ’ s  The Prince for the more worldly and godless. The Qur ’ an and 
the  Book of Ruses for those profiled for and targeted in ancient and modern crusades, 
and so on. But not all decisions are made in the frame of monotheistic religion or 
political absolutism, and one should guard against thinking that the book can ever 
itself be an infallibly certain object, as if decision support was, in an echo of the 
Cartesian cogito, about the provision of a rock-solid point of departure.  18 Geomancy 
and tarot, for example, offer less word-based advice, semiformal interpretative systems 
for the same, although they perhaps lack the social and cultural credibility accruing 
to the expert or to the statistic. Support for decisions, indicators for alternative courses 
of action, the weighing of consequences, can also be mediated through much less 
obvious, informal means. The relative size of piles of paper on a desk might indicate 
how to organize a working day; the shifting body language of colleagues might influ-
ence your decision on how to conduct a meeting. 
 In its standard form, a decision support system (DSS) is a structured way of integrat-
ing data about a problem, modeling interventions, visualizing results, and shaping 
decisions with reference to business models, strategies, and operational policies. DSS 
are used in business, complex resource management — such as that governing ecologi-
cal or military operations — and medicine. We might be stretching the meaning of the 
notion of a decision support system here a little, but if a team of knowledge engineers 
from Mars landed on Earth tomorrow, wanting to discover how decision making 
works, they would face a complicated, and not entirely coherent, set of situations, 
practices, techniques, concepts, and attitudes, a state of affairs that justifies the liber-
ties we are taking here. If we assume that the Martians would want to learn something 
from us,  19 would they take as their starting point Beau Brummell, a man so practiced 
in the art of delegating decisions that, although he could select a fine jacket himself, 
he would ask his valet to tell him (or so the story goes) which of the Cumbrian lakes 
he most admired? Or perhaps, if our Martians were readers of Herbert Simon (who 
felt decision making to be synonymous with management), might they take a random 
sample of middle managers and observe them in their by turns bumbling, obfuscatory, 

Productivity 
133
dogmatic, and exasperated day-to-day practices? What a contrast they would find if, 
as recent philosophers might recommend, they then sought to talk with Carl Schmitt, 
seeking clarifications of his adventurous thinking about authority, sovereignty, and so 
on. In short, the picture is more than a little fuzzy, and as ever, equivocation provides 
ample opportunity for ruseful cunning. 
 The knowledge engineers would perhaps also be confounded by the relative absence 
of mediating artifacts from theoretical considerations of the decision-making process 
(neither the experiential critics of AI or its enthusiastic mechanical advocates address 
the role of things or the idea that a composite apparatus may be central in decision 
making, for example), and their difficulties would doubtless also be compounded by 
the considerable scope for subterfuge that characterizes decision-making processes. 
Such subterfuge is legion: the executive who hires a management consulting company 
to turn the prior decision to sack 30 percent of the workforce into a rational response 
to a report on streamlining and efficiency savings; the politician whose resignation 
dissimulates his or her being fired; or the bogus telephone vote giving the seal of 
approval to a carve-up between artist management companies; all are not infrequent 
occurrences. The knowledge engineers might be perplexed, too, by the well-established 
practice of claiming to have taken the initiative when it is not yours to take, or of 
pretending to be taking it when you have in fact taken it already. Such are ploys with 
which most people will be familiar, but they are ploys that make it difficult to get a 
clear idea about how decision making occurs and what exactly it is. Are we dealing 
with decision making or role-playing here? 
 It seems that one is unlikely to obtain a consistent or reliable set of answers from 
humans about decision making per se, so it would not be unreasonable to turn to 
software, to the less ticklish stability of computational systems, to gain a cleaner 
understanding. Despite the mise-en-sc è ne of a certain guile in the founding specula-
tions about artificial intelligence,  20 the only deception that intelligent machines have 
managed to perpetrate with any degree of success is the idea that the decisions of a 
machine are somehow infallible, a hoax that crafty users sometimes manage to turn 
to their own ends, with practiced insincerity;  “ I ’ m very sorry, but the computer has 
rejected your application for a bank account .   .   . ” 
 A plethora of technologies, from newsfeeds and recommendation systems, through 
the indexing and weighting algorithms used in ordering preferences automatically, to 
decision support systems proper, do at least have the merit of operating on a replicable, 
reproducible, and mathematically quantifiable basis — which is perhaps why certain 
psychologists take such inspiration from the computer when making assertions about 
human cognitive processes. But were one to commence an understanding of decision 

134 
Productivity
making beginning with the machine, one might end up with a rather different picture 
of the process. 
 Despite the mythology that surrounds the decision and the decision maker (as seen 
in both Schmitt and Simon), decision support systems are fairly widespread. While 
the specific notion of decision support first entered vocabularies in the 1960s,  21 that 
history places Caesar in consultation with his auguries, Abraham Lincoln with his 
medium, or the Godfather with his consigliere (to say nothing of the modern politi-
cian with his assortment of focus groups and opinion polls) suggests that the power 
and authority that accrue to the decision maker represent only one element of a 
process that is distributed in a much more diffuse and problematic manner than our 
mythologies imagine. 
 Decision support systems in the strict sense offer a good starting point for exploring 
the deceptive ways in which decision making operates, and the value to be gained 
from introducing artifacts into this process. The decision support system seeks not to 
substitute for the presumed fallible expert in systems of the same name but to facilitate 
and expedite the process of problem solving by providing timely and accurate infor-
mation and what-if models and scenarios — alternative courses of action and their 
consequences. In this restricted, technical sense, a decision support system could be 
something as simple as a spreadsheet, but it might be something considerably more 
complicated — a database with some sort of OLAP facility,  22 for example, used to 
provide suites of reports on appropriate issues. Contrasted with the expert system, a 
spreadsheet does not take the place of a person (it might replace certain of their per-
ceptions, but that is a slightly different matter), nor does it directly replace the power 
of judgment of an individual (although it does present him or her with a range of 
options for consideration). The decision support system does, however, tend to presup-
pose and then reinforce a certain organizational and psychological model of thinking 
that may intersect opportunely with what can be figured as the realities of practice. 
 So the interest of the decision support system lies less in the quality of advice it 
provides than in its redistributive function, in the way that it can help displace and 
redefine expertise, valid knowledge, the landscape of choice and the rationalizations 
one makes of it. It effectuates a subtle kind of remodeling, which tends to operate on 
the forms of material about which decisions can be made, and promotes certain kinds 
of decisions as inherently more tractable, more likely to be resolved, and hence more 
important than others. To put it crudely, the point is that if you can quantify it, and 
your database gathers information about it, the decision support system might be able 
to help you make a decision about it. The importance of the decision support system, 
beyond the simple manner in which it gathers and centralizes information, thus has 

Productivity 
135
more to do with the way that it bolsters hierarchies and refocuses organizing and 
organizational energies. Once the spreadsheet or the database report becomes a media-
tor in the review meeting, critical efforts will focus on getting a  “ fairer, ” more accurate 
representation of the problem in question, rather than contesting the nature of the 
problem. 
 Herbert Simon ’ s well-known four-stage model of decision making, in part at least, 
attempted to shift thinking away from the tendency to emphasize the heroic moment 
of decision, in favor of deeper consideration of a process that he saw as consisting of 
intelligence, design, choice, and review.  23 But although this model has a capacious 
latitude for feedback loops at every step of the way, thus factoring in uncertainty and 
the room for optimizability, it does little to mitigate the fundamentally linear assump-
tions on which the model is built, a linearity that is built into and shapes organiza-
tional processes. 24 More significantly, when such a model is used to design a system — as 
opposed to formalizing a phenomenological description — it entails defining in advance 
what kinds of problems one will have to deal with, so that the system will be con-
structed in such a way as to collect the necessary intelligence to feed into the modeling 
of solutions. Thus it effectively presupposes or requires an environment that is reason-
ably stable (failing which, the problems your system is set up to deal with cease to be 
appropriate). Naturally there may be many processes about which decisions can be 
supported in this way, but this seems tendentially unlikely. 
 However, there are other reasons to use a decision support system than to get 
support for a decision. The preservation of an organizational hierarchy may be one. 
From a practical point of view, it is rare for everyone to have access to such systems. 
Even if the decisions that it makes are unnecessary, the executive reports, what-if 
scenarios, business projections, and so on, that they provide are of incomparable 
benefit in producing subjects who take themselves to be decisive. In this respect, one 
might consider the decision support system to be an important element in the produc-
tion of particular kinds of subjectivity. Furthermore, the semiotics, or even aesthetics, 
of the business report have a certain differential value that reinforces a hierarchy of 
reliability and accuracy: a proposed course of action that can be modeled with finan-
cial projections three years into the future (regardless of whether the input data are 
fact or fiction) has a certain well-formed quality that may inspire more confidence 
than figures inscribed on the back of a cigarette packet or on a paper napkin. Strategy 
documents with the predictive accuracy of a fortune-teller ’ s ruminations can acquire 
a certain power of conviction when produced in this way. Further, there is the sense 
that a decision that is mediated through a series of obviously disinterested data-
crunching algorithms has greater trustworthiness than decisions mediated through 

136 
Productivity
the representations of greedy, lazy, whining employees. One can rely here on a certain 
forgetfulness of the initial remit of system designers and a culturally entrenched sense 
that technical issues are not politically framed, that they arise from the self-evidence 
of the necessities of the day. 
 In its physical implementation, the decision support system effects the kind of 
concrete closure that Simon argued was necessary to allow humans to effectively 
decide something: the possibility of rational decision modeled on explicit, formally 
deductible lines could only be preserved on this basis. From within the world modeled 
by the decision support system, arguments that revolve around alternative lines of 
questioning and different ways of problematizing an issue will thus inevitably appear 
to be irrational, even inconceivable. Slipping into the psychology of prestige, saving 
face, and the myriad masks that stupidity can assume, such arguments will be further 
reinforced by the issue of capital outlay: there will always be a certain reluctance to 
decommission a system that is not fit for purpose, that asks the wrong questions about 
false problems, particularly if the demands for its acquisition were high or if it has a 
nice user interface. 
 The Occult Virtue of the Project Plan 
 From its background in operations research, and its historically determinable connec-
tions to the military-industrial complex more generally, few things break the promise 
of rational, ordered planning and decision making with such monotonous regularity 
than the project, which seems destined to live up to its promise only through a judi-
cious mixing of juggling, conjuring, and myriad other magic tricks and illusions. To 
intone the word  “ project ” is to awaken the baleful anticipation of life lived as geek 
clich é : budgets overspent, sleepless nights, relationship failure, and substance abuse. 
The activities of the project manager, whose  “ personal qualities ” and more particularly 
 “ authority ” are so often the focus of the technical literature, occupy a space of calcula-
tion that magically encourages the hellish descent into what some have called the 
 “ death march project, ” the sort of endeavor that is so gloomily weighed down with 
the leaden emotions of failure that it recalls the enforced destructions of sociopolitical 
dramas run aground on their own denial of reality.  25 A death march project is one 
that, on the basis of  “ an unbiased, objective risk assessment, ” 26 would be given a less 
than 50 percent chance of success and would never be undertaken (unless, perhaps, 
the risks of failure were tied to some form of appropriately unpleasant physical pun-
ishment for those in charge). Of course,  “ objective risk assessment ” here means both 
 “ objective assessment of risks ” and  “ assessment of risks to objects, ” and in this sense, 

Productivity 
137
it is precisely because of this selective focus of objective risk assessment that the  projec-
tive qualities of the project are forgotten. 
 As well as an outcome to be avoided, a limit state of organized activity, death march 
projects themselves are symptomatic of the subjective negligence of bureaucratic 
reason. Yet despite the ever-present threat of failure, and the conscious awareness that 
 maybe the concept of the project is not all it is cracked up to be, there is a compulsion 
to repeat such projects, a drive to tie productive activity into a doom-laden spiral, to 
burn and squander, to organize, rationalize, and then extinguish energies mobilized 
in a wildly optimistic estimate of goals, a cascading chain of overshot targets, emer-
gency budget extensions, and visions become missions. Viewed with the squinting 
eye of the strategist, this willingness to contemplate failure in the specifics from the 
outset, so as to save project management as a form, is one of its secret, occulted 
strengths, a strength that we must learn to read in the subjective effects of its idioms, 
methods, user groups, and bulletin boards, even in the generic qualities of its publica-
tions.  27 To lead your troops to certain doom is to act for the heroic perpetuation of 
an ideal. The field of project management might thus usefully be considered one 
wherein strategic value derives from the malicious effects of the channeling or semi-
oticization of activity that it accomplishes. Extract resources from the mundane 
rhythms of the habitual self-definitions of routine work, mobilize in a separate space 
and time, and watch as libidinal energies spiral.  28 
 Projects are never started: they are always  initiated . 29 The occult virtue of the project 
should thus be located not so much in the material impact of its logistical manage-
ment of resources as in the binding force of emotive adhesion that its tools and 
techniques produce. Considered stratagematically, project management is best viewed, 
then, as a technique for the production of particular types of subjectivity, a delicate 
process of fabrication negotiating the psychic hinterlands between neurosis, paranoia, 
and psychosis along with enthusiasm and a can-do spirit.  30 The matter of the promo-
tion or production of subjectivity is not explicitly the central concern of theoretical 
research on project management (although the first paper on project management in 
the  Harvard Business Review focused on  “ the project manager ” ) 31 but is palpably evident 
to the many people who participate  in projects, swept away as they are in the peculiar 
mixture of delirium and tedium that the form foments. The status of subjectivity 
itself, as what might be called a conceptual  externality to project thinking, has some 
efficacy insofar as one should always consider it a strategic misjudgment to draw 
attention to or  “ topicalize ” such vital resources.  32 A good magician is a master of 
attention management: focus on the task in hand so that you can ’ t see what is 
happening elsewhere. 

138 
Productivity
 So aside from anything else that it might do, project management should be con-
sidered as a way to order and reorder emotional force, offering an abstracted spatio-
temporal grid for the investment of personal energy. The project unfolds in a different 
dimension to that of work, and by yoking human resources into the hierarchical lin-
earity of unfolding tasks, it also provides a way to marshal or channel affect, condens-
ing and displacing the anxiety of time-strapped resources onto acceptable goals. The 
prerogative of the project manager to underestimate the time required to do things 
and the underling ’ s tendency to do the converse (while frequently sharing the overall 
aims and goals of the project as a whole) can in this sense be followed as an outcome 
of the peculiar forms of semiotic intermediation that the project produces, fomenting 
subjective states and active tendencies.  33 Borderline states that would be recognized 
for such when manifest in other areas of life (maintaining lists of kitchen utensils on 
a drawer-by-drawer basis, screaming at the trash collector for a late pickup) are not 
only tolerated but exacerbated and intensified through the relentless refiguring of 
activity within a semiotically neutralized abstract space-time.  34 
 Project management avails itself of numerous techniques in its bid for fine logistical 
ordering. The critical-path method, Project Evaluation Review Techniques, PRINCE2, 
and so on, are well-known, highly brochured and implemented examples. At a lower 
scale, but mission-critical in the productive, mediating function of project manage-
ment is the ubiquitous project plan. Distributed to the team as a photocopied handout, 
displayed prominently in an office as a wall chart, the project plan acts discreetly, at 
a safe distance, a crucial but unacknowledged member of the collective. More often 
than not, it is maintained online in one of many proprietary software packages that 
offer the security of automated management of the mundane scheduling tasks and 
myriad other calculations of management activity. In so doing, some aspects of the 
agency of the project plan as  semiotechnical machine become more visible, factored into 
the machinic constraints of logistically purposed algorithms. With an allure of measure 
and cascading hierarchies of dependency, the project plan channels process into 
geometry, mapping activity in a gridded, linear matrix, generating signals to be pro-
cessed by humans and machines alike. 
 Considered as a representation, the project plan — typically, although by no means 
always, mapped out using the Gantt chart format  35 — offers a synoptic overview of the 
distribution of resources, relative time scales of tasks, deadlines, milestones, and 
dependencies. It poses questions of accuracy — will the duration of a task and its cas-
cading chain of dependencies (foundations must be completed before floor can be 
laid) — provide an accurate overview of what has to be done and when? And it poses 
questions of responsibility (who has not met their deadline?). In the recurrent review 

Productivity 
139
meeting that punctuates the project, the project plan serves a unifying function, a 
disciplinary tool to channel and hierarchize cooperation and coordination by focusing 
on the logical form of the relationships of work activity, and it gives the manager the 
industrial equivalent of a chess set to play with, resources to be moved around, 
shuffled and rejiggered, as problems emerge or priorities change, a gray media weapon 
fighting the invisible enemy, time, made manageable in semiotic space. 
 By abstracting from the messy relationships and heterogeneous durations that 
activity entails, the semiotic grid of the project plan, with its sometimes harmonious 
play of Cartesian proportion, accomplishes a similar task to that of perspective space 
in the Renaissance, valuing the symbolic mastery of space(s), allowing the project 
manager to think metrologically, to focus on abstract quantities of work, unbundled 
from sensory-motor vehicles, to move from the material through the logical to the 
logistical. 
 From the point of view of representation, the project plan poses a problem of 
information design, a variant of the more generic problem of the visual display of 
quantitative information:  36 how can we represent these activities in such a way as to 
make their relationships easier to understand? From a stratagematic point of view, by 
contrast, we need to be able to read the project plan  “ symptomatically ” if we wish to 
better understand how it functions as a technique. 
 As a project increases in complexity, as more resources and more tasks are brought 
in to the process, or as activities fall out of step with each other, the clean two-
dimensional  “ prison grid ” that charted relationships, deadlines, milestones, and so 
on, loses its synoptic quality. Spreading over pages or on screen after screen of a high-
resolution pixelated matrix, the representation twists as dependencies multiply and 
timelines for task completion proliferate. Logically the relationships between tasks 
remain, but conveyed within such a convoluted topology that one senses the presence 
of other forces at play, the ugly dissonance and anxiogenic must of signs gone bad. 
 The distortions and opacities of synoptic vision in the plan here give away its 
peculiar role as a repressing representation,  37 the two-dimensional geometry of wish 
fulfillment, twisting and creaking under the impact of forces of another nature. The 
logical space of representation aims to transform the  “ unknowns ” of problems into 
simple obstacles to be overcome, refiguring activity and the relationships it requires.  38 
This process of mobilizing productive energy and forcing it into a geometrically ratio-
nalized space-time is a form of semiotechnical delegation.  39 By interceding between 
workers and work, the plan shears off the mess and variable libidinal attachment of 
individuals to their activity at the same time as it shifts responsibility for cooperation 
and communication onto the manager.  40 Links between activities, the problems they 

140 
Productivity
may raise, the possibility for divergent directions to emerge — all of this is abstracted, 
delegated, and hence transformed, at the same time as it is warped, mended, and 
postponed by machines, workers, replete with their own tacit modes of knowledge. 
 Planned logistically, executed atomically, ordered hierarchically, the project offers 
an excellent means both of reorganizing the communicative space in which working 
activity occurs and of shaping the subjective dispositions of workers. In this punctual, 
segmented, linear space, work can be assimilated to a series of theorematic proposi-
tions. But problems cannot be so easily transformed into simple obstacles to be over-
come, unless, over time, there is a change in the nature of the problems addressed 
and the intelligence required to solve them. The project might not, a priori, assume 
anything about where on the continuum of mental and material an activity might 
lie; after all, what does the manager care about  how the work gets done, so long as it 
 gets done ? However, a segmented, well-ordered conceptual space within which activi-
ties relate to each other via an intermediary that takes the initiative for coordination, 
cooperation, and control is always at risk of confusing map and territory. The troops 
are muttering; the leader fails to see the disaster to come. 
 Middle Management 
 Gunrunners, organizers of coups, keepers of safe houses, deal makers and breakers, 
the gray eminence, the ethnographer ’ s informant: while one hesitates in the presence 
of such a diverse band of middlemen, mediators, and intercessors, no compendium 
of evil media stratagems would be complete without some discussion of middle man-
agement. In the context of the divergently resonant question of  “ knowing what the 
organization knows ” (Nietzschean ears hear the deafening silences implied here), 
mildly twitchy or overcaffeinated antennae will detect the matter of body counts, 
skeletons in cupboards, white-collar crime (or sharp practice, at least), and  mani pulite : 
the delicate matter of the unspoken. It isn ’ t a matter of accusation here, merely of 
drawing attention to the risk that the dedicated company man runs of committing 
what might be called  “ unthought crimes, ” crimes that are committed in the 
labyrinthine and troubled precincts of nonknowledge. Without playing on words 
too much, it is a question of the spiritualist calling of  mediumnity and the construction 
of corporate states of trance or possession — of knowledge transfer and knowledge 
transference, the occult operations of authority conveyed through the trafficking of 
metaphor. 
 Wherever we are in the chain of command, we should put our critical scruples to 
one side for a moment and try a little harder to appreciate the nature of the work of 

Productivity 
141
the middle, the medium. For although the middle manager is often reviled, not just 
at work but in culture and society more generally, a strangely active and more or less 
surreptitious transformational aspect inheres to being in the middle. Naturally, when 
posing as an emissary or acting as a representative, and for different reasons, it is better 
to appear as a transparent intermediary rather than an active, shape-shifting manipula-
tor or incompetent — because otherwise the accusations of betrayal will not be slow in 
coming. But great power is involved in the middle, with being a medium, especially 
if that means becoming an obligatory point of passage.  41 The strategic role of middle 
management is encapsulated by Herbert Simon in his  Administrative Behavior :  “ Even 
though as far as physical cause and effect are concerned, it is the machine gunner and 
not the major who fights the battles, the major is likely to have a greater influence 
upon the outcome of a battle than any single machine gunner. ” 42 
 Early thinking about middle management, with its cyberlogistical black boxing of 
the organization into input – output systems, tended to envisage the role of middle 
management largely in passive, information-processing terms, a view that corre-
sponded both to a strictly dualistic conception of the division between mental and 
manual labor of the kind justly criticized by the Marxist economist and philosopher 
Alfred Sohn-Rethel and to the growing impact of cybernetics research and systems 
theory more generally.  43 But it was clearly a role that placed far too much emphasis 
on the mental end and far too little on the material end. One should not deny the 
possibility that becoming a smoothly fitting cog in a well-oiled machine — or, to follow 
the analogy  in silico , a bug-free information-processing module in an efficiently imple-
mented piece of software — is a crucial motivation for a middle manager (being a 
transparent intermediary is one way of avoiding responsibility), and it is certainly one 
that is conducive to the pervasiveness of dualistic, and hence representational, think-
ing. But it does not tell us much about what  happens in the middle, often without any 
explicit knowledge, and how mediation can be and is exploited. This is perhaps better 
understood in terms of  interpretative effects , effects that become all the more important 
as the shift to the wholesale investment of the soul at work  44 brings about a strategic 
emphasis on intellectual capital, tacit knowledge (or what the organization doesn ’ t 
yet know that it knows), and flexibilization. Getting the soul to work requires a greater 
artfulness in the composition of chains of mediators. 
 By virtue of his or her position, the middle manager is literally an  inter preter. 
Doubly so, because any channel, any conduit, offers the possibility of a two-way flow. 
Indeed, if, as has been argued, the chaotic circumstances in which  “ self-interested ” 
frontline workers (those doing the work rather than overseeing it, such as Simon ’ s 
machine gunner) operate give them a  “ limited perspective ” that makes them unable 

142 
Productivity
to generate and articulate knowledge by themselves, and the high-level visions of 
senior management ’ s preoccupation with what  “ ought to be ” in turn make it difficult 
for them to provide explicit knowledge,  45 middle managers must have a decidedly 
 productive role in their interpretive positioning, a role that evidently places them in 
an at once strategically crucial and risky situation. 
 While much maligned in the 1990s, decimated as a function of the world-flattening 
operations of labor arbitrage and replaced by any variety of computational system that 
might process information better (it was also the era of fantasies about flat manage-
ment), the middle man has returned. The newly critical importance of the middle 
manager in the face of the varying fortunes of the organization was recognized in the 
theory of middle-up-down management developed by Ikujiro Nonaka and Hirotaka 
Takeuchi. For them, organizational mediumnity could no longer be understood as 
simply a quasi-computational,  46 one-way function of the operationalization of the 
unambiguous directives of leadership. In a world in which innovation, leveraging, and 
monetization in matters of knowledge are deemed crucial, the middle manager 
acquired a crucial role in the  “ knowledge spiral, ” the ongoing process of the creation 
and sharing of knowledge throughout an organization. By virtue of his or her position 
between the visions of senior management, which could now be as equivocal as one 
liked, and the mute empirical experience of frontline workers, the middle manager 
could play a crucial role in articulating and rendering explicit tacit knowledges of all 
kinds. 
 In this new configuration, the upper echelons of the organization are no longer 
deemed or even required to be the bearers of explicit, clearly formulated knowledge. 
It suffices to have a  dream , a vision, if not a fantasy, because it is now the task of the 
middle manager to articulate such visions, as a way of directing the attention of the 
workforce, not just to give their work a sense of direction but also to give a material 
focus to the organization of their affective investment. Visions that are not embodied 
in such material reality are hallucinations. In such circumstances, the astute middle 
manager will not, of course, criticize such visions or dreams for being vacuous, vague, 
or half formulated. Indeed, in the interests of obeisance, remaining neutral in the face 
of the oneiric discourse of the executive is not an option. On the contrary, a judicious 
display of enthusiasm is usually the most appropriate response (if only so as not to 
raise the suspicion that you think the CEO a moron, which could make any operations 
difficult). 
 In the theory of middle-up-down management, the middle manager truly comes 
into his or her interpretive and suggestive own, because she or he not only becomes 
responsible for organizing and  “ facilitating ” this process of knowledge  “ conversion ” 

Productivity 
143
(extracting knowledge from workers, ensuring internalization of directives from man-
agement) but, as Nonaka and Takeuchi point out, must become  “ proficient at employ-
ing metaphors in order to help others generate and articulate imagination. ” 47 Supplying 
metaphors to articulate the babble of the tacit (and colored pens to draw the mind 
map), management becomes a more or less sophisticated art of discursive transforma-
tion, a quasi-therapeutic process that is all the more necessary given that, in practice, 
tacit knowledge admits of no easy organizational distinction between refined, con-
noisseurial expertise and complete ignorance, between fallible intelligence and unas-
sailable stupidity. In any case, the rebadging of incoherence as  “ strategic equivocality ” 
and the deliberate destruction of infrastructure and cooperative relations as  “ creative 
chaos ” suggest that the wise manager should be good not only at employing metaphor 
but also at interpreting euphemisms and detecting oxymorons.  48 
 Every bout of blue-skies thinking is an opportune moment for what the psycholo-
gist Thierry Melchior calls  proferential language : not the language that bears verifiable 
reference ( “ your colleagues look exhausted ” ) but the language of verbal entities and 
vague, fuzzy realities ( “ we are an investor in people ” ). 49 The relation of proference 
concerns the capacity of language to fabricate things and is especially prevalent in 
situations where concrete referents are lacking, in moments of downsizing and rede-
ployment, for example, or whenever targets and other quantitative abstractions are 
proposed. 
 In the face of the proliferating discourse networks that traverse the organization, a 
dialectic of tacit and explicit knowledge, thought to be the motor of knowledge cre-
ation in an organization, is too coarse a filter through which to understand the trans-
formational art of middle management. In any case, from the point of view of the 
effective organization and exercise of power, some kinds of knowledge and associated 
forms of practice are only effective on condition that they are not elevated into public 
explicitness: not funny handshakes, perhaps, but signs that follow other codes, that 
tell us who belongs and who doesn ’ t, when a threshold is crossed or a limit reached. 
The wrong word in a meeting that prompts a scarcely perceptible elevation of the 
eyebrow, the comment made from behind the hand. Perhaps this is why anecdotal 
evidence suggests that over 75 percent of management information systems (replacing 
crucial aspects of middle management strata) are not fit for purpose.  50 It is not neces-
sarily a matter of poor design, although that is often the case. In fact, the better 
designed a system is, with proper automated audit trails and security permission 
systems, the less easy it is to fudge decisions, to cover your tracks, to ensure deniability. 
Information processing lacks guile, which is why software is only initialized. By con-
trast, a medium, like a project, has to be initiated. 

144 
Productivity
 In truth, the mediumnity of middle management was already recognized by some 
of the gurus who established their reputations at the height of the managerial revolu-
tion of the 1960s and 1970s. Warren Bennis, for example, argued that attention man-
agement was a crucial element in shaping an organization ’ s vision.  51 More recent work 
on the culture of organizations establishes the importance of understanding how 
influence is transmitted throughout an organization.  52 This is not just a matter of 
having friends in high places. It means having a better understanding of the  influenc-
ing machines that beep, buzz, whir, and click away within the organization: how brains 
are furnished with the friendly numerological security of a color-coded spreadsheet, 
rely on the private e-mail address, come to insist on organizing discussion around the 
official minutes of a meeting, or are locked into the bullet point hits of a slide show 
briefing. 
 From this point of view, organizational mediumnity is increasingly a matter of 
dealing appropriately with psychic ergonomics. As work is globalized, outsourced, 
casualized, fractionalized, and so on, computational techniques of supply chain man-
agement come into increasingly close proximity with the guiding, soliciting, and 
shaping of the expectations of subjects. It is common to argue nowadays that even 
the leisure time of consumption is a kind of work, but considered from the point of 
view of administration, work is equally a kind of consumption, shaped by similar 
media practices of attention management. Keep your staff on message. 
 But the more one insists on the transparent accountability of the explicit, codified 
into denumerable procedure, current doctrine, and official practice, the more the 
covert trafficking of the tacit comes into play. This suggests another twist on the 
knowledge spiral and its binary distinction between tacit and explicit knowledge, and 
of how the organizational imperative of  “ knowing what you know ” brings an element 
of calculation, and hence the vertigo of interpretive possibility, into processes of 
mediation. 
 The deft handling of this kind of calculus, which is as much about nonknowledge 
as knowledge, gives a ruseful spin to the gray world of administration and is embodied 
in document classifications, software permissions systems, access to distribution lists, 
the physical policing of a building, as well as the faux bonhomie of the conversation 
in the corridor, the departmental jolly, or the ignorance imparted in the informative 
and friendly five minutes for questions at the end of a presentation. Proponents of 
the  “ media richness ” theory argue that media use is crucial for managing equivocality 
and uncertainty, 53 and different media forms are more or less effective at resolving 
ambiguity and dissolving uncertainty by virtue of the  “ richness ” of the informational 
cues they contain. Such an argument would be unexceptionable but for two things. 

Productivity 
145
In the first place, media never exist in isolation: ambiguity is just as easily created 
through multiplying use of media forms. In the second place, with its simplistic evacu-
ation of power from the analysis, the theory ignores the fact that the careful perpetu-
ation, even fomenting, of ambiguity is half the problem of a medium. When you don ’ t 
know something or there is something you don ’ t want others to know, ambiguity and 
evasiveness are crucial. In any case, the proferential induction of collective trances 
(call it a generalized process of team building) is not something that can be accom-
plished by means of transparency. The supreme skill of the accomplished professional 
medium, the adept of the catch-up session or the special committee, is to manage the 
hazy borderline between knowledge and nonknowledge, to pass off  flatus vocis as 
informative briefing and ensure that a liberal scattering of bullet points doesn ’ t expose 
too many holes. 


 Excellence 
 Metamodel, or Formalize, Virtue 
 In other stratagems, we have noted the existence of a  “ grammar ” for continuous 
reeducation, a grammar that codifies a set of software technologies, of machine envi-
ronments, and thus offers the possibility of an algorithmic dynamic to thought and 
to becoming. Such a grammar points toward the possibility of a more parsimonious 
route into the operations of subject production, one that can be conducted directly 
on and through language.  1 If we have a machine grammar — a techno logy — for continu-
ous reeducation, embodied across a range of hardware, software, and wetware options, 
perhaps some more condensed formulations of the multitudinous syntax that such a 
grammar affords might be possible. In this regard, the set of techniques known as 
neurolinguistic programming, lately popular among management consultants and 
psychotherapists alike (the likeness not being entirely accidental) and redolent of the 
trend toward positive psychology, perhaps offers a suitable candidate for the pressing 
requirement of engendering new forms of subjectivity. As the experts put it,  “ These 
days we need the skills to develop personal flexibility to the extreme. ” 2 Only individu-
als able to adapt to, or acquire a closer fit with, the demands of the world in progress 
will gain the right to call themselves virtuous. In the guise of a practice of modeling —
 or, rather,  metamodeling — NLP proposes an approach to reeducation that can, in prin-
ciple, operate at the micrological level of linguistic form itself, through a disclosure 
of what its proponents call the  “ mental syntax ” that orders experience. Better still, 
as a practice for the administration of the self, for minimum outlay (books, toolkit, 
webinars) NLP can be self-administered, although undoubted financial advantages 
accrue to becoming expert. 
 While the notion of the model equivocates delightfully in its use of the armature 
of science when scaled up beyond the strict confines of the laboratory, in general it 

148 
Excellence
condenses and essentializes pertinent variables and significant features in a highly 
portable, economical manner, even where the associated intellectual technology does 
not, a priori, require such fixity or closure. To develop a model of a set of events or 
situations in the real world is to purport to offer an accurate — if abbreviated — repre-
sentation of those events or that situation. A model thus permits the exploration of 
scenarios, mapping responses occurring according to variations in the parameters 
defining the model.  3 For a scientist, the model is a tool designed to capture an aspect 
of the reality being modeled. From a more strictly mathematical-logical point of 
view, models have to do with the  interpretation of formulas in a logical system; that 
is, they go from being meaningless strings to having a meaningful value: a model-
theoretic semantics ensures that syntactically well-formed formulas in a natural lan-
guage, for example, are susceptible to being considered true or false in a finite, 
parseable way. 4 
 For the neurolinguistic programmer, the model is an underlying mapping, along 
the lines of a structural grammar ( à la Chomsky) of the world, a formal-rhetorical 
device that, unlike a Chomskyan structure — which is not revisable at will — opens up 
the possibility of an infinite flexibility, a perpetually revisable relation to the world, 
the permanent reworking of  “ mind-body coding ” or the structure of subjective experi-
ence. These oxymoronic  “ structures of magic, ” as the founders of NLP call them, can 
be placed at the service of the modeling of excellence in all domains, facilitating the 
techno-therapeutic play of quasi-algebraic rewrite rules — now grasped as critical opera-
tors in the process of persuasion engineering — for a sophisticated, and in principle 
technologically translatable, practice of excellence in communication.  5 
 On the assumption of the ultimate existence of some presumed formally adequate 
syntax, the rewrite rules that metamodelers discern — deletion, distortion, generaliza-
tion  6 — offer a way of improving communication and, crucially, a form of self-assess-
ment that can be abstracted from the tacit habits of experience, that can be revised 
and recoded, ideally leading to the unconscious assimilation of patterns of excellence. 
Self-assessment using such rewrite rules clearly presupposes some abstract communi-
cational machine, a virtual reservoir of well-formed formulas that our intransigence, 
our lack of excellence, our everyday inflexibilities, prevent us from accessing. The 
metamodel presides over such processes, in a position of gray eminence, the very 
existence of which implies, if not ensures, its own requirement to banish the possibil-
ity of the evil negativity of malformed language.  7 
 The ease with which NLP practitioners flaunt a variable — and not always consis-
tent — jargon, their invocations of Ericksonian  “ solution-oriented ” hypnosis, or their 
highly pragmatic invocation of science all offer a ready matter for denunciation, one 

Excellence 
149
made all the easier by lurid stories about the shadowy lives of the founding fathers of 
the field. But in fact, in practices where  “ the truth ” is not at stake — except rhetorically, 
as in the art of always being right — the invocation of science, as elsewhere, can offer 
useful benefits, the accrual of a certain legitimacy, the stability of a socially well-dis-
tributed set of roles to slip into, codifying expectations through the powers of scientific 
knowledge. Naturally such benefits are open to abuse, as is the promise of measure-
ment more generally. In any case, there are fields of ostensibly scientific endeavor, 
economics, for example, in which it is apparent that the model has a decisive impact 
on reality, where the map is not only not the territory (a simple requisite for realism) 
but productive of the territory that it then claims to map. As such, with this produc-
tive role, the broader question of the redundancy or otherwise of affordances that 
models create, the kind of reeducation of practices they inculcate, is crucial — for both 
epistemics and technics alike.  8 
 But the productive use of models in neurolinguistic programming is more impor-
tant for the practice of  free indirect action to which it testifies: in a world where institu-
tions are predicated on the free consent of individuals for their smooth operation, 
manipulating models, rather than manipulating people, is an exemplary form of 
indirect action. Models are mediators, of course, and supremely interested ones at 
that. 9 When target individuals or clients can be encouraged to manipulate such models 
themselves, in a technology of self-modeling, we enter into the realm of free indirect 
action,  10 a crucial element for any autonomous practice of reeducation. Acceding to 
communication free of distortion, generalization, and deletion enables the produc-
tion of  well-formed outcomes , objectives that bring the individual into harmony 
with the culture of audit, the algorithms of workflow, the tasks and deliverables of 
project management. An  “ outcome frame ” provides a notional setting in which to 
budget for the allocation of sensory resources: you can make efficiency savings with 
experience.  11 
 With the ethico-aesthetic impulses of an evil media approach firmly in mind, the 
indirect way in which one inculcates virtuous behavior (excellence being a loose 
translation of the Aristotelian concept of  ar ê te ) through NLP compels most interest. 
The artful use of metamodeling questions (a use that admittedly offers some scope for 
unscrupulous manipulation), situated observation, and an analysis of excellent behav-
ior at a range of neurological levels offers the theoretical possibility of building up 
models of (domain-specific) excellence. By disclosing the strategies that virtuous exem-
plars use in fields such as futures trading, project management, strategic thinking, 
sports, and so on, and codifying these in a formal-rhetorical model of language use, 
one can not only promise to have extracted the essential features of what generations 

150 
Excellence
of scholars have puzzled over, but also to have done so in a format that renders them 
inherently transmissible. If complete, coherent, and consistent models of excellence 
in a given domain are not available, a process of divide-and-conquer permits the 
assimilation of strategies that reorder one ’ s mental syntax bit by bit. 
 With all the emphasis in the modeling industry on expertise and excellence, and 
the crossover in the corporate world between New Age and new money,  12 it is not 
surprising that NLP gurus experience some difficulty in encouraging the unconscious 
assimilation of excellence in the process by which clients  acquire excellence. After all, 
if the specific skill that a guru offers is a technique for remodeling people, almost at 
will, won ’ t clients take more of an interest in imitating the guru, the modeler, rather 
than the model role one is learning to play? These circumstances offer perfectly sen-
sible therapeutic and business reasons to encourage those thirsty for success, virtue, 
or wisdom to self-model: franchise opportunities, online dissemination, a healthy 
regard for reputation maintenance, among others. 
 Modeling excellence, which transforms habits of imitation into a process of knowl-
edge engineering for the design of virtue, requires an aptitude for prosopopoeia on 
the part of the modeler — an ability to speak (on) the part of the model. A model of 
excellence or exemplar (first party) cannot be transmitted from modeler (second party) 
to client (third party) if it has not already been assimilated by the second party. 
Imitation, a chameleonic capacity for mimicry, is here at the service of linguistically 
inculcated excellence, in which clarity of communication is imperative. You can ’ t  not 
communicate, cries the modeler, capturing any claim to ineffable giftedness within 
patterns of excellence and removing any obstacle or limit to the hopes and dreams 
one might weave into the magic of neurolinguistic modeling. It would be impossible 
to reproduce and hence exchange excellence were it not for the redundancies of the 
pattern that the model captures, an observation that brings neurolinguistic program-
ming into close proximity with the Turing machine. 
 Modeling as a constructive technique thus raises interesting possibilities. The more 
speculatively inclined strategist (and from the moment that we aim for, or are subject 
to, excellence, we are all strategists of one sort or another) might be inclined to further 
formalize virtue through a direct implementation in software.  “ Rewrite ” rules of the 
type that the NLP practitioner uses are already present in rudimentary form in inter-
face designs that reformat data input or provide list boxes for appropriate selection of 
vocabulary; and machines are considerably more flexible in assimilating models of 
excellence than imperfect, fallible humans, at least for as long as one ignores the faults 
and cracks in sociotechnical systems. The more skeptical strategist, by contrast, might 
ask what this incessant bid for excellence discloses — a postponement of the failure of 

Excellence 
151
reeducation with mind camps or brain spas fragmenting into franchises, perhaps? 
From the point of view of this collection of stratagems, both positions are correct; that 
is to say, their models are operative. 
 Lifelong Learning 
 There is nothing as beautiful as education, nothing so intimately wound up with the 
sense of meaningful life and an openness to the wonders of the universe. Education 
is both the foundation of independent thought and action and the means for acting 
in concert, through common understanding and reason. Education is the means by 
which we anticipate the past and learn from the future. For these reasons, among 
others, education lies at the core of any systematic implementation of evil media. 
Education is an affirmative  “ drawing out of what is there, ” a transductive aspect of 
becoming rather than a branding or molding of the individual subject. As such, it is 
not a tool or a cognitive prosthetic, plugged into an already established and self-suf-
ficient agent (although it may work by providing the chance for the illusion of such); 
rather, it works as an interweaving, a harmony. Instead of endless revision, it offers 
open-ended revisability. Withdrawn from the tendentially repressive mechanisms of 
the pastoral, shepherding order of education, it creates conditions in which people 
face the need to chart their own path. 
 Lifelong learning is a commitment of life force to this process, but it is also a means 
by which a life and its relation to knowledge may be arranged in logistical terms and 
developed. Whereas many specific stratagems need be used only sparingly, lifelong 
learning is a permanent commitment. This is not without consequence. 
 As a problem of becoming, learning is related to the stratagematics of love in the 
time-space of Bergsonian evolution, in that one can only undergo so many kinds of 
educational development simultaneously. And this problem of becoming can equally 
be related to a key question of computation as it negotiates between different kinds 
of abstraction, theoretical possibility, and the empiricism that rubs up against ques-
tions of material resources. A sense of the intractable insistence of infinity through 
and against finitude is key to stratagematic feeling and incisive thought. In its medi-
atic, computational form, we can provide instantiations of both. The Turing machine, 
as a working abstraction, establishes the possibility of infinitely long and complex 
computations made in finite steps. Beyond this threshold, which might be described 
as one of intractability, we encounter problems that are effectively incomputable by 
virtue of their complexity. Compared to the question of the infinite, however, the 
exigencies of the actual computations that must be made in the world require that 

152 
Excellence
we operate within limited timescales: the time it takes to crack a code, work out a 
profit – cost benefit, project and analyze the consequences of a move, render an object 
in time to meet a deadline. Such calculations may define the stratagematic and more 
broadly pragmatic horizon of the computability of a problem, pointing toward the 
importance of a judicious manipulation of resources when the insistence of infinite 
possibility opens up.  13 
 Integrating lifelong learning into questions of computation and computationalism 
brings into the picture the shifting nature of the intelligence that learning is supposed 
to inculcate. It highlights the thorny problem of the extent to which the educational 
calculus can afford to leave the details of the solutions to complex problems to take 
care of themselves. The possibilities of automated problem solving that Turing ’ s 
machine ushered in quickly found their limit when addressed by artificial intelligence 
programming envisaged as a kind of a priori investigation of the conditions of all 
possible cognition. 14 Programming every possible state that the automaton would be 
expected to process from the top down may have corresponded to a pervasive world-
historical fantasy of control,  15 but it left machines without the initiative to improvise 
when the commands from on high were ambiguous. Hence the interest in the sche-
matization of machine learning processes explored by both earlier and more recent 
forms of electronic brain research (with the caesura between them produced by the 
switch to symbolic AI). Training a neural network in a form of distributed cognition 
might or might not yield a solution to a problem that the programmer has no hope 
of understanding, but it will produce machines that can sometimes take the initiative 
for themselves.  “ Dis-organizing ” education so that learning is accomplished along the 
way by a flexibly adaptive brain, rather than programming axioms for all the moves 
in advance, facilitates an encounter with problems that cannot readily be parsed by 
a theorematic intelligence. 
 In network analysis, such difficulties are analogous to the development of  “ intrac-
table networks ” that do not correspond to the clean lines of power laws but stage layer 
after layer of honeycombed and fissiparous structures that are too irregularly assem-
bled and hence less readily computable. Similar problems are posed by the develop-
ment of massive, permanently  “ spammy neighborhoods ” on the Internet that exist 
in the regimes of ordering created by the operations of search engines solely to exploit 
them by means of automatically generated links. The human brain and the learning 
processes it takes part in match this disorderly matrix rather well, existing as legacy 
systems, historical meshes of collapsing and residue structures of interlinkage, pro-
duced in real time by vast numbers of actors responding both predictably and unpre-
dictably to stimuli and interaction. 

Excellence 
153
 Thus education exists among a class of problems linking complexity, expenditure 
of resources and capacities, computability, and the activities of humans and computers 
in operations over time. Education emphasizes the diagram of responsibility that it 
draws. Rather than being a problem that tends toward equalization of agency across 
a network, it is one that is located in the learning, self-nurturing subject. But whereas 
intractability in network analysis leads to problem solving in probabilistic terms, in 
this type of problem, only one answer is necessary: the responsible citizen. 
 A need likely exists for a stratagem for the analysis and allocation of agency in 
relations. Such a stratagem might explore the sophisticated virtues of functionalism. 
But creating conditions in which citizens achieve responsibility for their choices and 
educational investments, allowing them better to act in their own interests, voiding 
in turn the interests of others for such investments entails more than a technical 
description of human operations; it must also draw on resources such as feeling, the 
becoming properly speculative of hitherto merely social capital,  16 and the means by 
which reliable care, and opportunities to reward self-motivating aspiration, can be 
delivered at point of demand. 
 Under a classical understanding of the place of education in society, the biography 
of a citizen might look like this: birth, education, work, species reproduction, work, 
retirement, death. 
 Under conditions of lifelong learning, it is likely to look more like this: birth, 
trauma, therapy, training, internship, recruitment, role-playing, training, deployment, 
trauma, therapy, retraining, deployment, therapy, death. 
 These two selections have undergone many kinds of simplification and work here 
only for purposes of illustration. They may differ in terms of the probable interpola-
tion of gender, occupation, and the extent and quality of service, among other 
things — trauma, for instance, here being understood to be interchangeable with 
species reproduction. However, the main difference between the two rows of instruc-
tions is not the specific kind of events they include but the greater intensity and 
variety of knowledge-acquisition events that feature in the latter biography. We can 
also say that the latter exhibits a greater amount of repetition of the same category 
or kind of learning event. In the manner of a serial offender, an individual can undergo 
related processes several times in a lifetime and achieve higher levels of learning 
incrementally over the course of a biography. But what also changes in these examples 
is that work itself disappears as a separate, and even notionally separable, term, becom-
ing part of the learning process itself as opportunities for education and reeducation 
themselves weave in and out of work. Work should be understood to be consonant 
and coterminous with the now perpetually examined life. 

154 
Excellence
 Learning is inherently mediatic, a theater where the self encounters its own becom-
ing and engages in relays of value with the materials, media, organizations, and net-
works by which it is engaged and evaluated. Equally, therapeutics become core to the 
conception of learning as part of self-improvement, providing an upgrade in attitude, 
knowledge, or theoretical orientation. Health loses its simple emphasis on mechanical 
good function to acknowledge and assimilate a wider, more multidimensional sense 
of well-being. When work is coterminous with life as an ongoing educational process, 
the habits that a person acquires in one biographical segment threaten the possibility 
of adapting flexibly to the next segment. Emphasizing education in relation to health 
also offers a suitable means of devolving power. Thus lifelong learning operates via a 
double movement: first, the interiorization, the claiming for the self, of what was 
previously the work of the state, church, and family; and second, an opening up of 
possibilities to other kinds of actors and nonstandard learning events. 
 As a grammar that links events, process management, choice and decision struc-
tures, and knowledge, lifelong learning falls within the purview of evil media; but it 
also gains importance by the way in which it is delivered, by its operation as a media 
form. Education and training systems, such as virtual learning environments, testing 
zones, and brain-gym games, not to mention improving music played into the womb, 
are just some of the ways in which assessment and grading can be brought into a 
wider range of life experiences and integrated into myriad informatic circuits. Linking 
learning to testing through more, and more tightly looped, feedback mechanisms, 
real-time ratings plug-ins, and so on, in this way affords the crucial possibility of 
introducing distributed competition into the learning process. Algorithms used in 
processes of machine learning — Teuvo Kohonen ’ s  “ self-organizing maps, ” for exam-
ple — use a form of competitive learning to solve problems, and a formalistic indicator 
of how this might operate. The problem that the self-organizing map tackles is one 
of ensuring that a complex set of data inputs can be mapped onto a simpler, more 
readily calculable two-dimensional network of nodes. Nodes in the network, initially 
equipped with random weightings, are assessed by their degree of proximity to input 
data; the node that approximates most closely to the input data is selected as the 
winner; and other nodes with topological proximity to the winner are updated to 
respond to input in a similar way. Through round after round of successive compari-
sons to inputs, one ends up with a plastic, flexibly adaptive network.  17 Arbitrary 
problems, rewards for the winner, nudging and imitation: the computational formal-
ism points here to an abstract and abstractable logic of autonomous learning. As such, 
the minuscule inculcations of competition and rivalry and the encouragement to 
imitate, with a gently nudged weighting to push one way or another, can operate in 

Excellence 
155
a distributed fashion. The world is your classroom! As part of a generalized drive to 
perpetual testing, the logic of the self-organized map introduces a consciousness of a 
self responsible for one ’ s cognitive states and furnishes a ready explanation for failure 
that can no longer be blamed on the educational system. 
 While education can be thought of as an investment, it is never simply that, or, as 
could be said of many investments, it does not correspond well to such a categoriza-
tion. Human capital is also a form of consumption, of experience, of the self, and for 
this reason, lifelong learning is a commitment to a mode of life that never ceases to 
update itself through inquiry. But it can also be delivered by efficient means: in 
workplace-based packages or day release schemes; as voluntary or compulsory retrain-
ing for the unemployed; or (for those who have been traumatized or disabled) as 
occupational therapy, work as medicine. A self-directed path of personal growth is 
equally possible, as is self-directed retribution for criminals. In the context of increas-
ingly responsive and flexible work, the delivery of learning paths grows in importance. 
Lifelong learning does not require that skills, aptitudes, or ideas become redundant as 
new ones are added; it merely recognizes their place in a complex adaptive system. 
While some may die out, the opportunity for learning continues, and the ways in 
which it can adapt and survive persist. 
 Be Artistic 
 At the same time as logic, order, transparency, norms, and regularity have great value, 
they should never stand in the way of the free flow of tactics. Here it is useful to 
recount Saul Alinsky ’ s appeal to his fellow community organizers to keep a priori 
rationalizations of action at arm ’ s length and to follow one ’ s nose when generating a 
campaign.  18 For Alinsky, this is the seal of power, the ability to drive reality through 
a freestyle pragmatics while analyzing, attacking, and disrupting prevailing power 
structures. Driven as much by a lusty curiosity, the feel of an event turning from one 
state into another, as by the imperatives of justice, this lesson can also be learned in 
different ways. In the context of media, what is of interest is the way in which such 
drives couple with formally describable systems. In Alinsky ’ s case, such coupling of 
drive to system may happen through intermediating mechanisms such as ostensive 
moralities that can easily resolve into good or bad, or matters of technical or legal 
compliance. These may be made handleable, in the case of activism on a corporate 
body, at a further remove through means such as publicity, shareholding, or boycott, 
but other means link more directly to formal structuration. The question Alinsky 
poses, however, is important: how do the irrational, the messy, and the unpredictable 

156 
Excellence
key into formalizations? And how do these in turn produce new grammars of the 
unexpected and the wild, rational (rather than irrational) exuberance? Management 
writers in the muscular style of Tom Peters return to this question as a matter of 
process, but it can also be treated as a question of a deeper level of formalization.  19 
 The generative capacity of interlocking and mutually stimulating formalizations of 
process can bring its own kind of imagination and creative invention. In the use of 
both relational structures such as databases and user-facing interfaces, this is some-
thing to be remembered. To let the free flow of unanswerable logic concatenate into 
its ontogenetic state represents something other than the spook ’ s repertoire of ambigu-
ity and shades of interpretation. The clarity of a well-placed formalism leaves the divi-
nation of such gray mists for the bluntness of fact, category, and rule, something well 
exemplified in the following pre-database example from the forced labor camps 
described in Varlam Shalamov ’ s  Kolyma Tales :  “ Transfers from one shift to another 
were always made to catch the clock ’ s hour hand so that the working day was not lost 
and the prisoner could not receive a few extra hours of rest. ” 20 Rectitude has its own 
rewards, and the invention of this rule meant extracting a grueling double shift every 
time a change in duties occurred. While this is perhaps an anomalously human-scale 
example, it does offer a gratifying register for the operations of abstract dynamics made 
infrastructural and oblivious. 
 However, imposing a logical reading on reality tends to reduce operations to the 
mechanistic, losing sensitivity to the individual case or, more systemically, forcing 
behaviors through a too generally applied grammar. But before we look at this aspect 
of personalized service, it is worth examining the question of margins established by 
the story from Kolyma. As cultural theory so readily reminds us, the most interesting 
activity often occurs in the margin. Imagine the creativity involved in precisely locat-
ing the sweet spot between the probability of an event or an illness occurring and the 
profitable unease that can be mobilized sufficiently to sell an insurance product. 
Protection against the possibility of unlikely but costly leaks in particular pipes for 
homeowners, insurance to cover narrowly defined kinds of breast cancer in young 
women who have credit cards, additional warranty on electrical goods sold at the 
point of purchase extending to just before the point of failure: the margin between 
yield and outlay can open up hitherto inaccessible universes of doubt and discomfort 
and the financial transactions that can be offered up as prayers against their occur-
rence. But the simple linking of insurance to unease is only one initial domain in 
which such dynamics may be launched. As the founders of a popular data-mining 
service note in a paper setting out their problematic in terms of academic information 

Excellence 
157
retrieval research,  “ Usage was important to us because we think some of the most 
interesting research will involve leveraging the vast amounts of usage data that is 
available from modern web systems. ” 21 When this project of leveraging identifiable 
patterns in data couples with the margins of financial speculation, we are able to 
witness some of the most powerful abstract imaginings currently synthesizable. There 
is a race between the fabulations of capital and the ability of technicians to deliver 
new product, a race that is at the same time mutually stimulating, a structural coupling 
of phantasmatic numbers and yields that may yet become concrete or do not need to 
do so because the operative usefulness is in their possibility. Mapping relations between 
identifiable elements of data, how those data may or may not have directly or proba-
bilistically attachable relations to identities, human bodies, and their actual or future 
performance, the carbon digestion of forests, user-generated properties, (subprime) 
housing, the circulations of goods or other data, and recursively to other speculative 
vehicles and their future values, ownerships, identification, and functions become 
crucial. Although these proliferating data remain indexically linked to the entities 
from which they are abstracted, the multidimensional feature space into which they 
are mapped forms the basis of a new landscape in which such margins may be navi-
gated and enjoyed. 
 While a user might experience such a system as a  “ personalized ” service, systems of 
this kind are also treated as data-yielding entities, which to meet the requirements 
of database normalization are analytically or procedurally disassembled into a sequence 
of predicates without a subject. As such, their personalization is merely a ruse. What 
we see, rather, is the technical individuation of another entity generated out of myriad 
capta, traces, correspondences, likelihoods, and records. Gathered into  “ buckets ” 22 of 
data of the same category, these may, by a sequence of Boolean expressions, be linked, 
refined, and queried so as to be reassembled as a different set of qualities and features 
or, once those that are desirable and those that are undesirable have been assayed, to 
filter out any entities of the latter category. Just as for artificial intelligence researchers 
formalization is a means of  “ freeing their work from the unruliness and imprecision 
of vernacular language, ” 23 so data yielded from more organic or holistically experi-
enced and thus uninterpretable life stories can be a means of bringing meaning to 
peoples ’ lives. To be artistic, to work creatively with the generative powers of data 
fields, means to allow formalizations off the leash, to feel them biting into and shaping 
reality. Here creativity becomes not simply the domain of traditional intuition but 
what is traditionally considered its opposite, the meticulous attention to — and gaming 
of — rules. 

158 
Excellence
 Role Play 
 Prerequisite to the subtle facilitation of life that the smooth, even friction-free opera-
tions of the contemporary economy appeal to is a stable distribution of, and accom-
modation to, the playing of roles. While in earlier times knowing your place was a 
productive virtue, now a more flexible mode is required. Articles of social and eco-
nomic governance are still predicated on a stabilization of actors and entities, but they 
are more dynamically allocated. Politics depends on an acceptance of roles and a 
calculus of the ways in which they can be played against one another (you can be 
voter, citizen, employee, employer, parent, child, taxpayer, nationalist, immigrant): 
those who belong must have at least one part, and politics has little room for those 
who don ’ t. In the formation of the nation, for instance, the expiatory operations of 
exclusion heap a heteroclite and never consistent set of determinations on specific 
roles in the scripts of national or other kinds of belonging. The political distribution 
of roles becomes a more complicated issue when parliament also becomes — in theory, 
if not quite in practice — a parliament of things. In recent sociology, roles and actors 
multiply, demanding more of a focus on the implication of nonhumans, such as 
computers, in the operations and dynamics of power. This in turn increases the impor-
tance of crucial but much ignored devices like scripts in the configuration of the 
generalized dramaturgy of the social.  24 
 As part of such, scripts are vital to any playing of roles. A script is a mediating 
device that draws together theatrical, psychological, and machinic roles. Scripts shape 
the way in which components in a software system interact with each other, framing 
the parameters of behavior  within a computer toward its outside, or iterating into those 
carried out  with computational media,  in human – computer symbiosis, to behaviors 
that, enabled and entrained, move backward and forward  between computers, people, 
and other agents. Scripts equally afford certain kinds of relations between human 
agents, giving the social a dramatic coefficient open to all sorts of stage redirections. 
 Not all scripts are written, of course, and a sort of circular relationship even exists 
between scripts and actors (you need the one for the other, and the other for the one). 
Not every role is played with equivalent levels of conscious awareness, good faith, or 
algorithmic finality, but each generates a dance of expectant and preemptive behavior 
acting on behavior. Roles are defined and played so that tasks are scheduled and 
executed. A machine executes its task with less bad faith but with less scope for impro-
visation, perhaps, than a  gar ç on de caf é , Sartre ’ s exemplary instance of someone playing 
at being. 25 This dance of expectation and preemption implies both the opening up of 
movements and changes and the engineering of new requirements to smooth the 

Excellence 
159
transition of a script from one component to another. Scripts mediate and are medi-
ated, shaping roles that act on roles: they are prepositional operators that regularize 
actions by positioning actors in relations of point and counterpoint to each other. 
Some roles, and they are numerous, require tighter scripting than others: less a sketch 
for movements than a direct ordering that becomes more prescriptive and constrain-
ing as the role is less desirable, less easy. To put all of this in a slightly different way, 
the heterogeneous world of scripts is a world in which the automation of role play is 
a central concern. 
 The importance of the playing of roles in social and cultural life is not a recent 
discovery, and oratorical virtue sometimes depends on playing a part. Erving Goffman ’ s 
 The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life thematized the dramaturgical quality of collec-
tive life at the start of the 1960s, and more recently, researchers in the field of artificial 
intelligence have theorized the scripted quality of cognitive behavior as a prelude to 
the production of more intelligent machines.  26 
 However, in the domain of machines, this thematizing of scripts, roles, and plans 
presumes but ignores the existence and effectiveness of a more mundane configuration 
of roles, which makes a technological form a friend of the family, an accepted feature 
in the office, or a reliable component of everyday life. Intelligent behavior in the 
wrong context can seem like idiocy. One should not, then, ignore the scripts — batch-
processed files of command line instructions, for example — that set machines, or even 
applications, going as autonomous agents in the first place, that configure them so as 
not to overly destabilize existing distributions of roles and responsibilities, that con-
figure functions to refine and smooth a purpose. Imagine how tiresome it would be 
(and how difficult to maintain an appropriately flattering hierarchy of relations) if, 
with every new application, you had to copy each file and register each setting 
required to make the software work, by hand. There would be no intelligent medium 
responsive to  “ your ” needs and whims.  27 The roles of master and slave would be 
reversed as an entire subdomain so gray it blends into the background would spring 
to the fore in all its incomprehensible, numerological glory. 
 It is hardly surprising that such an oversight has developed. Pure and impure: a 
tacit hierarchy within the world of computer programming and software develop-
ment, for example, has long differentiated between programming and scripting; script-
ing is often looked down on because of its involvement with the messiness of pragmatic 
 “ real-world ” considerations.  28 In the axiology of programmer lore,  “ script kiddies ” 
with their cut ’ n ’ paste code never quite have the elite training or the refined ethics 
of the genuine hacker. This hierarchy corresponds to a more general sniffiness about 
the lack of authenticity conveyed by scripting: we suppress our inner actors and 

160 
Excellence
pretend not to like scripts, even if the roles they assign us provide comfort, warmth, 
and familiarity. 
 What pleasure we can find in taking up and playing a role (in every sense of the 
verb). Already, given the substitutability that it implies, the notion of role-playing 
offers the disjoining of parts, a little bit of shadow, the opportunity for hide-and-seek, 
of not quite being where the explicit role requires. The superposing of multiples roles 
and the conflict between the different universes of reference they unfold can in turn 
generate problems of psychosocial dissonance, the chance for a little art or poetry, or 
the chance to exploit the possibilities for multiple flip-flopping between, or confusion 
of, the roles an actor is scripted to play.  29 By flouting stable, well-configured expecta-
tions — exploited mercilessly by the hacker, slipping deviant commands into the 
myriad indeterminacies of a machine ’ s operation — an uncertain shift of dynamics can 
be engineered. Watch closely as the mask slips. 
 Scripting can entail a machine simulation of a sequence of actions that a user might 
carry out within an application: the macro written for a spreadsheet encodes the 
expectations of the application, sometimes without the user making any explicit deci-
sion at all. Or a script might be run on the installation of a piece of software, setting 
the parameters that define the  “ personalization ” of an application (it is  your amanu-
ensis). The growing importance of scripting languages (Perl, Tcl, JavaScript, Ruby, etc.) 
in the world of new media indicates a move away from the image of building purpose-
ful applications from a tabula rasa and toward a reconfiguration of specific compo-
nents, an integration and reuse of parts into a functional whole. This is a pragmatic 
problematics of intelligence, not a theorematic systematization. 
 Roles are especially critical in an environment in which one depends on the auto-
mation of activity. Script actions to create behavior: this is the requisite formula for 
the generation of algorithmic subjects, for agents and agency that can be batch pro-
cessed, shaped and scaled according to a strategic game plan, a set of measurable aims 
and objectives. You can only customize the operational parameters of a program if its 
application is certain. But automation, like the endless flexibilization and instability 
of social life, the move toward precarity, leads to a greater complexity in the distribu-
tion and configuration of roles, the growth of contention problems, and the dizzying 
shift from one position to another. A theory of the transaction costs of subjectivation 
seems to be required. Scripts provide a ready glue to cross this gap in the meantime. 
 The play of roles thus requires deftness and cunning. It ’ s not that in themselves 
they need require anything particular or complicated; indeed, the script itself may be 
minimal (laugh if a joke is told, vote when an election is called, moan as an orgasm 
seems due). Indeed, they can make the whole thing more involving, if not more grati-

Excellence 
161
fying, but as the universes of reference they suppose multiply, the coordinates that 
give a performance its consistency can become confused, and sometimes amusingly 
so. Historical layer piles on historical layer: the call-center employee in India, with 
the exaggerated English verbal tics of the colonial subaltern, has the scripted phone 
manner of the helpful servant with the impeccable accent. Sly civility is mobilized as 
a means and motive for incommunication.  30 
 Roles shift with the universe of reference one finds oneself in: a personal computer 
can be an accountant (you need a pay raise), an informant about the world outside 
(you are a floating voter), a substitute partner in a failing marriage (onanist), a desired 
object in child – parent conflict. The plurality of possible roles is large for both human 
and machine. Comparative analysis suggests that the computer sets the standard. Not 
only does it not grumble overmuch about being reskilled, but it can also switch set-
tings with greater ease and speed than you — provided you remember to tell it what 
to do (don ’ t forget to log out). This ability to shift between roles, to recognize the 
scales at which a role operates, is crucial to avoiding the infelicity of performance 
failure.  31 The intractable smirk of self-satisfaction is at times a critical parameter for 
the role of CEO in certain boardrooms, as might also be bonhomie, briskness, the 
ability to bite throats — though the smirk may not work before a committee of public-
ity-hungry congressmen under the klieg lights of network television. Some elements 
of a role may be drastically altered as they scale up and scale out, or not, as the case 
may be. Project your voice; project your face, emote; feel the depth of my distribution. 
It is not surprising, then, that techniques such as neurolinguistic programming or 
role-playing, which are designed to help in the modeling of new roles, appeal to flex-
ibility. When not uniquely about adaptation to the labor market, flexibility might be 
thought a properly sophisticated virtue, an exemplary form of excellence in commu-
nication. The winner is the person who finds it easiest to build up  “ rapport ” with 
others, with the expectant audience, used to the machine-theater of roles that you, 
by contrast, might want to shift or modify.  32 
 Managing roles and the play to which they give rise becomes more difficult in a 
distributed environment. Controlling the message when the medium is not just mul-
tiplied or dispersed through networks but is an organizing element of the execution 
of strategy illustrates this clearly. So, following the tightly prescribed rules of military 
engagement, a U.S. soldier opens fire on Iraqi civilians from a helicopter gunship: 
scripted perception.  33 As he does so, another script and another role kick in — the 
conditioned reflex fingers of the late-night gamer playing the role of a marine with 
his buddies in an online environment. He ’ s a first-person shooter ratcheting up the 
points before kicking back with pizza or a spliff: confusion of roles, telescoping of 

162 
Excellence
distances, blurring of scales. Rules of engagement flicker in and out of memory; roles 
move up and down the chain of command.  “ You shoot, I ’ ll talk. ” The azimuth limits 
of interpretation from inside a turret script what is seen that was never there; non-
combatants grow guns, in turn producing the opportunity for the scripts of the press 
conference and the acronym-rich jargons of military paperwork. 
 Conflicts and dissonances generated by the multiplication of roles are not just a 
matter for the competent authorities. Life being what it is, a full appreciation of what 
a role consists of must itself be assembled from an extended network of mediators: 
the narrative possibilities of the script unfold from chat rooms, DVDs, social media 
groups.  “ Isn ’ t this what fathers are supposed to do? ” the father asks his teenage son 
as they go to the football match.  “ No, ” comes the reply, sifting from the search results 
for  “ father + son + bonding. ” Within the home, a role is organized around a sort of 
virtual  “ stub ” script, a reduced or minimal piece of code that can be used to initiate 
a process, for which the bulk of the work is done elsewhere, or as a placeholder for 
some routine yet to be written. The narrative possibilities for an actor can be severely 
constrained by the network. The stability of roles thus comes into conflict with their 
rapid multiplication and overlap. The script is what patches roles together, allowing 
them to be cut and pasted from one job to the next. 
 Psychic Ergonomics 
 The hopes and passions people weave into a gadget, a media system, or a computa-
tional assemblage have no essential limit, but equally there is no easy way to know 
in advance what will work either. This is a crucial factor to acknowledge in a stratage-
matic approach that, as Terry Winograd says of Google, embraces the capacity to 
declare,  “ Here ’ s what we hope will be interesting. Let ’ s find out. Let ’ s try it. ” 34 This 
empirical dimension allows Google to remain spontaneous but equipped, able to open 
up new operations in beta and move on when they don ’ t catch. One of the problems 
for operating in a stratagematic mode, though, lies in how one might be able to gain 
a degree of direct manipulation over the conditions in which one operates. To what 
extent can one couple responsiveness, the ability to try something out, with the opera-
tion of positions of mastery? The stratagematic is not exhausted by the tactical mode 
of thinking on your feet. It also implies the ability to operate across scales, driving 
things from above. 
 One of the ways in which such traction can be gained is through psychic ergonom-
ics. That is to say, rather than attempting to engineer users, one works to provide the 
scaffolding around and through which the user ’ s fears, enthusiasms, and delights may 

Excellence 
163
grow and flourish. Psychic ergonomics therefore relates to the stratagems of facilita-
tion but emphasizes the emotional and cognitive aspect of such a gambit. As such it 
can usefully be understood through an account of media gadgets. In his lucid analysis 
of the cosmology of objects, Jean Baudrillard describes the functionality of gadgets as 
being merely subjective, objects that exist primarily for their ability to elicit delighted 
fascination.  35 While in Baudrillard ’ s account gadgets have a relatively minor role as 
the creations of eccentrics, such a quality may also serve, at a different moment, to 
bring them closer to the heart of contemporary matters. 
 As propositions, gadgets are unlimited in the degree of association that may be 
yielded as they come into conjuncture with other elements in the world. They do not 
easily give in to a retentive suck on the pus of experience or a description of the very 
capacity of perceptibility and naming out of a thing; they are too manifold. Such a 
willful overinvestment in an object, whether of a jug or an interface, is simply one of 
a class of approaches that calls for manipulation and not an inherent path to the truth 
of any essence. Staring at a gadget, feeling it, and testing the means by which it may 
riddle one ’ s nerves with ideas are means of garnering inspiration, not of harvesting 
essence or stockpiling reserves of insight or conjugating cloying verbifications. 
 Among the universe of gadgets, the influencing machines described by Victor Tausk 
are mechanisms reported by psychiatric patients as able to control their thoughts and 
senses, consisting of mystical and obscure components known through the populariza-
tion of science and technology.  36 In Melanie Klein ’ s terms, these are internal objects, 
mental concepts, which, as the particular class called influencing machines, are in 
turn able to steer and dominate others.  37 In D.   W. Winnicott ’ s reading of Klein, the 
internal object is also entangled in its relation to other registers of material objects 
that are not simply made of thought but can be caressed, licked, held, sucked, pulled 
at, and bitten.  38 Such objects exist between the child and the world, extending the 
sensoriality of the child in its transitions to the outside, and are also transitional in 
the sense that the thickness of engagement with them passes as other developments 
occur, and if they do not undergo  “ perversion. ” Winnicott ’ s work, which has a strong 
feel for the implications of the partial, the imperfect, and the  “ good-enough, ” is a 
pragmatics — it draws up a means for recognizing growth patterns that interweave the 
sensorial with materiality of other kinds, operating at other scales. 
 We find a wider sense of such scaffolding in the thinkers and experimentalists 
developing the  “ expanded-mind ” arguments in cognitive science, in which a cogni-
tive system is seen to be a combination of agencies and resources that combine to 
yield thought, whether or not all of them are encased in a single thick coating of 
skin. 39 Such work contains multiple differentiations along several lines of emphasis 

164 
Excellence
(functionalist, phenomenological, information-centric, bio-centric, etc.)  40 and can also 
be usefully coupled to means by which the generation and circulation of cognitive 
processes are turned into processes beyond the simple phenomenological scale of the 
individuated nervous system. A cluster of arguments in the discussion of cognition 
expanded beyond the brain emphasizes the storage and processing of information as 
being the key point at which cognition can be registered, information having a quality 
of sameness that can be registered and measured by familiar means as more or less 
constant across those that share it. More problematic is the measurement of phenom-
ena that evade figuration as solely informational, such as emotion. Numerous means 
exist — from  “ experience design ” to torture — that promise the engineering of emotion, 
and its more or less predictable formation, but they too remain simply means of 
loading the probabilities toward the achievement of a specific result. 
 A stratagematic implication of the expanded-mind argument, especially in relation 
to gadgets, is that it emphasizes not the individual cognitive assemblage — that of one 
expanded or contracted mind — but multiple minds, inhabiting scaffolds that provide 
associational frameworks. Minds with waxing and waning boundaries composed by 
persons, gadgets gorged on services, by apps that lock data into delivery, and by the 
developing habits of different modes of attentiveness and fidgeting. Here, following 
the thread of the possibility of emotion as a category in expanded-mind theory, we 
can turn to literature on the management of software engineering, with its emphasis 
on aligning desire, expectation, exertion, and communication with a production 
schedule. The more that emotional assets are incorporated into the management 
structure, the more such approaches risk yielding substantial multimodal glitches. 
Such glitches can be as simple as those that occur when an argument comes out of 
nowhere in a conversation, something that neither person can provide an account of 
but is engendered by the linguistic difficulty of the retrospectively untraceable mis-
understanding, often risking the loss or deletion of significant emotional assets. More 
substantially, as exemplified by methods that aim to maintain a state of excitement, 
of  “ team building, ” or of morale or esprit, emotion can move from project asset to 
managerial infrastructure. To truly work, an anatomy of emotion and its technical 
affordances should avoid a simple functionalism. As if in response to such a need, the 
gadget provides a technical form that is able to mediate directly between business plan 
and the tenderness of the soul. As such, returning to the thought we began with, the 
capacity of a gadget to exemplify human ideals has no essential limit. 
 Here the question of cognitive scaffold can be of use. As a scaffold, gadgetry is keyed 
into release schedules, upgrades, features, new models, new visions, the curious charm 
of obsolescence. But the nature of the gadget is not simply one of users being conned 

Excellence 
165
into buying something that is guaranteed to tank a month before their contract runs 
out or that otherwise exhibits the transience of a lettuce leaf under a heat lamp. This 
is only a very thinly sliced aspect of the complex pleasures a gadget may find itself 
sustaining. The question is therefore how to sense the shifting tensions and coagula-
tions that array themselves around the scaffolding of the gadget and the larger struc-
tures in which it integrates the user, and how to mobilize them in the right way. 
 When this happens, even when carried out from a position of relative topsight, the 
user experiences a certain excitement, a pleasure in the moment at which something 
exceeds his or her ability to understand how it works, but just feels right. At this 
distinctive point, the yield of the extended mind couples with the yearnings and pas-
sions of underlings, whose human factors synergize, beyond the simple state of user 
interface, and converge in a phase shift at which cognitive scaffolds give onto prolif-
erating markets and new opportunities. At such a sweet spot, there is no need to follow 
a particular aesthetic line of the gadget. Indeed, the more that gadgets proliferate and 
diversify, the more virtualities they are able to mobilize and render into tangible 
imaginaries, the more able they are to provide metalevels of transitional scaffolding 
for new opportunities to grow. Such capacities can already be seen in the general 
tendency of gadgets to go beyond the typology that we sketch in the following 
paragraph. 
 Within the domain of consumer-grade computing, users have a primary choice. 
Either you can choose a coupling of premium levels of specification, customer lock-in, 
and an interaction grammar of glossy rectitude emphasizing an integrated, neutral, 
and restrained palette of functions with unprecedented levels of self-consistency, a 
grandiloquent repertoire of flourishes, and an emphasis on a visual grammar of satu-
rated crispness; or you can opt for a more baroque, chaotic, and unsystematized stack 
of irreconciled tones, shapes, functions, choice trees, and microdramas of openings 
and closings, animated sequences of savings, dialing and, recording, held together by 
wizards and help files. Either of these may in turn be trumped by a rejection of the 
treatment of files as distinct objects rather than as data, which precludes profound 
computational behaviors, requiring verbose movements of the hand rather than the 
expert selection of functions and the promise of total customization and the iron-man 
rigor of perpetual bug fixing. Here users know that at a certain point they will experi-
ence a failure of desire, an unrequited symbiosis with the machine that simply fuels 
their ardor and dedication to feeding the development cycle. It is the correct choice. 
Last, for the rare few for whom the world is on its way to amplifying and embroider-
ing their vision of life as a ramified version of existence on the inside of an infinitely 
expandable Faberg é egg, the luxuriousness of too much detailed information (a pocket 

166 
Excellence
sundial that also includes an astrolabe, barometer, tidal predictor, powerful market 
analytics, and, with a minimum of flips and swooshes of the user interface, the imme-
diate purchase and download of new features in a lasting heirloom of quality crafts-
manship with up-to-the-atomically-measured-second features set in a bejeweled yet 
sober casing) is the only reasonable option. 
 Each of these modes of the gadget is nuanced by other kinds of triggers and idioms, 
the rhetoric of the rigor of engineering, which appears to yield to no design impera-
tive but the laws of mathematics and nature, resolved into a kind of robustly milled 
gunmetal UNIX, or by the figures of users, such as the power user, hacker, or other 
demographic hallucination and concomitant script position, whose newness yet famil-
iarity keeps marketeers in a state of heightened galvanic skin response. Within such 
a context, the founding paradigm of direct manipulation that established much of the 
interface work of personal computing is multiplied by a sense of the exponential scaf-
folding of new cognitive networks.  41 Here, where  “ you don ’ t even think about it, you 
just do, ” 42 a stratagematic question in psychic ergonomics simply turns on the art of 
how to keep the populations of machinic junkies mobilized by the gadgets exacerbat-
ing the proliferation of the cognitive scaffold safely within the constraints of their 
own skin, avoiding their becoming influencing machines of their own. 
 Optimize Stupidity Flow 
 Stupidity does not sit on one side and Intelligence on the other. They ’ re like Vice and Virtue — it 
takes an awfully shrewd mind to tell them apart. 
 — Gustave Flaubert  43 
 A difficult, and somewhat delicate, issue for any group, organization, or institution, 
particularly in a world that is characterized as a  “ knowledge economy, ” is how one 
tackles stupidity. Stupidity is to be distinguished from a momentary absence of knowl-
edge: with strategic intent, ignorance can be tackled once a representational structure 
and an epistemology have established how and what it is to know something. Stupidity, 
by contrast, has to do with the conditions of thinking as such and is not only com-
patible with knowledge in some of its forms but often indistinguishable from intel-
ligence (as debates over the existence or otherwise of artificial intelligence might 
suggest). 
 However, these philosophical issues should not obscure the issue at hand, where 
the question is one of the risks and opportunities that the existence of stupidity poses 
to the exercise of power. Research on contemporary bureaucratic practices has brought 

Excellence 
167
to light the strategic — or  antistrategic  — role of a will to ignorance in particular kinds 
of institutions. Linsey McGoey ’ s work has shown that, in the drug industry in particu-
lar, ignorance is mobilized as a means of circumventing regulation, and the shadowy 
role of nonknowledge in shaping organizational strategies is a widely drawn-on font 
of innovations.  44 But the functioning of stupidity, by contrast, is a better-kept secret, 
difficult to bring to light unless one accepts that an image of thought is prevalent in 
much discussion of organizations and in organizational practice, which assumes that 
thinking has some sort of a priori affinity with truth and goodwill — the idea that in 
their natural state, people are oriented toward the truth. It is an image that tends to 
confuse stupidity and error, implying that removing the errors that people make in 
their work is enough to guarantee intelligence. Even management theory — which one 
might imagine would seek to better attune itself to the dimly sensed operations of 
stupidity — cannot help but assume that the rational structuring of organizations is 
enough to protect them against the potential for stupidity that the drive to automa-
tion promotes, or indeed the fact that stupidity  “ can bodysnatch intelligence, disguise 
itself, or, indeed, participate in the formation of certain types of intelligence with 
which it tends to be confused. ” 45 One can tolerate the weaknesses of  bureaucratic 
rationality for as long one continues to perceive it as bureaucratic  rationality . And if 
that is not possible, refiguring the organization as a cybernetic system provides some 
assurance that if people aren ’ t thinking, at least they aren ’ t thinking  optimally . 
 But stupidity is a delicate and difficult issue to tackle, not least because of the 
immense capital invested in knowledge and the practical imperative that our sophis-
tication places on always being right. Becoming better attuned to stupidity requires a 
better understanding of how it is generated, what it is associated with, what effects it 
gives rise to, and what risks it exposes one to. This is a crucial prerequisite to the 
further problem of tackling, finessing, or leveraging stupidity. 
 Research in the field of distributed cognition has explored some of the subtle 
mechanisms by which ensembles of people and devices are organized to accomplish 
sophisticated cognitive tasks. Navigating a ship, for example, requires successful coor-
dination of, and cooperation between, a complex set of elements — actors, roles, 
gadgets, competences, and so on.  46 It is not difficult to see the scope for failure built 
into such ensembles, and how communication failures between the elements of such 
ensembles might result in erroneous cognition (the ship hits a rock, for example). But 
the distributed approach has hitherto tended to privilege relatively stable situated 
actions with well-defined and prescribed goals as its focus and is not as good at casting 
light on the less frequently acknowledged, and much less formal, operation of myriad 
objects, techniques, and practices,  assemblages of variable dimensions, with equally 

168 
Excellence
variable connections beyond the explicitly constituted framework of the organization 
or group. 
 The tacit, the implicit, the unspoken, and the secret gather on the fringes of the 
known and acknowledged aspects of organizational life, with its panoply of explicit 
mental and material structures. The humble document, for example, in its erratic 
circulation, the fabled water cooler, the gents ’ toilet before a meeting, the security 
guard with the spare office key, the regular drink in the pub on a Thursday night, 
out-of-hours text messaging, scripted kludges to stop a server from collapsing: all of 
these are just as important as the formal e-mails, policy documents, position papers, 
minuted meetings, qualifications, and archives. Some of this might be called  “ articula-
tion work, ” 47 but even a concept like articulation work will not tell us much about 
the occult nature of the group dynamics that informal practices sustain, the entire 
world of the  “ subconversation ” or the  “ perceptual politics ” of the meeting. And when 
an organization operates globally, in the twenty-four-hour cycle of outsourced soft-
ware development, for example, the dynamics of knowledge organization and produc-
tion acquire a geopolitical tinge. From this heteroclite point of view, when the 
organization of knowledge comes into focus, management theory not only needs to 
become a kind of media studies but needs to develop a much finer sense of the micro-
textures of everyday life. 
 Theories of distributed cognition do draw our attention to the role of mediation in 
propagating, amplifying, and embedding intelligent behavior in collective processes, 
pointing toward the crucial importance of media operations more generally in the 
genesis of thinking and knowing. But the role of media in propagating, amplifying, 
embedding, and redistributing stupidity is not one that has been studied in any great 
detail. This is not about dumbing down — a complaint that retains the neat separation 
of producer and consumer — and generally only concerns the specific contents of 
media rather than the concatenation of effects of media forms as such (as well as 
assuming that stupidity is a psychological characterization of the other). So the ques-
tion must become one of how to grasp the distribution of stupidity throughout par-
ticular kinds of assemblage as such. Or to put it a slightly different way, how is 
knowledge at work reorganized so as to render thought inhibitory? 
 Knowledge management, which has been loosely defined as the concern for and 
organization of  “ knowing what we know, ” 48 brings epistemological speculations of 
various sorts, economics, and information technology into a heady and problematic 
conjunction. Within knowledge management practices, the question of knowing what 
you know has a direct  material shape, depending on the way in which knowledge 
assets are organized and put into communication. While knowledge management is 

Excellence 
169
often understood conceptually as a matter of making explicit what rests at a tacit level, 
more prosaically it is a matter of identifying, configuring, and leveraging the concrete 
knowledge resources (artifacts, databases, communications technologies, wikis, books 
and other forms of document, personal and organizational memories) on which an 
organization depends. And as recent projects concerned with  “ communities of prac-
tice ” demonstrate, this gives knowledge management a scope that extends well beyond 
the confines of the organization and into the problematic differentiation between 
work and life.  49 
 For the knowledge manager, the task is to find a way of articulating what an orga-
nization knows so as to make it smarter, more flexible, better able to rise to the chal-
lenges posed by the milieu in which it finds itself, better able to monetize its knowledge 
assets and realize their value. At its most crude, this will consist in creating more 
channels of communication — from the suggestions box to rebadging managers as 
 “ listeners ” and  “ facilitators. ” On a more sophisticated level, it might consist in replac-
ing one technology with another: databases instead of filing cabinets; wikis instead 
of e-mails; content management systems and virtual private networks (VPNs) instead 
of offices, colleagues, and a physically structured working environment. On a global 
level, this might extend into a full-fledged strategy for knowledge transfer and out-
sourcing practices. 
 However, becoming more fully connected, in the sense of materially linking more 
and more knowledge resources, within and without an organization, does not of itself 
suffice to make anyone or anything any smarter, even if the broader availability of 
information within an organization is an important prerequisite to making informed 
decisions. 
 We might compare the tireless work of the knowledge manager, assembling 
resources, writing documents, compiling flowcharts, speccing software, configuring 
databases, strategizing knowledge transfer processes, to the industrious laborings of 
Flaubert ’ s inimitable double act Bouvard and P é cuchet. Their assiduous adventures in 
the acquisition of knowledge, their questing for the compilation of a comprehensively 
encyclopedic set of statements about what is known, betrays the active, even ardent, 
nature with which stupidity insists, and for which no knowledge is ever a sufficient 
antidote. For all their encyclopedic adventures, Bouvard and P é cuchet just don ’ t get 
it. 50 This fictional example carries over, though, because as a recent philosophical 
review of theories of knowledge management has asked (and it was not a rhetorical 
question): what  is the problem to which knowledge management is the answer?  51 A 
good question, although  solutions without problems might actually be the very defini-
tion of a stupid knowledge: a solution without the problem that gave rise to it is a 

170 
Excellence
solution that has dispensed with the need for any thought and really only poses the 
problem of its application. If that judgment sounds harsh, let us admit that in the 
broader interests of efficiency and clarity, it is at least important to ask what kind of 
tacit knowledge the knowledge manager draws on. 
 Processes of knowledge management — and the consequent attempts to engineer 
systems or processes or policies that best facilitate its production — often rest on the 
presumption of a dialectic between the tacit and the explicit. Ingenious means are 
proposed for accomplishing the process that translates knowledge from its inchoate, 
scarcely articulated, tacit state to an explicit, codifiable, transmissible, and reproduc-
ible state. But what is less easily translated in this process is the way in which tacit 
knowledge itself translates inventive responses to problematic situations, and these 
are not always a matter of the irenic pursuit of knowledge — as references to the soci-
ologist Pierre Bourdieu ’ s conception of the  habitus in the work of knowledge extraction 
suggests. 
 A knowledge-managed solution will be explicit, generic, and codifiable. In any set 
of circumstances, for any particular organization, it will define what is currently held 
to count as accountable knowledge. This will, in turn, produce a new domain of ideas, 
skills, and practices that do not count and can be safely forgotten while promoting 
others to the realm of signifying intelligence. 
 Leveraging the unknowns of technology is a useful possibility here: the machine 
whose dumbly insistent intransigence — it won ’ t do what you want it to do — leaves 
the user making allowances for its stupidity, figuring out work-arounds or patches. In 
fact the machine  requires that allowances be made for it, because unlike its human 
user, the machine won ’ t get sacked if it fails to do its job properly, and the user has 
a vested interest in at least pretending to know what she is doing. Make allowances 
for the dumb terminal or risk looking terminally dumb. 
 But the tacit assumption so far has been that stupidity is a bad thing: for an image 
of thought that links thought to knowledge and knowledge to the good, this is an 
assumption that goes without saying. From a stratagematic point of view, of course, 
this may not be the case. Indeed, the great virtue of stupidity, at least if we do a strat-
agematic reading of Flaubert and those after him who have attempted to finger stupid-
ity ’ s irreducibility to other negative figures (error, ignorance, illusion, etc.), is precisely 
the way in which it gets confused with intelligence. Stupidity is difficult to locate in 
a clearly circumscribed domain — hence the need to attribute it to others, psychologi-
cally. However, the possibility that stupidity might be not a psychological state but 
something that, as we have emphasized, has an organizational form and a mediational 
configuration (and perhaps even a professional ethos) does not mean it does not have 

Excellence 
171
psychological effects. The feeling that positive psychologists call  “ flow ” is endemic 
in stupidity: flow is the automation of habits, the blissful reinforcing of preexisting 
synaptic connections, a comforting transfer of feelings of cognitive security onto well-
established territories. Perhaps the compulsive search for flow lies behind the way in 
which stupidity hijacks intelligence, seizing hold of agents who then acquire a mis-
sionary zeal, the glinting eyes of the convert, an algorithmic certainty.  52 In any case, 
the ease with which stupidity clothes itself in all the other virtues — hard work, elo-
quence, clarity — facilitates its insinuating propagation. Seeking to motivate his team 
to think about the next project, clicking his fingers impatiently, the project manager 
calls on them to brainstorm, to come up with ideas fast. Recalcitrance, a justifiable 
inability to process the latest blue-skies initiative, is at this point the sign of certain 
idiocy, and dissent a threat to team morale. 
 In truth, the propagation of stupidity, its zealous, even assiduous promotion, care-
fully fabricated through the creation of structures that do not tolerate the divergent 
possibilities of alternatives (not that way! don ’ t be daft! chaos awaits you!), is easily 
accomplished: it suffices to confer the responsibility for thinking about what you are 
doing on others, to delegate authority. That stupidity hides out in intelligence and so 
easily translates into error or ignorance makes it difficult to pin down. While your 
enemies are still trying to figure out the thinking behind your next stupid move —
 making themselves look a bit slow-witted in the process — you can move on. Next 
project. Next target. Next goal. Click, click, click. And, of course, when confronted 
with stupidity ’ s consequences, you can always point to an error, one you can acknowl-
edge with more or less sincere, more or less real, humility — one would not want to be 
seen as being evil, after all. 


 Notes 
  
 Introduction 
 1.  Or mantra, as it is invoked as part of Google ’ s mission statement. See  http://investor.google
.com/corporate/code-of-conduct.html.  
 2.  See, e.g., Peter Galison,  “ The Ontology of the Enemy: Norbert Wiener and the Cybernetic 
Vision, ”  Critical Inquiry 21, no. 1 (Autumn 1994): 228 – 266. 
 3.  Roger Silverstone,  “ The Rhetoric of Evil, ” chap. 3 of  Media and Morality (London: Polity, 2007). 
 4.  A sort of functionalist reversal of the dictum that information is the difference that  “ makes 
a difference. ” 
 5.  See, e.g., David Nye,  The American Technological Sublime (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994). 
For Nye, the technological sublime is associated with the spectacular quality of large-scale engi-
neering projects in particular. Perhaps something similar can be said for the recent mass partici-
pation in the products of software engineering. 
 6.  Indeed, the distinction consecrated by aesthetics — the difference between the spectator and 
the artist — may be one of the ethical stakes for contemporary media forms. As Giorgio Agamben 
has put it, the split between art such as it is lived by the spectator and art such as it is lived by 
the artist is,  “ precisely, Terror. ” Giorgio Agamben,  The Man without Content , trans. Georgia Albert 
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999). 
 7.  Steven Shaviro has suggested a connection between thinking about affect and Raymond 
Williams ’ s conception of  “ structures of feeling ” that offers one way into exploring the broader 
configurations of affect in society. Steven Shaviro,  Post-Cinematic Affect (Winchester: Zero Books, 
2010). Sianne Ngai explores this reference in more detail in her research on  “ ugly ” feeling. Ngai ’ s 
work is largely restricted to the study of literary texts, but it does have a purchase on broader 
practices of mediation. Sianne Ngai,  Ugly Feelings (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2005). Ethnographic research has been equally suggestive of ways to get past the abstract general-
ity of much of the work on affect. See, e.g., Kathleen Stewart,  Ordinary Affects (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2007). 

174 
Notes
 8.  For Whitehead, the world itself is a medium. Given two entities A and D, for example, he 
says,  “ The medium between A and D consists of all those actual entities which lie in the actual 
world of A and not in the actual world of D. ” Alfred North Whitehead,  Process and Reality , 2nd 
ed. (London: Macmillan – Free Press, 1978), 226; see pt. 3, chap. 1, more generally on objects as 
mediators or bearers of feeling. 
 9.  For Jean Baudrillard, the abstract social relations constituted by the media — and hence the 
abolition of symbolic reciprocity they produce — are something of a given, a macroscopic social 
fact. It is more practical, though, to explore the constitution of these relations (which are no less 
real for it) as molar effects. Failure to do so in the case of media technologies usually results in 
some kind of deterministic argument. Baudrillard ’ s argument is developed in his  “ Requiem for 
the Media, ” in  For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign , trans. Charles Levin (St. Louis: 
Telos Press, 1981). 
 10.   Eyal Weizman,  The Least of All Possible Evils: Humanitarian Violence from Arendt to Gaza 
(London: Verso, 2012). 
 11.   The distinction between transparent intermediaries and active mediators is important for the 
understanding proposed by science and technology studies of various sorts. See the discussion 
in Bruno Latour,  Re-assembling the Social (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 39. 
 12.   Graham Harman,  Tool-Being (Peru, IL: Open Court, 2002). 
 13.  Sophistry, says Nietzsche, begins where the  “ boundary between good and evil is erased. ” 
Quoted in Barbara Cassin,  L ’ Effet sophistique (Paris: Gallimard, 1995), 7. 
 14.   According to Fran ç ois Flahault, the monotheistic roots that have been so crucial for dualistic 
thinking about good and evil develop from Parmenides ’ poem  On Nature and the Book of 
Job. As Flahault puts it,  “ Both of them mark the disappearance of Chaos and the coming of Being 
as simultaneously One and above alteration, ” a thinking that, developed in the culture of hel-
lenized Jews, feeds into Christianity. Fran ç ois Flahault,  Malice , trans. Liz Heron (London: Verso, 
2003), 23. 
 15.   To seduce, one must be able to be seduced in turn — a point that one might argue originates 
with the sophists. The point is an important one, because it suggests the need to cultivate a 
certain kind of sensibility, an ethic that is at the same time an aesthetic. 
 16.   Or what Machiavelli would call  virt ù . 
 17.   Niccol ò Machiavelli,  The Prince , trans. George Bull (London: Penguin, 1964), 131. 
 18.   See, e.g., Jack Goody,  Domestication of the Savage Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1977). 
 19.   Susan Leigh Star and James L. Griesemer,  “ Institutional Ecology,  ‘ Translations, ’ and Boundary 
Objects: Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley ’ s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907 – 39, ”  Social 
Studies of Science 19 (1989); and Susan Leigh Star,  “ This Is Not a Boundary Object: Reflections on 
the Origin of a Concept, ”  Science, Technology, and Human Values 35, no. 5 (2010). 

Notes 
175
 20.   See Carlo Ginzburg ’ s essay on Menocchio, the miller of Friuli, whose aberrant learnings at 
the end of the sixteenth century earned him a trial and subsequent burning for heresy:  The Cheese 
and the Worms: The Cosmos of a Sixteenth-Century Miller , trans. John Tedeschi and Anne C. Tedeschi 
(Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992). Menocchio ’ s cosmology seems to us an 
excellent example of the  “ ill-formed use ” of the Bible (and of Ovid) as a boundary object.  
 21.   Benedict Anderson,  Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism 
(London: Verso, 1991). 
 22.   Cf. Cassin,  L ’ Effet sophistique .  “ Homologia, ” not  “ homonoia, ” implying not a meeting of 
minds, but rather only the sympathetic resonance of the sound of words. We do not actually 
agree with or understand each other; it just sounds as if we do. 
 23.   Menocchio, in Ginzburg,  The Cheese and the Worms , 53. 
 24.   But not just Schopenhauer. We are thinking also of the writings of the Jesuit Balthasar 
Graci á n (of whom Schopenhauer was a fan), as well as of Machiavelli. See below. A pertinent 
exponent of the work of both these figures is Guy Debord, e.g., in  The Society of the Spectacle 
(Detroit: Black and Red, 1970). 
 25.   As a more contemporary source of guidance and advice would have it: see the stratagem 
entitled  “ Structure Data. ” 
 26.   See, e.g., the work of Chomsky. 
 27.   E.g., Jerome Nriagu et al.,  “ Saturnine Gout among Roman Aristocrats: Did Lead Poisoning 
Contribute to the Fall of the Empire? ”  New England Journal of Medicine 308, no.11 (March 1983): 
660 – 663. 
 28.   Alfred Crosby Jr.,  Ecological Imperialism , 2nd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2004). 
 29.   WikiLeaks may be one explicit case in point, but perhaps more telling are the complaints 
about the occlusive power of presentation software that the military uses for its internal com-
munications. See Elizabeth Bumiller,  “ We Have Met the Enemy and He Is PowerPoint, ”  New York 
Times , April 26, 2010, for a discussion of the various positions taken within the U.S. military on 
the use of presentation software. 
 30.   Roland Barthes,  The Neutral , trans. Rosalind E. Krauss and Denis Hollier (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2005). We should note that Barthes himself did not associate the neutral and 
grayness. 
 31.  See Primo Levi,  The Drowned and the Saved , trans. Raymond Rosenthal (London: Abacus, 
1989), chap. 2, esp. p. 27. See also Alan Blum ’ s efforts to develop the notion of the gray zone in 
 The Grey Zone in Health and Illness (London: Intellect, 2010). Gilles Deleuze and F é lix Guattari 
refer to the notion with reference to Martin Heidegger, wondering whether  “ all concepts include 
this grey zone and indiscernibility where for a moment the combatants on the ground are con-
fused and the thinker ’ s tired eyes mistake one for the other. ” Gilles Deleuze and F é lix Guattari, 
 What is Philosophy? trans. Graham Burchell and Hugh Tomlinson (London: Verso, 1994), 109. 

176 
Notes
 32.   In Whitehead ’ s pan-experiential — rather than pan-psychic — philosophy, everything in 
the universe is experience; everything is feeling, complex and interconnected. In its precision, 
his metaphysics offers a way of conceptualizing the immanence of affective and perceptual 
dispositions to technical and material apparatus. See Alfred North Whitehead,  Process and 
Reality . 
 33.   Ibid., 18. 
 34.   The ongoing research of Mark Andrejevic in his  iSpy: Surveillance and Power in the Interactive 
Era (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2009) develops arguments that are pertinent here, as 
is Armand Mattelart ’ s  The Globalization of Surveillance (London: Polity, 2010). Not drawing too 
much attention to oneself is characteristic of the operations by which  “ infernal alternatives ” are 
produced. See Isabelle Stengers and Philippe Pignarre,  Capitalist Sorcery: Breaking the Spell , trans. 
Andrew Goffey (London: Palgrave, 2011). 
 35.   Cf. Susan Leigh Star,  “ The Ethnography of Infrastructure, ”  American Behavioral Scientist 43 
(1999): 377. 
 36.   See the work of Donald MacKenzie in particular; and Philip Mirowski,  Machine Dreams: 
Economics Becomes a Cyborg Science (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). 
 37.   Andrew Barry,  Political Machines (London: Athlone, 2001), and Michel Callon et al.,  Acting 
in an Uncertain World (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009), offer detailed analyses of these socio-
technical conditions of contemporary politics. It seems to us that grayness is the aesthetic sen-
sibility that best corresponds to these developments. 
 38.  Jean-Luc Marion,  Sur l ’ ontologie grise de Descartes (Paris: J. Vrin, 1975), 190. 
 39.   For an analysis and discussion of Klee, see Gilles Deleuze and F é lix Guattari,  A Thousand 
Plateaus (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987), 344 – 345. 
 40.   F é lix Guattari,  Chaosmosis , trans. Paul Bains and Julian Pefanis (Sydney: Power Institute, 
1995). 
 41.   Alberto Moravia,  Boredom , trans. Angus Davidson (New York: NYRB, 1999), 8. 
 42.  Cf. Richard Coyne,  The Tuning of Place (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010). 
 43.   Cf.  “ Micropolitics and Segmentarity ” and the discussion of Gabriel Tarde and the  “ cycle ” of 
assemblages in Deleuze and Guattari,  A Thousand Plateaus . 
 44.   Christian Marazzi,  Capital and Language (New York: Semiotext[e], 2008); Paolo Virno,  The 
Grammar of the Multitude , trans. Isabella Bertoletti, James Cascaito, and Andreas Casson (New 
York: Semiotext[e], 2004). But see also work on economics as performative such as that collected 
in Donald MacKenzie, Fabian Muniesa, and Lucia Siu,  Do Economists Make Markets? On the 
Performativity of Economics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007). 
 45.  The key text for all this discussion is Cassin,  L ’ Effet sophistique . 
 46.   In addition to Paolo Virno and J ü rgen Habermas, the work of the German philosopher 
Karl-Otto Apel is also an important contemporary reference. 

Notes 
177
 47.   Right down to the ambiguities of the vindication of elitism, the potential for demagoguery, 
and the pragmatic attitude toward truth. Edward Bernays ’ s book  Propaganda (New York: Horace 
Liveright, 1928) exemplifies this. The argument is made directly, albeit from a position somewhat 
different to the one taken here, in Romain Laufer and Catherine Paradeise,  Marketing Democracy: 
Public Opinion and Media Formation in Democratic Societies , trans. Noel Castelino (New Brunswick, 
NJ: Transaction, 1990). 
 48.   See the commentary on Odysseus in Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer,  “ The Concept 
of Enlightenment, ” chap. 1 of  The Dialectic of Enlightenment (London: Verso, 1997). 
 49.   Balthasar Graci á n,  The Art of Worldly Wisdom , trans. Joseph Jacobs (London: Shambhala, 
1993). 
 50.   “ Radical evil ” is how Cassin characterizes it in her discussion of Aristotle. See also her  L ’ Effet 
sophistique , 234, for a connection with Bataille ’ s notion of the accursed share. 
 51.   The reference to sophistry proposed here equally reframes efforts to theorize  “ persuasive 
technology ” or  “ persuasive games. ” An understanding of technology in terms of rhetoric gets 
us only as far as the forms of codification by which such devices capture and modulate 
attention. 
 52.   In an essay called  “ Truth and Proof, ” Tarski offers a discussion of the well-known antinomy 
of the liar paradox — the statement  “ I am lying ” attributed to Eubulides — arguing that in natural 
language, it appears  “ as a kind of evil force with a great destructive power, ” which further compels 
us  “ to abandon all attempts at clarifying the notion of truth for natural languages. ” Alfred Tarski, 
 “ Truth and Proof, ”  Scientific American , June 1969; reprinted in R. I. G. Hughes,  A Philosophical 
Companion to First-Order Logic (Cambridge, MA: Hackett, 1993). In her discussion of the paradox, 
Claude Imbert wryly characterizes the Cretan liar as a kind of  “ double agent ” and points more 
generally to the occulting of the underhanded reliance that formal logic has on natural language. 
Claude Imbert,  Ph é nom é nologies et langues formulaires (Paris: PUF, 1992), 357. 
 53.   In a slightly different context, it is worth noting that Kevin Mitnick devotes a great deal of 
his work on the security of computational systems to a discussion of social engineering (see 
below), or what the FBI described, in a 1956 monograph, as  “ pretexts and cover techniques. ” See 
 http://mitnicksecurity.com/FBI_Pretexts_and_Cover_Techniques_May-1956.pdf.  
 54.   Bruno Latour,  The Pasteurization of France , trans. Alan Sheridan and John Law (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1988), 158. Latour ’ s interest in sophistry should also be noted 
here. See, e.g., his commentary on the debate between Socrates and Callicles in the final chapter 
of  Pandora ’ s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1999), 216 – 236. His essay  “ On Technical Mediation ” invokes the ruseful spirit of Daedalus and 
the cunning of  metis in its discussion of the operations of technique. Making the connection 
with sophistry seems an obvious extension for exploring the power and politics involved. 
 55.  The commentary by Graham Harman in the first half of his book on Latour is useful in this 
regard. Graham Harman,  Prince of Networks (Melbourne: re.press, 2009). 
 56.   Bruno Latour,  Science in Action (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987), 128. 

178 
Notes
 57.   The process of  “ delegation ” is crucial in the conception of technical mediation proposed by 
Latour. It might be considered here in a manner more akin to the operations of delegation 
explored critically by Deleuze and Guattari in  Anti-Oedipus (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1983). 
 58.   See, e.g., the work of W. Brian Arthur. 
 59.   Stratagems seek to  “ do ” things. In this sense they may be linked to ideas about the performa-
tive utterance. It is all the more tempting to make this link for the connections that have been 
established (a) between sophistry and Austinian performatives in the work of Cassin and 
(b) between the performative and contemporary knowledge practices, especially in the field of 
economics. If we avoid the notion of the performative here, we do so because in (b) it seems 
too readily to elide the distinction between knowledge and technique and in (a) retains a focus 
on the centrality of language. See MacKenzie et al.,  Do Economists Make Markets? 
 60.   As the writings of Luc Boltanski and Giorgio Agamben underline respectively. Luc Boltanski, 
 Different Suffering (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999); Agamben,  The Man without 
Content . See also Alain Badiou,  Ethics: An Essay on the Understanding of Evil , trans. Peter Hallward 
(London: Verso, 2001). 
 61.   Isabelle Stengers has proposed the notion of the operative construct in an essay on F é lix 
Guattari,  “ Relaying the War Machine, ” in  The Guattari Effect , ed. Eric Alliez and Andrew Goffey 
(London: Continuum, 2011). 
 62.   Michel Foucault,  “ Nietzsche, Genealogy, History, ” in  Language, Counter-memory, Practice , ed. 
Donald F. Bouchard (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977), 139 – 164. As the editor of this 
collection points out, Foucault deploys the notion of disparity more fully in his  The Archaeology 
of Knowledge . The spin that we give here to disparity is not, of course, one to be located in 
Foucault ’ s work. 
 63.  Max Atkinson,  Our Masters ’ Voices: The Language and Body-Language of Politics (London: 
Routledge, 1984). 
 64.   The scope that Foucault accords to strategies seems strictly circumscribed by the specific focus 
of his historical research. As a consequence, it is difficult to see how such work can be effective 
when taken up and treated in terms of unstated but much broader generalizations. 
 65.   Schopenhauer,  The Art of Always Being Right . 
 66.   E.g., 50 Cent and Robert Greene,  The 50th Law (New York: Harper, 2009). 
 67.   Benner suggests a strong degree of continuity between Machiavelli and ancient Greek and 
Roman writers and glosses the difference between deception and dissimulation thus:  “ Deception 
involves the attempt to persuade others that one ’ s intentions are altogether different from what 
they truly are. By contrast, dissimulation conceals some intentions or qualities while revealing 
others in indirect ways. ” Erica Benner,  Machiavelli ’ s Ethics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 2009), 65. 
 68.   Ibid., 101. 

Notes 
179
 Intelligence 
 1.  Giving the lie to the well-known hypodermic-syringe model of media effects, in its interest 
in  “ influence, ” Paul Lazarfeld ’ s two-step flow model, outlined in his  Personal Influence , arguably 
develops the insights of Gabriel Tarde in a manner consonant with ideas about brainwashing. 
Paul Lazarfeld,  Personal Influence: The Part Played by People in the Flow of Mass Communications 
(Piscataway, NJ: Transaction, 2006). Tarde famously argued that  “ the social state, like the hyp-
notic state, is a dream of control and a dream in action. ” Gabriel Tarde,  The Laws of Imitation , 
trans. Elsie Parsons (New York: Henry Holt, 1903), 77. 
 2.  Arthur Schopenhauer,  The Art of Always Being Right (London: Gibson, 2005), 28. 
 3.  In ancient Greece, the sophists had a neologism for this:  “ to citizen. ” Its analogy with Kantian 
practical reason is underlined by Barbara Cassin in  L ’ Effet sophistique . 
 4.  Dominic Streatfield,  Brainwashing: The Secret History of Mind Control (London: Hodder, 2006), 
23; Philippe Pignarre,  Les malheurs des psys (Paris: D é couverte, 2006), 143 – 162. 
 5.  Jean-Fran ç ois Lyotard,  The Differend (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1988), 84. 
 6.  See Georges Didi-Huberman on Charcot, hypocrisy as a method, and the  “ hypnotic theater ” 
through which Charcot staged hysteria. Georges Didi-Huberman,  Invention of Hysteria (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2003). The complex play of suggestion, the epistemic hall of mirrors at the birth 
of psychoanalysis, is discussed directly by Borch-Jacobsen in  Remembering Anna O.: A Century of 
Mystification (New York: Routledge, 1996). 
 7.  Edward Hunter,  Brain-washing in Red China: The Calculated Destruction of Men ’ s Minds (New 
York: Vanguard Press, 1951). 
 8.  John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern,  Theory of Games and Economic Behavior (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1944). In  “ The Ontology of the Enemy, ” Galison characterizes 
game theory as one of three of the  “ Manichaean sciences ” predicated on a characterization of 
the enemy, who is strangely similar to his opponent, as evil. 
 9.  As in the work of Jacques Lacan, whose own interest in formalisms is well known. See, e.g., 
Lacan,  Ecrits: A Selection , trans. Alan Sheridan (London: Routledge, 1977). 
 10.   Isabelle Stengers,  The Invention of Modern Science , trans. Daniel W. Smith (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2000). 
 11.   A point that seems to be lost on Kathleen Taylor in her updating of brainwashing via neu-
roscience,  Brainwashing: The Science of Thought Control (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004). 
On the links between brainwashing and torture, see Streatfield,  Brainwashing , esp. 29 – 59, 102 –
 140, 338 – 402. 
 12.   Attributed to James Jesus Angleton by the journalist Edward Jay Epstein. See the discussion 
in Michael Holzman,  James Jesus Angleton: The CIA and the Craft of Counterintelligence (Amherst: 
University of Massachusetts Press, 2008), 40 – 41. 

180 
Notes
 13.   See Holzman,  James Jesus Angleton ; and the review by Terence Hawkes,  “ William Empson ’ s 
Influence on the CIA, ”  Times Literary Supplement , June 10, 2009. 
 14.   William Empson,  The Seven Types of Ambiguity , 2nd ed. (London: Chatto  & Windus, 
1949), 2. 
 15.   See the discussion in Empson ’ s preface to the second edition (ibid., xv). 
 16.   Ibid., 3. 
 17.   Ibid., 237. 
 18.   Terence Hawkes makes the crucial point that while Empson may have thought ambiguity 
would never be resolvable, this appears not to have been the case for Angleton. See Hawkes, 
 “ William Empson ’ s Influence. ” 
 19.   Gilles Deleuze,  The Logic of Sense , trans. Mark Lester (London: Athlone, 1990), 114. 
 20.   A specific characteristic of the systemic ambiguity whose  mise en stratageme we are mapping 
here is that it is the expression of an objective indeterminacy. Ambiguity is not the merely sub-
jective form of mental conflict, as it is in Empson. See Deleuze,  The Logic of Sense , and equally 
 The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque, trans. Tom Conley (London: Athlone, 1993), where the ambigu-
ous sign is linked to Henry James as much as to Leibniz. 
 21.  Cf. Marvin Minsky,  “ Jokes and Their Relation to the Cognitive Unconscious ” (1981),  http://
web.media.mit.edu/~minsky/papers/jokes.cognitive.txt.  
 22.   See the discussion of Tarski in the introduction. 
 23.   Agre refers to this as a  “ grammar of action, ” a characterization that is helpful provided one 
recalls also that judgments of grammaticality can serve as markers of power. Philip Agre, 
 “ Surveillance and Capture: Two Models of Privacy, ” in  The New Media Reader , ed. Noah Wardrip-
Fruin and Nick Montfort (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003). On the links between grammar and 
power, see Gilles Deleuze and F é lix Guattari,  A Thousand Plateaus plateau 4,  “ The Postulates of 
Linguistics. ” 
 24.   The debates about artificial intelligence are a useful indicator of the terms of reference of 
corporate power structures. If machines do all the work, the human command structure provides 
a convenient mechanism for apportioning responsibility. Harry Collins and Trevor Pinch,  The 
Shape of Actions (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998); Hubert Dreyfus,  What Computers Still Can ’ t 
Do (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1979). 
 25.   Management theory typically focuses on  “ symbolic action. ” E. M. Eisenberg,  “ Ambiguity as 
Strategy in Organizational Communication, ”  Communication Monographs 51 (1984): 227 – 242. 
 26.   The concept of  “ repair ” comes from ethnomethodology. Collins and Pinch use it in their 
work; our use of the concept is slightly different. Collins and Pinch,  The Shape of Actions . 
 27.   That power relations are inherently reversible is a point that Foucault, often considered 
intolerably pessimistic, makes with humor. Maurizio Lazzarato has extended this insight in his 

Notes 
181
work on  “ les intermittents du spectacle. ” However, Lazzarato prefers to see ambiguity as some-
thing separate from the techniques, technologies, and practices that are used to codify and regu-
late behavior. On the contrary, if power relations are formed and (literally) formatted through 
technologies, holding to and exploiting their reversibility entails exploring the ambiguities 
created by those regularizing technologies themselves. Maurizio Lazzarato,  Exp é rimentations poli-
tiques , translation forthcoming from MIT Press. 
 28.   On trials of strength and the problems of generalized translation failure, see Bruno Latour, 
 “ Irreductions, ” in  The Pasteurization of France , trans. John Law and Alan Sheridan (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1993); and  Science in Action (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1987). See also the first half of Harman,  Prince of Networks . 
 29.   Quoted in Slavoj  Ž i ž ek,  Living in the End Times (London: Verso, 2010). 
 30.   We are not trying here to make a point about science in general but simply observing that 
the psy disciplines are a fascinating resource and topic for explorations of the interests of power. 
See, e.g., Isabelle Stengers,  Cosmopolitiques , vol. 7,  Pour en finir avec la tolerance (Paris: D é couverte, 
1997). 
 31.   Marcel Gauchet,  L ’ inconscient c é r é bral (Paris: Seuil, 1992). 
 32.   Stengers,  Pour en finir avec la tolerance . 
 33.   Deleuze and Guattari,  Anti-Oedipus , 46. 
 34.   See, e.g., the comments in Sigmund Freud,  Beyond the Pleasure Principle , Standard Edition, 
vol. 18 (1955), chap. 2. 
 35.   Francoise Sironi,  Bourreaux et victimes (Paris: Odile Jacob, 1992). 
 36.   Jacques Lacan, cited in Avital Ronell,  Crack Wars (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 
1992), 53. 
 37.   Mikkel Borch-Jacobsen,  “ L ’ inconscient simul é , ” in  La guerre des psys , ed. Tobie Nathan (Paris: 
Les Emp ê cheurs de Penser en Rond, 2006). 
 38.   Jean Baudrillard,  In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities (New York: Semiotext[e], 1983); Homi 
Bhabha,  “ Sly Civility, ”  October 34 (1985): 71 – 80. 
 39.   Freud,  Beyond the Pleasure Principle . 
 40.   Cf. Anna Munster,  “ Nerves of Data: The Neurological Turn in/against Networked Media, ” 
 Computational Culture 1 (December 2011),  http://computationalculture.net/.  
 41.   Vinciane Despret,  “ Le secret est une dimension politique de la th é rapie, ” in Nathan,  La guerre 
des psys . 
 42.   In the words of Walter Freeman, the intent was to turn  “ taxeaters ” into  “ taxpayers. ” Jack 
Pressman,  The Last Resort: Psychosurgery and the Limits of Medicine (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1998). 

182 
Notes
 43.   Marshall McLuhan,  Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1994). 
 44.   The ARTICHOKE program, for example. See Alan Scheflin and Edward Opton,  The Mind 
Manipulators (London: Paddington Press, 1978); and Streatfield,  Brainwashing . 
 45.   Cf. Retort,  Afflicted Powers: Capital and Spectacle in a New Age of War (London: Verso, 2005), 
20. 
 46.   Cf. Thomas Pynchon,  Gravity ’ s Rainbow (London: Penguin, 1995). 
 47.   As in the scenario imagined by Hitchcock and relayed by Slavoj  Ž i ž ek in  The Puppet and the 
Dwarf: The Perverse Core of Christianity (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003). See the brief discussion 
of this in Pignarre,  Les malheurs des psys , 44 – 45. On specificity, see Jean-Jacques Kupiec and Pierre 
Sonigo,  Ni Dieu ni g è ne  (Paris: Seuil, 2000), 17 – 60. 
 48.   Streatfield,  Brainwashing , 44 – 49. 
 49.   The ventilation system of a theater holding several hundred hostages taken by Chechen 
militants was flooded with an unspecified gas, killing or injuring both hostages and 
combatants. 
 50.   Reid Kirby,  “ Paradise Lost: The Psycho Agents, ”  Quarterly Journal of the Harvard Sussex Program 
on CBW Armament and Arms Limitation 71 (May 2006): 1. 
 51.   Ibid., 4. 
 52.   Cf. Chalmers Johnson,  Blowback (New York: Holt Paperbacks, 2004). 
 53.   F é lix Guattari,  “ Machinic Junkies, ” in  Soft Subversions (New York: Semiotext[e], 1996). See 
also Marazzi,  Capital and Language , on the short-term movements of credulity inherent in the 
financial markets. 
 54.   Ian Sample,  “ Leo Sternbach: Chemist Who Invented Librium and Valium, Drugs Whose Uses 
Are Still Being Explored, ”  Guardian , March 10, 2005,  http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2005/
oct/03/health.guardianobituaries.  
 55.   Pignarre develops the full argument in  Les malheurs des psys . His  Comment la d é pression est 
devenue une  é pid é mie (Paris: D é couverte, 2001) is a crucial text for following the logic of recruit-
ment in the pharmaceutical industry. 
 56.  See Sylvie le Poulichet,  Toxicomanies et psychanalyse: Les narcoses du d é sir (Paris: PUF, 1987), 
on the fate of the transference in addiction; Pignarre,  Les malheurs des psys , and Tobie Nathan, 
 A qui j ’ appartiens (Paris: Seuil, 2007), on new complexes of attachments in psychology; and Carole 
Rivi è re,  “ Le lien de d é pendance addictive  à Internet: Une nouvelle forme d ’ addiction? ”  http://
www.omnsh.org/article.php3?id_article=94  (accessed February 9, 2009), for an analytic approach 
to new media. 
 57.   Emilie Gomart,  “ Surprised by Methadone: In Praise of Drug Substitution Treatment in a 
French Clinic, ”  Body and Society 10, nos. 2 – 3 (2004): 85 – 110. 

Notes 
183
 58.   “ Freedom Fighter ’ s Manual, ”  http://www.ballistichelmet.org/school/free.html.  
 59.   Elizabeth Gurley Flynn,  Sabotage: The Conscious Withdrawal of Workers ’ Industrial Efficiency 
(Cleveland: Industrial Workers of the World, 1916). 
 60.   “ Psychological Operations in Guerrilla Warfare ” is available online in numerous locations. 
 61.   Bertrand Gille,  The Renaissance Engineers (London: Lund Humphries, 1966), 58. 
 62.   Guy Debord,  “ Report on the Construction of Situations and on the International Situationist 
Tendency ’ s Conditions of Organization and Action ” (June 1957), in  Situationist International 
Anthology , ed. Ken Knabb (Berkeley: Bureau of Public Secrets, 1981), 25. 
 63.   Situationist International,  “ Preliminary Problems in Constructing a Situation ” (1958), in 
 Situationist International Anthology , ed. Ken Knabb (Berkeley: Bureau of Public Secrets, 1981), 44. 
 64.  Asger Jorn,  “ The Situationists and Automation, ” in  Situationist International Anthology , ed. 
Ken Knabb (Berkeley: Bureau of Public Secrets, 1981), 47. 
 65.   Situationist International,  “ Preliminary Problems, ” 43. 
 66.   Ibid. 
 Togetherness 
 1.  StankDawg,  “ Hacking Google AdWords, ” in  The Best of 2600: A Hacker Odyssey , ed. Emmanuel 
Goldstein (Indianapolis: Wiley, 2008), 800. 
 2.  Herbert A. Simon,  Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in Administrative 
Organizations , 4th ed. (New York: Free Press, 1997), 252. 
 3.  Mark Bishop,  “ Dancing with Pixies: Strong Artificial Intelligence and Panpsychism, ” in  Views 
into the Chinese Room: New Essays on Searle and Artificial Intelligence , ed. John Preston and Mark 
Bishop (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 360 – 378. 
 4.  Stanley Milgram,  Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View (London: Harper Collins, 1974). 
 5.  Leo Szilard,  “ On the Decrease of Entropy in Thermodynamic Systems by the Intervention of 
Intelligent Beings, ” in  Maxwell ’ s Demon 2: Entropy, Classical and Quantum Information, Computing , 
ed. Harvey S. Leff and Andrew F. Rex (Bristol: Institute of Physics Publications, 2003), 110 – 119. 
Szilard ’ s attempts to mediate the entry into history of the atomic weapons stemming from his 
involvement in the Manhattan Project, by requesting that they should be demonstrated before 
 “ actual ” use, can perhaps be seen in this light. 
 6.  On general intellect, see Karl Marx ’ s  Grundrisse , where the term originates in the  “ fragment 
on machines ” and its development in the work of a number of theorists such as Negri, Berardi, 
and Virno. For the early stages of the idea of the no ö sphere, see Vladimir Vernadsky,  The Biosphere , 
trans. David B. Langmuir (New York: Copernicus, 1998); and for its later development, various 
texts by Teilhard de Chardin. 

184 
Notes
 7.  Jeff Howe,  “ The Rise of Crowdsourcing, ”  Wired 14.06 (June 2006). 
 8.  James R. Beniger,  The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of the Information 
Society (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986), 391. 
 9.  Christopher Kelty,  Two Bits: The Cultural Significance of Free Software (Durham: Duke University 
Press, 2008). 
 10.   Howe,  “ The Rise of Crowdsourcing. ” 
 11.   Howard Rheingold,  Smart Mobs: The Next Social Revolution (New York: Basic Books, 2002), 
117. 
 12.   Knuth Dohse, Ulrich Jurgens, and Thomas Malsch,  “ From  ‘ Fordism ’ to  ‘ Toyotism ’ ? The Social 
Organization of the Labor Process in the Japanese Automobile Industry, ” International Institute 
for Labour Policy, Working Paper, Berlin, April 1984. 
 13.   Victor Shklovsky,  Zoo, or Letters Not about Love: A Novel , trans. Richard Sheldon (Normal, IL: 
Dalkey Archive Press, 2001). 
 14.   Nicholas Lobachevski,  “ The Theory of Parallels, ” trans. George Bruce Halsted, appendix to 
 Non-Euclidean Geometry: A Critical and Historical Study of Its Development , by Roberto Bonola, trans. 
H.   S. Carslaw (New York: Dover Books, 1955). 
 15.   Kenneth Dean and Brian Massumi,  First and Last Emperors: The Absolute State and the Body of 
the Despot (New York: Autonomedia, 1992). 
 16.   Henri Bergson,  Creative Evolution (New York: Dover Books, 1998), 100. 
 17.   Frank Ball, Denis Mollison, and Gianpaolo Scalia-Tomba,  “ Epidemics with Two Levels of 
Mixing, ”  Annals of Applied Probability 7, no. 1 (1997): 46 – 89, 61. 
 18.   Chris Anderson,  The Long Tail: How Endless Choice Is Creating Unlimited Demand (London: 
Random House, 2006); Erik Brynjolfsson, Yu Jeffrey Hu, and Duncan Simester,  “ Goodbye Pareto 
Principle, Hello Long Tail: The Effect of Search Costs on the Concentration of Product Sales, ” 
November 2007,  http://ssrn.com/abstract=953587.  
 19.   Mirowski,  Machine Dreams . 
 20.   See, e.g., Marazzi,  Capital and Language . 
 21.   In a manner somewhat analogous to that suggested by Donald MacKenzie in  An Engine, Not 
a Camera: How Financial Models Shape Markets (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006). 
 22.   Theories that extend economic logic beyond the normal bounds of markets predate behav-
ioral economics, as in the work of Gary Becker, for example. 
 23.   Such a connection might have taken Akerloff and Shiller, in their discussion of Keynes ’ s 
 “ animal spirits, ” in a rather different direction. George Akerloff and Robert Shiller,  Animal Spirits: 
How Human Psychology Drives the Economy, and Why It Matters (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 2009). 

Notes 
185
 24.   Ibid., 4. 
 25.   On alpha-male behavior, see Vinciane Despret,  Quand le loup habitera avec l ’ agneau 
(Paris: Les Emp ê cheurs de Penser en Rond, 2002); on simulated symptoms, see Borch-Jacobsen, 
 Anna O . 
 26.   See Baudrillard ’ s infamous essay  In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities . 
 27.   Deleuze and Guattari make the point amply in  Anti-Oedipus . 
 28.   In this respect, behavioral economics occupies a position analogous to that of Leibniz in 
relation to God. Where Leibniz proposes a sort of psychotic effort to save theological reason, 
behavioral economics operates the delirious reconstruction of economic reason, saving it by 
finding it everywhere. Not all economic behavior is rational, but all behavior is economic. 
Regarding Leibniz, see Deleuze,  The Fold . 
 29.   Such as, presently, the Wii or Xbox with Kinect. 
 30.   If you are reading this book on certain e-readers, for instance, your scrolling, noting, and 
searching will be recorded and sent back to the great river of servers for analysis and for the deri-
vation of future product. 
 31.   Cf. Dan Ariely,  Predictably Irrational , rev. ed. (London: HarperCollins, 2009), 173 – 194. 
 32.   Robert Rogers,  Rogers ’ Rangers Rules (Rogers Island, 1757); Robert Taber,  The War of the Flea 
(New York: Brassey ’ s, 2002). 
 33.  Vladimir Tasi c´ ,  “ Politics of Chaos, ” manuscript, n.d.; Richard K. Guy,  “ The Strong Law of 
Small Numbers, ”  American Mathematical Monthly 95, no. 8 (October 1988): 697 – 712. 
 34.   Casey Alt,  “ Viral Load: The Fantastic Rhetorical Power of the Computer Virus in the Contem-
porary U.S. Technoscape, ” in  “ Fremdk ö rper, ” ed. Philipp Sarasin, special issue,   Ö sterreichische 
Zeitschrift f ü r Geschichtswissenschaft 16, no. 3 (2005): 133 – 149; Jussi Parikka,  Digital Contagions 
(New York: Peter Lang, 2007). 
 35.   Malcolm Gladwell,  The Tipping Point (London: Abacus, 2001). 
 36.   Niccol ò Machiavelli,  The Prince , XXV, 130 – 133. 
 37.   Leo Strauss,  The City and Man (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1964). For Strauss, the noble lie is 
the untruth required to engender the most moral, brave, or noble behavior. 
 38.   Michael Power,  Organized Uncertainty: Designing a World of Risk Management (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2007). 
 39.   See Tony Sampson,  “ How Networks Become Viral: Three Questions concerning Universal 
Contagion, ” in  The Spam Book: On Viruses, Porn, and Other Anomalies from the Dark Side of Digital 
Culture , ed. Jussi Parikka and Tony D. Sampson (Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 2009). 
 40.   Alluqu é re Roseanne Stone,  The War of Desire and Technology at the Close of the Machine Age 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996). 

186 
Notes
 41.   Rhodri Hayward,  “ The Tortoise and the Love-Machine: Grey Walter and the Politics of 
Electroencephalography, ”  Science in Context 14, no. 4 (2001): 615 – 641. For a critical analysis of 
Internet dating sites, see Eva Illouz,  Cold Intimacies: The Making of Emotional Capitalism (Cambridge: 
Polity, 2007). 
 42.   Schopenhauer,  The Art of Being Right ,  § 38. 
 43.   For instructors in  “ the art of the pickup, ” see various online training courses and forums. 
 44.   See, e.g., Catherine Hakim,  “ Erotic Capital, ”  European Sociological Review 26, no. 5 (2010): 
1 – 20. 
 45.   Matt Ridley,  The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature (London: Viking, 1993). 
 46.   Franco  “ Bifo ” Berardi,  The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy , trans. Francesca Cadel 
and Giuseppina Mecchia (New York: Semiotext[e], 2009). 
 47.   Olga Goriunova,  Art Platforms and Cultural Production on the Internet (London: Routledge, 
2011). 
 48.   Gilles Deleuze,  “ The Exhausted, ” in  Essays Critical and Clinical , trans. Daniel W. Smith and 
Michael A. Greco (London: Verso, 1998), 152 – 174. 
 Algorithms 
 1.  Vladimir Sorokin,  “ Afterword, ” in  The Queue , trans. Sally Laird (New York: NYRB Classics, 
2008), 256. 
 2.   See, for an evaluation of such claims, Matthias Scheutz, ed.,  Computationalism :  New Directions 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002). 
 3.  Harvey M. Wagner,  Principles of Operations Research with Applications to Managerial Decisions , 
2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1975). 
 4.  Beniger,  The Control Revolution , 333 – 336. 
 5.  Max Horkheimer,  Critique of Instrumental Reason (London: Continuum, 1983). 
 6.  See, e.g., David Lyon, ed.,  Surveillance and Social Sorting (London: Routledge, 2002). 
 7.  Lizette Alvarez,  “ Meet Mikey, 8: U.S. Has Him on Watch List, ”  New York Times , January 13, 
2010. 
 8.  Algorithms exemplifying such an approach include heapsort, quicksort, insertion sort, merge 
sort, cocktail sort, and others. 
 9.  A classic problem in computer science, in which the shortest path between several different 
points (cities to be visited by a salesman) is to be calculated. 
 10.   Roy Mayall,  Dear Granny Smith (London: Short Books, 2009). 
 11.   Gilles Deleuze,  Difference and Repetition , trans. Paul Patton (London: Athlone, 1994). 

Notes 
187
 12.   Ulas Vural and Yusuf Akgul,  “ Eye-Gaze Based Real-Time Surveillance Video Synopsis, ”  Pattern 
Recognition Letters 30, no. 12 (September 2009): 1151 – 1159. 
 13.   Mark Fisher,  Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative? (Winchester: Zero Books, 2009), 17. 
 14.   See Stephen Toulmin ’ s account of various versions of the founding of modernity as the 
establishment of a rational society de novo in  Cosmopolis: The Hidden Agenda of Modernity 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990). 
 15.   Isaac Newton, preface to  Philosopiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (London: S. Pepys, 1687). 
 16.   See Toscano ’ s efforts to rethink the notion of  “ real abstraction ” in Marx. Alberto Toscano, 
 “ The Open Secret of Real Abstraction, ”  Rethinking Marxism 7, no. 2 (April 2008): 273 – 287. 
 17.   For further discussion of the regular expression, see the stratagem  “ Express Regularly, But 
Not Too Regularly ” in the essay titled  “ Technicalities. ” 
 18.   See, e.g., Gary Klein,  Sources of Power: How People Make Decisions (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1999). 
 19.   The invention of the finite-state machine is attributed to McCulloch and Pitts. Papers by 
Huffman and by Moore in the 1950s are crucial references; paradoxically, the Turing machine 
generalizes its logic before the invention of the finite-state machine per se. 
 20.   We encounter here the notion of simulation that Manuel De Landa deploys in  Simulation 
and Philosophy (London: Continuum, 2011). 
 21.   See, e.g., George C. Caffentzis,  “ Crystals and Analytic Engines: Historical and Conceptual 
Preliminaries to a New Theory of Machines, ”  Ephemera 7, no. 1 (2007): 24 – 45,  http://www
.ephemeraweb.org/journal/7-1/7-1caffentzis.pdf.  
 22.   Yuri Gurevich,  Logic and the Challenge of Computer Science (New York: Computer Science Press, 
1988), 4. 
 23.   E. B ö rger,  “ High Level System Design and Analysis Using Abstract State Machines, ” in 
 Proceedings of the International Workshop on Current Trends in Applied Formal Method: Applied Formal 
Methods , October 7 – 9, 1998, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1641, ed. D. Hutter, W. 
Stephan, P. Traverso, and M. Ullmann (London: Springer, 1999), 1. 
 24.  Enthusiasm for economic globalization would be somewhat attenuated if the digital connec-
tions that delocalized working practices requires were not seen to work seamlessly. See the strata-
gem on workflow in the  “ Technicalities ” chapter. 
 Structures 
 1.  Addressing machine memory might be considered an elementary process of semioticization. 
See P.   B. Andersen,  A Theory of Computer Semiotics (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991); 
and P.   B. Andersen, B. Holmqvist, and J.   F. Jensen,  The Computer as Medium (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 1993). 

188 
Notes
 2.  Bjarne Stroustrup, the inventor of the enormously successful programming language C++, 
quotes Machiavelli in the epigraph to the section titled  “ Abstraction Mechanisms, ” in  The C++ 
Programming Language , 3rd ed. (Reading: Addison-Wesley, 1997):  “ There is nothing more difficult 
to carry out, nor more doubtful of success, nor more dangerous to handle, than to initiate a new 
order of things. For the reformer makes enemies of all those who profit by the old order, and 
only lukewarm defenders in all those who would profit by the new order ” (222). 
 3.  See also the stratagem titled  “ Abstract Captures ” in the previous essay. 
 4.  David Allen,  Getting Things Done: The Art of Stress-Free Productivity (London: Penguin, 2001). 
 5.  A Petri net is a system for graphing the structure of events caused by interacting elements in 
mutual reaction and dependency, originally deriving from analysis of chemical reactions. 
 6.  The significance of the  “ life hacks ” trend can be attributed to this sense of a need to adapt to 
the imperatives of information. 
 7.  Cf. Berardi,  The Soul at Work ; Fisher,  Capitalist Realism . 
 8.  D.   T. Ross and K.   E. Schoman,  “ Structured Analysis for Requirements Definitions, ” in  Classics 
in Software Engineering , ed. Edward Nash Yourdon (New York: Yourdon Press, 1979), 365 – 388. 
 9.  Michel Foucault,  The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the Coll è ge de France, 1978 – 1979 , trans. 
Graham Burchell (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008). 
 10.   John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid,  The Social Life of Information (Cambridge: Harvard 
Business School Press, 2000). 
 11.   Herman Melville,  Bartleby the Scrivener (London: Hesperus, 2007). 
 12.   Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star,  Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999), 298. 
 13.   Geert Lovink and Nathaniel Tkacz, eds.,  Critical Point of View: A Wikipedia Reader (Amsterdam: 
Institute of Network Cultures, 2011). 
 14.   Brown and Duguid,  The Social Life of Information , 47. 
 15.   Eric Raymond,  The Cathedral and the Bazaar (Sebastopol, CA: O ’ Reilly Media, 2001). 
 16.   It would be interesting to see the results of the application of peer production to utilities to 
maintain limits on this way of working and to reemphasize the market as the primary mechanism 
for self-organization and the realization of desires. From a technical perspective, it is useful to 
maintain and cultivate forms of cunning that can operate in multiple conditions. 
 17.   As exemplified in initial versions of Windows Vista or KDE 4, among others. 
 18.   Edgar F. Codd,  “ A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks, ”  Communications 
of the ACM 13, no. 6 (June 1970): 377 – 387. 
 19.   Machiavelli,  The Prince , 131. 

Notes 
189
 20.   A usage initiated in OS/360. 
 21.   Ian Hacking,  “ How Should We Do the History of Statistics? ” in  The Foucault Effect: Studies in 
Governmentality , ed. Graham Burchell, Colin Gordon, and Peter Miller   (Hemel Hempstead: 
Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1991). 
 22.   Friedrich Kittler ’ s development of Foucault ’ s archaeology turns precisely on the fulcrum 
produced by this shift. 
 23.   Chris Thornton,  Truth from Trash: How Learning Makes Sense (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2000). 
 24.   This expression may sound a little odd. However, it is not unprecedented. See the discussion 
of  “ plug-ins ” and  “ psychomorphs ” in Latour,  Re-assembling the Social , 207 – 218; and more gener-
ally Guattari,  Chaosmosis . The recent research of Armand Mattelart in  The Globalization of 
Surveillance and, in a different way, that of Mark Andrejevic have started to develop a more 
detailed analysis of the links between gathering data and marketing processes. 
 25.   See Marazzi,  Capital and Language . 
 26.   The argument that the consumption of advertisements represents a form of labor is an old 
one and can be attributed to, for example, Dallas Smythe; see his  Dependency Road: Communications, 
Capitalism, Consciousness (Toronto: Ablex, 1981). For a more recent update of the argument, see, 
e.g., Mark Andrejevic,  “ The Work of Being Watched: Interactive Media and the Exploitation of 
Self-Disclosure, ”  Critical Studies in Media Communication 19, no. 2 (June 2002). 
 27.   In  Anti-Oedipus , Deleuze and Guattari insist on the distinction between the singularity of 
desiring machines and the statistical aggregates of social production. The distinction is relevant 
here for what it suggests about the antagonism between singularity and probability. 
 28.  See, e.g., Felix Salmon,  “ Recipe for Disaster: The Formula That Killed Wall Street, ”  Wired 17.03 
(February 2009). 
 Technicalities 
 1.  Workflow Management Coalition,  “ The Workflow Management Coalition Terminology 
and Glossary, ” document no. WFMC-TC-1011, p. 8, http:// www.wfmc.org/standards/docs/
TC-1011_term_glossary_v3.pdf.  
 2.  Thomas L. Friedman,  The World Is Flat: The Globalized World in the Twenty-first Century (London: 
Penguin, 2006), 78. 
 3.  For further discussion, see  http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/tc_home.php?wg_abbrev
=wsbpel. 
 4.  Friedman,  The World Is Flat , 79. 
 5.  Pointing in turn to the difficulty of saying with any precision what activities actually count 
as work in some cases. 

190 
Notes
 6.  Toscano,  “ Open Secret of Real Abstraction. ” 
 7.  Wil van der Aalst and Kees van Hee,  Workflow Management: Models, Methods, and Systems 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002), 2. 
 8.  A helpful cataloging of standard patterns may be found at the YAWL Web site:  http://www
.yawlfoundation.org.  
 9.  Harry Braverman,  Labor and Monopoly Capital (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1974). 
 10.   Friedman,  The World Is Flat . 
 11.  Perhaps an adept of neurolinguistic programming, Friedman favors the term  “ seamless ” in 
his account of workflow. 
 12.   Mark Klein and Chrysanthos Dellarocas,  “ A Knowledge-Based Approach to Exception 
Handling, ”  Computer Supported Collaborative Work 9, nos. 3 – 4 (2000): 399 – 412. 
 13.   The creation of a regular expression is the creation of a specific set of instructions or rules 
about what counts or can be  “ recognized ” as an acceptable string. A regular-expression engine, 
such as that incorporated into the Perl scripting language, provides a series of  “ metacharacters ” 
that allow an expression for matching to be constructed. ^(Mary|Mungo|Midge)$ will match lines 
of text solely comprising either  “ Mary, ”  “ Mungo, ” or  “ Midge, ” for example (the ^ metacharacter 
specifies the start of a line, the | specifies  “ or, ” and the $ specifies the end of a line). The regular 
expression. * will match anything at all, because the . metacharacter matches any character and 
the * says  “ any number of times. ” Regular-expression engines also feature a number of functions 
that extend the capacity of what can be done to process text, such as replacing strings, storing 
expressions, and so on. 
 14.   The concept of the regular expression can be traced back to S. C. Kleene ’ s 1951 Rand 
Corporation memorandum demonstrating the formal equivalence of the logic of the finite 
automaton and McCulloch and Pitts ’ s  “ logical calculus ” of nervous activity. Stephen C. Kleene, 
 “ Representation of Events in Nerve Nets and Finite Automata, ” in  Automata Studies , ed. C. 
Shannon and J. McCarthy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1956). 
 15.   The Internet Engineering Taskforce ’ s Request for Comments Repository is maintained at 
 http://www.ietf.org/rfc.html/.  
 16.   Niklaus Wirth,  Algorithm + Data Structure = Program (London: Prentice Hall, 1976). 
 17.   Cf. Barbara Cassin and Philippe B ü ttgen,  “ The Performative without Condition: A University 
sans Appel, ”  Radical Philosophy 162 (July – August 2010): 31 – 37. 
 18.   One might also consider the filing and documentation structures of an organization in terms 
of this process of regularization. 
 19.   See the discussion of formalism and discipline in chap. 3 of Marc Berg,  Rationalizing Medical 
Work (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997). 

Notes 
191
 20.   See the discussion of the  “ recognition-primed decision model ” and its relation to intuition 
in Klein,  Sources of Power , 15 – 45. 
 21.   In the informational sense that pattern is redundancy. 
 22.   For a discussion, see Kleene,  “ Representation of Events. ” 
 23.   A minor reworking of Jacques Lacan ’ s  “ that one speaks remains hidden behind what is heard 
of what is said. ” Cf. Barbara Cassin,  “ Performance before the Performative ” (forthcoming). The 
interest of speech act theory for a consideration of computing technology is a feature of the work 
of Winograd and Flores. One critique has been developed by Lucy Suchman in  “ Do Categories 
Have Politics? ”  Computer-Supported Co-operative Work 2 (1994): 177 – 190. The view we propose 
here is slightly different: computers translate speech acts into signals. 
 24.   Weibe Bijker and John Law have developed the notion of obduracy in the afterword to 
 Shaping Technology ; Madeleine Akrich and Bruno Latour examine the prescriptive aspect of tech-
nology in their essays in the same collection. Weibe Bijker and John Law, eds.,  Shaping Technology 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992). 
 25.   Which is not without analogy to the numbering systems used to organize nomadic warriors. 
See the discussion of  “ numbering number ” in Deleuze and Guattari ’ s exploration of the war 
machine and countersignifying semiotics in  A Thousand Plateaus . 
 26.   An advantage mined by the field of usability in, for instance, Steve Krug,  Don ’ t Make Me 
Think! A Common Sense Approach to Web Usability , 2nd ed. (Berkeley: New Riders, 2005). 
 27.   The idea of  “ implicatures ” in language use is associated with the work of H.   P. Grice on the 
pragmatic maxims of conversation. See  “ Logic and Conversation, ” in  Studies in the Way of Words , 
ed. H.P. Grice (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989). 
 28.   Cf. chap. 5 of Harry Collins,  Artificial Experts: Social Knowledge and Intelligent Machines 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990), 62 – 71. 
 29.   Cf. the tension between, and gradual merging of, information systems and communication 
systems described by Enrico Coiera in his  “ Informality, ” HP Laboratories technical document 
HPL-97-37. 
 30.   Edgar Codd,  “ A Relational Model for Large Shared Data Banks. ” See also Edgar Codd,  The 
Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2 (Reading: Addison-Wesley, 1990). 
 31.   Yochai Benkler,  The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom 
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006). 
 32.   Herbert A. Simon,  Sciences of the Artificial , 3rd ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996). 
 33.   J. L. Kuhns,  Answering Questions by Computer: A Logical Study (Santa Monica, CA: Rand 
Corporation, 1967). 
 34.   See, e.g., the United Kingdom ’ s Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (RIPA). 

192 
Notes
 35.   Alain Badiou and Giorgio Agamben exemplify this trend. See Alain Badiou,  Theory of the 
Subject , trans. Bruno Bosteels (London: Continuum, 2009); and Giorgio Agamben,  The State of 
Exception Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005). 
 36.   Carl Schmitt,  Political Theology: Four Chapters on the Concept of Sovereignty (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1985), 15. In the same text, Schmitt says, more infamously, that the  “ sovereign decides 
on the exception. ” We examine this claim in more detail when we address decision support 
systems. Schmitt is thought to be glossing Kierkergaard ’ s discussion of the exception in his 
 Repetition . 
 37.   From a different point of view, the sociologist Harry Collins has argued in his  Artificial Experts 
that debates about computing (he is thinking in particular of AI) are inseparable from metaphysi-
cal questions. 
 38.   Alfred Jarry,  The Exploits and Opinions of Dr. Faustroll, Pataphysician , trans. Simon Watson 
Taylor (Cambridge, MA: Exact Change, 1997). 
 39.   This, at least, is how it appears to Badiou in his  Theory of the Subject , and more generally in 
his magnum opus  Being and Event (London: Continuum, 2007). Agamben comments on related 
concerns in  The Coming Community , trans. Michael Hardt (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1993), among other places. 
 40.   Lawrence Lessig ’ s optimistic social engineering maxim  “ code is law ” can usefully be viewed 
in the light of this imminence to collapse. Lawrence Lessig,  Code, Version 2.0 (New York: Basic 
Books, 2006). 
 41.   Michael Howard and David LeBlanc,  Writing Secure Code , 2nd ed. (Seattle: Microsoft Press, 
2002). 
 42.   Grady Booch,  Object-Oriented Analysis and Design with Applications (Reading: Addison-Wesley, 
2007), 51 – 52. 
 43.   In the Java programming language, the exception belongs to the java.lang.Throwable class. 
This class contains one basic type of exception, and then further extensions. The java.lang.
NullPointerException extends java.lang.RuntimeException, which itself extends java.lang.
Exception. 
 44.   Bertrand Russell,  “ Letter to Frege ” (1902), in  From Frege to G ö del: A Sourcebook in Mathematical 
Logic, 1879 – 1931 , ed. Jean van Heijenoort (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1967), 
124 – 125. 
 45.   Friedrich Nietzsche,  Untimely Meditations , trans. R. J. Hollingdale (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1997), 123. 
 46.   Bryan Cantrill,  “ A Spoonful of Sewage, ” in  Beautiful Code: Leading Programmers Explain How 
They Think , ed. Andy Oram and Greg Wilson (Sebastopol, CA: O ’ Reilly Media, 2007), 353 – 369. 
 47.   A summary of this work can be found in John Johnson,  The Allure of Machinic Life: Cybernetics, 
Artificial Life, and the New AI (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008). 

Notes 
193
 48.   Rodney A. Brooks and Lynn Andrea Stein,  “ Building Brains for Bodies, ” in  Autonomous Robots , 
vol. 1 (Boston: Kluwer Academic, 1994), 7 – 25. 
 49.   Rodney A. Brooks,  “ Elephants Don ’ t Play Chess, ”  Robotics and Autonomous Systems 6 (1990): 
3 – 15. 
 50.   Friedrich Nietzsche,  Beyond Good and Evil: Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future , ed. Rolf-Peter 
Horstmann and Judith Norman, trans. Judith Norman (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2002), 78. 
 Productivity 
 1.  It might seem idiosyncratic to treat a concept as a mediator in the sense we propose here for 
this term; concepts are more usually thought of as more or less adequate representations of some 
aspect of states of affairs. But from a pragmatic view, building on the formulations in the strata-
gem  “ Multiply Interfaces ” (in the essay titled  “ Structures ” ), concepts operate to capture some 
aspect or another of a situation, an operation that occurs more or less successfully according to 
the transverse sets of connections they make. 
 2.  Harry Collins,  Tacit and Explicit Knowledge (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010), pro-
vides a helpful account of the semantic drift to which Polanyi ’ s concept has been subjected. 
Collins ’ s argument that the explicit, rather than the tacit, is the variety of knowledge that requires 
more understanding provides a cautionary reminder that in matters of knowledge management, 
issues are considerably more complex than they might seem. What we are interested in here, 
though, is the way that the drift to which the concept of the tacit has been subjected itself offers 
scope for the mischief of abuse and misappropriation. 
 3.  See, e.g., Antonio Damasio,  Descartes ’ Error (London: Penguin, 2005). Let us not forget in 
passing the way that Polanyi ’ s work makes itself available to an evolutionistic reading. 
 4.  J.    C. Spender and Andreas Georg Scherer,  “ The Philosophical Foundations of Knowledge 
Management: Editors ’ Introduction, ”  Organization 14, no. 1 (2007): 5 – 28,  http://ssrn.com/
abstract=958768.  
 5.  In science, the history of the development of the Royal Society and the allocation of roles in 
the development of experiments and instruments arranged between artisan and gentleman sci-
entist exemplifies this differentiation. 
 6.  See the stratagem  “ Work Abstraction Layers ” in the essay titled  “ Structures. ” 
 7.  Pierre Bourdieu,  Outline of a Theory of Practice (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977), 
83. 
 8.  Nietzsche,  On the Genealogy of Morality , 2nd essay,  § 1. 
 9.  Friedrich Nietzsche,  Writings from the Late Notebooks , ed. R ü diger Bittner, trans. Kate Sturge 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003),  § 10 (165). 
 10.   James Burnham,  The Managerial Revolution (Harmondsworth: Pelican, 1945). 

194 
Notes
 11.   Marilyn Strathern,  Audit Cultures: Anthropological Studies in Accountability, Ethics, and the 
Academy (London: Routledge, 2000), 4. 
 12.  For a discussion of the neutral, see the stratagem  “ Grayness ” in the introduction. 
 13.   As Peter F. Drucker so handsomely reminds us,  “ Indeed, one of the major contributions of 
management by objectives is that it enables us to substitute management by self-control for 
management by domination. ” Drucker,  The Practice of Management (1955; Oxford: Butterworth 
Heinemann, 1995), 129. 
 14.   Niccol ò Machiavelli,  The Prince , trans. George Bull (London: Penguin, 1964), 101. 
 15.   Louis Althusser,  Machiavelli and Us (London: Verso, 2001). 
 16.   See, e.g., Friedrich Kittler,  “ Code, ” in  Software Studies: A Lexicon , ed. Matthew Fuller 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008). 
 17.   Michel Foucault,  Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Coll è ge de France, 1977 – 78 , ed. 
Michel Senellart, trans. Graham Burchell (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007). 
 18.   See Adrian Johns ’ s mammoth reconstruction,  The Nature of the Book: Print and Knowledge in 
the Making (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000). 
 19.   An amusing fiction, and one that is less evident than it might seem — Hollywood, for 
example, routinely displays a clear anxiety that the Other might be more intelligent than  “ us. ” 
 20.   E.g., the gender performance involved in the Turing test. 
 21.   Pedagogical literature often restricts the  “ decision support system ” even further, sandwiching 
it somewhere between transaction systems, executive information, and expert systems. For 
a general background, see D.    J. Power,  “ A Brief History of Decision Support Systems, ”  http://
dssresources.com/history/dsshistory.html . For the place of Herbert Simon, see also Jean-Charles 
Pomerol and Fr é d é ric Adam,  “ On the Legacy of Herbert Simon and His Contribution to Decision 
Making Support Systems and Artificial Intelligence, ” in  Intelligent Decision-Making Support Systems 
(i-DMSS): Foundations, Applications, and Challenges , ed. J. Gupta, G. Forgionnne, and M. Mora 
(Frankfurt: Springer, 2005), 25 – 44. 
 22.  OLAP stands for online analytic processing, a way of extracting information from a database 
and presenting in a multidimensional format. It is common to a number of large database man-
agement systems. 
 23.   Herbert Simon,  Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in Administrative 
Organizations (New York: Free Press, 1997). This text lists the first three stages; the fourth stage 
appears to have been added later. See Herbert Simon,  The New Science of Management Decision , 
3rd rev. ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1977) (the first edition was published in 1960). 
 24.   Whether the model is a cause or an effect of decision support systems implemented in soft-
ware does not matter here: Simon was no more able to think outside the assemblages in which 
he found himself than is anyone else. The development of the sciences of the artificial, as he 

Notes 
195
liked to call them, during the Cold War was patently a closed-world phenomenon. See Paul N. 
Edwards,  The Closed World (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996). 
 25.  A pertinent conception of the perpetration of evil might be the one proposed by Alain Badiou 
in his  Ethics , wherein an evil is what emerges in the simulation of truth. 
 26.   Edward Yourdon,  Death March , 2nd ed. (Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall, 2003). Yourdon 
specifies that such assessment  “ includes an assessment of technical risks, personnel risks, legal 
risks, political risks, etc. ” (3). 
 27.   The death march is, of course, a military term, but one derived from administration and its 
imaginary rather than from combat action. One can see this in the victory for abstraction and 
the sumptuary expenditure of Cold War vanity projects, and in a more dispersed way in the 
asymmetric projections of force of the present. In the world of software engineering, Jerry Manas ’ s 
 Napoleon on Project Management: Timeless Lessons in Planning, Execution, and Leadership (Nashville, 
TN: Thomas Nelson, 2006) is not untypical. Alan Axelrod ’ s  Patton on Leadership: Strategic Lessons 
for Corporate Warfare (Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall, 2001) offers a good example of the figura-
tive resonances on which such thinking depends more generally. 
 28.  While not a study per se of project management, Gillian Tett ’ s study of the invention of 
credit default swaps by a team of bankers at J. P. Morgan,  Fool ’ s Gold , is highly suggestive with 
regard to the possibilities for mobilization when a group finds itself working in a subjectively 
demarcated space-time. Gillian Tett,  Fool ’ s Gold: How Unrestrained Greed Corrupted a Dream, 
Shattered Global Markets, and Unleashed a Catastrophe (New York: Little, Brown, 2009). 
 29.   The  ‘ Project Initiation Document ’ is a key element of the PRINCE2 methodology and is 
widely adopted as a key element of project management. Little work has been done on initiation 
processes. However, see Stengers and Pignarre,  “ Minions, ” chap. 4 of  Capitalist Sorcery . 
 30.   Burkard Sievers,  “ Psychotic Organization as a Metaphoric Frame for the Socioanalysis of 
Organizational and Interorganizational Dynamics, ”  Administration and Society 31, no. 5 (1999): 
588 – 615. The field of research known as  “ socio-analysis ” tends to ignore the role of techniques, 
technologies, and tools in shaping the organizational unconscious. 
 31.   Paul O. Gaddis,  “ The Project Manager, ”   Harvard Business Review 37 (1959): 89 – 97. 
 32.   It is noteworthy that Morris does not consider the mental environment at all in the list of 
externalities (roughly, side effects or indirect consequences) that he produces in his discussion 
of project management. Peter W. G. Morris,  The Management of Projects (London: Thomas Telford, 
1997). 
 33.   Cf. R. Thomsett,  “ Double Dummy Spit and Other Estimating Games, ”  American Programmer 
9, no. 6 (1996): 16 – 22. 
 34.  In this sense, we might say that the project is to work what utopias are to politics. For more 
on utopias and semantic neutralization, see Louis Marin,  Utopics: The Semiotics of Spatial Play , 
trans. Robert Vollrath (Amherst, NY: Humanity Books, 1984). 

196 
Notes
 35.   The Gantt chart was developed in 1917 by Henry Gantt as a way of organizing the produc-
tion of armaments at the Frankford Arsenal in Pennsylvania. 
 36.   To borrow the title of Edward Tufte ’ s well-known book. See  The Visual Display of Quantitative 
Information , 2nd ed. (Cheshire, CT: Graphic Press, 2001). The discussion forum on Tufte ’ s Web 
site contains a number of threads on project plans. See, e.g.,  http://www.edwardtufte.com/
bboard/q-and-a-fetch-msg?msg_id=000076.  
 37.   A notion owed to Deleuze and Guattari ’ s  Anti-Oedipus . 
 38.   For the early proponents of project management, it was a matter of  “ making ” the work of 
scientists fit in with strategic and economic goals of the U.S. military-industrial complex. See 
Gaddis,  “ The Project Manager. ” 
 39.  “ Delegation ” is a role that STS theorists often attribute to technological devices. See Madeline 
Akrich,  “ The De-scription of Technical Objects, ” in Bijker and Law,  Shaping Technology . It is also 
a role that psychoanalysts attribute to representations. In the psychoanalytic sense, delegation 
is equally a form of displacement of energy, a redirection. 
 40.   Project management handbooks insist that communication is the key skill of the project 
manager. 
 41.   Michel Callon,  “ Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation: Domestication of the Scallops 
and the Fishermen of Saint Brieuc Bay, ” in  Power, Action, and Belief: A New Sociology of Knowledge? 
Sociological Review Monograph 32, ed. John Law (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1986). 
 42.   Herbert A. Simon,  Administrative Behavior (New York: Macmillan, 1947), 47. 
 43.   Alfred Sohn-Rethel,  Intellectual and Manual Labour: A Critique of Epistemology (London: 
Macmillan, 1978). 
 44.   Franco  “ Bifo ” Berardi,  The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy , trans. Cadel F. and G. 
Mecchia (New York: Semiotext[e], 2009). 
 45.   The terms used by I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi,  The Knowledge-Creating Company (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 1995). 
 46.   Rationalizing the organization as a quasi-computational input-output system is one of the 
features of Simon ’ s work. 
 47.  Nonaka and Takeuchi,  The Knowledge-Creating Company , 156. 
 48.   On the growing importance of oxymoron in contemporary discourse, see Bertrand Meheust, 
 La politique de l ’ oxymore (Paris: D é couverte, 2009). 
 49.  Thierry Melchior,  Cr é er le reel (Paris: Seuil, 1998), 247 – 392. 
 50.   K. C. Laudon and J. P. Laudon,  Management Information Systems: New Approaches to Organization 
and Technology , 5th ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1998); cited in Marc Berg,  “ Patient Care Information 
Systems and Health Care Work: A Sociotechnical Approach, ”  International Journal of Medical 
Informatics 55 (1999): 88. 

Notes 
197
 51.   Warren G. Bennis,  The Unconscious Conspiracy: Why Leaders Can ’ t Lead (New York: AMACOM, 
1976). 
 52.   Edgar Schein,  Organizational Culture and Leadership (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2004). 
 53.   R. L. Daft and R. H. Lengel,  “ Information Richness: A New Approach to Managerial Behavior 
and Organizational Design, ” in  Research in Organizational Behavior , vol. 6, ed. L. L. Cummings 
and B. M. Staw (Homewood, IL: JAI Press, 1984). 
 Excellence 
 1.  It is, in a sense, what Agre is pointing toward in his article  “ Surveillance and Capture: Two 
Models of Privacy. ” 
 2.  Romilla Ready and Kate Burton,  NLP for Dummies (Chichester: John Wiley and Sons, 2004), 
9. The key text is Richard Bandler and John Grinder,  The Structure of Magic I: A Book about Language 
and Therapy (Palo Alto: Science  & Behavior Books, 1975). 
 3.  This is a highly simplified account of mathematical modeling as used in more or less scientific 
research: a model of sorts itself, then. Our account differs somewhat from model theory as it is 
understood in mathematics and computing science. On the model theory, see Alain Badiou,  The 
Concept of Model , trans. Zachary Fraser and Tzuchien Tho (Melbourne: re.press, 2007). The history 
of the use of models in science is explored in, e.g., Daniela Bailer-Jones,  “ Tracing the Development 
of Models in the Philosophy of Science, ” in  Model-Based Reasoning in Scientific Discovery , ed. 
Lorenzo Magnani, Nancy J. Nersessian, and Paul Thagard (Berlin: Springer, 1999). 
 4.  Some confusion arises between modeling and models, particularly in cognitive science. For 
techniques of influence, such confusions are both felicitous and propitious. 
 5.  Compare this with Virno, who adopts an Aristotelian principle of virtuosity in his exploration 
of the role of language in production, or with Cassin ’ s reading of the performative nature of 
sophist eloquence. Virno,  The Grammar of the Multitude ; Cassin,  L ’ Effet sophistique . 
 6.  See the detailed discussion of these in Bandler and Grinder,  Structures of Magic . 
 7.  The notion of the  “ well-formed ” is everywhere present in NLP. It comes from formal logic. 
 8.  This may be one way to distinguish between the metamodeling of neurolinguistic program-
ming and the metamodeling of schizoanalysis. Regrettably, the take-up of schizoanalysis in 
business circles has been somewhat limited. See F é lix Guattari,  Les cartographies schizoanalytiques 
(Paris: Galil é e, 1989). 
 9.  Mary S. Morgan and Margaret Morrison, eds.,  Models as Mediators: Perspectives on Natural and 
Social Science (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), esp. chaps. 2 and 3. 
 10.   NLP theorists sometimes bemoan resistance to the unconscious assimilation of patterns of 
excellence (perhaps a residual or vestigial resistance to the authority, the glory of the guru). Self-
modeling is encouraged under such circumstances. 

198 
Notes
 11.   NLP arguably improves on SMART thinking by complementing Specific, Measurable, 
Attainable, and Relevant outcomes with sensory experience. On SMART see George T. Doran, 
 “ There ’ s a S.M.A.R.T. Way to Write Management ’ s Goals and Objectives, ”  Management Review 70, 
no. 11 (1981). 
 12.   Giorgio Agamben explores the possibility that money and mysticism share a somewhat more 
involved relationship in  La regne et la gloire (Paris: Seuil, 2008). 
 13.   That pragmatic, and more exactly stratagematic, considerations are operative in computation 
is made evident in textbooks on a regular basis. See, e.g., Stephane Faroult,  The Art of SQL 
(Sebastopol, CA: O ’ Reilly Media, 2006). 
 14.  Jean-Pierre Dupuy,  On the Origins of Cognitive Science: The Mechanization of the Mind (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2009). 
 15.   Edwards,  The Closed World . 
 16.   Robert Putnam,  Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community (New York: 
Simon  & Schuster, 2000). 
 17.   For the detail, see Teuvo Kohonen,  Self-Organizing Maps (Berlin: Springer, 2001). 
 18.   Saul D. Alinsky,  Rules for Radicals: A Pragmatic Primer for Realistic Radicals (New York: Vintage, 
1989). 
 19.   See, e.g., Tom Peters,  Thriving on Chaos: Handbook for a Management Revolution (New York: 
Harper Perennial, 1987). 
 20.   Varlam Shalamov,  Kolyma Tales , trans. John Glad (London: Penguin, 1994), 127. 
 21.   Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page,  “ The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web Search 
Engine, ”  Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 30, nos. 1 – 7 (April 1998): 107 – 117,  § 1.3.2. 
 22.   Stephen Baker,  The Numerati (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2008). 
 23.  Philip Agre,  “ The Practical Logic of Computer Work, ” in  Computationalism: New Directions , 
ed. Matthias Scheutz (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002). 
 24.   On the  “ parliament of things, ” see Bruno Latour,  We Have Never Been Modern , trans. Catherine 
Porter (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993). 
 25.   Jean-Paul Sartre,  Being and Nothingness (London: Methuen, 1958), 59 – 61. 
 26.   Erving Goffman,  The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (London: Penguin, 1990); R. C. 
Schank and R. Abelson,  Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1977). 
 27.   A minor point, perhaps, but the increasing penetration of information technology into 
everyday life would not have happened if every software upgrade required the direct intervention 
of a computer engineer. 
 28.   Ronald Loui,  “ In Praise of Scripting: Real Programming Pragmatism, ”  IEEE Computer 41, 
no. 7 (2008). 

Notes 
199
 29.   F é lix Guattari explores the concept of the  “ universe of reference ” in his  Cartographies 
schizoanalytiques . 
 30.   Bhabha,  “ Sly Civility. ” 
 31.   Performative utterances, like scripts, can be used to configure roles:  “ I thee wed. ” 
 32.   “ Rapport ” is an important element of neurolinguistic programming and allegedly derives 
from observations of the excellence of the hypnosis strategies of Milton Erickson. See Jay Haley, 
 Uncommon Therapy: Psychiatric Techniques of Milton H. Erickson ,  M.D. (New York: W. W. Norton, 
1993). 
 33.   The  “ Collateral Murder ” video published on the WikiLeaks Web site displays the confusion 
of scaling and universes of reference particularly clearly. 
 34.   Quoted in Bill Moggridge,  Designing Interactions (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006), 466. 
 35.   Jean Baudrillard,  The System of Objects , trans. James Benedict (London: Verso, 1996). 
 36.   Victor Tausk,  “ The Influencing Machine, ” in  Zone 6: Incorporations , ed. Jonathan Crary and 
Sanford Kwinter (New York: Zone Books, 1992), 542 – 569. 
 37.   Melanie Klein,  “ A Contribution to the Psychogenesis of Manic-Depressive States, ” in 
 Contributions to Psychoanalysis, 1921 – 1945 (London: Hogarth, 1948). 
 38.   D.   W. Winnicott,  “ Transitional Objects and Transitional Phenomena: A Study of the First 
Not-Me Possession, ”  International Journal of Psychoanalysis 34 (1953). 
 39.   Andy Clark and David Chalmers,  “ The Extended Mind, ”  Analysis 58, no. 1 (1982): 7 – 19. 
 40.   Michael Wheeler,  “ Minds, Things, and Materiality, ” in  The Cognitive Life of Things: Recasting 
Boundaries of the Mind , ed. Lambros Malafouris and Colin Renfrew (Cambridge: McDonald 
Institute for Archaeological Research, 2010). 
 41.  Ben Schneiderman,  “ Direct Manipulation: A Step beyond Programming Languages, ”  IEEE 
Computer 16, no. 8 (August 1983): 57 – 69. 
 42.   Scott Forstall, iPad promotional video,  http://www.apple.com/ipad  (accessed May 12, 2010). 
 43.   Gustave Flaubert, quoted in  “ Stan and Ollie in the Lab, ” Mark Polizotti, introduction to 
 Bouvard and P é cuchet , by Gustave Flaubert, trans. Mark Polizotti (Normal, IL: Dalkey Archive Press, 
2005), xv. 
 44.   Linsey McGoey,  “ On the Will to Ignorance in Bureaucracy, ”  Economy and Society 36, no. 2 
(2007): 212 – 235. 
 45.   Avital Ronell,  Stupidity (Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 2003), 10. On the  “ image of 
thought, ” see Deleuze,  Difference and Repetition , chap. 3. 
 46.   Ed Hutchins,  Cognition in the Wild (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996). 

200 
Notes
 47.   Anselm Strauss,  “ The Articulation of Project Work: An Organizational Process, ”  Sociological 
Quarterly 29, no. 2 (1988): 63 – 178; Lucy Suchman,  “ Supporting Articulation Work, ” in 
 Computerization and Controversy: Value Conflicts and Social Choices , ed. Rob Kling (London: 
Academic Press, 1991), 407 – 423. 
 48.   Ann Macintosh,  “ Position Paper on Knowledge Asset Management, ”  http://www.aiai.ed.ac
.uk/~alm/kam.html.  More explicitly, Macintosh defines knowledge management as  “ the identi-
fication and analysis of available and required knowledge, and the subsequent planning and 
control of actions to develop knowledge assets so as to fulfill organizational objectives. ” 
 49.   See, e.g., Etienne C. Wenger,  Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998). 
 50.   Flaubert,  Bouvard and P é cuchet . 
 51.   See J.-C. Spender and Andreas Georg Scherer,  “ The Philosophical Foundations of Knowledge 
Management: Editors ’ Introduction, ”  Organization 14, no. 1 (2007): 5 – 28. 
 52.   As the work of Alain Badiou suggests, thinking is affirmed in the interruption of the algo-
rithms of subjectivity. Badiou,  Theory of the Subject , esp. sec. 4. 
  

 Bibliography 
 Aalst ,  Wil van der , and  Kees  van Hee .   Workflow Management: Models, Methods, and Systems . 
 Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  2002 . 
 Adorno ,  Theodor , and  Max  Horkheimer .   The Dialectic of Enlightenment .  London :  Verso ,  1997 . 
 Agamben ,  Giorgio.   The Coming Community . Trans. Michael Hardt.  Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press ,  1993 . 
 Agamben ,  Giorgio .   La regne et la gloire .  Paris :  Seuil ,  2008 . 
 Agamben ,  Giorgio .  The Man without Content . Trans. Georgia Albert.  Stanford :  Stanford University 
Press ,  1999 . 
 Agamben ,  Giorgio .   The State of Exception .  Chicago :  University of Chicago Press ,  2005 . 
 Agre ,  Philip .  The practical logic of computer work . In   Computationalism: New Directions , ed. 
 Matthias   Scheutz .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  2002 . 
 Agre ,  Philip .  Surveillance and capture: Two models of privacy . In   The New Media Reader , ed.  Noah 
 Wardrip-Fruin  and  Nick  Montfort .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  2003 . 
 Akerloff ,  George , and  Robert   Shiller .   Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the Economy, 
and Why It Matters .  Princeton, NJ :  Princeton University Press ,  2009 . 
 Akrich ,  Madeline .  The de-scription of technical objects . In   Shaping Technology , ed.  Weibe  Bijker  
and  John  Law .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  1992 . 
 Alinsky ,  Saul D.   Rules for Radicals: A Pragmatic Primer for Realistic Radicals .  New York :  Vintage , 
 1989 . 
 Allen ,  David .   Getting Things Done: The Art of Stress-Free Productivity .  London :  Penguin ,  2001 . 
 Alt ,  Casey .  Viral load: The fantastic rhetorical power of the computer virus in the contemporary 
U.S. technoscape . In   Fremdk ö rper , ed. Philipp Sarasin, special issue,   Ö sterreichische Zeitschrift f ü r 
Geschichtswissenschaft  16  ( 3 ) ( 2005 ):  133  – 149 . 
 Althusser ,  Louis .   Machiavelli and Us .  London :  Verso ,  2001 . 

202 
Bibliography
 Alvarez ,  Lizette . Meet Mikey, 8: U.S. has him on watch list.  New York Times , January 13,  2010 .  
 Andersen ,  P. B.   A Theory of Computer Semiotics .  New York :  Cambridge University Press ,  1991 . 
 Andersen ,  P. B. ,  B.   Holmqvist , and  J. F.   Jensen .  The Computer as Medium .  New York :  Cambridge 
University Press ,  1993 . 
 Anderson ,  Benedict .   Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism . 
 London :  Verso ,  1991 . 
 Anderson ,  Chris .   The Long Tail: How Endless Choice Is Creating Unlimited Demand .  London : 
 Random House ,  2006 . 
 Andrejevic ,  Mark .   iSpy: Surveillance and Power in the Interactive Era .  Lawrence :  University Press of 
Kansas ,  2009 . 
 Andrejevic ,  Mark .  The work of being watched: Interactive media and the exploitation of self-
disclosure.   Critical Studies in Media Communication  19  ( 2 ) (June  2002 ):  230 – 248 . 
 Anonymous . Psychological operations in guerrilla warfare. New York: Vintage Books,  1985 .  
 Ariely ,  Dan .   Predictably Irrational .  Rev. ed .  London :  HarperCollins ,  2009 . 
 Arthur ,  Brian  W.  The Nature of Technology: What It Is and How It Evolves .  London :  Penguin , 
 2010 . 
 Atkinson ,  Max .   Our Masters ’ Voices: The Language and Body-Language of Politics .  London :  Routledge , 
 1984 . 
 Axelrod ,  Alan .   Patton on Leadership: Strategic Lessons for Corporate Warfare .  Hemel Hempstead : 
 Prentice Hall ,  2001 . 
 Badiou ,  Alain .  Being and Event .  London :  Continuum ,  2007 . 
  Badiou ,  Alain .   The Concept of Model . Trans. Zachary Fraser and Tzuchien Tho.  Melbourne :  re.press , 
 2007 . 
 Badiou ,  Alain .  Ethics: An Essay on the Understanding of Evil . Trans. Peter Hallward.  London :  Verso , 
 2001 . 
 Badiou ,  Alain .   Theory of the Subject . Trans. Bruno Bosteels.  London :  Continuum ,  2009 . 
 Bailer-Jones ,  Daniela .  Tracing the development of models in the philosophy of science . In   Model-
Based Reasoning in Scientific Discovery , ed.  Lorenzo   Magnani ,  Nancy J.   Nersessian , and  Paul 
 Thagard .  Berlin :  Springer ,  1999 . 
 Ball ,  Frank ,  Denis  Mollison , and  Gianpaolo   Scalia-Tomba .  Epidemics with two levels of mixing . 
 Annals of Applied Probability  7 ( 1 ) ( 1997 ):  46  – 89 . 
 Baker ,  Stephen .   The Numerati .  New York :  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt ,  2008 . 
 Bandler ,  Richard , and  John   Grinder .  The Structure of Magic I: A Book about Language and Therapy . 
 Palo Alto :  Science  & Behavior Books ,  1975 . 

Bibliography 
203
 Barry ,  Andrew .  Political Machines .  London :  Athlone ,  2001 . 
 Barthes ,  Roland .   The Neutral . Trans. Rosalind E. Krauss and Denis Hollier.  New York :  Columbia 
University Press ,  2005 . 
 Baudrillard ,  Jean .   For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign.  Trans. Charles Levin.  St. Louis, 
MO :  Telos Press ,  1981 . 
 Baudrillard ,  Jean .   In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities .  New York :  Semiotext(e) ,  1983 . 
 Baudrillard ,  Jean .   The System of Objects . Trans. James Benedict.  London :  Verso ,  1996 . 
 Beniger ,  James R.  The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of the Information 
Society .  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press ,  1986 . 
 Benkler ,  Yochai .  The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom . 
 New Haven :  Yale University Press ,  2006 . 
 Benner ,  Erica .   Machiavelli ’ s Ethics .  Princeton, NJ :  Princeton University Press ,  2009 . 
 Bennis ,  Warren G.   The Unconscious Conspiracy: Why Leaders Can ’ t Lead .  New York :  AMACOM , 
 1976 . 
 Berardi, Franco  “ Bifo. ”  The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy . Trans. Francesca Cadel and 
Giuseppina Mecchia.  New York :  Semiotext(e) ,  2009 . 
 Berg ,  Marc .  Patient care information systems and health care work: A sociotechnical approach . 
 International Journal of Medical Informatics  55  ( 1999 ):  87  – 101 . 
 Berg ,  Marc .   Rationalizing Medical Work:  Decision Support Techniques and Medical Practices .  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press ,  1997 . 
 Bergson ,  Henri .   Creative Evolution .  New York :  Dover Books ,  1998 . 
 Bernays ,  Edward .   Propaganda .  New York :  Horace Liveright ,  1928 . 
 Bhabha ,  Homi .  Sly civility .   October  34  ( 1985 ):  71  – 80 . 
 Bijker ,  Weibe , and  John   Law , eds.   Shaping Technology .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  1992 . 
 Bishop ,  Mark .  Dancing with pixies: Strong artificial intelligence and panpsychism . In   Views into 
the Chinese Room: New Essays on Searle and Artificial Intelligence , ed.  John  Preston and  Mark   Bishop , 
 360  – 378 .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press ,  2002 . 
 Blum ,  Alan .   The Grey Zone in Health and Illness .  London :  Intellect ,  2010 . 
 Boltanski ,  Luc .   Different Suffering .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press ,  1999 . 
 Booch ,  Grady .   Object-Oriented Analysis and Design with Applications .  Reading :  Addison-Wesley , 
 2007 . 
 Borch-Jacobsen ,  Mikkel .  L ’ inconscient simul é . In   La guerre des psys , ed.  Tobie   Nathan .  Paris :  Les 
Emp ê cheurs de Penser en Rond ,  2006 . 

204 
Bibliography
 Borch-Jacobsen ,  Mikkel .  Remembering Anna O.: A Century of Mystification .  New York :  Routledge , 
 1996 . 
 B ö rger ,  E. High level system design and analysis using abstract state machines. In  Proceedings of 
the International Workshop on Current Trends in Applied Formal Method: Applied Formal Methods , ed. 
D. Hutter, W. Stephan, P. Traverso, and M. Ullmann. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 
1641. London: Springer,  1999 . 
 Bourdieu ,  Pierre .   Outline of a Theory of Practice .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press ,  1977 . 
 Bowker ,  Geoffrey C. , and  Susan Leigh   Star .   Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences . 
 Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  1999 . 
 Braverman ,  Harry .   Labor and Monopoly Capital .  New York :  Monthly Review Press ,  1974 . 
 Brin ,  Sergey,  and  Lawrence   Page .  The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web search engine . 
 Computer Networks and ISDN Systems  30  (1 – 7) (April  1998 ):  107  – 117 . 
 Brooks ,  Rodney A.   Elephants don ’ t play chess .   Robotics and Autonomous Systems  6 ( 1990 ):  3 – 15 . 
 Brooks ,  Rodney A. , and  Lynn Andrea   Stein .  Building brains for bodies . In   Autonomous Robots , vol. 
1,  7 – 25 .  Boston :  Kluwer Academic ,  1994 . 
 Brown ,  John Seely , and  Paul   Duguid .  The Social Life of Information .  Cambridge :  Harvard Business 
School Press ,  2000 . 
 Brynjolfsson ,  Erik ,  Yu Jeffrey   Hu , and  Duncan   Simester . Goodbye Pareto principle, hello long tail: 
The effect of search costs on the concentration of product sales. November  2007 .  http://ssrn
.com/abstract=953587.  
 Bumiller ,  Elizabeth . We have met the enemy and he is PowerPoint.  New York Times , April 26, 
 2010 .  
 Burnham ,  James .   The Managerial Revolution .  Harmondsworth :  Pelican Books ,  1945 . 
 Caffentzis ,  George C.  Crystals and analytic engines: Historical and conceptual preliminaries to a 
new theory of machines.  Ephemera 7 (1) (2007): 24 – 45.  http://www.ephemeraweb.org/journal/
7-1/7-1caffentzis.pdf.  
 Callon, Michel.  Some elements of a sociology of translation: Domestication of the scallops and 
the fishermen of Saint Brieuc Bay . In   Power, Action, and Belief: A New Sociology of Knowledge? ed. 
 John  Law . Sociological Review Monograph 32.  London :  Routledge  & Kegan Paul ,  1986 . 
 Callon ,  Michel ,  Pierre   Lascoumes , and  Yannick   Barthe .   Acting in an Uncertain World . Trans. 
Graham Burchell.  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  2009 . 
 Cantrill ,  Bryan .  A spoonful of sewage . In   Beautiful Code: Leading Programmers Explain How They 
Think , ed.  Andy  Oram and  Greg   Wilson , 353 – 369.  Sebastopol, CA :  O ’ Reilly Media ,  2007 . 
 Cassin ,  Barbara .   L ’ Effet sophistique .  Paris :  Gallimard ,  1995 . 
 Cassin ,  Barbara.  Performance before the performative. Forthcoming.  

Bibliography 
205
 Cassin ,  Barbara,  and  Philippe   B ü ttgen .  The performative without condition: A university sans 
appel .   Radical Philosophy  162  (July – August  2010 ): 31 – 37. 
 Clark ,  Andy , and  David   Chalmers .  The extended mind .   Analysis  58  ( 1 ) ( 1982 ):  7 – 19 . 
 Codd ,  Edgar .  The Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2 .  Reading :  Addison-Wesley , 
 1990 . 
 Codd ,  Edgar F.   A relational model of data for large shared data banks .   Communications of the ACM 
 13  ( 6 ) (June  1970 ):  377  – 387 . 
 Coiera ,  Enrico . Informality. HP Laboratories technical document HPL-97-37.  
 Collins ,  Harry .   Artificial Experts: Social Knowledge and Intelligent Machines  .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT 
Press ,  1990 . 
 Collins ,  Harry .  Tacit and Explicit Knowledge .  Chicago :  University of Chicago Press , 2010 . 
 Collins ,  Harry , and  Trevor  Pinch .   The Shape of Actions .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  1998 . 
 Coyne ,  Richard .   The Tuning of Place .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  2010 . 
 Crosby ,  Alfred ,  Jr .   Ecological Imperialism ,  2nd ed.   Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press , 
 2004 . 
 Daft ,  R. L. , and  R. H.   Lengel .  Information richness: A new approach to managerial behavior and 
organizational design . In   Research in Organizational Behavior , vol. 6, ed.  L. L.   Cummings  and  B. 
M.  Staw , 191 – 233.  Homewood, IL :  JAI Press ,  1984 . 
 Damasio ,  Antonio .   Descartes ’ Error .  London :  Penguin ,  2005 . 
 Dean ,  Kenneth , and  Brian   Massumi .   First and Last Emperors: The Absolute State and the Body of the 
Despot .  New York :  Autonomedia ,  1992 . 
 Debord ,  Guy . Report on the construction of situations and on the International Situationist 
tendency ’ s conditions of organization and action (June 1957). In  Situationist International 
Anthology , ed. Ken Knabb. Berkeley: Bureau of Public Secrets,  1981 . 
 Debord ,  Guy .   The Society of the Spectacle .  Detroit :  Black and Red ,  1970 . 
 De Landa ,  Manuel .   Simulation and Philosophy .  London :  Continuum ,  2011 . 
 Deleuze ,  Gilles .   Difference and Repetition . Trans. Paul Patton.  London :  Athlone ,  1994 . 
 Deleuze ,  Gilles .  The exhausted . In   Essays Critical and Clinical , trans. Daniel W. Smith and Michael 
A. Greco,  152  – 174 .  London :  Verso ,  1998 . 
 Deleuze ,  Gilles .   The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque . Trans. Tom Conley.  London :  Athlone ,  1993 . 
 Deleuze ,  Gilles .   The Logic of Sense . Trans. Mark Lester.  London :  Athlone ,  1990 . 
 Deleuze ,  Gilles , and  F é lix   Guattari .   Anti-Oedipus .  Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota Press , 
 1983 . 

206 
Bibliography
 Deleuze ,  Gilles , and  F é lix   Guattari .   A Thousand Plateaus . Trans. Brian Massumi.  Minneapolis : 
 University of Minnesota Press ,  1987 . 
 Deleuze ,  Gilles , and  F é lix   Guattari .   What Is Philosophy?  Trans. Graham Burchell and Hugh 
Tomlinson.  London :  Verso ,  1994 . 
 Despret ,  Vinciane .  Le secret est une dimension politique de la th é rapie . In  La guerre des psys, 
manifeste pour une psychoth é rapie democratique , ed. T. Nathan.  Paris :  Les Emp ê cheurs de Penser en 
Rond,   2006 . 
 Despret ,  Vinciane .  Quand le loup habitera avec l ’ agneau .  Paris :  Les Emp ê cheurs de Penser en Rond , 
 2002 . 
 Didi-Huberman ,  Georges .   Invention of Hysteria:  Charcot and the Photographic Iconography of the 
Salp ê tri è re .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  2003 . 
 Dohse ,  Knuth ,  Ulrich  Jurgens , and  Thomas   Malsch . From  “ Fordism ” to  “ Toyotism ” ? The social 
organization of the labor process in the Japanese automobile industry. International Institute for 
Labour Policy, Working Paper, Berlin, April  1984 . 
 Doran ,  George T.  There ’ s a S.M.A.R.T. way to write management ’ s goals and objectives.  Management 
Review 70 (11) ( 1981 ): 35 – 36.  
 Dreyfus ,  Hubert .   What Computers Still Can ’ t Do .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  1979 . 
 Drucker ,  Peter F.   The Practice of Management . 1955;  Oxford :  Butterworth Heinemann ,  1995 . 
 Dupuy ,  Jean-Pierre .   On the Origins of Cognitive Science: The Mechanization of the Mind .  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press ,  2009 . 
 Edwards ,  Paul N.   The Closed World .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  1996 . 
 Eisenberg ,  E. M.  Ambiguity as strategy in organizational communication .   Communication 
Monographs  51 ( 1984 ):  227  – 242 . 
 Empson ,  William .   The Seven Types of Ambiguity ,  2nd ed.   London :  Chatto and Windus ,  1949 . 
 Faroult ,  Stephane .   The Art of SQL .  Sebastopol, CA :  O ’ Reilly Media ,  2006 . 
 50 Cent and Robert Greene.   The 50th Law .  New York :  Harper ,  2009 . 
 Fisher ,  Mark .   Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative?  Winchester : Zero Books ,  2009 . 
 Flahault ,  Francois .   Malice . Trans. Liz Heron.  London :  Verso ,  2003 . 
  Flaubert ,  Gustave .  Bouvard and P é cuchet . Trans. Mark Polizotti. Normal, IL: Dalkey Archive Press, 
 2005 . 
 Flynn ,  Elizabeth Gurley .   Sabotage: The Conscious Withdrawal of Workers ’ Industrial Efficiency . 
 Cleveland :  Industrial Workers of the World ,  1916 . 
 Forstall ,  Scott . iPad promotional video.  http://www.apple.com/ipad  (accessed May 12, 2010).  

Bibliography 
207
 Foucault ,  Michel .   The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the Coll è ge de France, 1978 – 1979 . Trans. 
Graham Burchell.  London :  Palgrave Macmillan ,  2008 . 
 Foucault ,  Michel . Nietzsche, genealogy, history. In  Language, Counter-memory, Practice , ed. Donald 
F. Bouchard. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,  1977 .  
 Foucault ,  Michel .  Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Coll è ge de France, 1977 – 78 . Ed. Michel 
Senellart, trans. Graham Burchell. London: Palgrave Macmillan,  2007 . 
 Freedom Fighter ’ s Manual.  http://www.ballistichelmet.org/school/free.html.  
 Freud ,  Sigmund .  Beyond the Pleasure Principle , Standard Edition,  vol. 18 . New York: W. W. Norton, 
 1955 . 
 Friedman ,  Thomas L.   The World Is Flat: The Globalized World in the Twenty-first Century .  London : 
 Penguin ,  2006 . 
 Gaddis ,  Paul O.  The project manager.  Harvard Business Review , no. 37 ( 1959):  89 – 97.  
 Galison ,  Peter .  The ontology of the enemy: Norbert Wiener and the cybernetic vision .  Critical 
Inquiry  21  ( 1 ) (autumn  1994 ):  228  – 266 . 
 Gauchet ,  Marcel .   L ’ inconscient c é r é bral .  Paris :  Seuil ,  1992 . 
 Gille ,  Bertrand .   The Renaissance Engineers .  London :  Lund Humphries ,  1966 . 
 Ginzburg ,  Carlo .  The Cheese and the Worms: The Cosmos of a Sixteenth-Century Miller . Trans. John 
Tedeschi and Anne C. Tedeschi.  Baltimore, MD :  Johns Hopkins University Press ,  1992 . 
 Gladwell ,  Malcolm .   The Tipping Point .  London :  Abacus ,  2001 . 
 Goffman ,  Erving .   The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life .  London :  Penguin ,  1990 . 
 Gomart ,  Emilie . Surprised by methadone: In praise of drug substitution treatment in a French 
clinic.  Body and Society 10 (2 – 3) (June  2004 ): 85 – 110.   
 Goody ,  Jack .   Domestication of the Savage Mind .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press ,  1977 . 
 Google . Code of Conduct.  http://investor.google.com/corporate/code-of-conduct.html.  
 Goriunova ,  Olga .  Art Platforms and Cultural Production on the Internet .  London :  Routledge , 
2011 . 
 Graci á n ,  Balthasar .   The Art of Worldly Wisdom . Trans. Joseph Jacobs.  London :  Shambhala ,  1993 . 
 Grice ,  H. P.  Logic and conversation. In  Studies in the Way of Words , ed. H.   P. Grice. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press,  1989 . 
 Guattari ,  F é lix .  Chaosmosis . Trans. Paul Bains and Julian Pefanis.  Sydney :  Power Institute ,  1995 . 
 Guattari ,  F é lix .  Les cartographies schizoanalytiques .  Paris :  Galil é e ,  1989 . 
 Guattari ,  F é lix . Machinic junkies. In  Soft Subversions . New York: Semiotext(e),  1996 . 

208 
Bibliography
 Gurevich ,  Yuri .   Logic and the Challenge of Computer Science .  New York :  Computer Science Press , 
 1988 . 
 Guy ,  Richard K.  The strong law of small numbers .   American Mathematical Monthly  95  ( 8 ) (October 
 1988 ):  697  – 712 . 
 Hakim ,  Catherine .  Erotic capital .   European Sociological Review  26  ( 5 ) ( 2010 ):  1 – 20 . 
 Hacking ,  Ian . How should we do the history of statistics? In  The Foucault Effect: Studies in 
Governmentality , ed. Graham Burchell, Colin Gordon, and Peter Miller. Hemel Hempstead: 
Harvester Wheatsheaf,  1991 .  
 Haley ,  Jay .  Uncommon Therapy: Psychiatric Techniques of Milton H. Erickson, M.D .  New York :  W. W. 
Norton ,  1993 . 
 Harman ,  Graham .   Prince of Networks: Bruno Latour and Metaphysics . Melbourne: re.press,  2009 . 
 Harman ,  Graham .   Tool-being .  Peru, IL :  Open Court ,  2002 . 
 Hawkes ,  Terence .  William Empson ’ s influence on the CIA .   Times Literary Supplement (June  2009 ): 
 10 . 
 Hayward ,  Rhodri .  The tortoise and the love-machine: Grey Walter and the politics of electroen-
cephalography .   Science in Context  14  ( 4 ) ( 2001 ):  615  – 641 . 
 Holzman ,  Michael .  James Jesus Angleton: The CIA and the Craft of Counterintelligence .  Amherst : 
 University of Massachusetts Press ,  2008 . 
 Horkheimer ,  Max .   Critique of Instrumental Reason .  London :  Continuum ,  1983 . 
 Howard ,  Michael , and  David   LeBlanc .   Writing Secure Code ,  2nd ed.   Seattle :  Microsoft Press ,  2002 . 
 Howe ,  Jeff.  The rise of crowdsourcing.  Wired 14.06 (June  2006) .  
 Hunter ,  Edward .  Brain-Washing in Red China: The Calculated Destruction of Men ’ s Minds .  New York : 
 Vanguard Press ,  1951 . 
 Hutchins ,  Ed .  Cognition in the Wild .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  1996 . 
 Illouz ,  Eva .   Cold Intimacies: The Making of Emotional Capitalism .  Cambridge :  Polity ,  2007 . 
 Imbert ,  Claude .   Ph é nom é nologies et langues formulaires .  Paris :  PUF ,  1992 . 
 Internet Engineering Taskforce .  Request for comments repository.  http://www.ietf.org/rfc.html.  
 Jarry ,  Alfred .   The Exploits and Opinions of Dr. Faustroll, Pataphysician . Trans. Simon Watson Taylor. 
 Cambridge, MA :  Exact Change ,  1997 . 
 Johns ,  Adrian .  The Nature of the Book: Print and Knowledge in the Making .  Chicago :  University of 
Chicago Press ,  2000 . 
 Johnson ,  Chalmers .   Blowback .  New York :  Holt Paperbacks ,  2004 . 
 Johnson ,  John .  The Allure of Machinic Life: Cybernetics, Artificial Life, and the New AI .  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press ,  2008 . 

Bibliography 
209
 Jorn ,  Asger .  The situationists and automation . In  Situationist International Anthology , ed.  Ken 
 Knabb .  Berkeley :  Bureau of Public Secrets ,  1981 . 
 Kelty ,  Christopher .  Two Bits: The Cultural Significance of Free Software .  Durham :  Duke University 
Press ,  2008 . 
 Kirby ,  Reid . Paradise lost: The psycho agents.  Quarterly Journal of the Harvard Sussex Program on 
CBW Armament and Arms Limitation , no. 71 (May  2006 ): 1.   
 Kittler ,  Friedrich . Code. In  Software Studies: A Lexicon , ed. Matthew Fuller. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press,  2008 . 
 Kleene ,  Stephen C . Representation of events in nerve nets and finite automata. In  Automata 
Studies , ed. C. Shannon and J. McCarthy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,  1956 . 
 Klein ,  Gary .   Sources of Power: How People Make Decisions .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  1999 . 
 Klein ,  Mark , and  Chrysanthos   Dellarocas .  A knowledge-based approach to handling exceptions 
in workflow systems.   Computer Supported Collaborative Work  9 ( 3 – 4 ) ( 2000 ):  399 – 412 . 
 Klein ,  Melanie .  A contribution to the psychogenesis of manic-depressive states . In   Contributions 
to Psychoanalysis, 1921 – 1945 .  London :  Hogarth Press and the Institute of Psychoanalysis ,  1948 . 
 Kohonen ,  Teuvo .   Self-Organizing Maps .  Berlin :  Springer ,  2001 . 
 Krug ,  Steve .  Don ’ t Make Me Think! A Common Sense Approach to Web Usability ,  2nd ed.   Berkeley : 
 New Riders ,  2005 . 
 Kuhns ,  J. L.   Answering Questions by Computer: A Logical Study .  Santa Monica, CA :  Rand Corporation , 
 1967 . 
 Kupiec ,  Jean-Jacques , and  Pierre   Sonigo .   Ni Dieu ni g è ne:  Pour une autre th é orie de l’h é r é dit é .  Paris : 
 Seuil ,  2000 . 
 Lacan ,  Jacques .   Ecrits: A Selection . Trans. Alan Sheridan.  London :  Routledge ,  1977 . 
 Latour ,  Bruno .  Irreductions . In  The Pasteurization of France , trans. Alan Sheridan and John Law. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,  1993 . 
 Latour ,  Bruno .  Pandora ’ s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies .  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard 
University Press ,  1999 . 
 Latour ,  Bruno .  The Pasteurization of France . Trans Alan Sheridan and John Law.  Cambridge, MA : 
 Harvard University Press ,  1988 . 
 Latour ,  Bruno .  Re-assembling the Social .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press ,  2005 . 
 Latour ,  Bruno .  Science in Action .  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press ,  1987 . 
 Latour ,  Bruno .  We Have Never Been Modern . Trans. Catherine Porter.  Cambridge :  Harvard University 
Press ,  1993 . 
 Laudon ,  K. C. , and  J. P.   Laudon .  Management Information Systems: New Approaches to Organization 
and Technology ,  5th ed.   New York :  Macmillan ,  1998 . 

210 
Bibliography
 Laufer ,  Romain , and  Catherine   Paradeise .   Marketing Democracy: Public Opinion and Media Formation 
in Democratic Societies . Trans. Noel Castelino.  New Brunswick, NJ :  Transaction ,  1990 . 
 Lazarfeld ,  Paul .   Personal Influence: The Part Played by People in the Flow of Mass Communications . 
 Piscataway, NJ :  Transaction ,  2006 . 
 Lazzarato ,  Maurizio.   Exp é rimentations politiques.  Paris: Editions Amsterdam,  2009 . Translation 
forthcoming from MIT Press.   
 Le Poulichet ,  Sylvie .   Toxicomanies et psychanalyse: Les narcoses du d é sir .  Paris :  PUF ,  1987 . 
 Lessig ,  Lawrence .   Code, Version 2.0 .  New York :  Basic Books ,  2006 . 
 Levi ,  Primo .   The Drowned and the Saved . Trans Raymond Rosenthal.  London :  Abacus ,  1989 . 
 Lobachevski ,  Nicholas . The theory of parallels, trans. George Bruce Halsted, appendix to  Non-
Euclidean Geometry: A Critical and Historical Study of Its Development , by Roberto Bonola, trans. H. 
S. Carslaw.  New York :  Dover Books ,  1955 . 
 Loui ,  Ronald . In praise of scripting: Real programming pragmatism.  IEEE Computer 41 (7) ( 2008 ): 
22 – 26.  
 Lovink ,  Geert , and  Nathaniel   Tkacz , eds.   Critical Point of View: A Wikipedia Reader .  Amsterdam : 
 Institute of Network Cultures ,  2011 . 
 Lyon ,  David , ed.   Surveillance and Social Sorting .  London :  Routledge ,  2002 . 
 Lyotard ,  Jean-Fran ç ois .   The Differend .  Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota Press ,  1988 . 
 Machiavelli , Niccol ò .   The Prince . Trans. George Bull.  London :  Penguin ,  1964 . 
 Macintosh ,  Ann . Position paper on knowledge asset management.  http://www.aiai.ed.ac.uk/~alm/
kam.html.  
 MacKenzie ,  Donald .   An Engine, Not a Camera: How Financial Models Shape Markets  .  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press ,  2006 . 
 MacKenzie ,  Donald ,  Fabian   Muniesa , and  Lucia  Siu .   Do Economists Make Markets? On the 
Performativity of Economics .  Princeton, NJ :  Princeton University Press ,  2007 . 
 Manas ,  Jerry .  Napoleon on Project Management: Timeless Lessons in Planning, Execution, and 
Leadership .  Nashville, TN :  Thomas Nelson ,  2006 . 
 Marazzi ,  Christian .  Capital and Language . New York: Semiotext(e),  2008 . 
 Marin ,  Louis .  Utopics: The Semiotics of Spatial Play . Trans. Robert Vollrath.  Amherst, NY :  Humanity 
Books ,  1984 . 
 Marion ,  Jean-Luc .   Sur l ’ ontologie grise de Descartes .  Paris :  J. Vrin ,  1975 . 
 Mattelart ,  Armand .   The Globalization of Surveillance .  London :  Polity ,  2010 .  
 Mayall ,  Roy .   Dear Granny Smith .  London :  Short Books ,  2009 . 

Bibliography 
211
 McGoey ,  Linsey .  On the will to ignorance in bureaucracy .   Economy and Society  36  ( 2 ) ( May 2007 ): 
 212  – 235 . 
 McLuhan ,  Marshall .  Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press , 
 1994 . 
 Meheust ,  Bertrand .   La politique de l ’ oxymore .  Paris :  D é couverte ,  2009 . 
 Melchior ,  Thierry .   Cr é er le reel .  Paris :  Seuil ,  1998 . 
 Melville ,  Herman .   Bartleby the Scrivener .  London :  Hesperus Press ,  2007 . 
 Milgram ,  Stanley .   Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View .  London :  Harper Collins , 
 1974 .  
 Minsky ,  Marvin . Jokes and their relation to the cognitive unconscious.  1981 .  http://web.media
.mit.edu/~minsky/papers/jokes.cognitive.txt.  
 Mirowski ,  Philip .   Machine Dreams: Economics Becomes a Cyborg Science .  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press ,  2002 . 
 Moggridge ,  Bill .   Designing Interactions .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  2006 . 
 Moravia ,  Alberto .   Boredom . Trans. Angus Davidson.  New York :  NYRB ,  1999 . 
 Morgan ,  Mary S. , and  Margaret   Morrison , eds.  Models as Mediators: Perspectives on Natural and 
Social Science .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press ,  1999 . 
 Morris ,  Peter W. G.   The Management of Projects .  London :  Thomas Telford ,  1997 . 
 Munster ,  Anna . Nerves of data: The neurological turn in/against networked media.  Computational 
Culture 1 (December 2011),  http://www.computationalculture.net.  
 Nathan ,  Tobie .  A qui j ’ appartiens?  Paris :  Seuil ,  2007 . 
 Newton ,  Isaac .  Philosopiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (The Mathematical Principles of Natural 
Philosophy) .  London :  S. Pepys ,  1687 . 
 Nietzsche ,  Friedrich .  Beyond Good and Evil: Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future . Ed. Rolf-Peter 
Horstmann and Judith Norman, trans. Judith Norman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
 2002 . 
 Nietzsche ,  Friedrich .  On the Genealogy of Morality . Ed. Keith Ansell-Pearson, trans. Carol Diethe. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,  1994.  
 Nietzsche ,  Friedrich .   Untimely Meditations . Trans. R.    J. Hollingdale.  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press ,  1997 . 
 Nietzsche ,  Friedrich .  Writings from the Late Notebooks . Ed. R ü diger Bittner, trans. Kate Sturge. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,  2003 . 
 Ngai ,  Sianne .   Ugly Feelings .  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press ,  2005 . 

212 
Bibliography
 Nonaka ,  I. , and  H.   Takeuchi .  The Knowledge-Creating Company. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
 1995 . 
 Nriagu,   Jerome,  et al.  Saturnine gout among Roman aristocrats: Did lead poisoning 
contribute to the fall of the Empire?   New England Journal of Medicine  308  ( 11 ) (March  1983 ): 
 660  – 663 . 
 Nye ,  David .   The American Technological Sublime .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  1994 . 
 Office of Government Commerce . Project initiation documentation.  http://www.ogc.gov.uk/
documentation_and_templates_project_initiation_document_pid.asp  (accessed February 28, 
 2010 . Site now defunct).  
 Parikka ,  Jussi .  Digital Contagions .  New York :  Peter Lang ,  2007 . 
 Peters ,  Tom .  Thriving on Chaos: Handbook for a Management Revolution .  New York :  Harper Perennial , 
 1987 . 
 Pignarre ,  Philippe .   Comment la d é pression est devenue une  é pid é mie .  Paris :  D é couverte ,  2001 . 
 Pignarre ,  Philippe .   Les malheurs des psys .  Paris :  D é couverte ,  2006 . 
 Pomerol ,  Jean-Charles , and  Fr é d é ric  Adam .  On the legacy of Herbert Simon and his contribution 
to decision making support systems and artificial intelligence . In   Intelligent Decision-Making 
Support Systems (i-DMSS): Foundations, Applications, and Challenges , ed.  J.   Gupta ,  G.  Forgionnne , 
and  M.  Mora ,  25 – 44 .  Frankfurt :  Springer ,  2005 . 
 Power ,  D. J.  A brief history of decision support systems.  http://dssresources.com/history/
dsshistory.html . 
 Power ,  Michael .   Organized Uncertainty: Designing a World of Risk Management .  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press ,  2007 . 
 Pressman ,  Jack .   The Last Resort: Psychosurgery and the Limits of Medicine .  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press ,  1998 . 
 Putnam ,  Robert .   Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community .  New York :  Simon 
 &  Schuster ,  2000 . 
 Pynchon ,  Thomas .   Gravity ’ s Rainbow .  London :  Penguin ,  1995 . 
 Raymond ,  Eric .  The Cathedral and the Bazaar:  Musings on Linux and Open Source by an Accidental 
Revolutionary .  Sebastopol , CA: O ’ Reilly Media,  2001 . 
 Ready ,  Romilla , and  Kate   Burton .   NLP for Dummies .  Chichester :  John Wiley and Sons ,  2004 . 
 Retort .   Afflicted Powers: Capital and Spectacle in a New Age of War .  London :  Verso ,  2005 . 
 Rheingold ,  Howard .   Smart Mobs: The Next Social Revolution .  New York :  Basic Books ,  2002 . 
 Ridley ,  Matt .   The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature .  London :  Viking , 
 1993 . 

Bibliography 
213
 Rivi è re ,  Carole . Le lien de d é pendance addictive  à Internet: Une nouvelle forme d ’ addiction? 
Observatoire des Mondes Num é riques en Sciences Humaines.  http://www.omnsh.org/article
.php3?id_article=94.  
 Rogers , Robert.  Rogers ’ Rangers Rules ,  1757 .  http://www.military-info.com/freebies/roger.htm .  
 Ronell ,  Avital .  Crack Wars: Literature, Addiction, Mania .  Lincoln :  University of Nebraska Press , 
 1992 . 
 Ronell ,  Avital .  Stupidity .  Chicago :  University of Illinois Press ,  2003 . 
 Ross ,  D. T. , and  K. E.   Schoman .  Structured analysis for requirements definitions . In  Classics in 
Software Engineering , ed.  Edward Nash   Yourdon ,  365  – 388 .  New York :  Yourdon Press ,  1979 . 
 Russell ,  Bertrand .  Letter to Frege  (1902). In   From Frege to G ö del: A Sourcebook in Mathematical 
Logic, 1879 – 1931 , ed.  Jean   van Heijenoort ,  124  – 125 .  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press , 
 1967 . 
 Sampson ,  Tony .  How networks become viral: Three questions concerning universal contagion . 
In   The Spam Book: On Viruses, Porn, and Other Anomalies from the Dark Side of Digital Culture , ed. 
 Jussi  Parikka  and  Tony D.  Sampson .  Cresskill, NJ :  Hampton Press ,  2009 . 
 Sartre ,  Jean-Paul .   Being and Nothingness .  London :  Methuen ,  1958 . 
 Schank ,  R. C. , and  R.   Abelson .   Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding .  Hillsdale, NJ :  Erlbaum , 
 1977 . 
 Scheflin ,  Alan , and  Edward   Opton .   The Mind Manipulators .  London :  Paddington Press ,  1978 . 
 Schein ,  Edgar .  Organizational Culture and Leadership .  Hoboken, NJ :  John Wiley ,  2004 . 
 Scheutz ,  Matthias , ed.   Computationalism: New Directions .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  2002 . 
 Schmitt ,  Carl .   Political Theology: Four Chapters on the Concept of Sovereignty .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT 
Press ,  1985 . 
 Schneiderman ,  Ben .  Direct manipulation: A step beyond programming languages .   IEEE Computer 
 16  ( 8 ) (August  1983 ):  57  – 69 . 
 Schopenhauer ,  Arthur .   The Art of Always Being Right .  London :  Gibson ,  2005 . 
 Shalamov ,  Varlam .   Kolyma Tales . Trans. John Glad.  London :  Penguin ,  1994 . 
 Shaviro ,  Steven .   Post-Cinematic Affect .  Winchester :  Zero Books ,  2010 . 
 Shklovsky ,  Victor .   Zoo, or Letters Not about Love: A Novel . Trans. Richard Sheldon.  Normal , IL: 
 Dalkey Archive Press ,  2001 . 
 Sievers ,  Burkard .  Psychotic organization as a metaphoric frame for the socioanalysis of organiza-
tional and interorganizational dynamics .   Administration and Society  31  ( 5 ) ( 1999 ):  588  – 615 . 
 Silverstone ,  Roger .   Media and Morality .  London :  Polity ,  2007 . 

214 
Bibliography
 Simon ,  Herbert A.   Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in Administrative 
Organizations .  4th ed.   New York :  Free Press ,  1997 . 
 Simon ,  Herbert A.   The New Science of Management Decision , 3rd rev. ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall,  1977 . 
 Simon ,  Herbert A.   Sciences of the Artificial ,  3rd ed.   Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  1996 . 
 Sironi ,  Francoise .   Bourreaux et victimes .  Paris :  Odile Jacob ,  1992 . 
 Situationist International . Preliminary problems in constructing a situation (1958). In  Situationist 
International Anthology , ed. Ken Knabb. Berkeley: Bureau of Public Secrets,  1981 .  
 Sohn-Rethel ,  Alfred .  Intellectual and Manual Labour: A Critique of Epistemology. London: Macmillan, 
 1978 . 
 Smythe ,  Dallas .   Dependency Road: Communications, Capitalism, Consciousness .  Toronto :  Ablex , 
 1981 . 
 Sorokin ,  Vladimir .   The Queue . Trans. Sally Laird.  New York :  NYRB Classics ,  2008 . 
 Spender ,  J.   C., and  Andreas Georg   Scherer .  The philosophical foundations of knowledge manage-
ment: Editors ’ introduction .   Organization  14  ( 1 ) ( 2007 ):  5 – 28 . 
 StankDawg .  Hacking Google AdWords . In   The Best of 2600: A Hacker Odyssey , ed.  Emmanuel 
 Goldstein .  Indianapolis :  Wiley ,  2008 .  
 Star ,  Susan Leigh .  The ethnography of infrastructure .   American Behavioral Scientist  43  ( 1999 ): 
 377  – 391 . 
 Star ,  Susan Leigh .  This is not a boundary object: Reflections on the origin of a concept .   Science, 
Technology, and Human Values  35  ( 5 ) ( 2010 ): 601 – 617.  
 Star ,  Susan Leigh , and  James L.   Griesemer . Institutional ecology,  “ translations, ” and boundary 
objects: Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley ’ s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907 – 39.  Social 
Studies of Science 19 (3) (August  1989 ): 387 – 420.   
 Stengers ,  Isabelle .  Cosmopolitiques , vol. 7:  Pour en finir avec la tolerance . Paris: D é couverte,  1997 . 
 Stengers ,  Isabelle .  The Invention of Modern Science . Trans. Daniel W. Smith.  Minneapolis :  University 
of Minnesota Press ,  2000 . 
 Stengers ,  Isabelle . Relaying the war machine. In  The Guattari Effect , ed. Eric Alliez and Andrew 
Goffey. London: Continuum,  2011 . 
 Stengers ,  Isabelle , and  Philippe   Pignarre .   Capitalist Sorcery: Breaking the Spell . Trans. Andrew 
Goffey.  London :  Palgrave ,  2011 . 
 Stewart ,  Kathleen .   Ordinary Affects .  Durham, NC :  Duke University Press ,  2007 . 
 Stone ,  Alluqu é re Roseanne .   The War of Desire and Technology at the Close of the Machine Age . 
 Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  1996 . 

Bibliography 
215
 Strathern ,  Marilyn , ed.   Audit Cultures: Anthropological Studies in Accountability, Ethics, and the 
Academy .  London :  Routledge ,  2000 .  
 Strauss ,  Anselm .  The articulation of project work: An organizational process .   Sociological Quarterly 
 29  ( 2 ) ( 1988 ):  163  – 178 . 
 Strauss ,  Leo .   The City and Man .  Chicago :  Rand McNally ,  1964 . 
 Streatfield ,  Dominic .   Brainwashing. The Secret History of Mind Control .  London :  Hodder ,  2006 . 
 Stroustrup ,  Bjarne .   The C++ Programming Language ,  3rd ed.   Reading :  Addison-Wesley ,  1997 . 
 Suchman ,  Lucy .  Do categories have politics?   Computer Supported Cooperative Work  2 ( 1994 ): 
 177  – 190 .  
 Suchman ,  Lucy . Supporting articulation work. In  Computerization and Controversy: Value Conflicts 
and Social Choices , ed. Rob Kling, 407 – 423. London: Academic Press,  1991 . 
 Szilard  ,   Leo . On the decrease of entropy in thermodynamic systems by the intervention of 
intelligent beings. In  Maxwell ’ s Demon 2: Entropy, Classical and Quantum Information, Computing , 
ed. Harvey S. Leff and Andrew F. Rex, 110 – 119. Bristol: Institute of Physics Publications, 
 2003  .  
 Taber ,  Robert .  The War of the Flea .  New York :  Brassey ’ s ,  2002 . 
 Tarde ,  Gabriel .  The Laws of Imitation . Trans. Elsie Parsons.  New York :  Henry Holt ,  1903 . 
 Tarski ,  Alfred .  Truth and proof. In   A Philosophical Companion to First-Order Logic , ed. R. I .G. 
Hughes .  Cambridge, MA :  Hackett ,  1993 . Originally published in   Scientific American , June 
1969.   
 Tasi c´ ,  Vladimir. Politics of chaos. n.d.  
 Tausk ,  Victor . The influencing machine. In  Zone 6: Incorporations , ed. Jonathan Crary and Sanford 
Kwinter, 542 – 569. New York: Zone Books,  1992 .  
 Taylor ,  Kathleen .   Brainwashing: The Science of Thought Control .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press , 
 2004 . 
 Thomsett ,  R.  Double dummy spit and other estimating games .   American Programmer  9 ( 6 ) ( 1996 ): 
 16  – 22 . 
 Thornton ,  Chris .   Truth from Trash: How Learning Makes Sense .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  2000 . 
 Tett ,  Gillian .   Fool ’ s Gold: How Unrestrained Greed Corrupted a Dream, Shattered Global Markets, and 
Unleashed a Catastrophe .  Boston :  Little, Brown ,  2009 . 
 Toscano ,  Alberto.  The open secret of real abstraction.  Rethinking Marxism 7 (2) (April  2008  ): 
273 – 287 .  
 Toulmin ,  Stephen .   Cosmopolis: The Hidden Agenda of Modernity . Chicago:  University of Chicago 
Press ,  1990 . 

216 
Bibliography
 Tufte ,  Edward .  The Visual Display of Quantitative Information ,  2nd ed.   Cheshire, CT :  Graphic Press , 
 2001 . 
 Virno ,  Paolo .  The Grammar of the Multitude . Trans. Isabella Bertoletti, James Cascaito, and Andrea 
Casson. New York: Semiotext(e),  2004 . 
 von Neumann ,  John , and  Oskar   Morgenstern .   Theory of Games and Economic Behavior .  Princeton, 
NJ :  Princeton University Press ,  1944 . 
 Vural ,  Ulas , and  Yusuf  Akgul .  Eye-gaze based real-time surveillance video synopsis .  Pattern 
Recognition Letters  30   (12)  (September  2009 ):  1151 – 1159 . 
 Wagner ,  Harvey M.   Principles of Operations Research with Applications to Managerial Decisions ,  2nd 
ed.  Englewood Cliffs, NJ :  Prentice Hall ,  1975 . 
 Weizman ,  Eyal .  The Least of All Possible Evils: Humanitarian Violence from Arendt to Gaza .  London : 
 Verso ,  2012 . 
 Wenger ,  Etienne C.   Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity .  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press ,  1998 . 
 Wheeler ,  Michael .  Minds, things, and materiality . In   The Cognitive Life of Things: Recasting 
Boundaries of the Mind , ed.  Lambros  Malafouris  and  Colin   Renfrew .  Cambridge :  McDonald 
Institute for Archaeological Research ,  2010 . 
 Whitehead ,  Alfred North .   Process and Reality ,  2nd ed.   London :  Macmillan – Free Press ,  1978 . 
 WikiLeaks . Collateral murder. April 5,  2010 .  http://www.collateralmurder.com.  
 Winnicott ,  D.   W. Transitional objects and transitional phenomena: A study of the first not-me 
possession.  International Journal of Psychoanalysis  34  ( 1953 ): 89 – 97.  
 Wirth ,  Niklaus .   Algorithm + Data Structure = Program . Upper Saddle River, NJ:  Prentice Hall ,  1976 . 
  Workflow Management Coalition . The workflow management coalition terminology 
and glossary. Document no. WFMC-TC-1011, p. 8.  http://www.wfmc.org/standards/docs/
TC-1011_term_glossary_v3.pdf.  
 YAWL Foundation . YAWL: Yet another workflow language.  http://www.yawl-system.com/
resources/patterns.html.  
 Yourdon ,  Edward .   Death March ,  2nd ed.  Upper Saddle River, NJ:  Prentice Hall ,  2003 . 
 Ž i ž ek ,  Slavoj .   Living in the End Times .  London :  Verso ,  2010 . 
 Ž i ž ek ,  Slavoj .  The Puppet and the Dwarf: The Perverse Core of Christianity .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT 
Press ,  2003 . 

 Index 
 Abstract data type (ADT), 85 – 86 
 Abstraction, 13, 77 – 82, 85, 86, 88, 89, 107, 
116, 120, 123, 124, 151 
 cognitive, 65 
 conceptual, 19 
 concrete, 71, 76 
 formalized, 16 
 layer, 62, 65, 78, 79, 81, 85, 86, 87 – 89, 91, 
120 
 mechanism, 85 
 quantitative, 143 
 sign, 112 
 Abstract-state machine.  See Machine 
 Accident, 101, 103 
 Addiction, 21, 37, 42, 68 
 Administration, 1, 12, 47, 144, 147 
 Advertising, 67 
 Aesthetic, aesthetics, 7, 13, 21, 72, 135, 
165 
 of combinatoriality, 68 
 of cunning, 130 
 grotesque, 130 
 quality, 7, 10 
 sensibility, 3, 21 
 Affect, 4, 11, 12, 14, 18, 19, 25, 38, 40, 42, 
66, 76, 91, 138 
 energy, 21 
 intensity, 11 
 investment, 142 
 labor, 4 
 philosophy, 91 
 Agency, 7, 8, 9, 31, 32, 49, 51, 76, 88, 89, 95, 
99, 106, 138, 153, 160, 163 
 AJAX, 106 
 Algorithm, 11, 14, 22, 31, 33, 35, 63, 69 – 82, 
83 – 86, 87, 98 – 99, 113, 114, 120, 138, 154 
 certainty, 171 
 codification, 127 
 data-crunching, 135 
 dynamic, 147 
 finality, 158 
 flow, 119 
 genetic, 99 
 indexing and weighting, 133 
 model, 38 
 operation, 79, 86 
 perfection, 76 
 process, 64 
 quality, 79, 83 
 rule, 117 
 subject, 160 
 subjectivity, 78 
 tendency, 23 
 workflow, 15, 149 
 Alienation, 107, 109 
 Alinsky, Saul, 155 – 156 
 Alliance, 3, 11, 14, 20, 29, 39, 40, 41, 59 
 Althusser, Louis, 130 
 Ambiguity, 18, 35, 56, 125, 129, 144 – 145 
 interpretation, 100 
 strategic, 36 
 systemic, 29 – 32, 32 – 35 

218 
Index
 Angleton, James Jesus, 30 
 Anxiety, 33, 35 – 38, 42, 58, 102, 138 
 Archive, 12, 16, 94, 103, 168 
 Arguing, art of, 9 
 Aristotle, 16, 22 
 Art, artfulness, 16, 17, 22, 40, 141 
 of always being right, 9, 22, 149 
 of arguing, 9 
 of winning, 26 
 Artificial intelligence (AI), 34, 47, 123, 133, 
152, 157, 159, 166 
 ASCII (American Standard Code for 
Information Interchange), 113 
 Assemblage, 15, 58, 88, 167, 168 
 cognitive, 164 
 computational, 162 
 Automation, 96, 101, 160 
 behavior, 90 
 business process, 105 
 habit, 171 
 role play, 159 
 Autonomy, 16, 26, 38, 76 
 loss, 25 
 Avoidance, 67, 68, 77 
 Axiology 
 media, 4 
 power, 6 
 programmer, 159 
  
 Badiou, Alain, 21 
 Banality, 15 
 Barthes, Roland, 11 
 Baudrillard, Jean, 56, 163 
 Behavior, 54 – 58, 60, 61, 64, 70, 74, 75, 81, 
87, 90, 91, 100, 123, 156, 158, 160 
 automation, 90 
 brand, 83 
 cognitive, 159 
 computational, 165 
 intelligent, 159, 168 
 parameter, 158 
 pattern, 31, 32, 33, 97 
 pious, 102 
 semioticization, 98 
 shaping, 3 
 standardized, 131 
 virtuous, 149 
 Behaviorism, 36, 38 
 Bergson, Henri, 53, 151 
 Bishop, Mark, 47 – 48 
 Black box, black boxing, 4, 9, 12 – 13, 48, 85, 
120, 141 
 Blog, 67 
 Bolshevik Party, 58 – 59 
 Book, 7 – 11, 30, 107, 117, 132, 147, 169 
 handbook, 19 
 rule book, 47, 48 
 Boredom, 14, 67, 98 
 Bourdieu, Pierre, 128, 170 
 distinction, 128 
 habitus, 128, 170 
 Brain, 20, 25, 51, 52, 90, 126, 144, 151, 152, 
154, 164.  See also Brainwashing; Cognition; 
Mind 
 activity, 38 
 adaptive, 153 
 blood-brain barrier, 41 
 central processor, 70 
 dressage, 128 
 hand-eye-brain, 55 
 Brainwashing, 25 – 29, 37 
 Brand, 107.  See also Branding 
 behavior, 83 
 damage, 61 
 Branding, 151 
 Breuer, Josef, 37 
 Brooks, Rodney, 123 
 Brown, John Seely, 90 
 Browser, 20, 106, 111 
 BSD licence, 50 
 Bug, 17, 32, 35, 60, 92, 119, 140, 
165 
 Bureaucracy, 94 
 bureaucratic reason, 137 
 paper-based, 91 
 of statistics, 93 – 95 

Index 
219
 Business, 1, 84, 91, 132, 150 
 community, 51 
 model, 99, 132 
 ontology, 76 
 operation, 97 
 plan, 164 
 process, 105, 108 
 projections, 135 
 report, 135 
  
 C++, 86 
 Calculation, 73, 74, 138, 144, 152 
 Calculus, 4, 5, 14, 77, 144, 158 
 educational, 152 
 first-order predicate, 31 
 malefic, 21, 70 
 pseudo-economic, 21 
 stratagematic, 32 
 strategic, 30, 40 
 Call center, 107, 111 
 worker, 48, 49, 161 
 Callicles, 18.  See also Sophism; Sophists 
 Capital, 157, 167 
 cognitive, 126 
 cultural, 36 
 dissipation, 117 
 human, 155 
 intellectual, 126, 141 
 movement, 58 
 personal, 126 
 social, 143 
 Capitalism, 4, 52 
 Capitalization, 66 
 Capture, abstract, 77 – 82 
 Categorization, 72, 115 
 CCTV (Closed-circuit Television), 76 
 CD player, 124 
 Certainty, 120.  See also Uncertainty 
 algorithmic, 171 
 Chance, 19, 49, 59, 60, 61, 87, 103, 122, 131 
 Chaos, 8, 13, 14, 35, 76, 87, 143, 171 
 Charcot, Jean-Martin, 27 
 Chemistry, 40 
 Chinese room, 47 – 49 
 Chomsky, Noam, 148 
 CIA (Central Intelligence Agency), 27, 29, 
30, 43 
 Cipher, 112 
 Classification, 144 
 machine, 94 
 Codd, Edgar, 93, 114 – 115 
 Code, 35, 88, 118 – 119, 143, 152, 162 
 alphanumeric, 73 
 binary, 81 
 computer, 16, 81, 107 
 credit, 84 
 cut ’ n ’ paste, 159 
 modification, 50 
 processing, 72 
 secure, 118 
 simple, 20 
 source, 20, 50 
 Coder, 119 
 Coding, 35, 81, 106, 119, 148.  See also 
Decoding; Encoding; Transcoding; Writing 
 Cognition, 26, 70, 77, 106, 111, 164 
 distributed, 153, 167, 168 
 situated, 123 
 Cognitive behavioral therapy, 42 
 Cognitive science, 37, 57, 98, 163 
 Cold War, 25 – 26, 29, 32, 37 
 Colonialism.  See Power, colonial 
 Combinatoriality, 116 
 aesthetics, 68 
 Command, 5, 33, 48, 97, 113, 152 
 chain, 140, 162 
 and control, 107 
 deviant, 160 
 line, 110, 159 
 social, 3 
 Commodification, 52 
 Community, 21, 66, 106, 155 
 business, 51 
 imagined, 8 
 of practice, 169 
 service, 44 

220 
Index
 Compatibility, 64 
 machine, 112 
 Complexity, 10, 81, 139, 151, 153, 160 
 attack, 79 
 computational, 79 
 information, 87 
 workflow, 106 
 Computability, 152, 153 
 Computation, 48, 50, 61, 72, 87, 116, 121, 
122, 123, 151 
 Computationalism, 47, 70, 152 
 Computational theory of mind, 70 
 Computer science, 18, 54, 72, 80, 82, 107.  See 
also Computing 
 Computing, 73, 98, 122.  See also Computer 
science 
 cloud, 76 
 consumer-grade, 165 
 forensic, 31 
 Internet, 111 
 personal, 166 
 science, 85 
 ubiquitous, 81, 95 
 Confusion, 87, 89, 103 
 of roles, 160, 161 
 Consensus, 8, 9, 34, 129 
 Consistency, 16, 32, 162 
 self-, 165 
 Consultant, 58, 106 
 management, 85, 147 
 Consumer, 1, 20, 58, 98, 99, 117, 168 
 preference, 127 
 Consumption, 21, 41, 54, 57, 67, 71, 97, 99, 
131, 144, 155 
 Content management system, 169 
 Control, 12, 15, 21, 27, 28, 29, 33, 40, 49, 56, 
73, 75 – 76, 80, 83, 84, 94, 96, 97, 105 – 108, 
115, 120, 121, 127, 128, 140, 161, 163 
 command-and-control, 107 
 crowd, 41 
 data, 84 
 development, 85 
 fantasy, 152 
 flow, 118, 119 – 120 
 media system, 9 
 mind, 25, 26, 36 – 38, 39 
 parametric, 94 
 programmable, 4 
 proprietary, 20 
 quality, 48 
 recursiveness, 75 
 stock, 51 
 under, 30 
 Cooperation, 10, 105, 106, 110, 126, 127, 
139, 140, 167 
 Coordination, 8, 10, 50, 92, 96, 105, 110, 
139, 140 
 Copyright, 91 
 Corporation, 21, 61, 99, 106, 107, 110 
 pharmaceutical, 58 
 tech, 106 
 Corruption, 76 
 Craftiness, 124 
 Creativity, 63, 107, 156, 157 
 Credulity, 55 
 Crisis, 52, 123 
 management, 41 
 period, 43 
 Crowdsourcing, 50 – 52 
 Cunning, 2, 6, 21, 42, 112, 125, 130, 131, 
132, 160 
 aesthetic of, 130 
 artful, 18 
 ruseful, 16, 35, 133 
 Customization, 51, 160, 165 
 Cybernetics, 141 
 Cyborg 
 quality, 13 
 science, 54 
  
 Data, 18, 57, 63, 64, 65, 72, 73, 79, 89, 92, 
93, 95, 102, 106, 108, 111, 115 – 116, 122, 
132, 157, 164, 165 
 abstract data type (ADT), 85 – 86 
 bank, 115, 117 
 crunching, 135 

Index 
221
 digital, 21 
 dump, 2 
 entry, 112, 115 
 extraction, 85 
 field, 62, 112, 113, 114 
 flow, 86, 108 
 input, 135, 150, 154 
 gathering, 12, 95, 97 
 harvest, 16 
 mining, 57, 67, 94, 96 – 100, 116 
 posting, 56 
 structure, 15, 31, 58, 78, 83 – 86, 112, 
156 
 traffic, 4 
 yielding, 157 
 Database, 1, 12, 31, 51, 60, 63, 92, 94, 
114 – 117, 119, 131, 132, 134, 135, 
156, 169 
 normalization, 92, 115, 157 
 relational, 93, 114 – 117 
 Dataset, 93 – 96, 97 
 Dataveillance, 31 
 Dating, 56, 63 – 65.  See also Romance; Flirting 
 Dean, Kenneth, 53 
 Debt, 67, 99 
 Deception, 23, 26, 30, 31, 34, 98, 133 
 Deciphering, 34 
 Decision, 91, 95, 98, 99, 132 – 136, 154 
 making, 4, 44, 70, 89 – 90, 92, 98, 108, 
132 – 136 
 strategic, 99 
 Decision support system (DSS), 132 – 136 
 Decoding, 33.  See also Coding; Encoding; 
Transcoding 
 Deletion, 101, 115, 148, 149, 164 
 Deleuze, Gilles, 31 
 Democracy, 13, 78 
 representative, 70 
 Deniability, 143 
 plausible, 34, 37, 81 
 Descartes, Ren é , 13 
 cogito, 132 
 proportion, 139 
 De-skilling, 107, 108 
 Determination, 158 
 probabilistic, 63 
 Determinism, 40 
 Disruption, 49 
 Dissimulation, 13, 23, 30, 133 
 Distortion, 139, 148, 148 
 Document, 7, 9, 29, 31, 32, 43, 44, 60, 89, 
100, 101, 102, 103, 105, 110, 114, 135, 
168, 169 
 briefing, 11 
 classification, 144 
 electronic, 32 
 government, 112 
 policy, 168 
 of policy and procedure, 2 
 reader, 111 
 RFC, 111 
 storage, 16 
 strategy, 7, 135 
 system, 90 
 writing, 169 
 Drug, 39, 42, 67, 81 
 addiction, 21 
 design, 40 
 industry, 167 
 marketization, 41 
 prescription, 42 
 Duguid, Paul, 90 
 Dulles, Allen, 27 
 Duty, 26, 63 
 sense, 65 
  
 Ecology, 11, 34 
 media, 3, 7, 8, 10, 22, 33 39 
 Economics, 13, 54, 69, 148, 168 
 behavioral, 55 – 56, 58 
 Economy, 16, 26, 55, 56, 57, 61, 75, 79, 98, 
102, 105, 112, 166 
 communication, 112 
 information, 1 
 knowledge, 14, 19, 57, 79, 100, 
166 

222 
Index
 Education, 151 – 155.  See also Learning 
 system, 33 
 reeducation, 137, 149, 151 
 E-mail, 15, 58, 86, 106, 144, 168, 160 
 attachment, 10 
 Emotion, 4, 39, 91, 136, 164 
 Empowerment, 1, 45, 87.  See also Power 
 self-, 44 
 Empson, William, 29 – 30 
 Encapsulation, 120 
 Encoding, 101.  See also Coding; Decoding 
 Encrypting, 30 
 Encyclopedia, 91.  See also Wikipedia 
 Engineering, 17, 40, 148, 150, 158, 164 
 knowledge, 96, 127, 128, 150 
 practices, 80 
 reverse, 9 
 rigor, 166 
 social, 47 – 49 
 software, 110, 164 
 Entropy, 49, 87 
 Enunciation, 112 
 machine, 114 
 Environment, 4, 10, 34, 60, 85, 95, 118, 
122, 135, 160 
 distributed, 161 
 habit, 13 
 online, 161 
 operative, 99 
 predictable, 119 
 quantitative, 60 
 shift, 12 
 technosocial, 33, 34 
 virtual learning, 154 
 working, 85 
 Epideixis , 27 
 Epistemology, 13, 166 
 Ergonomics, psychic, 144, 162 – 166 
 Error, 49, 62, 119, 121 – 124, 167, 170, 171 
 user, 32 – 33, 35, 114, 119 
 Essentialism, 72 
 Ethico-aesthetic 
 impulse, 149 
 paradigm, 13 
 sensibility, 21 
 Ethics, 2, 3, 21, 159 
 beyond-good-and-evil, 5, 18 
 communication, 16 
 Event, 14, 28, 44, 53, 59, 60, 66, 72, 87, 89, 
109, 112, 118, 119, 129, 130, 131, 148, 
153, 154, 155, 156 
 discrete, 71 
 micropolitical, 60 
 nonevent, 123 
 prehensible, 112 
 recursive, 75 
 undesiderable, 109, 110 
 Everyday life, 54, 55, 57, 58, 62, 69, 86, 95, 
98, 131, 159, 168 
 Evil, 2 – 7, 18, 21, 32, 119, 171 
 deus ex machina, 27 
 media, 2, 3, 5, 8, 19, 23, 25, 75, 87, 105, 
129, 131, 140, 149, 151, 154 
 negativity, 148 
 radical, 17, 18 
 Excellence, 14, 126, 147 – 171 
 Exception, 106, 109 – 110, 117 – 121 
 Exchange, 5, 56, 150 
 information, 106 
 stock, 41 
 Execution, 64, 71, 72, 87, 97, 109, 110, 119, 
161 
 Exhaustion, 68, 87 
 Expenditure, 153 
 Experimentation, 4, 12, 96, 125 
 psychological, 49 
 Exploitation, 16, 18, 26, 35 
 Expression, regularization of, 111, 113 
 Externality, 137 
 Exuberance, 39, 87, 156 
  
 Factory, virtual, 50 
 Fantasy, 55, 142 
 of control, 152 
 ideological, 28 
 Fear, 3, 37, 38, 42, 62, 98, 102, 123, 166 

Index 
223
 File, 29, 72, 85, 87, 111, 159, 165 
 hierarchy, 86 
 intelligence, 12 
 sharing, 52 
 Financialization, 54 – 55, 58 
 Finite-state machine.  See Machine 
 Flaubert, Gustave, 166, 169, 170 
 Flexibility, 161 
 configurational, 81 
 infinite, 148 
 interpretative, 8 
 personal, 147 
 Flirting, 62 – 66.  See also Dating; Romance 
 Formalism, 18, 28, 31, 70, 78, 80, 89, 106, 
108, 109, 127, 156 
 Formalization, 18, 76, 88, 156, 157 
 Foucault, Michel, 22, 94 
 Fraud, 130.  See also Cunning 
 Free Software Foundation, 50 
 Freud, Sigmund, 36 – 38, 56 
 transference, 27 
 Friedman, Thomas L., 105 – 106, 108 
 Functionalism, 153, 164 
  
 Gadget, 4, 9, 15, 19, 52, 54, 57, 77, 86, 96, 
121, 162 – 166, 167 
 Game, gamer, 8, 17, 34, 38, 54, 56, 
65, 67, 68, 100, 114, 154, 160, 
161 
 Game theory, 28, 130 – 131 
 Gantt chart, 138 
 Gaussian copula, 99 
 Genealogy.  See Nietzsche, Friedrich 
 General Electric Corporation, 50 
 Geometry, 52 – 53, 138, 139 
 Geopolitics.  See Politics 
 Glitch, 17, 96, 164 
 Globalization, 105 
 Goffman, Erving, 159 
 Google, 2, 162 
 Gorgias, 18 
 Goriunova, Olga, 67 
 Gossip, 102 
 Governance, 14, 40, 47, 94 
 corporate, 32 
 economic, 158 
 industrial-corporate, 3 
 liberal, 88 
 sociotechnical, 112 
 GPS (Global Positioning System), 15, 
122 
 Graci á n, Balthasar, 17, 22, 23 
 Grammar, 18, 50, 76, 147, 156 
 interaction, 165 
 machine, 147 
 structural, 148 
 visual, 165 
 Gray 
 administration, 144 
 anticipation, 103, 148 
 area, 41 
 communication, 18 
 components, 94 
 eminence, 30, 32, 140 
 feeling, 12 
 immanence, 13, 32 
 literature, 2 
 matter, 39, 41 
 media, 1, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 31, 39, 83, 121, 
131, 139 
 mist, 158 
 ontology, 13 
 point, 13 
 propaganda, 45 
 quality, 22 
 subdomain, 159 
 zone, 9, 11, 12, 31 
 Grayness, 2, 11 – 14, 20 
 Grid, 138, 139 
 GUI (Graphic User Interface), 87 
  
 Habermas, J ü rgen, 16 
 Habit, 1, 12, 13, 55, 64, 97, 115, 154, 164 
 automation, 171 
 conceptual, 76 
 of experience, 148 

224 
Index
 of imitation, 150 
 perceptual, 54 
 of thought, 19 
 Hacker, 15, 159, 160, 166 
 Hallucination, 55, 142 
 demographic, 166 
 Hardware, 72, 94, 147 
 Harvard Business Review , 137 
 Health, 95, 154 
 mental, 86 
 Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 11, 22 
 Hegemony, 9 
 cultural, 30 
 Heterogeneity, 8 
 chaotic, 6 
 Hierarchy, 19, 33, 62, 69, 71, 117, 126, 130, 
135, 159 
 organizational, 135 
 HT/Lingual, 29 
 HTML (HyperText Markup Language), 111 
 HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol), 106 
 Humanism, 7 
 Humanity, 5, 26.  See also Humans 
 Humans, 20, 21, 31, 84, 86, 90, 94, 95, 111, 
113, 128, 133, 136, 138, 150, 153.  See also 
Humanity; Nonhumans 
 Humor, 5, 63, 113 
 black, 67 
 Hypnosis, 26 
 Ericksonian, 148 
  
 IBM, 93 
 Idealization, 3, 110, 131 
 formalized, 107 
 Identification, 40, 116, 157 
 card, 73 
 psychological, 44 
 Idiocy, 119, 159, 171.  See also Stupidity 
 Idiom, 137, 166 
 Ignorance, 28, 38, 79, 81, 86, 100, 127, 143, 
144, 166, 167, 170, 171 
 of the exception, 117 – 121 
 Illusion, 10, 26, 75, 106, 136, 151, 170 
 Imitability, 83 
 Imitation, 126, 128, 150, 154 
 Immanence, 13, 32 
 Implementation, 13, 44, 52, 61, 83, 85, 86, 
88, 89, 111, 120, 131, 151 
 detail, 109 
 direct, 150 
 physical, 136 
 Indecision, 79 
 Indeterminacy, 31, 32- 35, 96 
 Inference, statistical, 96 
 Information, 3, 17, 45, 57, 58, 76, 84, 
90, 95, 96, 97, 98, 101, 105, 120, 134, 
164, 165 
 academic, 156 
 asymmetry, 49, 56 
 availability, 169 
 circulation, 39, 65 
 complexity, 87 
 demographic, 98 
 design, 139 
 economy, 1 
 exchange, 106 
 infrastructure, 119 
 loss, 10 
 management system, 143 
 meaningless, 97 
 nutritional, 95 
 overload, 11, 68 
 processing, 94, 141, 142, 143, 164 
 processor, 50 
 production, 86 
 quantitative, 139 
 source, 43 
 statistical, 96 
 structured, 106 
 technology, 168 
 theory, 60 
 Infrastructure, 4, 19, 20, 143 
 abstract, 13, 115 
 information, 119 
 managerial, 164 
Habit (cont.)

Index 
225
 material, 114 
 sociotechnical, 15 
 Innovation, 19, 63, 71, 91, 142, 167 
 Intelligence, 25 – 45, 65, 99, 121, 123, 135, 
140, 143, 152, 160, 166 – 167, 170, 171 
 agency, 27 
 artificial, 34, 47, 123, 133, 152, 157, 159, 
166 
 collective, 49 – 52 
 counter, 29 – 31 
 expert, 27 
 file, 12 
 gathering, 22 
 officer, 11 
 stratagematic, 123 
 theorematic, 152 
 Intention, 5, 6, 9, 15, 17, 29, 30, 31, 32, 34, 
101, 123 
 Intentionality, 30.  See also Intention 
 Interaction, 8, 10, 31, 34, 57, 106, 113 – 114, 
120, 121, 123, 152 
 banal, 32 
 degradation, 92 
 direct, 129 
 discursive, 14 
 fast, 122 
 grammar, 165 
 micro-scale, 57 
 pattern, 8 
 speed, 91 
 tracking, 131 
 Interactivity, machine, 57 
 Interface, 57, 78, 83, 87, 88, 89 – 93, 163, 166 
 contractual, 120 – 121 
 gestural, 56 
 icon-powered, 56 
 transparent, 35 
 user, 78, 136, 156, 165, 166 
 Interference, 32, 72, 112, 122 
 Internet, 12, 42, 63, 66, 106, 111, 152 
 access, 67 
 addiction, 68 
 content, 64 
 technology, 111 
 of things, 95 
 traffic, 94 
 Interpellation, 99 
 Interpretation, 8, 11 30, 35, 61, 65, 88, 92, 
100, 121, 148, 156.  See also 
Misinterpretation 
 ambiguity, 100 
 layer, 130 
 limits, 162 
 Interrogation, 114 
 room, 41 
 technique, 29 
 Intractability, 76, 151, 153 
 Intuition, 28, 79, 90, 110, 111, 125, 157 
 Irony, 37, 67, 113.  See also Humor 
 Irritability, 66 – 68 
  
 Jung, Carl, 37, 38 
  
 Kafka, Franz, 89 
 Kairos , 18 
 Kennedy, John F., 39 
 Klee, Paul, 13 
 K-means clustering, 96 
 Knowledge, 1, 6, 11, 13, 19, 21, 26, 34, 36, 
51, 75, 79, 90, 94, 96, 103, 108, 117, 119, 
126 – 127, 142, 143, 144, 145, 151, 154, 166, 
168, 169, 169, 170 
 acquisition, 153 
 category, 13, 19 
 conversion, 141 
 creation, 143 
 economy, 14, 19, 57, 79, 100, 166 
 embedding, 126 
 engineering, 85, 96, 127 – 128, 132, 133 
 explicit, 141, 143, 144 
 extraction, 127 
 habitual, 75 
 local, 32, 75 
 management, 21, 91, 126, 127, 128, 168, 
169 
 nonknowledge, 3, 117, 140, 144, 145, 167 

226 
Index
 organization, 168 
 personal, 127 
 practical, 15 
 practice, 15 
 principle, 118 
 production, 35, 168 
 scientific, 19, 20, 94, 125, 127, 149 
 spiral, 141, 144 
 statistical, 94 
 tacit, 75, 125, 126, 128, 140, 141, 142, 143 
 technical, 77 
 transfer, 108, 169 
 transference, 140 
 valid, 134 
 value, 19 
 Kohonen, Teuvo, 154 
  
 Labor, 48, 49, 75, 109, 120, 131, 142 
 affective, 4 
 bureaucratic, 94 
 cheap, 51 
 child, 110 
 division, 119, 121 
 forced, 156 
 manual, 131 
 market, 33, 161 
 network, 51 
 Language, 9, 16 – 18, 22, 23, 30, 31, 32, 34, 
35, 37, 48, 50, 55, 57, 62, 78, 87, 94, 106, 
110, 111, 112, 113, 118, 143, 147, 149 
 assembly, 31, 78, 81, 82 
 body, 132 
 clean, 111 
 disambiguation, 34 
 game, 8 
 formal, 115 
 malformed, 148 
 manipulation, 54 
 markup, 94, 95 
 metalanguage, 38 – 42 
 natural, 22, 31, 32, 113 
 philosopher, 47 
 pragmatics, 113 
 proferential, 143 
 programming, 18, 84, 110, 112, 118 
 scripting, 160 
 specification, 80 
 vernacular, 157 
 Latour, Bruno, 20 
 Leak, 17, 22, 88, 89, 100 – 103, 109, 130, 156 
 Learning, 108, 109, 126, 128, 151 – 155.  See 
also Education 
 Leary, Timothy, 39 
 Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 31 
 Leveraging, 51, 142, 157, 167, 169, 170 
 Levi, Primo, 11, 13 
 License, 50, 51 
 Lisp, 86 
 Lobachevsky, Nicholas, 53 
 Loewi, Otto, 38 
 Logic, 17, 18, 80, 83, 116, 121, 155 
 Logistics, 51, 71, 110, 112, 116, 137, 138, 
139, 151 
 Lotus Notes, 106 
 Love, 52 – 54, 62 – 64, 67, 100, 151 
 Lyotard, Jean-Fran ç ois, 27 
  
 Machiavelli, Niccol ò , 6, 11, 17, 20, 23, 60, 
93, 130 
 The Prince , 17, 130, 132 
 Machine, 6, 15, 20, 31, 34, 78 – 82, 84, 94 – 96, 
98, 102, 108, 111, 113, 121, 134, 138, 140, 
150, 152, 158, 159, 161, 165, 170 
 abstract-state, 80 
 classification, 94 
 code-executing, 80 
 communicational, 148 
 compatibility, 112 
 enunciation, 114 
 environment, 147 
 finite-state, 78, 110, 123 
 grammar, 147 
 gun, 65 
 gunner, 141 
 influencing, 8 – 9, 144, 163, 166 
Knowledge (cont.)

Index 
227
 intelligent, 133, 159 
 interactivity, 57 
 learning, 152, 154 
 memory, 85 
 psychopharmacological, 41 
 readability, 94 
 recognition, 96 
 semiotechnical, 138 
 simulation, 160 
 sociotechnical, 4 
 syntax, 111 
 topological, 116 – 117 
 Turing, 48, 79 – 80, 116, 150, 151 – 152 
 war, 44 
 Machinery 
 datadriven, 95 
 discursive, 16 
 media, 16 
 nondiscursive, 14 
 social, 61 
 Macropolitics.  See Politics 
 Malfunction, 61.  See also Error 
 Management, 13, 52, 69, 80, 90, 96, 102, 
115, 125, 129, 132, 138 
 automated, 138 
 behavior, 64 
 company, 133 
 consultant, 85, 147 
 content management system, 169 
 crisis, 41 
 database, 114 
 knowledge, 21, 91, 127, 128, 168, 169 
 logistical, 137 
 method, 1 
 micromanagement, 131 
 middle, 140 – 145 
 process, 154 
 project, 137 – 138, 149 
 risk, 61 
 scientific, 126 
 senior, 82 
 software, 131, 164 
 supply chain, 108 
 theorist, 126 
 theory, 4, 33 – 34, 168 
 traffic, 129 
 writer, 156 
 Manhattan Project, 28 
 Manipulation, 6, 9, 14, 15 – 17, 26, 31, 35, 36, 
48, 56, 65, 92, 94, 96, 149, 163 
 direct, 162, 166 
 ideological, 29 
 low-level, 26 
 of opinions, 17 
 of resources, 152 
 of science, 26, 27 
 symbol, 6, 16, 47, 112 
 Mao Zedong, 35 
 Marazzi, Christian, 16 
 Market, 13, 51, 54, 56, 57, 58, 60, 91, 92, 97, 
99, 125 – 126, 129, 165 
 activity, 98 
 analytics, 166 
 black, 101 
 demand, 97 
 financial, 33 
 labor, 33, 161 
 logic, 20 
 operation, 21 
 price, 99 
 profile, 128 
 rationality, 55 
 signal, 58 
 stock, 57 
 Marketing, 40, 58 
 Markup language.  See Language 
 Massumi, Brian, 53 
 Materiality, 4, 85, 163 
 abstract, 15, 20 
 of machines, 113 
 of things, 13 
 Mathematics, 18, 80, 166 
 Maxwell, James Clark, 49 
 McCulloch, Warren, 112 
 McLuhan, Marshall, 1, 39 
 Meaning, 9, 10, 12, 17, 30, 32, 157 

228 
Index
 Media, 1 – 7, 9, 12, 13, 14, 19, 20, 21, 23, 33, 
35, 37, 39, 40, 43, 44, 50, 56, 60, 63, 64, 
65, 66, 67, 72, 76, 90, 114, 118, 124, 128, 
144, 145, 155, 162, 168 
 chemical, 40 
 communications, 55 
 computational, 52, 61, 68, 79, 158 
 design, 57, 81 
 digital, 52, 57, 61, 82, 110 
 ecology, 3, 7, 8, 10, 22, 33 39 
 electronic, 25 
 evil, 2, 3, 5, 8, 19, 23, 25, 75, 87, 105, 129, 
131, 140, 149, 151, 154 
 form, 1, 3, 7, 10, 11, 15, 18, 33, 41, 57, 79, 
84, 107, 144, 145, 154, 168 
 format, 64 
 gadget, 163 
 gray, 1, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 31, 39, 83, 121, 
131, 139 
 hardware, 94 
 interactive, 99 
 mass, 12, 30, 39 
 multimedia, 42 
 networked, 52 
 new, 160 
 operation, 88 
 operative, 31, 86 
 social, 12, 98, 162 
 stratagematic, 124 
 studies, 1, 2, 12, 16, 55 
 system, 1, 6, 9, 33, 35, 60, 65, 76, 82, 114, 
162 
 technics, 106 
 technology, 6, 56, 106 
 theorist, 83 
 theory, 31 
 unstable, 34 
 Mediation, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 
19, 20, 23, 31, 32, 35, 85, 90, 108, 123, 
141, 144, 168.  See also Mediator 
 digital, 4 
 formal-material, 120 
 programmable, 84 
 rejection, 44 
 of weaponization, 41 
 Mediator, 4, 5, 8, 34, 38, 39, 41, 58, 81, 85, 
86, 95, 125, 140, 141, 149, 162.  See also 
Mediation 
 Medium, 8, 11, 37, 39, 42, 94, 112, 
141, 143, 145, 159, 161.  See also 
Media 
 Medium (psychic), 36, 135 
 Mediumnity, 140, 144 
 organizational, 142, 144 
 Melchior, Thierry, 143 
 Melville, Herman, 90 
 Memo, 7, 10 
 Memory, 11, 77, 84, 162 
 addressable, 85 
 allocation, 85 
 computational, 79, 84 
 computer, 94 
 device, 101 
 exteriorization, 86 
 living, 84 
 machine, 85 
 magnetic, 101 
 material, 84 
 organization, 84 – 85 
 pointer, 86 
 stick, 85 
 Metabolism, 38 – 42 
 Metamodeling, 147 – 151 
 Micropolitics.  See Politcs 
 Milgram, Stanley, 48 – 49 
 Military 
 American, 10 
 engagement, 161 
 governance, 3 
 military-civilian divide, 41 
 military-industrial complex, 137 
 onslaught, 10 
 operation, 40, 132 
 paperwork, 162 

Index 
229
 Mind, 39, 43, 47 – 48, 65, 70.  See also Brain; 
Cognition 
 camp, 151 
 computational theory, 70 
 control, 25 – 26, 36, 37, 39 
 global, 52 
 expanded, 164 
 extended, 165 
 map, 143 
 multiple, 164 
 state, 30, 48 
 Mind-body, coding, 148 
 Misinterpretation, 31 
 Mistake, 87, 119, 122, 131.  See also Error 
 Modernity, 13 
 Modularity, 50, 76 
 Money, 117, 150 
 Morality, 131 
 Kantian, 26 
 Moscow Theater siege, 40 
  
 NASDAQ, 106 
 Nature, 53, 166 
 bifurcation, 13 
 second, 32 
 Negativity, 148 
 Network, 1, 3, 4, 9, 10, 23, 32, 50, 51, 62, 66, 
71, 86, 92, 93, 97, 114 – 117, 125, 152, 154, 
161, 162 
 of actors, 15, 28 
 adaptive, 154 
 analysis, 53, 152, 153 
 Boolean, 99 
 centralized, 53 
 cognitive, 166 
 digital, 4 
 discourse, 143 
 evolution, 53 
 extended, 162 
 globalized, 3 
 gray media, 7 
 idiotypic, 10 
 intelligent, 32 
 intractable, 152 
 labor, 51 
 large-scale, 50 
 neural, 96, 99, 152 
 social, 16, 52, 66, 74, 76, 83, 112, 131 
 television, 161 
 topology, 39 
 transport, 97 
 VPN (Virtual Private Network), 169 
 Neural network, 96, 99, 152 
 Neurobiology, 37 
 Neurolinguistic Programming (NLP), 111, 
147 – 150, 161 
 Neutrality, 20, 37, 72, 115 
 New Criticism, 30 
 Newton, Isaac, 107 
 Nietzsche, Friedrich, 5, 25, 124, 128, 140 
 genealogy, 22 
 Nihilism, 21 
 NKVD (The People’s Commissariat for 
Internal Affairs), 27 
 Nonaka, Ikujiro, 142, 143 
 Normalization, 92, 115, 157 
 Number, 69, 72, 84, 112, 116, 157 
 passport, 73 
 small, 58 – 62 
  
 Object-oriented programming, 118, 119, 120 
 Obligation, 17, 67, 68, 86 
 debt, 99 
 OLAP (Online Analytic Processing), 134 
 Ontology 
 business, 76 
 gray, 13 
 of queues, 71 
 of things, 13 
 Opacity, 1, 5, 14 
 Open-source software, 92 
 Operating system, 85, 87, 93, 122 
 Opportunity, 59 – 60, 69, 71, 73, 76, 92, 100, 
113, 133, 155, 160, 162 

230 
Index
 Optimizability, 135 
 Optimization, 57, 63, 81, 83, 87, 84, 97, 98, 
99, 166 – 171 
 Ordering, 18, 31, 70, 71, 72, 74, 116, 122, 
133, 152, 159.  See also Sorting 
 devices, 15, 112 
 Outsourcing, 92, 107, 127 
  
 Pacification, 21, 120 
 Paradox, 3, 17 
 Participation, 1, 14, 50, 52, 60, 70, 93, 
128 
 Pataphysics, 118 
 Pattern, 4, 8, 25, 29, 34, 55, 57, 63, 76, 77, 
94, 97, 102, 106, 107, 110, 111, 122, 150, 
157, 163 
 activity, 75, 107, 127 
 behavior, 31, 32, 33, 97 
 conflict, 31 
 design, 107 
 excellence, 148, 150 
 interference, 32 
 knowledge, 127 
 matching, 57, 79, 110, 111 
 metabolic, 42 
 qualitative, 20 
 recognition, 32, 97, 99 
 singular, 75 
 structured, 84 
 thought, 39 
 workflow, 109 
 Perception, 13, 128, 161 
 Personalization, 114, 157, 160 
 Peters, Tom, 156 
 Petri net, 86, 107 
 Philby, Kim, 33 
 Philosophy, 17, 34, 119 
 affect, 91 
 critical, 135 
 speculative, 4 
 Pill, 41.  See also Drug 
 Pitts, Walter, 112 
 Placebo effect, 58 
 Plato 
 essentialism, 72 
 The Republic , 75 
 Poisson distribution, 59 
 Polanyi, Michael, 125, 126, 127 
 Politician, 17, 22, 23, 29, 38, 58, 88, 133 
 Politics, 6, 12, 13, 16, 23, 25, 26, 27, 35, 44, 
61, 88, 98, 116, 118, 136, 158 
 geopolitics, 3, 10, 14, 15, 12, 25, 29, 35, 36, 
39, 168 
 macropolitics, 41 
 micropolitics, 60, 61 
 perceptual, 168 
 Porn, 63, 67, 98 
 Postal service, 74 – 75, 90 
 Pound, Ezra, 29 
 Power, 9, 15, 18, 22, 28, 32, 35, 37, 38, 40, 
51, 64, 65, 72, 88, 93, 101, 105, 117, 130, 
134, 135, 141, 145, 154, 155 
 axiology, 6 
 cognitive, 50 
 diagnostic, 41 
 dynamics, 21, 158 
 executive, 32 
 exercise of, 20, 73, 143 
 of the few, 58 
 game, 34 
 lack, 34 
 laws, 152 
 operations, 13 
 organized, 9 
 play, 22 
 political, 27 
 pragmatics, 10, 20 
 prepersonal, 53 
 processing, 95 
 production, 21 
 relations, 35, 93 
 ruse, 9 
 of science and technique, 27, 28 
 of small numbers, 58 – 62 
 social, 35 
 user, 166 

Index 
231
 PowerPoint, 11 
 PR (public relations) 
 counsel, 16 
 guru, 36 
 Pragmatics, 155, 163 
 conjuncture, 130 
 evil media, 8 
 language, 113 
 power, 10, 20 
 stratagem, 22 
 Precarity, 160 
 Preemption, 30, 101, 158 
 PRINCE2 (PRojects IN Controlled 
Environments 2), 138 
 Probability, 54, 59, 70, 156 
 Procedure, 2, 4, 11, 15, 16, 18, 19, 32, 52, 57, 
64, 75, 89, 144 
 Producer, 58, 98, 168 
 Profiling, 78, 114 
 Programming, 152, 159 
 artificial intelligence, 152 
 computer, 159 
 language, 18, 84, 110, 112, 118 
 library, 78 
 neurolinguistic, 111, 147 – 151, 161 
 object-oriented, 119 – 120 
 Project, 1, 91, 123, 130, 131, 136 – 140, 152, 
157, 161, 169, 171 
 asset, 164 
 death march project, 136 – 137 
 IT, 14 
 joint, 92 
 management, 137 – 138, 149 
 manager, 136 – 140, 171 
 Manhattan Project, 28 
 plan, 1, 15, 136 – 140 
 software, 93 
 Project Evaluation Review Techniques, 
139 
 Propaganda 
 black, 43, 45 
 gray, 45 
 theory, 16 
 Property, 50, 91, 115 
 intellectual, 91 
 loss, 61 
 Protagoras, 18 
 Protocol, 4, 14, 15, 18, 22, 23, 96, 106, 107, 
108, 121, 129 
 Psyche, 28, 37, 41, 44, 45, 58 
 Psychoanalysis, 27, 36 – 37 
 Psychoanalyst, 37, 41 
 Psychological operation, 22, 42 – 45.  See also 
Psyops 
 Psychology, 28, 37, 42, 44, 57, 65, 78, 136 
 individual, 77 
 Pavlovian, 27 
 positive, 137 
 Psychopharmacology, 37, 38 – 41 
 Psyops, 43 – 44.  See also Psychological 
operation 
  
 Queuing, 70 – 71, 74 
 ontology, 71 
  
 Randomness, 59 
 Ranking, 64, 71, 73 – 74, 122, 129 
 Rationality, 17, 124.  See also Reason 
 autonomous, 25, 26 
 bureaucratic, 167 
 critical, 34 
 formal, 11 
 instrumental, 5 
 market, 55 
 Raymond, Eric, 92 
 Readability, machine, 94 
 Reading, 11, 48, 90 
 close, 29 – 30 
 logical, 156 
 speed, 90 
 stratagematic, 95, 170 
 Reason, 6, 16, 91, 122, 124, 151.  See also 
Rationality 
 bureaucratic, 137 
 ideological, 13 
 instrumental, 72 

232 
Index
 modern, 26 
 practical, 2 
 Recursion, 59, 75 – 77 
 Regular expression (REGEX), 78, 79, 
110 – 114 
 Repetition, 153 
 Rhetoric, 3, 7, 17, 18, 65, 92, 99, 126, 166 
 Ribeaudequin , 44 
 Role play, 158 – 162 
 Romance, 62, 63, 65.  See also Dating; 
Flirting 
 Rumor, 57, 58, 91 
  
 Sabotage, 43 
 Sartre, Jean-Paul, 86, 158 
 Scalability, 116 
 Schmitt, Carl, 118, 133 
 Schopenhauer, Arthur, 9, 17, 22 – 23, 26 
 stratagem, 23, 64 
 Science and technology studies (STS), 4, 8, 
11, 13, 20 
 Script, 32, 47, 109, 157, 159 – 162, 166 
 Scripting, 111, 159 – 160 
 Searle, John, 47 – 48.  See also Chinese room 
 Security, 87, 102, 114, 144 
 automated management, 138 
 cognitive, 171 
 guard, 168 
 homeland, 57 
 national, 30 
 permission system, 143 
 sense of, 73 
 Seduction, 27, 54, 64, 76, 97 
 Semantics, 8, 32, 70 
 model-theoretic, 148 
 Semiotics, semioticization, 58, 98, 
135 
 Sensibility, 9, 12, 21 
 ethico-aesthetic, 21 
 sociotechnical, 15 
 Shalamov, Varlam, 156 
 Shklovsky, Viktor, 52 – 54 
 Sign, 2, 28, 33, 63, 112, 139, 143, 171 
 abstraction, 112 
 ambiguous, 4, 31, 35 
 imperative, 14, 15 
 production, 34 
 regime, 113 
 transformation, 112 
 uncertain, 34 
 Simon, Herbert, 47, 132, 134 – 136, 141 
 Simulation, 37, 56, 61, 78, 79, 80, 116 
 machine, 160 
 Situationist International, 44 
 Skinner box, 55 
 Smartphone, 15 
 Smiley, George, 11 
 SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol), 106 
 SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol), 106 
 Social network, 16, 52, 66, 74, 76, 83, 112, 
131 
 Sociobiology, 65 
 Socrates, 75 
 Software, 1, 20, 34, 36, 47, 50, 69, 72, 75, 81, 
88, 93, 112, 119, 122, 128, 131, 133, 141, 
143, 147, 158, 160, 169 
 application, 34 
 design, 21, 77, 110, 118 
 development, 50, 70, 159 
 digital presentation, 10 
 engineer, 18, 77 
 engineering, 110, 164 
 group-work, 1 
 implementation, 150 
 management, 131, 164 
 open-source, 92 
 participatory social network, 66 
 permissions systems, 144 
 poor, 83 
 proprietary, 138 
 testing, 57 
 workflow, 105, 107 
 Sohn-Rethel, Alfred, 141 
 Solidarity, 10, 127 
 Sophism, 16, 62 
Reason (cont.)

Index 
233
 Sophistication, 2, 14 – 19, 63 
 cultural, 37 
 lack, 43 
 Sophistry, 16 – 18, 26, 92 
 Sophists, 5, 15 – 16, 111 
 Sorokin, Vladimir, 69, 71 
 Sorting, 69, 71 – 75, 83, 84, 89, 115, 116 
 Spam, 49, 152 
 Spectator, 2, 4, 21, 23, 24 
 Speculation, 117 
 epistemological, 168 
 financial, 157 
 Speech, 18, 22 – 23, 32, 37, 42, 103, 112 
 Spirituality, 8 
 Spreadsheet, 15, 58, 112, 132, 134, 135, 144, 
160 
 Spychoanalysis, 36.  See also Psychoanalysis 
 Stabilization, 40, 120, 159 
 self-, 89 
 Stakhanov, Alexei, 85 
 Stalin, Joseph, 27 – 28 
 purges, 27 
 Statistics, 131 
 bureaucracy, 93 – 95 
 Steels, Luc, 123 
 Stein, Gertrude, 31 
 Stein, Lynn Andrea, 123 
 Stimulus and response, 55, 57 
 Storage, 103 
 device, 103 
 document, 16 
 information, 164 
 Stratagem, 2, 9, 14, 17, 19 – 23, 36, 39, 60, 62, 
70, 75, 77, 84, 87, 93, 120, 121, 125, 140, 
147, 151, 153, 163 
 Schopenhauer, Arthur, 26, 64 
 Strategy, 22, 30, 33, 41, 42, 94, 112, 117, 127, 
128 130, 131, 132, 149, 169 
 assimilation, 150 
 discursive, 94 
 document, 7, 135 
 execution, 161 
 geopolitical, 3 
 governmental, 63 
 knowledge management, 126 
 lifestyle, 81 
 marketing, 58 
 organizational, 167 
 and tactics, 9, 21 
 Strauss, Leo, 60 
 Stupidity, 33, 43, 45, 124, 136, 143, 
166 – 171 
 Subjectivity, 55, 97, 135 
 algorithmic, 78 
 market, 55 
 production, 56, 97, 137 
 status 137 
 Surf club, 67 
 Surveillance, 16, 94 
 studies, 73 
 Symbol, 48, 110 
 manipulation, 6, 16, 47, 112 
 Syntax, 70, 111, 113, 147, 148, 150 
 Systematization 
 of relations, 129 
 theorematic, 160 
 Systems theory, 141 
  
 Tactics, 9, 21, 22, 28, 63, 127, 131, 151 
 Takeuchi, Hirotaka, 142 – 143 
 Tarski, Alfred, 18 
 Taxonomy, 94, 100, 117 
 Terror, 4 
 watch list, 73 
 Test, 3, 26, 57, 74, 81, 91, 154, 155, 163 
 Milgram, 49 
 software, 57 
 Turing, 49 
 Text, 7, 9, 12, 29, 43, 70, 89, 110 
 Text messaging, 56, 114, 168 
 Therapy, 36, 40, 159 
 cognitive behavioral, 42 
 occupational, 155 
 Topology, 76, 116, 117, 139 
 machine, 116 – 117 
 network, 39 

234 
Index
 proximity, 154 
 quality, 62 
 Totality, 53, 122 
 Toyotism, 51 
 Trade, 55, 90, 91, 149 
 slave, 55 
 Trademark, 91 
 Transcoding, 49.  See also Coding; Decoding; 
Encoding 
 Transference, 28, 36, 37 
 Freudian, 27 
 knowledge, 140 
 Transparency, 4, 5, 38, 89, 102, 128, 145, 
155 
 Traveling Salesman ’ s Problem, 74 – 75 
 Truman, Harry S. 27, 28 
 Turing machine, 48, 79, 116, 150, 151 – 152 
 Turing test, 49 
 Tweeting, 56, 57, 58 
  
 Ubiquitous computing.  See Computing 
 UML activity diagram, 106 
 Uncertainty, 34, 35, 96, 135, 144.  See also 
Certainty 
 Unicode, 113 
 Universality, 38, 72 
 Unpredictability, 57, 59, 76, 119 
 User, 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 51, 54, 56, 57, 
63, 64, 66, 78, 81, 88, 91, 92, 93, 96, 
112, 115, 117, 118, 119, 122, 131, 
133, 157, 160, 162, 164, 166, 
170 
 end, 34, 51, 57, 78 
 error, 32 – 33, 35, 114, 119 
 experience, 81 
 feedback, 101 
 group, 42, 137 
 input, 118 
 interest, 98 
 interface, 78, 136, 156, 165, 166 
 license, 51 
 profiling, 114 
 User-generated 
 content, 66 
 encyclopedia, 91 
 propriety, 157 
   
 Valorization, 58 
 Verification, 12 
 Virno, Paolo, 16 
 Virtuality, 101 
 Virtual learning environment, 
154 
 Virtue, 6, 20, 43, 129, 136 – 140, 
147 – 151, 153, 166, 171 
 abstractive, 21 
 of the digital, 7 
 oratorical, 159 
 pragmatic, 79 
 productive, 158 
 quantifiable, 75 
 sophisticated, 161 
 of stratagem, 75 
 of stupidity, 170 
 of workflow formalism, 109 
 Virus, 10 
 computer, 60 
 VPN (Virtual Private Network), 
169 
  
 Warfare, 29, 101 
 chemical, 41 
 guerilla, 43, 59 
 Weapon, 40 – 41, 44, 123, 139 
 Weaponization, 40 – 41 
 Webcam, 57 
 Web Services Business Process Execution 
Language, 106 
 Web site, 75, 93, 99, 111, 119, 120 
 Web system, 119 
 Wetware, 147 
 Whitehead, Alfred North, 6, 12 
 Wikipedia, 59, 91 – 92 
 Winnicott, D. W., 163 
 Winograd, Terry, 162 
Topology (cont.)

Index 
235
 Wisdom, 20, 150 
 information economy, 1 
 practical, 6 
 Workflow, 105 – 110 
 algorithm, 15, 149 
 software, 105, 107 
 World Intellectual Property Organization, 91 
 World Trade Center, 59 
 World War II, 27 – 28, 39, 54 
 Worm, 8 
 computer, 60 ( see also Bug; Virus) 
 Writing, 7, 22 – 23, 112 
 code, 119 ( see also Coding) 
 document, 169 
  
 XML (Extensible Markup Language), 94, 106 
  
 YAWL (Yet Another Workflow Language), 106 
  
 Zinoviev, Grigory, 27  
Index prepared by M. Beatrice Fazi.

