

Mike Barlow
Evolving Architectures
of FinTech
Structuring a New Generation
of Financial Services with
Modular Software and Agile
Development Strategies
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-96776-8
[LSI]
Evolving Architectures of FinTech
by Mike Barlow
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Susan Conant
Production Editor: Colleen Lobner
Copyeditor: Rachel Monaghan
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
September 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-09-06: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Evolving Architec‐
tures of FinTech, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly
Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
Evolving Architectures of FinTech. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Rapid Evolution and Broad Commercial Impact                                 2
Building Better Platforms                                                                        3
Enabling Consumers Across Networks                                                 4
Byzantine Complexities and Myriad Possibilities                                5
Banks Won’t Disappear; They’ll Evolve                                                 5
What SOA and Microservices Bring to the Party                                 6
Developer-Friendly APIs                                                                         7
Agility and Integration Through Modularity                                       8
Nibbling Around the Edges of Legacy Architectures                          9
Going Where Banks Fear to Tread                                                       11
Will Blockchain Change Everything?                                                  12
Governance Matters                                                                               13
Mutual Understanding and Better Communication                         14
v


Evolving Architectures of FinTech
Fintech, or financial technology, is often reduced to breathless
sound bites, such as “It’s like having a bank in your smartphone!” or
“By this time next year, no one will be carrying cash or writing
checks!”
But the fintech phenomenon is broadly misunderstood, mainly
because disruption is a sexier headline word than integration. In the
vast majority of cases, fintech solutions will be integrated with exist‐
ing systems of hardware and software. From the perspective of
fintech developers, the challenge is integrating new software with
old systems. From the perspective of financial services institutions,
the challenge is providing operating platforms that are friendly
to developers.
Although fintech is only one piece of the global financial services
ecosystem, it is rapidly evolving into something on the scope and
scale of social media and online search. In the same way that email
“killed” snail mail, fintech will render some forms of banking either
less important or completely irrelevant. At minimum, it will funda‐
mentally alter the way we relate to the numerous financial systems
that support and surround our daily lives.
Here are some of the ways fintech will transform the landscape of
financial services:
• Highly personalized digital banking and financial services will
become the norm.
• For most consumers, borrowing and lending processes will
become easier, safer, and more transparent.
1

• A small but significant minority of consumers will become
“credit pariahs,” unable to obtain credit at reasonable terms.
• Speed to market will replace efficiency as the main driver in
software development decision-making processes.
• Modular software architectures will be used to gain competitive
advantages, not just to save costs and increase efficiency.
• The financial services industry (including banking, lending,
trading, and insurance) will endure a long period of restructur‐
ing and significant job loss.
Within the financial services sector, fintech can reduce complexity
and minimize friction in data-intensive areas such as personal
finance, loan origination, cash transfer, consumer banking, capital
markets, and equities trading.
The numbers involved aren’t trivial. By some estimates, the financial
services industry generates roughly $13 trillion annually—about 17
percent of the world’s economy. Revenues from global payments, an
area in which fintech is rapidly expanding, are expected to exceed $2
trillion by 2020, according to a recent McKinsey report.
Rapid Evolution and Broad Commercial Impact
“Fintech isn’t just for bankers, brokers, and hedge fund managers.
It’s also for merchants and shopkeepers. And increasingly, fintech is
for consumers,” says Michael Minelli, vice president of commerciali‐
zation at Mastercard Labs, the global research and development
division of Mastercard. “Essentially, fintech is for anyone who han‐
dles money, which means it’s a truly global transformation.”
For example, Mastercard recently unveiled MasterPass, a digital pay‐
ment solution enabling omni-channel shopping experiences. Mas‐
terPass works in-store, in-aisle, in-app, and online. It also uses
advanced security methods, such as tokenization with bank identifi‐
cation and verification of cardholders to protect consumers from
fraud. Merchants can use MasterPass APIs (application program‐
ming interfaces) and SDKs (software development kits) to enable
checkout within mobile apps or online.
Mastercard Labs has also built Qkr! with MasterPass, a mobile
order-ahead platform used in a variety of consumer scenarios, such
as paying and splitting bills at restaurants; paying for gas and park‐
2 
| 
Evolving Architectures of FinTech

ing; in-seat ordering at stadiums, movie theaters, and lounges; and
paying for school and club fees, lunches, and supplies.
“The digital shift represents a major change in financial services,
and we see this as the biggest opportunity for Mastercard since the
introduction of plastic,” says Minelli. “We have to think differently,
design products differently, and innovate faster than ever before to
keep pace with customer expectations.”
Building Better Platforms
Studies of big data generated by ecommerce sites have shown that
fewer clicks will result in higher sales volumes and increased cus‐
tomer loyalty. In other words, consumers are more likely to com‐
plete purchases when they are required to perform only a minimum
of tasks. Nowadays, it’s a given that removing friction from payment
processes generates higher sales.
In 2014, Braintree launched One Touch mobile payments for PayPal.
The following year, it rolled out a web-based version of the platform.
Both versions basically enable consumers to pay for goods and serv‐
ices across multiple applications with one click, eliminating the need
to re-enter usernames and passwords.
In brief, here’s how One Touch works:
• When a PayPal user opts in to One Touch on a specific device
(for example, a smartphone or laptop), PayPal first validates the
user using its proprietary risk systems. If the validation is suc‐
cessful, a token is placed on the user’s device, indicating that the
user wants to use One Touch for future purchases with partici‐
pating merchants on that device and browser combination.
• When that user wants to pay with PayPal at checkout on the
same device and browser, PayPal will validate the token that is
stored in the browser against its backend risk systems. If valida‐
tion is successful, PayPal will securely authenticate the user for
that checkout transaction without requiring the user to type in
a password.
It’s a lot of work on PayPal’s end, but the company figures it’s worth
the extra effort. One Touch is also another step in the direction
of creating coherent fintech platforms, rather than one-off apps, for
enabling “anywhere, everywhere” ecommerce. It also foreshadows
Building Better Platforms 
| 
3

the critical role of software architecture in emerging fintech ecosys‐
tems.
Arnold Goldberg, PayPal’s head of global merchant products, fore‐
sees the day when PayPal will serve as a secure and highly trusted
operating system providing a diverse range of inherent capabilities.
Both consumers and merchants want the ability to use a wide vari‐
ety of payment systems. “Merchants are already realizing that their
websites aren’t the only destinations for consumers,” says Goldberg.
Enabling Consumers Across Networks
Nowadays, a consumer’s decision to purchase an item often begins
on a social network such as Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, or Pinter‐
est. But most sites don’t make it easy for consumers to transition
seamlessly from an initial impulse to a completed purchase.
For example, let’s say you see something on Instagram that you want
to buy. But the seller is only selling through eBay or Etsy. In a perfect
world, says Goldberg, you would be able to purchase the item
without leaving your news feed. “We’re trying to demystify the pro‐
cess and remove the unnecessary friction and complexity, while
maintaining the security and trust needed by all parties to complete
the transaction,” he says.
Goldberg predicts that “over the next two or three years,” the ability
to deliver seamless and secure experiences to buyers and sellers
across multiple platforms and applications will prove “disruptive” to
traditional models of commerce and older software architectures.
“The cost of developing new software continues to come down,” he
says. But fear of the unknown prevents many financial service com‐
panies from exploring or adopting new technology solutions. “As an
industry, we need to become more aggressive about adopting Agile,
DevOps, and open source,” he says. “At the end of the day, propriet‐
ary software hasn’t shown that it’s more secure or more effective
than open source software.”
Goldberg also advocates for updating financial services platforms to
make them more “developer friendly,” a sentiment shared by soft‐
ware architects and developers interested in creating fintech solu‐
tions. From his perspective, there’s a “huge mismatch” between most
legacy platforms and “anyone trying to actually build something
new.” Navigating those “murky waters” can be difficult for develop‐
4 
| 
Evolving Architectures of FinTech

ers and startups. “We need to make it easier for people who are
building new things and creating new solutions,” says Goldberg. “It’s
not rocket science; it’s more an issue of cleaning up existing plat‐
forms and decreasing friction for developers.”
Security is also a major concern, he says. “Improving the customer
experience is important, but we also spend lots of time and energy
securing the interactions between consumers and merchants. Secu‐
rity is an area in which mobile devices are actually superior…
because there’s an amazing amount of telemetry from your phone
we can use to verify that you really are who you say you are.”
Byzantine Complexities and Myriad
Possibilities
Credit and lending are two of the most powerful and lucrative profit
centers of the global financial services industry. But each is incredi‐
bly complex and bound by centuries of tradition.
In the credit card business, for example, there are acquirers, issuers,
payment facilitators, and processors. There are also card associa‐
tions, such as Mastercard, Visa, American Express, and Discover. It’s
easy to swipe your credit card, but the process behind the curtain is
complicated. There are authorizations, address verifications, batch
submittals, captures, chargebacks, clearings, currency conversions,
holdbacks, interchange fees, and settlements. “Most people have no
idea of the complexities involved,” says Minelli. “It’s a complicated
dance, with many participants and players.”
Those complexities, of course, provide opportunities for developers
and entrepreneurs. “If you’ve discovered how to make the system
more effective and more convenient, people will definitely listen to
your pitch,” he says.
Banks Won’t Disappear; They’ll Evolve
Jason Gardner, founder and CEO of Marqeta, does not expect fin‐
tech to put banks out of business. Marqeta develops and provides
payment processing technologies for physical card, virtual card, and
tokenized card solutions, for credit, debit, and prepaid—all key ele‐
ments of the existing financial services ecosystem.
Byzantine Complexities and Myriad Possibilities 
| 
5

“I’m a bit of a contrarian,” says Gardner, explaining that fintech isn’t
about disrupting banks. “Our customers in alternative lending, on-
demand services, expense management, and ecommerce all need the
banks. People forget that companies like Mastercard and Visa are
networks of 19,000 banks. None of us could operate within the pay‐
ment services industry without banks…anything involved with
moving money also involves the banking system.”
From Gardner’s perspective, the banks need to decide if their brands
should be “front and center, or behind the scenes.” Either way, banks
are critical to the larger ecosystem and will remain important play‐
ers. “I’m a strong believer in creating a robust ecosystem,” he says.
“What excites me most about fintech is the ability to innovate
quickly. You didn’t have that opportunity before. Today, we have
publicly available APIs and open source technology. We have
modern hardware and open source databases. Small merchants can
use mobile phones as POS [point-of-sale] terminals, enabling them
to accept credit cards instead of just cash or checks.”
But the daunting regulatory environment of the financial services
industry scares away many developers and entrepreneurs. “The
industry is heavily regulated, with all sorts of bureaucracies at the
state and federal levels of government,” says Gardner. “The degree of
complexity frightens many developers and startups.”
Marqeta is among a handful of newer fintech companies that com‐
bine technical expertise with market knowledge to overcome regula‐
tory hurdles and provide practical technology solutions. “Marqeta’s
issuing and processing payment platform is built for developers and
innovators who are quickly reinventing commerce. We have just the
right mix of DNA,” says Gardner.
Looking forward, a significant portion of “fintech DNA” will be
composed of flexible software architectures such as SOA (service-
oriented architecture) and microservices.
What SOA and Microservices Bring to the Party
Although SOA and microservices are different in many ways, they
are both examples of service-based distributed architectures, which
means their application components are accessed remotely over a
network and connected through a layer of APIs.
6 
| 
Evolving Architectures of FinTech

Imagine that you’re managing a fantasy baseball team and you can
select a different lineup of players not only for each game, but also
for each inning and each at-bat. Service-based architectures like
SOA and microservices offer similar flexibility and opportunities
for creativity.
But flexibility and creativity come with risks. There’s no single rack-
mounted box you can point to and say, “There’s the problem.” For
the most part, the applications and the data are somewhere in the
cloud. Getting them together at the precise moment you need them
is the tricky part.
The financial services sector is a heavily regulated industry, and reg‐
ulators like to know where data is stored. Telling regulators that
your data is “somewhere in the cloud” will not make them happy.
Ideally, of course, the rules and regulations governing finance would
evolve to keep pace with advances in financial technology. But the
realities of modern politics make smooth progress unlikely, so be
prepared for bumps in the road.
Developer-Friendly APIs
As suggested earlier in this report, the evolution of healthy fintech
ecosystems will require financial services companies to create plat‐
forms with APIs that developers can access and use easily, since
APIs are basically the glue holding everything together.
“The API has emerged as the easiest way to integrate new service
offerings with existing infrastructure,” says Sam Newman, a senior
consultant developer at Thoughtworks and the author of Building
Microservices: Developing Fine-Grained Systems (O’Reilly). “Finer-
grained APIs make it easier to access and integrate newer and older
types of services in a more controlled and safe way than traditional
integration technologies of the past,” says Newman. “An organiza‐
tion that has effectively exposed finer-grained APIs will be able to
integrate more easily with new services developed by third parties
and other organizations. It will also be able to expose its own offer‐
ings in ways that generate new opportunities and potential value.”
Developer-Friendly APIs 
| 
7

Agility and Integration Through Modularity
Fintech innovation will also require agility and integration, says
Mark Richards, a software architect with over 30 years’ experience
and the author of Microservices vs. Service-Oriented Architecture
(O’Reilly). “I like to define agility as the ability to respond quickly to
change,” he says. “That means you need modular software. When
you have modular software, you can compartmentalize functionality
and isolate changes so they don’t impact other applications.”
The problem is that most of the existing legacy architectures are
monolithic rather than modular, which makes it difficult to integrate
new services. “When I think about the challenges preventing wider
adoption of fintech, the two words that spring to mind are agility
and integration,” says Richards. “Those challenges can be overcome
by migrating to more agile and modular architectures.”
That’s where SOA and microservices, which are both highly flexible
and modular, come into play. “I see SOA solving the integration
problem,” says Richards. “Integrating with heterogeneous platforms
is one of SOA’s sweet spots.”
But relying exclusively on SOA to solve integration issues would be
a mistake, he says. “Then you’re going back to square one, where
you have immovable architectures throughout the enterprise that
are difficult to change quickly.”
He foresees the emergence of hybrid architectures incorporating the
best qualities of SOA and microservices. “I see hybrid solutions as a
balancing point. You sacrifice some scalability and some agility, but
you have less risk and more security,” says Richards.
Ignoring or downplaying risk and security issues would be fatal to
banks and other financial services companies. With memories of the
global recession still relatively fresh, it’s understandable that bankers
and regulators are leery of complicated technology solutions. At the
same time, SOA and microservices enable developers to create new
financial products more quickly than ever before. It’s interesting to
note that when SOA was introduced, it was touted primarily for its
ability to save costs by reusing code. Now, it’s touted for its ability to
help developers complete projects faster.
But is faster always better? It used to be that we went from “too small
to care” to “too big to ignore” to “too big to fail” in a series of more
8 
| 
Evolving Architectures of FinTech

or less orderly steps. Today, says Richards, many companies leap
directly from “too small to care” to “too big to fail” overnight.
Alipay, a payment platform operated by Ant Finance, an affiliate of
Alibaba, has 450 million users. Within the span of a few years, Ali‐
pay has become one of China’s leading payment services. Most of us
can remember when Alibaba’s claim to fame was printing t-shirts on
demand.
The rise of Alipay demonstrates the power of combining scalable
fintech solutions with highly disciplined business strategies. It also
hints at the dangers of scaling quickly. In complex systems, there are
always hidden variables and unexpected outcomes. In a laboratory
setting, those kinds of risks might be acceptable. But in the real
world, with trillions of dollars in play, a modicum of caution isn’t
necessarily a bad thing.
Nibbling Around the Edges of Legacy
Architectures
If you find it ironic that in Europe and America, the financial serv‐
ices industry trails other industries in adopting the newest forms of
information technology, you are not alone. Most IT experts agree
with you. “Banks adopted IT before most other industries, which
means they have more legacy infrastructure than any other sector of
the economy. That makes it more difficult for them to integrate
newer technologies,” says Newman.
It also explains why the fintech phenomenon looks as though it is
evolving more rapidly in regions of the world where there is less
existing infrastructure. In Africa and parts of Asia, for example,
there are far fewer traditional banks than in Europe and America.
The absence of incumbent infrastructure makes it easier for new‐
comers to gain footholds and create novel types of business models.
M-Pesa is the best-known example of an innovative fintech service
that capitalized on a region’s lack of banking infrastructure. M-Pesa
provides essential money transfer, financing, and microlending
services through a mobile platform developed by Vodaphone. The
service was launched in 2007 in Kenya, and has expanded to Afgha‐
nistan, South Africa, India, Romania, and Albania. In addition to
creating new economic opportunities, it also brought social change
to millions of people who previously had no access to safe or legal
Nibbling Around the Edges of Legacy Architectures 
| 
9

forms of banking. “It’s interesting to note that M-Pesa probably
would not have been allowed to exist in the West, largely because of
regulatory hurdles,” says Newman.
Although the hurdles are high, they haven’t stopped a new genera‐
tion of entrepreneurs from using fintech solutions to launch start‐
ups. When Matt Oppenheimer was working in Nairobi, he noticed
that people often sent money to relatives via informal networks of
minibus taxi drivers. “You handed your money to the driver of a
matatu (minibus) and you prayed that he actually brought it to your
mother in another village,” recalls Oppenheimer. His experiences in
Kenya eventually led him to start Remitly, a mobile payments ser‐
vice that enables consumers to make person-to-person international
money transfers from the United States and Canada to the Philip‐
pines, India, and Mexico.
“The cool thing about our business is that we answer the needs of a
population that’s been really underserved,” says Oppenheimer.
“Until recently, the whole process of transferring cash was fraught
with risk, delays, and costs. Now people can send money to relatives
from their mobile phones. It’s much safer and much less costly.”
In addition to potentially improving the lives of billions of people,
entrepreneurs like Oppenheimer see opportunities for leveraging
fintech innovation to create new markets. The global remittance
industry handles $500 billion annually. Of that total, 8 percent “dis‐
appears” in the form of fees. “That’s $40 billion being taken away
from families who need the money their relatives send them,” says
Oppenheimer. “Not only is that money taken, it’s taken in a way
that’s not transparent.”
Replacing informal or illegal money transfer systems with digital
systems that are legal, transparent, safe, and convenient seems like a
win-win for everyone but the loan sharks and matutus.
Innovative services like M-Pesa and Remitly demonstrate the viabil‐
ity of business models based on fintech software architectures.
Investors are keeping close watch on the fintech space, and carefully
funding new ventures that seem promising. Those investments will
also spur banks and other traditional players to develop or invest
more heavily in fintech. “The banks are starting to get scared, which
is good,” says Newman. “The big players really haven’t been chal‐
lenged, but they’re starting to see innovators nibbling around
the edges.”
10 
| 
Evolving Architectures of FinTech

That “nibbling around the edges” is actually making the big banks a
little braver about investing in fintech solutions, especially for their
retail divisions, which tend to serve younger consumers.
Going Where Banks Fear to Tread
Banks generally avoid lending to small businesses. From the typical
banker’s point of view, small business loans simply aren’t profitable
enough to justify the bank’s investment of time and resources.
The reluctance of banks to engage with small businesses has left the
field open to startups like OnDeck, Fundbox, and Kabbage. “If
you’re a small business owner and you need a loan of less than
$250,000, the banks are hard to deal with,” says Rob Frohwein, an
intellectual property lawyer who cofounded Kabbage in 2008. “But
data technology is the great equalizer in many ways.”
Because Kabbage connects electronically with a borrower’s data, “we
can create a living, breathing product,” says Frohwein. Unlike tradi‐
tional banks, which still rely almost entirely on paper records to loan
applicants, “we understand how your business looks today, tomor‐
row, the day after tomorrow, and all the days after that.”
In addition to leveraging real-time data to monitor creditworthi‐
ness, companies like Kabbage can potentially customize products
based on a customer’s cash flow. “This is when it gets interesting,
when data moves from the back office to informing the products
themselves,” says Frohwein. “With access to your data, I should be
able to deliver customized suggestions for products.”
Here’s how that might play out in the real world. Let’s say the data
collected by Kabbage indicates that your small business typically
has great cash flow in September and October, but lackluster cash
flow in January and February. Theoretically, Kabbage could alter
your loan payments so they align more closely with your actual cash
flow. For most small business owners, that would be like manna
from heaven.
“Having access to data over time allows you to modify your prod‐
ucts over time,” says Frohwein. In other words, when you have more
cash, you would make bigger payments, and when you have less
cash, you would make smaller payments. “If we notice that your
cash flow is spread out more evenly, we would spread out the pay‐
Going Where Banks Fear to Tread 
| 
11

ments more evenly. That adds a lot of value to our relationship,”
he says.
Will Blockchain Change Everything?
Any conversation about fintech has to touch on blockchain, the
sequential distributed database that is foundational to cryptocurren‐
cies like Bitcoin. But enabling Bitcoin transactions represents only a
fraction of blockchain’s potential impact across the fintech universe.
“Blockchain has the potential to change financial processing radi‐
cally by speeding up asset processing time and reducing operational
costs,” says Blythe Masters, a former JP Morgan Chase executive
credited with inventing the modern credit default swap and the CEO
of  Digital Asset Holdings, a startup providing settlement and ledger
services to the financial services community. “Faster settlement
means less risk in the financial system and lower capital require‐
ments.”
While the Bitcoin blockchain “has some features that are problem‐
atic in the context of regulated financial institutions,” Masters says,
“alternatives known as private or permissioned distributed ledgers,
which limit participation to known and approved parties and
improve upon privacy, transparency, and throughput capacity” are
gaining trust across the banking community.
Improved standardization will also be critical to wider adoption.
“The Hyperledger Project being run under the auspices of the Linux
Foundation is one important open source initiative that has been
formed with the goal of creating a common standardized infrastruc‐
ture, which in turn will drive adoption of blockchain,” says Masters.
Major market infrastructure providers like ASX (Australian Security
Exchange) and DTCC (Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation),
which already count the world’s major banks as their customers, are
actively exploring blockchain technology, she says.
“We don’t see blockchain as a disruptive technology but rather a
constructive technology that will disrupt inefficient business pro‐
cesses within and between institutions,” says Masters.
12 
| 
Evolving Architectures of FinTech

Governance Matters
It’s difficult to estimate where the market for fintech will level off,
but it’s clearly growing. Inevitably, the spread of fintech raises ques‐
tions about IT governance in financial services companies.
“I think you will see a resurgence of interest in IT governance,
because in the absence of governance, you have chaos—which
would be unacceptable in the financial services industry,” says Chris
Moschovitis, an IT governance expert and chief executive officer at
tmg-emedia, an independent technology consulting company. “For
fintech, governance will be absolutely critical. Here’s why: IT exists
to generate value. Cybersecurity exists to protect value. They are par‐
allel tracks and ideally, they shouldn’t touch,” he says.
Governance, for example, would prevent a financial services enter‐
prise from creating an organizational structure in which the chief
information security officer (CISO) reports to the chief information
officer (CIO). That reporting structure might make sense from a
technology perspective, but it might be catastrophic from a risk per‐
spective. “It would lead to very bad outcomes, since cybersecurity
and value generation are in direct conflict,” says Moschovitis. “That’s
a good reason for having fintech governance, because the various
relationships involved in the process aren’t always completely clear
and unambiguous. If I’m the CIO of a fintech company, my goal is
creating powerful software applications to crush the competition.
Without governance, I will face no constraints and I will try to move
as fast as I can without delays.”
Governance, which flows from the board to the executives to the IT
department, is “the commonsense bible that sets forth the rules of
the road,” he says, preventing technology from running amok.
With fintech, a large part of the risk stems from the unintended con‐
sequences of moving too quickly. Service-based software architec‐
tures like SOA and microservices enable developers to perform leaps
that would have seemed almost magical five or six years ago. But
those leaps aren’t free—the price is unforeseen risk, which can prove
very expensive.
Governance Matters 
| 
13

Mutual Understanding and Better
Communication
There is a chasm between software developers and financial services
companies, but the chasm is not unbridgeable. Building the bridge,
however, will take some effort from both sides. As mentioned at the
beginning of this report, software architects and developers have
different perspectives than bankers and brokers. Both sides are driv‐
ing toward similar goals, but each faces a different set of challenges.
Developers need accessible platforms with APIs; financial services
companies need software that delivers real value and profitability.
If you’re a startup, Minelli advises you to do your homework
and figure out how to make your applications work within existing
financial services ecosystems. “Yes, the banks have to do a better job
of creating developer-friendly platforms,” he says. “But the develop‐
ers have to do a better job of creating products that banks can use.
For developers, that means understanding how banks assess risk,
calculate profitability, and integrate new services with their existing
systems.”
For the moment, it seems, both sides are expecting too much from
the other. The developers want platforms they can plug into easily;
the banks want applications that will generate profits quickly for
their lines of business. What’s needed is greater mutual understand‐
ing and more communication.
“You don’t always have to throw knock-out punches. Not everything
you create has to be disruptive or earth shattering,” says Minelli.
“Chances are, if you’re working in the US, Canada, or Europe, you
won’t have to invent something like M-Pesa that works despite the
lack of banking infrastructure,” he says. “In fact, you’ll be more suc‐
cessful if you understand existing infrastructure and make sure your
software is a good fit.”
14 
| 
Evolving Architectures of FinTech

About the Author
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist, author, and communi‐
cations strategy consultant. Since launching his own firm, Cumulus
Partners, he has worked with various organizations in numerous
industries.
Barlow is the author of Learning to Love Data Science (O’Reilly,
2015). He is the coauthor of The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise
Social Media Strategy (Wiley, 2011) and Partnering with the CIO
(Wiley, 2007). He is also the writer of many articles, reports, and
white papers on numerous topics, including smart cities, ambient
computing, predictive maintenance, advanced data analytics, and
infrastructure.
Over the course of a long career, Barlow was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including the Journal
News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns
appeared regularly in the Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, Miami
Herald, Newsday, and other major US dailies. He has also written
extensively for O’Reilly Media.
A graduate of Hamilton College, he is a licensed private pilot, avid
reader, and enthusiastic ice hockey fan.

