Mike Barlow
Evolving Along 
with the Internet 
of Things
Sponsored by

Mike Barlow
Evolving Along with the
Internet of Things

Evolving Along with the Internet of Things
by Mike Barlow
Copyright © 2014 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
This article originally appeared on O’Reilly Radar and is part of a collaboration between
O’Reilly and Teradata. See O’Reilly’s statement of editorial independence.
June 2014:
First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition:
2014-06-23: First release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Evolving Along with
the Internet of Things and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to open
source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsibility to
ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Data from the Internet of Things
Makes an Integrated Data
Strategy More Vital than Ever
The Internet of Things (IoT) is more than a network of smart toasters,
refrigerators, and thermostats. For the moment, domestic appliances
are the most visible aspect of the IoT. But they represent merely the
tip of a very large and mostly invisible iceberg.
IDC predicts that by the end of 2020, the IoT will encompass 212
billion “things,” including hardware we tend not to think about: com‐
pressors, pumps, generators, turbines, fans, blowers, rotary kilns, oil
drilling equipment, conveyer belts, blast furnaces, diesel locomotives,
and medical imaging scanners. Sensors embedded in such machines
and devices use the IoT to transmit data on vibration, temperature,
humidity, wind speed, location, fuel consumption, radiation levels,
and hundreds of other variables.
“Machines can be very chatty,” says William Ruh, a vice president and
corporate officer at GE.
In his current role at GE, Ruh drives the company’s efforts to develop
an “industrial” Internet that blends three elements: intelligent ma‐
chines, advanced analytics, and an expanding universe of empowered
users. Together, those elements generate a variety of data at an aston‐
ishing pace, creating a deluge that makes early definitions of big data
seem wildly understated.
Making sense of that data and using it to produce a steady stream of
usable insights require infrastructure and processes that are fast, ac‐
curate, reliable, and scalable. Merely collecting data and loading it into
1

a data warehouse is not sufficient – you also need capabilities for ac‐
cessing, modeling, and analyzing your data; a system for sharing re‐
sults across a network of stakeholders; and a culture that supports and
encourages real-time collaboration.
What you don’t need is a patchwork of independent data silos in which
information is stockpiled like tons of surplus grain. What you do need
are industrial-grade, integrated processes for managing and extracting
value from IoT data and traditional sources.
Dan Graham, general manager for enterprise systems at Teradata, sees
two distinct areas in which integrated data will create significant busi‐
ness value: product development and product deployment.
“In the R&D or development phase, you will use integrated data to see
how all the moving parts will work together and how they interact.
You can see where the friction exists. You’re not looking at parts in
isolation. You can see the parts within the context of your supply chain,
inventory, sales, market demand, channel partners, and many other
factors,” says Graham.
The second phase is post-sales deployment. “Now you use your inte‐
grated data for condition-based (predictive) maintenance. Airplanes,
locomotives, earth movers, automobiles, disk drives, ATMs, and cash
registers require continual care and support. Parts wear out and fail.
It’s good to know which parts from which vendors fail, how often they
fail, and the conditions in which they fail. Then you can take the device
or machine offline and repair it before it breaks down,” says Graham.
For example, microscopic changes in the circumference of a wheel, or
too little grease on the axle of a railroad car, can result in delays and
even derailments of high-speed freight trains. Union Pacific, the larg‐
est railroad company in the US, uses a sophisticated system of sensors
and analytics to predict when critical parts are likely to fail, enabling
maintenance crews to fix problems while rolling stock is in the rail
yard. The alternative, which is both dangerous and expensive, would
be waiting for parts to fail while the trains are running.
Union Pacific uses infrared and audio sensors placed on its tracks to
gauge the state of wheels and bearings as the trains pass by. It also uses
ultrasound to spot flaws or damage in critical components that could
lead to problems. On an average day, the railroad collects 20 million
sensor readings from 3,350 trains and 32,000 miles of track. It then
uses pattern-matching algorithms to detect potential issues and flag
2 
| 
Data from the Internet of Things Makes an Integrated Data Strategy More Vital than Ever

1. Murphy, Chris. “High-Speed Analytics: Union Pacific shows the potential of the in‐
strumented, interconnected, analytics-intensive enterprise.” Information Week, Au‐
gust 13, 2012.
them for action. The effort is already paying off: Union Pacific has cut
bearing-related derailments by 75 percent, says Graham.1
NCR Corporation, which pioneered the mechanical cash register in
the 19th century, is currently the global leader in consumer transaction
technologies. The company provides software, hardware, and services,
enabling more than 485 million transactions daily at large and small
organizations in retail, financial, travel, hospitality, telecom, and tech‐
nology sectors. NCR gathers data telemetrically from the IoT – data
generated by ATMs, kiosks, point-of-sale terminals, and self-service
checkout machines handling a total of about 3,500 transactions per
second. NCR then applies its own custom algorithms to predict which
of those devices is likely to fail and to make sure the right technician,
with the right part, reaches the right location before the failure occurs.
Underneath the hood of NCR’s big data/IoT strategy is a unified data
architecture that combines an integrated data warehouse, Hadoop,
and the Teradata Aster Discovery Platform. The key operating prin‐
ciple is integration, which assures that data flowing in from the IoT is
analyzed in context with data from multiple sources.
“The name of the game is exogenous data,” says Michael Minelli, an
executive at MasterCard and co-author of Big Data, Big Analytics:
Emerging Business Intelligence and Analytic Trends for Today’s Busi‐
nesses. “You need the capabilities and skills for combining and ana‐
lyzing data from various sources that are outside the four walls of your
organization. Then you need to convert data into actionable insights
that will drive better decisions and grow your business. Data from the
IoT is just one of many external sources you need to manage in com‐
bination with the data you already own.”
From Minelli’s perspective, data from the IoT is additive and comple‐
mentary to the data in your data warehouse. Harvey Koeppel, former
CIO at Citigroup Global Consumer Banking, agrees. “The reality is
that there is still a legacy environment and it’s not going away anytime
soon. Facts are facts; they need to be collected, stored, organized, and
maintained. That’s certainly the case for Fortune 1000 companies and
I expect it will remain that way for the foreseeable future,” says Koep‐
pel.
Data from the Internet of Things Makes an Integrated Data Strategy More Vital than Ever 
| 
3

Big data collected from the IoT tends to be “more ephemeral” than
traditional types of data, says Koeppel. “Geospatial data gathered for
a marketing campaign is different than financial data stored in your
company’s book of record. Data that’s used to generate a coupon on
your mobile phone is not in the same class as data you’re required to
store because of a government regulation.”
That said, big data from the IoT is rapidly losing its status as a special
case or oddity. With each passing day, big data is perceived as just
another item on the menu. Ideally, your data architecture and data
warehouse systems would enable you to work with whichever type of
data you need, whenever you need it, to create actionable insights that
lead to improved outcomes across a variety of possible activities.
“In the best of all worlds, we would blend data from the IoT with data
in the data warehouse to create the best possible offers for consumers
in real time or to let you know that your car is going to run out of gas
10 minutes from now,” says Koeppel. “The thoughtful approach is
combining data from a continuum of sources, ranging from the IoT
to the traditional data warehouse.”
4 
| 
Data from the Internet of Things Makes an Integrated Data Strategy More Vital than Ever

About the Author
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist, author, and
communications-strategy consultant. Since launching his own firm,
Cumulus Partners, he has represented major organizations in numer‐
ous industries.
Mike is coauthor of The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise Social Media
Strategy (Wiley 2011) and Partnering with the CIO: The Future of IT
Sales Seen Through the Eyes of Key Decision Makers (Wiley 2007). Mike
has also written many articles, reports, and white papers on marketing
strategy, marketing automation, customer intelligence, business per‐
formance management, collaborative social networking, cloud com‐
puting, and big data analytics.
Over the course of a long career, Mike was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including The Journal
News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns ap‐
peared regularly in The Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, Miami
Herald, Newsday, and other major US dailies.

