
“The future has a funny way of 
sneaking up on you. You don’t 
notice it until you’re soaking in it. 
That was the feeling 
at O’Reilly’s Solid 
Conference.”
 — Wired
The traditional boundaries between hardware and software are falling. It’s a perfect storm of 
opportunity for a software-enhanced, networked physical world. The new products and services 
created from the melding of software, hardware, and data are built by people who work across 
disciplines and industries. A vibrant new community is emerging, made up of business and 
industry leaders, software developers, hardware engineers, designers, investors, startup founders, 
academics, artists, and policy makers—many of whom have never come together before. They 
gather at Solid to be inspired, to make connections and launch conversations, and to plug into 
the future for a few days. Will you be a part of it?
Find out more at solidcon.com
THE O’REILLY INTERNET OF THINGS CONFERENCE

Mike Barlow
Evolving Infrastructures
of the Industrial IoT
The Rise of Smart Machines
in the New Internet Economy

978-1-491-93276-6
[LSI]
Evolving Infrastructures of the Industrial IoT
by Mike Barlow
Copyright © 2015 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Acquisitions Editor: Mike Loukides
Editor: Susan Conant
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
August 2015:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-08-06: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Evolving Infra‐
structures of the Industrial IoT. The cover image © Taqren | Dreamstime.com - Opti‐
mus Prime Photo.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
Evolving Infrastructures of the Industrial IoT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Challenges of Merging Industry and the Internet                          2
The Industrial Internet: A System of Systems                                 2
Spinning Toward Divergence                                                             3
Taming the Industrial Frontier                                                          3
Safety, Security, and Resilience: Industrial IoT Brings New
Concerns                                                                                            4
Integration and Interoperability                                                        5
Smart Cities Blaze a New Trail                                                           6
Engendering a Collaborative Mindset                                              8
Addressing Connectivity                                                                    9
VHS, Betamax, or Netflix?                                                               12
v


Evolving Infrastructures of the
Industrial IoT
Imagine two worlds. In one world, people communicate by using
abstract mathematical symbols. In the other world, people commu‐
nicate by punching each other in the arm. Now imagine people from
those two worlds meeting up and trying to communicate.
A similar kind of meet-up is occurring today, as the information
technology (IT) world attempts to merge with the operational tech‐
nology (OT) world. The goal of that merger is the Industrial Inter‐
net, variously known as the Industrial Internet of Things, Internet
4.0, Internet +, and other monikers.
Arranging a marriage between the Internet and traditional industry
isn’t like slapping together a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. It’s
more like trying to engineer a new and highly complex life form,
using pre-existing parts that weren’t designed to work together.
Computers—of course!—are at the heart of the problem. We use
symbols to communicate with our computers, but we use levers,
switches, and knobs to communicate with our machines. We often
communicate with our computational resources from far away, but
we tend to be standing right next to our machines and devices when
we flip the switch to turn them on.
Computers don’t care where we are, but machines typically require
our physical presence. As a result, we almost never encounter
latency issues with our machines. I turn a knob on the stove and it
begins heating up. I touch the switch on the air conditioner and the
room gets cooler. I push down on the accelerator pedal and the car
1

goes faster. There are no intermediary networks between me and the
machine.
Computers and machines are like cats and dogs—they just aren’t
natural partners. The easy solution would be creating machines that
have the capabilities of computers. But that would require scrapping
millions of perfectly good machines or spending tons of money ret‐
rofitting them with chips and microprocessors.
Challenges of Merging Industry and the
Internet
Combining the power and potential of the Internet with the world’s
industrial platforms seems like a great idea. But there are fundamen‐
tal challenges that resist easy solutions.
It’s important to remember that the Internet was a serendipitous
one-of-a-kind event in human history. It might as well have dropped
out of the sky, like Athena emerging full-grown from the head of
Zeus. It was a largely unintended gift, wrapped up and delivered to
us by an odd set of parents: Cold War paranoia coupled with the rise
of computer networks at research facilities and universities across
the United States. The Pentagon needed a communications frame‐
work that would survive a thermonuclear conflict; the researchers
simply wanted to exchange messages between their computer net‐
works.
That original Internet, increasingly referred to as the “consumer
Internet,” was engineered primarily to convey messages. Twenty
years ago, the messages we sent contained mostly text; today we’re
sharing everything from classical music to cat videos, along with
detailed blueprints for skyscrapers, live images from various space
missions, and the latest episodes of “Silicon Valley” on HBO.
The Industrial Internet: A System of Systems
In the old days, we sometimes referred to the Internet as a “network
of networks.” The Industrial Internet is more like a “system of sys‐
tems.” The original Internet had relatively few moving parts. The
Industrial Internet will have trillions of moving parts. Some of those
parts will be moving slowly and predictably. Many of those parts will
2 
| 
Evolving Infrastructures of the Industrial IoT

be spinning, tumbling, gyrating, flying, pumping, tunneling, and
drilling.
“This is not a deterministic system,” says Joseph Salvo, founder and
director of the Industrial Internet Consortium and director at GE
Global Research. “We’ll need resiliency and the capabilities for react‐
ing quickly because it will be harder to predict exactly what’s going
to happen.”
Largely because of its origins as a government-funded science
project, the consumer Internet and its various parts are held
together by a kind of consensual centrifugal force. No similar force
binds the innumerable components of the Industrial Internet.
Unlike the Internet we’ve grown accustomed to using, the Industrial
Internet is the child of commercial interests.
“In a technical sense, the Internet is intrinsically convergent,” says
Chris Greer, director of the Smart Grid and Cyber-Physical Systems
Program Office, and national coordinator for Smart Grid Interoper‐
ability at the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST). “It’s focused on exchanging bits over networks between
computers. That single focus is a driver for convergence.”
Spinning Toward Divergence
In sharp contrast, the Industrial Internet is intrinsically divergent.
“It’s not arising from a common technology goal, but from many
different commercial goals, such as advanced manufacturing, smart
power grids and intelligent transportation,” Greer says. “The chal‐
lenge is finding the right forces and levers for promoting a conver‐
gent and interoperable Industrial Internet. It’s a hard problem.”
It’s also an important problem. The Industrial Internet isn’t just
another tech fad. It’s the beginning of a new chapter in human his‐
tory. Will the Industrial Internet advance the dream of universal
prosperity, or will it quickly mutate into a chaotic and dangerous
“Internet of unsafe things,” as some are already calling it?
Taming the Industrial Frontier
In the absence of a natural binding force, a rough draft of rules and
principles is gradually emerging. In 2014, several companies with
deep roots in the digital and physical economies launched the
Spinning Toward Divergence 
| 
3

Industrial Internet Consortium (IIC). In 2015, the IIC published the
Industrial Internet Reference Architecture, a lengthy document that
describes and defines the various systems and frameworks necessary
to sustain a viable Industrial Internet.
The document is long, but worth reading. Here’s why: It’s not merely
a laundry list of technical specifications; it also contains a rudimen‐
tary social contract with a built-in moral compass—something the
original Internet still lacks. Reading the document feels like reading
an imaginary but highly detailed first draft of Asimov’s Three Laws
of Robotics.
Clearly, the authors of the reference architecture are aware of the
risks posed by a fully operational Industrial Internet spanning
oceans and continents. The authors note the inherent difficulties of
combining two domains (IT and OT) with different purposes,
standards, disciplines, and ontologies. They even mention the
“symbol-grounding problem,” alluded to earlier in this report, which
comes into play when we try to use abstract symbols and computa‐
tional models to operate machines that are normally operated by
physical means.
Safety, Security, and Resilience: Industrial IoT
Brings New Concerns
Basic expectations are listed (e.g., privacy, reliability, usability, and
scalability). The complex and evolutionary nature of the new system
(large scale, multi-vendor, multi-national, public-private) is
acknowledged. The system must have “end-to-end characteristics”
and “emergent properties,” according to the document. The three
key characteristics are:
1. Safety
2. Security
3. Resilience
Those three words—safety, security, and resilience—rarely surface in
casual conversations about software development. On the other
hand, they are commonly heard in conversations about construc‐
tion, manufacturing, energy, pharmaceuticals, healthcare, transpor‐
tation, law enforcement, military, and government.
4 
| 
Evolving Infrastructures of the Industrial IoT

The reason is simple: People are rarely physically injured or killed by
software. It’s a different story with hardware, which is why we wear
hardhats while touring factories and construction sites.
Safety, according the authors, is when the system operates “without
causing unacceptable risk of physical injury or damage to the health
of people, either directly, or indirectly…”
Security is when the system operates “without allowing unintended
or unauthorized access, change or destruction of the system or the
data and information it encompasses.”
Resilience refers to the system’s ability to “avoid, absorb, and/or
manage dynamic adversarial conditions…and to reconstitute opera‐
tional capabilities after casualties.”
Together, those key characteristics signal clear intentions: Let’s not
try not to harm anyone. Let’s make sure that bad people can’t take
over the system. Let’s make sure that when the system crashes, we
can bring it up again quickly.
The document is a great starting point, and definitely feels like an
improvement over the amorality of the original Internet. But will it
prevent us from winding up like the Krell? In the 1956 science-
fiction classic “Forbidden Planet,” the Krell create a perfect global
manufacturing system that kills them when they turn it on.
Integration and Interoperability
Nobody wants a replay of the anarchic Wild West. But too many
rules and regulations can stifle innovation. How much “law and
order” is too much? Which are more likely to produce better out‐
comes, a top-down set of strictures or an organically grown body of
commonly accepted behaviors?
The main difference between the Industrial Internet and the con‐
sumer Internet can’t be reduced to a simple case of “law and order
vs. the Wild West.” The real difference is both substantive and strate‐
gic, and it raises a critical question: If you’re building a global digital
system to run billions of machines, should the system emerge from
careful planning or haphazard serendipity?
For Greer and his colleagues at NIST, the answer is careful planning.
The Industrial Internet is a network of cyber-physical systems and
applications that meet four basic criteria:
Integration and Interoperability 
| 
5

1. Integrated
2. Co-designed
3. Adaptive
4. Predictive
“It’s truly an integration of cyber and physical systems, not just bolt‐
ing IT onto a physical system,” Greer says. “The systems aren’t acci‐
dental hybrids, but intentionally co-designed to integrate their cyber
and physical components. Taken as a whole, the systems are adap‐
tive and predictive to optimize function.”
Interoperability is crucial, since it encourages the development of
horizontal systems over domain-specific vertical systems. “We’re
interested in a globally interoperable system, not something that’s
specific to any one domain,” Greer says. Horizontal platforms invite
collaboration and knowledge sharing; vertical platforms generally
veer toward secrecy and strict control of intellectual property.
Salvo and his colleagues at the IIC favor the development of hori‐
zontal systems built on platforms that are “secure, open, and
standards-based,” such as IBM’s Bluemix, Microsoft’s Azure, and
GE’s Predix.
Despite the presence of corporate sponsors such as AT&T, Cisco,
IBM, GE, and Intel, meetings of the IIC feel less like buttoned-down
business conferences and more like Grateful Dead concerts. There’s
a strong sense of adventure and wide-eyed enthusiasm, enlivened by
an interesting blend of demographics and disciplines.
The boldest strides so far have been made by players in the transpor‐
tation and energy sectors. GE, for example, attributes huge reduc‐
tions in fuel costs to its focus on gathering in-flight data from sen‐
sors on jet engines, analyzing the data in real time, and generating
insight that can be used to optimize engine performance and mini‐
mize unplanned downtime. The company uses similar techniques to
trim costs and improve energy production at wind farms and power
plants in Asia and the Middle East.
Smart Cities Blaze a New Trail
Some of the most exciting examples of successful cyber-physical
marriages have come from Global City Teams Challenge (GCTC), a
network of “action clusters” that apply networked technologies to
create smarter cities and communities. GCTC is a partnership of
6 
| 
Evolving Infrastructures of the Industrial IoT

NIST, US Ignite, the Department of Transportation (DoT), the
National Science Foundation (NSF), the International Trade Admin‐
istration (ITA), the Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS), and the Department of Energy (DoE).
Smart cities and smart communities make great test beds for a vari‐
ety of reasons, including real needs (everything from disaster man‐
agement to improved parking), critical mass (lots of people, busi‐
nesses, and existing infrastructure), and common goals (providing
public services such as health, safety, education, mass transit, and
sanitation).
“When we held the challenge in 2014, we had more than four dozen
cities and communities participating,” Greer says. “We had cities
large and small from across the U.S. and cities from the U.K., Spain,
Italy, Israel, and Indonesia. It really demonstrated the interest and
momentum of the smart city movement.”
GCTC projects included a system for automated detection, triage,
and treatment of severe contagious disease outbreaks; a storm-
resilient modular micro-grid; a next-generation emergency response
dispatch system; deploying sensor networks on buildings to monitor
allergens; and a system for enabling citizens to participate in track‐
ing multimodal transportation patterns for the purpose of develop‐
ing green alternatives.
Greer sees the smart city movement as a driver for convergence, sort
of a counter-force to purely commercial interests that would tend to
produce closed-off, proprietary systems based primarily on the
needs of separate industry verticals.
“Smart cities are a positive force for progress,” Greer says, noting
differences between the ways smart city projects evolve in the U.S.
and elsewhere. “In Europe and Asia, they tend to use top-down
approaches, while in the U.S., we rely much more on a bottom-up,
commerce-driven approach.”
Another force driving the Industrial Internet toward convergence is
manufacturing, which accounts for 12% of the U.S. GDP, or roughly
$2.09 trillion, according to the National Association of Manufactur‐
ers. Each dollar spent on manufacturing adds $1.37 to the U.S. econ‐
omy, putting it ahead of other economic sectors in terms of its mul‐
tiplier effect.
Smart Cities Blaze a New Trail 
| 
7

Manufacturing also generates more data than any other sector in the
economy—but currently uses less than 10% of it, says William King,
Chief Technology Officer at the Digital Manufacturing and Design
Innovation Institute (DMDII) at UI LABS in Chicago, IL, where he
directs a $100M portfolio of technology investments. King is a pro‐
fessor of engineering at the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign, and an outspoken proponent of data-driven manufac‐
turing.
“Data flows across the lifecycle of every product, and yet more than
90% of that data is thrown away,” says King. “There’s an enormous
gap between what people actually use and the size of the opportu‐
nity.”
The DMDII and GE Global Research have partnered to create the
Digital Manufacturing Commons (DMC), an open source commu‐
nity for sharing data, analytical models, simulations, and knowledge.
“It’s a collaborative platform and marketplace for ideas,” King says.
Ideally, the DMC will also serve as a virtual bridge between large
manufacturers with deep pockets and thousands of smaller firms
whose existence is essential to the vitality of the 21st century global
manufacturing ecosystem.
The continuous interplay between large, small, and medium-size
companies is critical to progress in the manufacturing sector. “The
big companies have the resources to pursue new ideas, but many of
those new ideas come from smaller companies,” King says. “There
are all kinds of great opportunities out there.” The smaller compa‐
nies are often more innovative, and the larger companies have the
deep resources necessary for bringing new products and services to
market.
Engendering a Collaborative Mindset
There is more than mere idealism at work here as players in the
Industrial Internet attempt to draft basic guidelines and outline
practical frameworks. The lack of a collaborative manufacturing
ecosystem creates costs and reduces efficiency. The prime example is
NASA, which operates spacecraft with life spans that are measured
in decades. Many of the original parts in those spacecraft were
invented and manufactured by small companies that no longer exist.
When NASA needs a replacement part for an older spacecraft, it
needs to design and manufacture the part from scratch.
8 
| 
Evolving Infrastructures of the Industrial IoT

King and his colleagues are aiming to avoid those kinds of scenarios
as digital manufacturing evolves into a larger part of the global
economy. “We’re seeing massive digitization of industry—not just in
manufacturing, but also in energy and transportation. Companies
need to become more information-savvy. Today, companies make
products. Tomorrow, they will make products and sell data about
those products,” King says.
The shift from purely physical manufacturing to cyber-physical
manufacturing will open doors for millions of entrepreneurs and
start-ups all over the world. It will also create serious economic
threats and challenges for longstanding incumbents. “The barriers
to entry are much lower for companies offering digital services than
for companies manufacturing widgets,” says King.
Addressing Connectivity
Some believe the Industrial Internet will evolve quickly into the
default “nervous system” of the growing cyber-physical economy. If
that happens, are the world’s communication networks capable of
supporting such a system?
Let’s look at the Internet of Things (IoT), which is the Industrial
Internet’s consumer-centric cousin. The IoT is expected to connect
50 billion devices by 2020. That’s a large number of devices, but it
pales in comparison to the predicted trillions of machines, parts,
and sub-assemblies that will be part of the Industrial Internet.
“At a minimum, the IoT will probably double the amount of data on
networks,” says Benjamin Beckmann, lead scientist in the Complex
Systems Engineering Lab at GE Global Research. “But with the
Industrial Internet, we foresee data volume increasing by 1,000X in
the not too distant future. That will require us to rethink how we
transfer data and how we do computation.”
If we continue pumping data into existing networks, we face the
possibility of hitting the Shannon Limit. Named for information
theorist Claude Shannon, the Shannon Limit denotes a theoretical
boundary to the amount of information you can feed into a network
before the information begins to degrade. Some experts estimate we
could hit the Shannon Limit for fiber-optical cable next year; others
see us hitting the wall in 2021. Whether you agree or disagree with
Addressing Connectivity 
| 
9

Shannon’s theory, there’s no question that radically higher levels of
data will challenge the capabilities of networks and their operators.
For example, there are only five “knobs” you can twist to push more
information through a fiber-optical network, says Beckmann.
1. Change the physical spacing of the fibers.
2. Polarize the light going through the fibers.
3. Increase the frequencies.
4. Change the timing of the light pulses.
5. Move the signal around in space by shifting its phase or
amplitude.
After you’ve exhausted those five possibilities, the only choice left is
building more fiber-optical infrastructure or moving to another
medium. (For a more detailed discussion about scaling optical fiber
networks, please read Peter J. Winzer’s excellent article in the March
2015 issue of Optics & Photonics News.)
Fortunately, the Industrial Internet will rely on a mix of media and
supporting technologies for connectivity, including wired (coaxial,
fiber-optical, Ethernet), wireless (Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, cellular), and
satellite. Parsing connectivity into three broad categories makes the
problem look simple, but it isn’t. Within the wireless category, for
example, is WPAN (wireless personal area network), WLAN (wire‐
less local area network), and WWAN (wireless wide area network),
each of which contains several sub-categories, such as ANT+, Blue‐
tooth Smart, ZigBee, Z-Wave, 802.11 a/b/g, LTE, 4G, and the greatly
anticipated 5G. It’s a veritable alphabet soup of protocols and stand‐
ards, with varying degrees of compatibility.
For established network connectivity providers like AT&T, sorting
through tangles of competing and conflicting technologies goes with
the territory. “The role of the network provider is ensuring that con‐
nections are secure, global, and multi-network,” says Mobeen Khan,
executive director, advanced mobility solutions at AT&T Business
Solutions. “That’s what we do, day in and day out.”
The machines and devices themselves are more likely to cause prob‐
lems than the networks, he says. “The real challenge is making sure
that industrial assets are connected, addressable, and can be upda‐
ted, just like software. The assets should be network-ready from day
one.” Ideally, says Khan, network providers collect, organize, and
10 
| 
Evolving Infrastructures of the Industrial IoT

present data to their customers. The complex processes going on
behind the scenes should be largely invisible.
“When we talk to customers about connectivity, we don’t just talk
about cellular connectivity. If you’re connecting x-ray machines in a
hospital, maybe the best way is to connect through Ethernet or Wi-
Fi,” he explains. “We provide connectivity in a multi-network envi‐
ronment, and a single interface into multiple types of connectivity.”
At the edges of a network, most connectivity will be handled by
wireless technologies. As you get closer to the “heart” of a network,
connectivity will be handled by a mix of technologies. As always,
timing will be everything. For non-critical devices, latencies meas‐
ured in minutes or even hours will be acceptable. For critical machi‐
nery operating in hazardous conditions, latency will be measured in
fractions of a second.
“Control over real-time processes can be tricky,” says Zoran Kostic,
an associate professor of electrical engineering at Columbia Univer‐
sity and a former research scientist at Bell Labs. “Today, our faster
response times are on the order of several hundred milliseconds. But
one millisecond is the magic number we’re striving toward. The
problem is the speed of light. If I want to send a command to a
machine and have it respond in one millisecond, it can’t be more
than 150 kilometers away.”
Kostic sees “ad hoc” networks as part of the solution. Let’s say you go
to a conference and there’s no Wi-Fi. If everyone at the conference
agreed to reconfigure the Wi-Fi modules on their laptops and tab‐
lets, they could create an ad hoc point-to-point network of confer‐
ence attendees.
For the Industrial Internet, a more likely solution will be embedding
more intelligence in machines or devices so they can make decisions
on their own, without going on a network. Salvo sees this trend
leading to another trend, the emergence of self-aware networks and
groups of devices. “This is the end of the Information Age and the
beginning of an international revolution,” says Salvo. From his point
of view, the Industrial Internet is a live demonstration of Metcalfe’s
law, which claims “the value of a telecommunications network is
Addressing Connectivity 
| 
11

1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metcalfe%27s_law
proportional to the square of the number of connected users of the
system (n2).”1
VHS, Betamax, or Netflix?
It’s safe to say that achieving seamless interoperability across a truly
global Industrial Internet will require networks composed of multi‐
ple heterogeneous technologies and standards for sharing informa‐
tion efficiently. In the past, the inability to agree on standards con‐
strained or slowed the growth of several industries, including broad‐
cast television, which spent years arguing over the best way to trans‐
mit color images. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, VHS went toe-
to-toe with Betamax for domination of the home videocassette
recorder (VCR) market. VHS, which was considered the inferior
standard, won the battle. But VHS was eventually eclipsed by DVD
technology, which is rapidly losing ground to streaming video today.
When VCRs were introduced, the movie studios lobbied heavily for
laws that would have severely curtailed their penetration into con‐
sumer markets. Today, it seems laughable that Hollywood was so
easily frightened. As it turned out, VCRs generated hundreds of mil‐
lions of dollars in additional revenue for the studios and created val‐
uable new markets for Hollywood’s products.
Even though the studio moguls were proven wrong in the final anal‐
ysis, you have to give credit to Hollywood for making its case. Who
is making the case for—or against—the Industrial Internet? If the
Industrial Internet has the potential its supporters claim it has,
shouldn’t the public be clamoring for their governments and elected
officials to fund more projects and support more experiments to
determine the best ways to make it work?
If the Industrial Internet is destined to become a positive force for
social good and economic growth, why aren’t more people talking
about it and getting involved?
12 
| 
Evolving Infrastructures of the Industrial IoT

About the Author
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist, author, and communi‐
cations strategy consultant. Since launching his own firm, Cumulus
Partners, he has represented major organizations in numerous
industries.
Mike is coauthor of The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise Social Media
Strategy (Wiley, 2011) and Partnering with the CIO: The Future of IT
Sales Seen Through the Eyes of Key Decision Makers (Wiley, 2007). He
is also the writer of many articles, reports, and white papers on mar‐
keting strategy, marketing automation, customer intelligence, busi‐
ness performance management, collaborative social networking,
cloud computing, and big data analytics.
Over the course of a long career, Mike was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including The Journal
News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns
appeared regularly in The Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, Miami
Herald, Newsday, and other major U.S. dailies.
Mike is a graduate of Hamilton College. He is a licensed private
pilot, an avid reader, and an enthusiastic ice hockey fan. Mike lives
in Fairfield, Connecticut, with his wife and their two children. 

