Excel 2010
Made Simple
Abbott Katz
Office for Windows Made Simple
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

For your convenience Apress has placed some of the front 
matter material after the index. Please use the Bookmarks 
and Contents at a Glance links to access them. 
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

 
iii 
 
Contents at a Glance 
Contents ............................................................................................................. iv 
About the Author ................................................................................................. x 
About the Technical Reviewer ........................................................................... xi 
Acknowledgments ............................................................................................ xii 
■Quick Start Guide ............................................................................................. 1
■Chapter 1: Introducing Excel 2010 ................................................................ 27
■Chapter 2: Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry ............................ 31
■Chapter 3: Editing Data .................................................................................. 63
■Chapter 4: Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges ......... 73
■Chapter 5: For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data .......................... 103
■Chapter 6: Charting Your Data ..................................................................... 155
■Chapter 7: Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features ..... 195
■Chapter 8: PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation ........... 219
■Chapter 9: Managing Your Workbook .......................................................... 261
■Chapter 10: Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy ................. 289
■Chapter 11: Automating Your Work with Macros ........................................ 323
Index ............................................................................................................... 339
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

 
 
 
 
1 
1 
 
 
 
 
Quick Start Guide 
Believe it or not, you’re looking at a book about one of the most widely owned—but 
underused—programs on the planet: Microsoft Excel, the 2010 edition. Underused? 
Yep, because even though millions of people around the globe apply Excel to a vast 
range of daily tasks, most users still don’t appreciate the even wider range of things 
Excel can do—once they nail down its basics and begin to glimpse the huge potential 
that lurks behind all those cells and buttons.  
What makes Excel is interesting, and even exciting, is that once you learn those basics 
you can start to make things happen onscreen. It’s true—enter a number here, and 
something happens over there; change the values contributing to a chart, and the chart 
changes. Write some formulas, and you’ll suddenly see something there that wasn’t 
there before—and that something can make your work easier and more productive. 
Is it worth learning about? You bet; and this Quick Start Guide will introduce you to 
Excel and point you to the places in this book where you can learn more about the 
things you have to know in order to get the most you can out of the software. So let’s 
get started. 
The Excel Worksheet: What You’re Looking At 
Click your way into Excel, and you’ll be brought face to face with a screen that looks like 
Figure 1 (minus the descriptive captions, of course). 
 
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

QUICK START GUIDE 
2 
 
Figure 1. The Excel worksheet 
What you’re looking at is a large grid called a worksheet—and there’s a lot more of it 
than you can see at one time. Don’t confuse the worksheet with the workbook, which is 
the name for the whole Excel file; just as Word speaks of a document, Excel uses the 
term workbook. Think of a worksheet, then, as a page in the larger workbook. 
The worksheet is bordered by a collection of buttons, icons, and fields that may not 
make all that much sense to you yet, so I’ll offer a few introductory words about them 
and what’s behind them. And don’t worry, I’ll explain in more detail as we move on. 
 Row headers: These are the row numbers lining the far left 
of the grid. You need to know row numbers in order to 
determine a cell’s address. A cell is the name given to all 
those rectangles making up the grid; each cell has an 
address, formed by the intersection of a row header and a 
column header. 
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

QUICK START GUIDE 
3 
 Column headers: These are the 
letters bordering the top of the 
grid. Cells have addresses such 
as E34, A279, and the like (the letter always come first—e.g., there’s no cell 
34E, which sounds like a seat on an airplane). It’s in those cells where you’ll be 
entering your spreadsheet data. 
 Name box: Among other things, the 
Name box records the current address 
of the cell pointer, that thick rectangle 
that highlights the cell to which you’ve traveled. In the accompanying 
screenshot, the Name box lets us know we’re in cell B12. 
 Formula bar: This white strip reveals the data you’ve entered in a cell (see 
Figure 2). If you think you can already tell that simply by looking at the 
actual cell, you’ll soon learn that that’s not always the case. 
 
Figure 2. The formula bar 
 Ribbon: This is a strip of buttons that, when clicked, carry out a wide 
variety of actions on the spreadsheet (see Figure 3). For example, the 
ribbon is responsible for formatting (i.e., changing the appearance of 
numbers in cells to look like, say, $45.00 instead 45, or turning any cell 
containing a number greater than 100 orange). Click any of the 
headings above the ribbon—the command tabs—and the contents of 
the ribbon changes, revealing a new set of buttons. Note that the 
command tabs are subdivided into Home, Insert, Page Layout, 
Formulas, Data, Review, View, and Add-Ins, as shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. The ribbon 
 Button groups: These are clusters of buttons that perform related 
tasks. Figure 3 shows the contents of the Home tab, which contains the 
button groups Clipboard, Font, Alignment, and so on. The arrows in the 
figure point to the Alignment and Styles button groups. 
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

QUICK START GUIDE 
4 
 Quick Access toolbar: This is a 
set of buttons—sort of a mini-
ribbon—that contains 
important basic commands 
you’re likely to use often. The advantage of the Quick 
Access toolbar is that it remains onscreen even if the 
contents of the ribbon beneath it change, and it can 
be customized so that you can add buttons to 
represent other commands you often use.  
 Worksheet tabs: Back to the 
worksheet concept, those 
three inserts entitled Sheet1, 
Sheet2, and Sheet3 tucked in 
the lower left of the screen are worksheet tabs, representing the three 
worksheets that make up an Excel workbook for starters. Clicking any 
of these three will reveal another worksheet just like the others, 
affording you another batch of all those cells. When you start Excel, 
you’ll be brought to Sheet1 by default. You can add many more new 
worksheets to the workbook if you need more space in which to store 
still more information. 
 Scroll buttons: These are four arrow-shaped buttons holding down the 
lower right and far right of the worksheet screen (see Figure 4). 
Clicking these moves the worksheet right/left and up/down on the 
screen. Try them and you’ll see what they do.  
 
Figure 4. Scroll buttons 
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

QUICK START GUIDE 
5 
 Select All button: Clicking that rectangle wedged 
between the A and the 1 in the upper left of the screen 
will select, or highlight, all the cells in your worksheet—
and why that might matter will be discussed soon. 
 Status bar: This is the lower border of the worksheet, which contains 
buttons enabling you to modify ways in which the worksheet can be 
viewed, and which reports information about selected cells (see Figure 
5). Note the mode indicator at the left of the status bar, a caption that 
reports the activity you’re currently performing on the worksheet—
Enter (for data entry), Edit, Ready, and so forth. You’ll see what all that 
means soon. 
 
Figure 5. The status bar, at the bottom of the worksheet. The arrow points to the mode indicator 
 Dialog box launchers: These are the small 
arrows pinned to the lower-right corner of 
some of the button groups. Clicking a 
launcher opens a dialog box that offers 
command options additional to the ones 
shown in the group. 
 Cell pointer: This is the bold rectangle that indicates your 
current position on the spreadsheet. 
 
Key Tips: Accessing Buttons with the Keyboard 
The standard way to access all those buttons filling Excel’s ribbon is simply to click your 
mouse on the button you want.  
NOTE: Unless otherwise stated, all mouse clicks utilize the left button. 
But there’s a keyboard alternative to this technique, called key tips. If you press the Alt 
key once, you’ll introduce a collection of initialed minibuttons—the key tips—to the 
screen (see Figure 6). 
 
Figure 6. Note the letters that now accompany each tab. 
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

QUICK START GUIDE 
6 
By typing any of the letters (or numbers, in some cases) shown, you’ll be brought to the 
tab associated with that letter. Thus, if you press A, you’ll call up the Data tab, as shown 
in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7. Take a letter: Accessing the Data tab with key tips 
As shown, once you’ve accessed a tab, its button options can also be 
accessed via the key tips, some of which require tapping two keys in 
sequence. Thus, in Figure 7, pressing T will activate the Filter option 
(something you’ll learn about in Chapter 7). 
Moreover, if the button command you’ve selected fires up a drop-down 
menu, those menu commands can likewise be accessed with key tips. 
Thus, if you first tap H to access the Home tab and then press V to trigger 
the Paste button, its drop-down menu options will also be accompanied 
by key tips, as shown in the illustration.  
NOTE: Clicking any button that features a small arrow will reveal a drop-down menu. 
And each time you press the Esc key, you move back up one key tip level. 
That means that in the preceding screenshot, pressing Esc will close the drop-
down menu and return you to all the Home tab key tips; pressing Esc again will 
take you back to the original key tips pinned to each tab, and pressing Esc still 
once more will turn off the key tips altogether. 
Contextual Tabs 
There’s another set of tabs that may suddenly materialize on the screen. Called 
contextual tabs, these appear only when you’ve clicked certain objects, such as charts 
(see Chapter 6) or PivotTables (Chapter 8), and bring along tabs containing buttons 
specific to that object (see Figure 8). 
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

QUICK START GUIDE 
7 
 
Figure 8. The Chart Tools contextual tab (see the arrow at the top) and the Chart Tools tabs (see the lower arrow): 
Design, Layout, and Format 
The Chart Tools tab only appears when you click the chart. Click away from the 
chart and the Chart Tools contextual tab disappears, to return only when you 
click back on the chart. That’s what makes it contextual. 
A Visit Backstage 
Beginning with the 2010 release of Excel, a new green tab called File 
has been added.  
The File tab was introduced to replace the Office 2007 button, that 
rather ambiguous circular object that was stationed at the upper left 
of Excel’s screen. 
Click the File tab and you’ll be brought to what’s called the Backstage—a large  
behind-the-scenes area that houses commands that impact the workbook as a whole—
including printing (including a print preview), saving, and sending the workbook, as well 
as sharing it with others (see Figure 9). It also offers numerous default settings that you 
can change if you want (e.g., how many worksheets a new workbook will start with). The 
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

QUICK START GUIDE 
8 
Backstage also lists the workbooks you’ve recently accessed, so that you can click any 
one on the list and open it again. 
 
Figure 9. A print preview as displayed in the Backstage. Note the other Backstage options in the left columns. 
TIP: To exit the Backstage and return to the worksheet, press the Esc key or just click any other 
tab. 
Customizing the Quick Access Toolbar 
Now let’s get back to the Quick Access toolbar, 
that downsized ribbon assigned to the upper left 
of the worksheet screen. 
To repeat, the Quick Access toolbar stores frequently used buttons—and again, what 
makes the Quick Access toolbar so handy is that, unlike the larger tabs sitting beneath 
it, it’s always there, along with its buttons, of course.  
What makes the Quick Access toolbar even handier is that you can post additional 
buttons there, so they too will always remain in view and available. 
There are several ways in which you can customize the Quick Access toolbar with 
additional buttons. 

QUICK START GUIDE 
9 
For one, you can click the small arrow at the far right of the
Quick Access toolbar, revealing the menu shown in the
accompanying screenshot.  
The menu offers just a small sample of all of Excel’s
commands, but these are among the more popular ones. Just
click the commands you want to install, and buttons
representing your selections will appear on the Quick Access
toolbar. 
You can right-click virtually any button on any Excel tab,
calling up the menu shown here. 
In this case the currency format button has been
clicked, which gives numbers a currency-like
appearance (e.g., 45.23 might be changed into
$45.23). 
Now that button will also show up in the Quick Access
toolbar.  
If you click the File tab to enter the Backstage, and then click Options  Quick Access
Toolbar, you’ll see the dialog shown in Figure 10. 

QUICK START GUIDE 
10 
 
Figure 10. Another route to adding buttons to the Quick Access toolbar—via the Backstage 
Figure 10 shows a very long list of Excel commands, any of which you can select with 
your mouse and then click Add in order to install it onto the Quick Access toolbar. 
Figure 11 shows the Spelling... command being selected and added it to the Quick 
Access toolbar, which is done by clicking the Add button. 
 
Figure 11. Adding the Spelling... button to the Quick Access toolbar  

QUICK START GUIDE 
11 
Try it yourself. Select Spelling... and click Add, and the Spelling... button will be added to 
the right-hand Customize Quick Access Toolbar column, as shown in Figure 12. 
 
Figure 12. There it is! 
Click OK, and the button will take its place in the Quick 
Access toolbar , as shown in the accompanying 
illustration. 
To remove a button from the Quick Access toolbar , 
just right-click the button and select the first option 
on the resulting menu, as shown in the illustration to 
the right. 
 
NOTE: By default, adding a button to the Quick Access toolbar makes that button available on the 
Quick Access toolbar in all your workbooks. If you want to restrict the button’s appearance to the 
Quick Access toolbar of the current workbook only, you need to click the drop-down arrow by the 
Customize Quick Access field and click the name of the particular workbook (see Figure 13). 

QUICK START GUIDE 
12 
 
Figure 13. Adding a button to the Quick Access toolbar for a particular workbook only 
Where to Learn More 
Table1 lists the major Excel topics you’ll find discussed in this book, and where to find 
them.  
Table 1. Major Excel Topics 
Topic 
Illustration 
Where to Learn More (Chapter and Section) 
Navigating the 
worksheet 
 
Chapter 2, “Getting Around a Worksheet”  
Entering text data 
in cells 
 
Chapter 2, “Entering Text and Data” 
Selecting (or 
highlighting) cells 
 
Chapter 2, “Selecting Multiple Cells” 
Getting text to fit in 
columns 
 
Chapter 2, “Widening and Narrowing 
Columns” 
Entering numerical 
data 
 
Chapter 2, “Entering Numerical Data: How 
It’s Different” 
Validating data  
 
Chapter 2, “Data Validation: Bringing 
Quality Control to the Worksheet” 
 
Constructing a 
drop-down menu 
 
Chapter 2, “Making a List: Personalizing a 
Drop-Down Menu” 
Making changes to 
data in cells 
 
Chapter 3, “Changing Your Data” 

QUICK START GUIDE 
13 
Topic 
Illustration 
Where to Learn More (Chapter and Section) 
Copying and 
moving data 
 
Chapter 3, “Copying and Moving: 
Duplicating and Relocating Your Data” 
Writing formulas 
 
Chapter 4, “Customizing the Worksheet 
with Formulas” 
Using functions 
 
Chapter 4, “Automatic Calculations with 
Functions” 
Copying and 
moving formulas 
 
Chapter 4, “Copying Formulas: More Than 
Just Duplication” 
Working with 
relative and 
absolute cell 
references 
$N6*A2 
 
Chapter 4, “Keeping a Cell Reference 
Constant with Absolute Addressing” 
Pasting values 
 
Chapter 4, “Copying a Formula’s Result 
Only” 
Changing font 
appearances 
 
Chapter 5, “Basic Formatting” 
Changing cell 
alignment 
 
Chapter 5, “Aligning (and Realigning) Your 
Data” 
Wrapping text in 
its cell 
 
Chapter 5, “Wrapping Text” 

QUICK START GUIDE 
14 
Topic 
Illustration 
Where to Learn More (Chapter and Section) 
Merging and 
centering cells 
 
Chapter 5, “Adding a Title with Merge and 
Center” 
Inserting columns 
and rows 
 
Chapter 5, “Inserting, Deleting, and Hiding 
Columns and Rows” 
Formatting 
numeric data 
 
Chapter 5, “Formatting Values: Making the 
Numbers Look Good” 
Working with dates 
 
Chapter 5, “Working with Dates: Dates Are 
Numbers Too” 
Using the format 
painter 
 
Chapter 5, “Copying Formats (Not Data) 
with the Format Painter” 
 
Using cell styles 
 
Chapter 5, “Applying Ready-Made Formats 
with Styles” 
 
Working with 
conditional 
formatting 
 
 
Chapter 5, “Conditional Formatting” 
 
Understanding 
chart types 
 
Chapter 6, “Choosing a Chart Type” 

QUICK START GUIDE 
15 
Topic 
Illustration 
Where to Learn More (Chapter and Section) 
Constructing a 
chart 
 
Chapter 6, “Creating a Column Chart” 
Changing a chart 
 
Chapter 6, “Changing a Chart” 
Changing the 
default chart 
 
Chapter 6, “Changing the Default Chart” 
Changing chart 
formatting 
 
Chapter 6, “Formatting Charts” 
Adding a chart title 
 
Chapter 6, “Adding Extra Chart Elements 
with the Layout Tab” 
Working with 
sparklines 
 
Chapter 6, “Introducing Sparklines: Mini-
Charts Placed in Cells” 
 
Sorting data 
 
Chapter 7, “Sorting Data: Instilling Order in 
Your Data” 
Filtering data 
 
Chapter 7, “Finding What You Want with 
Filters” 
 
Using tables 
 
Chapter 7, “Tables: Adding User-
Friendliness to Your Database” 
 

QUICK START GUIDE 
16 
Topic 
Illustration 
Where to Learn More (Chapter and Section) 
Formatting and 
styling tables  
 
Chapter 7, “Tables: Adding User-
Friendliness to Your Database” 
 
Removing 
duplicate records 
in a table 
 
Chapter 7, “Finding Duplicate Records in 
the Table (and Removing Them)” 
Learning what 
PivotTables can do 
 
Chapter 8, “Looking at Some PivotTables” 
 
Constructing a 
PivotTable 
 
Chapter 8, “Creating a PivotTable” 
 
Grouping 
PivotTable data 
 
Chapter 8, “Grouping PivotTable Data: 
Organizing Your Time(s)” 
 
Adding new 
records to the 
PivotTable  
 
Chapter 8, “Refreshing the PivotTable: 
Changing the Data” 
 
Learning how to 
use the Slicer 
 
Chapter 8, “Viewing which Records Are 
Filtered: Using the Slicer” 
 
Formatting a 
PivotTable 
 
Chapter 8, “Formatting the PivotTable” 
 

QUICK START GUIDE 
17 
Topic 
Illustration 
Where to Learn More (Chapter and Section) 
Devising a 
PivotChart 
 
Chapter 8, “Creating Charts from 
PivotTables Using PivotCharts” 
 
Adding and 
moving new 
worksheets 
 
Chapter 9, “Adding and Moving New 
Worksheets” 
 
Hiding and 
unhiding 
worksheets 
 
Chapter 9, “Hiding Sheets” 
Grouping sheets 
 
Chapter 9, “Grouping Sheets: Changing 
Multiple Sheets at the Same Time” 
 
Writing formulas 
with cells in 
different 
worksheets 
 
Chapter 9, “Referring to Cells in Other 
Worksheets: Using Them in Formulas” 
Displaying or 
hiding gridlines, 
headings, and 
formulas 
 
Chapter 9, “Using the View Context Tab to 
Show and Hide Basic Screen Elements” 
 
Freezing screen 
panes 
 
Chapter 9, “Keeping Important Data in 
View with the Freeze Panes Option” 
 
Protecting 
worksheets and 
workbooks 
 
Chapter 9, “Protecting the Worksheet and 
the Workbook” 
 
Printing the entire 
worksheet 
 
Chapter 10, “Printing the Entire 
Worksheet” 
Printing a selected 
range of the 
worksheet  
 
Chapter 10, “Printing a Selection” 
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

QUICK START GUIDE 
18 
Topic 
Illustration 
Where to Learn More (Chapter and Section) 
Working with the 
Print Backstage 
 
Chapter 10, “Surveying Printing Options: 
The Print Backstage” 
Setting the print 
area 
 
Chapter 10, “Setting the Print Area” 
Imposing a page 
break 
 
Chapter 10, “Working with Page Breaks” 
Working with page 
break previews 
 
Chapter 10, “Previewing the Page Break: 
Getting a Bird’s-Eye View of the Printout” 
 
Working with 
headers and 
footers  
 
Chapter 10, “Adding Headers and Footers” 
Recording and 
editing basic 
macros 
 
Chapter 11  
Excel Keyboard Equivalents 
Because there are so many things you can do with Excel, it naturally needs to offer its 
users a long list of commands—and along with them, a long list of keyboard equivalents. 
Needless to say, you may never have to use some of these, but they’re available, and as 
your knowledge of Excel expands you may want to explore more of them. Table 2 lists a 
lengthy assortment of keyboard equivalents that employ the Ctrl key. While you may not 

QUICK START GUIDE 
19 
yet understand what some of them do, by the time your reach the end of this book they
should make a lot more sense. 
Table 2. Ctrl Key Shortcuts 
Ctrl Key Combination 
What It Does 
Ctrl+Shift+) 
Unhides any hidden columns within the selection. 
Ctrl+Shift+(
Unhides any hidden rows within the selection. 
Ctrl+Shift+~
Applies the General number format. 
Ctrl+Shift+$
Applies the Currency format with two decimal places (negative numbers in
parentheses). 
Ctrl+Shift+%
Applies the Percentage format with no decimal places. 
Ctrl+Shift+!
Applies the Number format with two decimal places, a thousands
separator, and a minus sign (–) for negative values. 
Ctrl+Shift+:
Enters the current time; that is, the actual time as data, not a formula result. 
Ctrl+Shift+"
Copies the value from the cell above the active cell into the cell or the
formula bar. That is, if you click in a blank cell, this shortcut will copy any
value in the cell immediately above it. If that value is the result of a formula,
this shortcut will paste only that value, not the formula. 
Ctrl+;
Enters the current date as data, not a formula result. 
Ctrl+`
Alternates between displaying cell values and displaying formulas in the
worksheet. That is, this shortcut will display a cell formula on the screen
instead of its value. Tap the shortcut a second time and the value will
return. This option is available for the workbook via File  Advanced  Show
formulas in cells instead of their calculated results.  
Ctrl+'
Copies the formula from the cell above the active cell into selected cells or
the formula bar. The copied formula cell references change as per relative
cell references. You need to select the source cell along with the
destination cells at the same time. 
Ctrl+1
Displays the Format Cells dialog box. 
Ctrl+5
Applies or removes a strikethrough effect through characters populating
cells. 
Ctrl+9
Hides the selected rows. 
Ctrl+0
Hides the selected columns. 

QUICK START GUIDE 
20 
Ctrl Key Combination 
What It Does 
Ctrl+A 
Selects the entire worksheet. If the worksheet contains data, Ctrl+A selects 
the current region—that is, an area of cells populated by data (e.g., a 
table)—if you click in that region. Pressing Ctrl+A a second time selects the 
entire worksheet. If you click in a blank area of the worksheet, Ctrl+A will 
initially select the entire worksheet. 
Ctrl+B 
Applies or removes bold formatting with alternating taps. 
Ctrl+C 
Copies the selected cells.  
Ctrl+D 
Uses the Fill Down command to copy the contents and format of the 
topmost cell of a selected range into the cells immediately below.  
Ctrl+F 
Displays the Find and Replace dialog box, with the Find tab selected. This 
works similarly to the Find and Replace option in Word. This dialog is also 
available via the Find & Select option in the Editing button group on the Home 
tab. 
Ctrl+Shift+F 
Opens the Format Cells dialog box with the Font tab selected. 
Ctrl+G  
Displays the Go To dialog box (as does F5). 
Ctrl+H  
Displays the Find and Replace dialog box, with the Replace tab selected. 
Ctrl+I 
Applies or removes italic formatting with alternating taps. 
Ctrl+L 
Displays the Create Table dialog box (equivalent to Ctrl+T). 
Ctrl+N  
Creates a new, blank workbook. 
Ctrl+O  
Displays the Open dialog box to open or find a file. 
Ctrl+P 
Displays the Print tab in Microsoft Office Backstage view. 
Ctrl+R 
Uses the Fill Right command to copy the contents and format of the 
leftmost cell of a selected range into the cells to the right. 
Ctrl+S 
Saves the active file with its current file name, location, and file format. 
Ctrl+T 
Displays the Create Table dialog box. 
Ctrl+U 
Applies or removes underlining with alternating taps. 
Ctrl+V  
Performs the classic Paste command. Pressing Ctrl+V inserts the contents 
of the Clipboard at the insertion point and replaces any selection. This 
option is available only after you have cut or copied text, cell contents, or 
an object. 

QUICK START GUIDE 
21 
Ctrl Key Combination 
What It Does 
Ctrl+Alt+V  
Displays the Paste Special dialog box, enabling you to paste only the results 
of a copied formula, by clicking the Values option in the dialog box. If, for 
example, a formula in cell A17 states =SUM(A2:A13) and yields 3224, Paste 
Special will return only the value 3224 in the destination cell. It will not copy 
the formula. This option is also available via the Paste button on the Home 
tab and on the Paste shortcut menu.  
Ctrl+W 
Closes the selected workbook window. 
Ctrl+X  
Cuts the selected cells 
Ctrl+Y 
Performs a redo; that is, it undoes the last command you’ve undone via 
Undo. But it also repeats any last command or action, if possible. 
CTR+Z 
Uses the Undo command to reverse the last action or delete the last entry 
you typed. Successive presses of Ctrl+Z continue to undo the immediately 
previous command. 
The shortcuts shown in Table 3 work with the function keys (the “F” keys stationed in 
the upper row of your keyboard).  
Table 3. Function Key Shortcuts 
Function Key 
What It Does 
F1 
Displays the Excel Help task pane. 
Ctrl+F1 displays or hides the ribbon. 
Alt+F1 creates a chart of the data in a current range in which you’ve clicked, on 
the worksheet containing the data. 
Alt+Shift+F1 inserts a new worksheet. 
F2 
Edits the active cell and positions the insertion point at the end of the cell 
contents. It also moves the insertion point into the formula bar when the 
capability to edit in a cell is turned off. This keystroke draws a temporary border 
around the cells that contribute to any formula in the cell you’re editing. Thus, 
tapping F2 while in a cell containing =AVERAGE(A6:A10) will trace a border 
around cells A6:A10. It provides an easy way to identity cell relationships. 
Shift+F2 adds or edits a cell comment. 
Ctrl+F2 displays the print preview area on the Print tab in the Backstage view (as 
does Ctrl+P). 
F3 
Displays the Paste Name dialog box. This option is only available if there are 
range names in the workbook. 
Shift+F3 displays the Insert Function dialog box. 

QUICK START GUIDE 
22 
Function Key 
What It Does 
F4 
Repeats the last command or action, if possible. 
Ctrl+F4 closes the selected workbook window, as does Ctrl+W. 
Alt+F4 closes Excel. As usual, you’ll will be prompted to save your changes 
should you not have already done so. 
F5 
Displays the Go To dialog box. 
Ctrl+F5 restores the window size of the selected workbook window. 
F6 
Switches between the worksheet, ribbon, task pane, and zoom controls. In a 
worksheet that has been split, F6 includes the split panes when switching 
between panes and the ribbon area. (You can split a worksheet via View  
Manage This Window  Freeze Panes  Split Window.) 
Shift+F6 switches between the worksheet, zoom controls, task pane, and ribbon. 
Ctrl+F6 switches to the next workbook window when more than one workbook 
window is open. 
F7 
Displays the Spelling dialog box to check spelling in the active worksheet or 
selected range. 
F8 
Turns Extend mode on or off. In Extend mode, “Extended Selection” appears in 
the status line, and the arrow keys extend the selection. Extend mode allows 
you to select consecutive cells with the keyboard arrow keys without requiring 
you to hold down the Shift key. Tapping F8 a second time toggles this 
command off. 
Shift+F8 enables you to add a nonadjacent cell or range to a selection of cells 
by using the arrow keys. That is, after having selected one range, tapping this 
shortcut lets you click elsewhere and drag or key-select another range, even as 
the original range remains selected. 
Alt+F8 displays the Macro dialog box, for creating, running, editing, or deleting a 
macro. 
F9 
Calculates all worksheets in all open workbooks. You’ll rarely use this one 
nowadays. You might, however, if your workbook features thousands of 
formulas. When you enter new data, Excel recalculates every formula whose 
result has changed since the last calculation. On a slow computer, that process 
can be rather time-consuming. If this is the case, you can click Formulas  
Calculation  Calculation Options  Manual, which prevents Excel from recalculating 
formulas when you enter new data. F9 will then calculate the worksheet when 
pressed. The Calculate Now button in the Calculation button group calculates the 
workbook in which you’ve clicked. 
Shift+F9 calculates the active worksheet. 
Ctrl+Alt+F9 calculates all worksheets in all open workbooks, regardless of 
whether they have changed since the last calculation. 
Ctrl+F9 minimizes a workbook window to an icon. 

QUICK START GUIDE 
23 
Function Key 
What It Does 
F10 
Turns key tips on the ribbon on or off. Pressing Alt does the same thing. 
Shift+F10 displays the shortcut menu for a selected item. 
Ctrl+F10 maximizes or restores the selected workbook window; it’s equivalent 
to clicking the lower tier of maximize/minimize buttons in the upper right of your 
screen. 
F11 
Creates a chart of the data in the current range in a separate chart sheet. 
Shift+F11 inserts a new worksheet. 
F12 
Displays the Save As dialog box. 
Table 4 shows a collection of other shortcut keys. 
Table 4. Additional Shortcut Keys 
Shortcut Key 
What It Does 
Arrow keys 
Moves one cell up, down, left, or right in a worksheet.  
Ctrl+arrow key moves to the edge of the current data region in a worksheet (a 
data region is a range of cells that contains data and that is bounded by empty 
cells or datasheet borders). 
Shift+arrow key extends the selection of cells by one cell. 
Ctrl+Shift+arrow key extends the selection of cells to the last nonblank cell in 
the same column or row as the active cell; or if the next cell is blank, it extends 
the selection to the next nonblank cell. 
Left arrow or right arrow selects the tab to the left or right when the ribbon is 
selected via the Alt Key. When a submenu is open or selected, these arrow keys 
switch between the main menu and the submenu. When a ribbon tab is 
selected, these keys navigate the tab buttons. 
Down arrow or up arrow selects the next or previous command when a menu or 
submenu is open.  
In a dialog box, arrow keys move between options in an open drop-down list, or 
between options in a group of options. 
Down arrow or Alt+down arrow opens a selected drop-down list. 
Backspace 
Deletes one character to the left in the formula bar. 
In cell-editing mode, it deletes the character to the left of the insertion point (as 
in Word). 
Delete 
Removes the cell contents (data and formulas) from selected cells without 
affecting cell formats or comments.  
In cell-editing mode, it deletes the character to the right of the insertion point (as 
in Word).  

QUICK START GUIDE 
24 
Shortcut Key 
What It Does 
End 
Turns on what’s called End mode. In End mode, you can then press an arrow 
key to move to the next nonblank cell in the same column or row as the active 
cell. If the cells are blank, pressing End followed by an arrow key moves the cell 
pointer to the very last cell in the row or column—that is, row 1048576 or 
column XFD.  
End also selects the last command on the menu when a menu or submenu is 
visible. 
Ctrl+End moves to the last cell on a worksheet—that is, the lowest used row of 
the rightmost used column. However, see the additional discussion about this in 
Chapter 2. If the cursor is in the formula bar, Ctrl+End moves the cursor to the 
end of the text. 
Ctrl+Shift+End extends the selection of cells to the last used cell on the 
worksheet (lower-right corner). If the cursor is in the formula bar, Ctrl+Shift+End 
selects all text in the formula bar from the cursor position to the end—this does 
not affect the height of the formula bar.  
Enter 
Completes a cell entry from the cell or the formula bar, and selects the cell 
below it (by default). 
In a data form, it moves to the first field in the next record. 
It also opens a selected menu (press F10 to activate the menu bar) or performs 
the action for a selected command. 
In a dialog box, it performs the action for the default command button in the 
dialog box (the button with the bold outline, often the OK button). 
Alt+Enter starts a new line in the same cell—a kind of a manual text wrap. 
Ctrl+Enter fills the selected cell range with the current entry. 
Shift+Enter completes a cell entry and selects the cell immediately above. 
Esc 
Cancels an entry in the cell or formula bar.  
It also closes an open menu or submenu, dialog box, or message window. 
It also closes full screen mode when this mode has been applied, and returns to 
normal screen mode to display the ribbon and status bar again. 
Home 
Moves to the beginning of a row in a worksheet. 
Moves to the cell in the upper-left corner of the window when Scroll Lock is 
turned on. 
Selects the first command on the menu when a menu or submenu is visible. 
Ctrl+Home moves to the beginning of a worksheet. 
Ctrl+Shift+Home extends the selection of cells to the beginning of the 
worksheet. 

QUICK START GUIDE 
25 
Shortcut Key 
What It Does 
Page Down 
Moves one screen down in a worksheet.  
Alt+Page Down moves one screen to the right in a worksheet. 
Ctrl+Page Down moves to the next sheet in a workbook. 
Ctrl+Shift+Page Down selects the current and next sheet in a workbook. 
Page Up 
Moves one screen up in a worksheet. 
Alt+Page Up moves one screen to the left in a worksheet. 
Ctrl+Page Up moves to the immediately previous sheet in a workbook.  
Spacebar 
In a dialog box, performs the action for the selected button, or selects or clears 
a check box. 
Ctrl+spacebar selects an entire column in a worksheet. 
Shift+spacebar selects an entire row in a worksheet. 
Ctrl+Shift+spacebar selects the entire worksheet, behaving as Ctrl+A.  

 
 
27 
27 
 
 
 
Chapter 
Introducing Excel 2010 
Most people don’t quite appreciate it, but lurking in the inner recesses of their hard 
drives in the Microsoft Office suite is a mighty, flexible—and often dormant—tool for 
working with information in countless ways: Microsoft Excel.  
Of course, people know it’s in there somewhere, but even in an age in which computer 
savvy is increasingly widespread, computer users often just don’t realize exactly what 
they have in their PCs, and how a deeper understanding of Excel can make the work 
they need to do easier, both on the job and at home.  
When I speak to people about Excel, they marvel at the programming wisdom that 
enables it to do what it does (or rather what it can do). But the next step—actually 
applying Excel productively to a task, or applying a technique that can do a job more 
deftly than it’s being done currently—is often something else again. 
This book is here to help. Excel 2010 is the latest version of that best-selling application, 
and while there’s always more to learn about it, we want to introduce you here to the 
important basics that will let you do actual work.  
The Advantages of Learning More 
Ask someone how well they know Microsoft Word, and they’re likely to reply with the “I 
know what I need to know” answer. That is, their expertise extends to the limits of the 
jobs they need to do—writing correspondence, batching up a mail merge, working with 
styles, and so on. And that’s fine. But Excel is different, because learning about its 
capabilities, even when you don’t think you need to know them, can be a valuable thing. 
Once you discover something new about Excel, you may begin to appreciate how you 
can use it—and now. And with your additional knowledge you’ll start to glimpse the 
nearly limitless range of things you can do with it. 
It’s one thing, for example, to be able to total your company’s monthly or annual 
receipts, and you might be able to carry out that task without a spreadsheet, after all. 
But what if you needed to know how much each salesperson earned? Again, you might 
be able to get away with that job without any aid from Excel, but things will start to get 
1 

CHAPTER 1:  Introducing Excel 2010 
28 
messy if you go it alone. But if you need to know how much each salesperson earned 
each month, as in Figure 1–1, well, that’s a job for Excel. 
 
Figure 1–1. Try that one with a calculator! 
And it’s worth learning how to do it. 
Spreadsheets Defined 
But we haven’t quite answered the question of what a spreadsheet is. So here goes. A 
spreadsheet is a program that emulates, but far surpasses, those vast, green, lined 
ledgers on which accountants and bookkeepers used to enter columns and rows of 
numbers. Because spreadsheets work electronically, of course, they can do a great 
many more things with their data than any ledger could do with its handwritten entries. 
And the spreadsheet “ledger” is far vaster than the hard copy version (see Figure 1–2). 
 
Figure 1–2. A spreadsheet (in actuality, just part of one) 
In fact, this figure shows only a very small fraction of the whole ledger. 
A calculator also works electronically, but here too a spreadsheet has got it beat, and by 
a mile. Enter a number into the slender calculator readout and all you’ll be able to see is 
one number. Add a number to it and the second will replace the first on the screen—
that’s it.  
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 1:  Introducing Excel 2010 
29 
But add a series of numbers on a spreadsheet—each one stored in a rectangular space 
called a cell—and they all remain visible on the screen, as in Figure 1–3. 
 
Figure 1–3. The sum total of a column of numbers: What you see is what you get on a spreadsheet 
And you can add millions of numbers in one go, all of which are available on the screen 
for your review and inspection (after all, there might be a couple of data entry mistakes 
among those millions). And that’s just for starters; with spreadsheets you can also 
change the ways the numbers (and text) look—that is, you can format them, you can 
perform all sorts of mathematical operations on them, and you can capture numerical 
information in chart form, too (see Figure 1–4). 
 
Figure 1–4. A chart in Excel 
Once you learn the basics of charting, you can turn out the type of chart shown in the 
figure in about 10 seconds. 

CHAPTER 1:  Introducing Excel 2010 
30 
Excel Can Be Fun 
“Excel can be fun” may sound like a nerdy thing to say, but once you start to get the
hang of it, Excel can be a rather entertaining application, in addition to simply being a
tool for enhancing your work routine. There’s a kind of interactive, video game quality to
the way Excel does its thing—enter a number in one cell, and watch another cell
change, even if that cell is many rows away. Enter a value and watch the cell in which
you’ve typed it automatically turn a different color (there’s a reason for that, of course—
to be discussed in Chapter 5). Change one of the bowling averages from Figure 1–4 and
the chart will change—again, automatically. And it’s all happening under your direction.
(Unfortunately, the video game analogy doesn’t go much farther than this, though—no
machine guns, aliens, or Formula 1 racetracks here.)  
Summary 
Let’s face it; there are lots of intelligent people out there who can think of an awful lot of
things they’d rather do than concoct a spreadsheet—not out of lack of interest, but
because it’s hard to hold a mouse in your hand when you have cold feet. It’s important
not to let self-intimidation get in the way of acquiring basic (and even more advanced)
spreadsheet skills, and there isn’t much reason why you can’t do so.  
It’s also important to note that if you have experience with pre-2007 releases of Excel
only, you’ll have to acquaint yourself with a different interface—that is, a revised
arrangement of the buttons and commands on the screen. So, with the learning, there
may be a bit of unlearning, too. But speaking from experience, it’s all doable. 
While of course you’ll need to experiment and practice with it a bit, remember that there
are millions of people worldwide who use Excel, and not one of them was born knowing
how. And all of them have more to learn.  
So let’s start learning! 

 
 
31 
31 
 
 
 
Chapter 
Getting Around the 
Worksheet and Data Entry 
The Journey Starts Here  
Whether you use a map, a satnav, a web-drawn itinerary, or do the retro thing instead 
and question an actual human being, any trip begins with knowing where you’re going, 
knowing how to get there, and then deciding what to do once you’ve pulled into your 
destination. Your travels across an Excel worksheet aren’t much different. You need to 
know where you want to go and how to track that destination down; and once you’re 
there, you need to know how to fill that destination with the data that’ll make the 
worksheet do what you want it to. It’s a worksheet after all, and we’re going to start 
doing that essential work now. 
Looking Around 
The grid in Excel is a good deal larger than what you’re viewing on screen, and that’s 
putting it mildly. In fact, every Excel 2010 worksheet contains 1,048,576 rows, probably 
way more than you’ll ever need, and probably more than your computer could handle 
anyway were all those rows to be filled with data. And each workbook is outfitted with 
16,384 columns, raising an obvious address question: if the 26th column is called Z, then 
what does Excel call number 27? The answer: AA, followed by AB, etc. And when Excel 
runs out of double-letter combinations—at column ZZ, it adds a third letter, yielding 
AAA, and so on—all the way down to column XFD. Thus, ABC123 is a perfectly legal cell 
address. 
Getting Around a Worksheet 
Now in order to enter data in any cell you have get there first, by maneuvering the cell 
pointer into the desired address. Excel gives you many ways of getting there. Here are 
some of the standard ways:  
2 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
32 
You can utilize these navigational techniques with the keyboard: 
 The Enter key—pressing Enter moves the pointer down one row. 
 The Arrow keys—pressing any of these moves the pointer in the 
appropriate direction. That means the down arrow really does the 
same thing as Enter when you’re navigating to the next cell– it takes 
you down one row. 
 Tab—moves the pointer one column to the right. 
 Shift-Tab—moves the pointer one column to the left. (But the 
Backspace key won’t work here!) 
 PgDn/PgUp—when pressed moves the pointer down or up one 
screen’s worth of rows. Keep in mind that because you can change 
the height of rows, the number of rows you travel with these command 
may vary. 
 Alt-PgDn/Alt-PgUp—A less-well-known pair of keyboard 
combinations. Pressing Alt-PgDn advances the pointer ahead one 
screen’s worth of columns. Pressing Alt-PgUp takes the pointer back 
one screen’s worth of columns. Again, because you can modify the 
width of columns, the distance you’ll travel could vary. 
 Ctrl-Home—a surprisingly useful combination. Ctrl-Home takes you to 
cell A1—the first cell in the worksheet. It’s good to know about when 
you’ve travelled a long way across the worksheet, and you need to get 
back to the sheet’s beginning. 
NOTE: Holding any keyboard navigational key(s) down, and keeping it down, will move the cell 
pointer rapidly in the desired direction. Thus if you hold the Enter key down, you’ll scoot swiftly 
down the rows of the column in which you find yourself. 
 
ANOTHER NOTE: As we’ve already noted, clicking the scroll buttons moves the worksheet 
across, or up or down, the screen. But the scroll buttons don’t move the cell pointer. For 
example—if the cell pointer has been positioned in cell A12 and you then click the right scroll 
button, you’ll start to see columns well to the right of the A column—but the cell pointer will 
remain in A12. Scroll buttons don’t move the cell pointer to a new cell—rather, they just shift the 
rows and columns you see across the screen. 
Consider this scenario, then: You’re in cell B22 and you want to make your way to cell 
Z18. You can click the right scroll button until the Z column appears on screen. Then 
just click on Z18 (the column letter doesn’t have to be upper case, by the way). Try it! 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
33 
Of course you can get to your cell destination with the mouse, by simply clicking it onto 
the cell to which you want to go (note that unless otherwise indicated, all mouse clicks 
call upon the left button). 
You can also use the Name Box to visit a cell. Just click into the box, type your cell 
destination, and press Enter. Voila—you’re there. 
     
 
Figure 2–1. Note the cell pointer in cell B7. Typing H1 in the Name box in pressing Enter takes you to….cell H1. 
The Name Box is a cool way to travel long distances in the worksheet with precision -so 
if you need to get to cell XY38451, and fast, just type it in the Name Box and press 
Enter. Now want to get back where you came? Press Ctrl-Home, and you’re returned to 
cell A1. 
This table summarizes the techniques we’ve described: 
Table 2–1. Navigational techniques summarized 
Technique 
Type of Movement 
Enter key 
Moves one row down 
Shift-Enter 
Moves one cell up 
Tab 
Moves one cell to the right 
Shift-Tab 
Moves one cell to the left 
Arrow keys 
Moves one cell in desired direction 
Page-Down/Up 
Moves one screen’s worth of rows up or down 
Alt-Page Down/Up 
Moves one screen’s worth of columns right or left 
Ctrl-Home 
Always moves to cell A1 
Name Box 
Moves to cell whose address you’ve typed in box after 
Mouse 
Enables user to click into any cell 
Scroll buttons/bars 
Moves to a new area of the worksheet; but does not directly select any cell 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
34 
Remember that when you travel to any cell the current location of the cell pointer is 
always recorded in the Name Box. 
Selecting Multiple Cells 
In the course of your spreadsheet activity you may decide that you need to highlight, or 
select, more than one cell at a time. Why? There are several reasons you may want to 
do this, including these: 
 You want to format the data in a group of cells all at the same time. 
For example: You want a group of numbers—perhaps a very large 
group—to display that currency format we spoke about earlier. By 
selecting all those cells simultaneously you can introduce the currency 
format to all of them, rather than having to change each cell 
individually. (See Chapter 4.) 
 You may want to copy, or move, or delete, a group of cells at the 
same time. (See later this chapter.) 
 You may want to print some, but not all the cells, in a worksheet. To 
carry this out, you’d first need to select just the cells you want to print. 
(See Chapter 8.) 
 You may want to subject a group of cells to a mathematical operation- 
say, add the numbers in certain cells. (See Chapter 3.) 
Selecting multiple cells, then, is your way of informing Excel exactly which cells you 
want to modify or work with. 
There are several related ways in which you can select cells, and they’re all pretty easy. 
The standard way is simply to click in the first cell you want to select, hold down the left 
button, and drag with your mouse across, or down, the other cells. The technique is 
very similar to the way you’d select a group of words in Word. 
Thus if I wanted to select cells A6 through A19 I’d 
1. Click cell A6. 
2. Hold the left mouse button down. 
3. Drag to cell A19. 
4. Release the mouse. 
Carry out this sequence, and again, your screen should look like this: 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
35 
    
 
Figure 2–2. Selecting cells. Start by dragging (left screenshot) and when you’ve selected them all, release the 
mouse (right screenshot).  
Note that the cell pointer—the thick black border—has expanded to include all the 
selected cells, which have turned temporarily blue (with the exception of A6, the first cell 
we’ve selected. (Why A6 hasn’t changed color will be discussed a bit later in more 
detail, but the blank cell represents the cell in which the data will go when you start to 
type. It’s the blue color that tells you that these are the cells you’ve selected. Now you 
can go ahead and reformat the cells, or copy or print them (of course you’d want to put 
data in them first!) 
Now of course you’re eventually going to have to turn off the selection area in order to 
go ahead and do something else. To stop the selection process and banish the blue 
from your screen, just click your mouse, or press any arrow key.  
Selecting Cells Down and Across the Worksheet 
And when we select cells, we’re not restricted to cells in one column. Once we’ve 
started to select we can keep that left mouse button down and drag to the right (or left, 
if we have room in that direction, or even up) as well, and select cells in additional 
columns: 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
36 
     
 
Figure 2–3. Selecting rows and columns, as we start to drag to the right 
Selecting Cells with the Keyboard 
You can also select cells with the keyboard. Click in the first cell you want to select, 
release the mouse, and then 
1. Hold down the Shift key. 
2. Leaving the Shift key down, tap any of the arrow keys in the direction of 
the cells you want to select.  
3. You can change arrow keys as you proceed, so that you can select cells 
to the right of the start cell by tapping the right arrow key, and then 
begin to select cells downward by tapping the down arrow key.  
Selecting All the Cells 
Now back to that Select All button: 
 
Figure 2–4. Remember—it’s to the left of the A column heading, and above row heading 1. 
Remember that clicking Select All highlights all the worksheet cells at the same time—all 
1.7 billion or so of them. You’d turn to Select All, then, if you wanted reformat all those 
cells uniformly—say to implement the same font change in all of them. (Note: clicking 
Ctrl-A will also normally select all worksheet cells. (There’s an exception to this rule, 
though: if you click anywhere in a group of consecutive cells that contain data—called a 
range, a topic which is coming next—Ctrl-A will select only those cells.) 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
37 
 
Figure 2–5. Complete coverage: what the worksheet looks like when you’ve selected all its cells  
As we just indicated, a group of adjoining cells of the kind we’ve illustrated above is 
called a range, a key spreadsheet concept. Knowing how to identify ranges in 
formulas—something we’re going to learn about soon—will enable you to work with 
large numbers of cells at the same time: to add the numbers entered in those cells, 
calculate their average, find the smallest number among them, and to carry out a nearly 
unlimited number of other tasks. 
Still One More Selection Technique—The Name Box 
And while we’re at it, here’s another cool way to select a range. You can click in the 
Name Box and type a range reference, something like 
 
Figure 2–6. Entering range coordinates in the Name Box 
Now what does that mean? It means we want to select all the cells from A12 though 
C23 (including A12 and C23). That’s what the colon does—and if you press Enter next, 
all those cells will be selected. 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
38 
Entering Text and Data 
Data entry in Excel is as easy as it is important. Just select the cell you need, and type 
the entry—although that doesn’t quite finish the process. When you type in Word, all you 
do, after all, is…type. But data entry in Excel requires an additional, but simple step. You 
need to confirm what you’ve entered with an additional command—almost always a 
navigational keystroke or mouse click. 
Let’s illustrate. The typical way to enter data is to select a cell, type whatever you want, 
and press the Enter key—and that’s it.  
    
 
Figure 2–7. Note the cursor alongside the letter l in the first shot. That indicates that you’re still “in” the cell. 
When you press Enter, the cell pointer travels down one row. 
Pressing Enter does two things:  
1. It ”installs” whatever you’ve typed in the cell 
2. It bumps the cell pointer down one row, as Enter normally does—
nothing new there (as you’ll see, there’s an exception to this rule—when 
you select a range and then enter data into its cells).  
Note: If you’re in the process of entering data in a cell and decide you don’t want to continue, 
pressing the ESC key will cancel what you’re doing and leave the original cell contents intact. 
That’s the way it works—type your data in the cell, and press Enter—OR an arrow key, 
OR PgDn or PgUp, OR click the mouse into another cell. Typing data into a cell and 
following it up with say, a tap of the right arrow key, also does two things: it installs the 
data, and then in this case delivers the cell pointer one column to the right. Completing 
the data entry with a mouse click instead will simply land the cell pointer into the cell in 
which you’ve clicked—after the data has been installed in the original cell. I told you it 
was easy. The idea is that the pointer moves in the desired direction after carrying out 
the data entry. 
There’s also another way to carry out the data entry process. Select your cell, type 
away, and instead of executing one of the standard navigational moves we’ve described 
above click the gray check mark alongside the formula bar: 
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
39 
 
Figure 2–8. Getting ticked off: Completing the data entry process by clicking the gray tick 
This click-the-tick approach will also finish off the data entry as with all the other 
techniques, but this time—and unlike the other methods listed above- will leave the cell 
pointer in the same cell. Note also the X to the left of the tick; click it instead and the 
445 you’ve started to type above will be canceled  
Aligning Your Data—Where It Appears in the Cell 
Now let’s look at a little more closely at the data you’ll enter and how they appear in 
cells. When you type a textual entry the results appear left-aligned—that is, starting at a 
cell’s left edge—by default, and that’s simply because our Roman alphabet proceeds 
from left to right. But type a number—or what Excel calls a value, and it will position 
itself by default—that is, for starters—at the cell’s right edge, because our number 
system is Arabic, extending right to left: 
 
Figure 2–9. Choosing sides: Text aligned left, numbers right 
Text data entry differs in some important ways from its numeric cousin. For one thing, if 
you type a lengthy phrase in a cell—and you can actually type over 32,000 characters in 
a cell—Excel will allow the excess text to spill into adjoining columns: 
 
Figure 2–10. Crossing the line: a text phrase advancing into other cells 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
40 
Just type away and let the text do its thing, bearing in mind that, appearances to the
contrary, all the text you see in the above screen shot inhabits just one cell—the cell in
which you started to type. That’s all perfectly legal. But crossing cell boundaries can
cause a problem.  
Let’s say the text we see above has been inscribed in cell B6. If we go ahead and type
an entry in cell C6—the cell to its immediate right, we see something like this: 
Figure 2–11. Now you see it, now you don’t: The case of the missing text. 
What happened? What happened is that the new phrase in C6 is simply claiming its own
turf, so to speak. C6 was empty, after all, and all we did was enter a bit of text there—
obscuring, but not deleting, that part of the text in B6 that had overstepped its bound. 
And how do I know that none of the text in B6 has been deleted? I can verify that fact by
clicking on B6 and looking at the Formula Bar. You’ll see 
Figure 2–12. All there: the text in B6, revealed in the Formula Bar 
Now we can begin to understand how the Formula Bar reveals the data you’ve entered
in a cell. By that I meant that a glance at the actual cell doesn’t always tell you what’s
really going on inside of it, and we’ll see more evidence of this when we starting looking
at formulas. Here we see that because of the data in C6, some of the phrase in B6 isn’t
visible—at least not on the worksheet itself. And if you were to go ahead and print the
worksheet in its current state, the text in B6 would remain eclipsed as you see it above.
But the Formula Bar reassures us that that it’s all still there just the same.  

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
41 
Widening and Narrowing Columns 
But that explanation still leaves us with the problem: we can’t see the whole phrase in 
B6—and we want to. It’s a classic spreadsheet dilemma—and the way to resolve it is to 
widen the column containing the “missing” text, revealing it completely on the 
worksheet. 
There are several ways in which to widen Excel columns, and we’ll explore what are 
probably the two most popular: 
 Altering a column manually 
 Using the auto-fit feature 
Altering a column manually 
Let's try the first method to widen a column: 
1. Position the mouse over the right border of the column you want to 
widen—in this case column B—and click (don’t release the mouse). 
You’ll see: 
 
Figure 2–13. The first step toward widening a column. Note the double-arrowed cursor. 
2. Now drag the column boundary toward the right. You’ll see the B 
column expand, revealing more of the text in B6 as you drag. When 
you’ve exposed all of the text, release the mouse.  
That was easy, wasn’t it? Just click on the right column boundary (it must be the right), 
and drag to widen. Just keep in mind that you need to click on the column boundary, 
and not on row 1 of the worksheet in order to carry out this task.  
If you want you can narrow a column, too, by dragging to the left, in the same way. 
Now that’s pretty neat, but the process is slightly hit-or-miss and trial-and-error—
because if you‘ve written a very lengthy text phrase in a cell, you may have to try the 
click-and-drag repeatedly until you‘ve widened the column to precisely the dimension 
you want. And that takes us to Method 2—the auto-fit.  

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
42 
Using the Auto-fit Feature 
Let's try an auto-fit: 
1. As with the Method 1, glide the mouse atop the right column boundary, 
until you see the double-arrowed cursor. 
2. Double-click the mouse. The column should be widened to reveal all of 
the contents of the cell. 
Got that? Again, it’s called auto-fit, and we see that double-clicking any column’s right 
boundary resizes the column until all the data in that column is revealed. And that also 
means that if you’ve entered data into many cells in the B column and many of them 
exhibit obscured text, a double-click will widen the column to reveal them all. In other 
words, the auto-fit resizes the column to the width of the widest data entry in the 
column. 
You can execute an auto-fit on several columns at the same time. That means that if several 
columns suffer from the obscured-text-syndrome at the same time, you can widen them all 
in one shot. Here’s how: Let’s say that columns A through D all have data in some of their 
cells which are hidden by data in the adjoining columns, something like this: 
 
Figure 2–14. But the words get in the way…four columns’ worth of obscured text. 
3. Click atop the first column heading you want to auto-fit (in this case, A)—
and not its boundary, this time—keep the left button down, and drag 
across the headings of the adjoining columns you want to auto-fit: 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
43 
 
Figure 2–15. Selecting the columns by their headings 
4. Double-click any one of the column boundaries selected—and all the 
columns will be auto fit: 
 
Figure 2–16. Fit to be tried! 
5. Then click anywhere on the worksheet to turn off the blue selection color. 
Pretty handy. Just remember that this multi-column auto-fit won’t engineer identical 
widths for each column, because each width is tied to the widest entry in each column. 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
44 
Entering Numerical Data—How it’s Different  
Now let’s say a few words about entering values—that is, numbers. The basic 
techniques are identical for text entry: select a cell, type the value, and conclude the 
process with a navigational keystroke, mouse click, or that green tick. And don’t worry 
about commas, decimal points, and currency symbols. Those are formatting 
embellishments that don’t change the actual value you’ve entered. 
NOTE: See Chapter 5 for working with commas, decimal points, and currency symbols.  
 
Figure 2–17. Some ways in which you can format values. Note the rounded off value in the third case. 
So far so good. But there’s a quirk about values you’ll want to know about early on: 
Excel won’t allow a large value to barge across into the neighboring column. That is, if 
you type 1000000000—however that value is translated into English—Excel simply will 
prevent it from trespassing into the column next door. So what does Excel do instead? 
It does one of several things, depending on what’s gone on in the worksheet before you 
entered the value.  
By default, Excel carries out a kid of automatic auto fit on a lengthy value—that is, it will 
automatically expand the column to display the value in its entirety, without you having 
to double-click the column boundary.  
But if you had already narrowed that column before you entered the value, Excel 
assumes you had a good reason for having done so, and leaves the column width alone. 
So instead, it does one of two things:  
Displays the value in scientific notation, so 
it looks something like Figure 2–18. While 
you probably haven’t seen a value 
expressed that way since high school, it 
does represent a more compact way of 
displaying the value in a narrowed column. 
 
Figure 2–18. Remember these? A long value in 
scientific notation. The two values are identical. 
But if the column is very narrow, such that 
it can’t even accommodate the scientific 
notation, Excel displays the data as shown 
in Figure 2–19. Called pound signs in the 
US and hash marks in the UK, they tell the 
user that the column is simply too narrow 
to display anything else. Pound signs don’t 
suggest you’ve made a mistake—what 
 
Figure 2–19. There’s a value in there somewhere, and 
it’s the same as the one you can see. 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
45 
they always mean, rather, is that a value’s 
in there (never text), and you just can’t see 
it. All you need to do here is to widen the 
column—but truth to be told, you can 
leave it as is, if you want to only use it in 
formulas and the like. 
Entering Data into a Selected Range 
Now let’s get back to a data entry issue I pointed to earlier, but didn’t discuss. You’ll 
recall that when you select a range of cells, the first cell in the group remains white—that 
is, it doesn’t turn blue: 
 
Figure 2–20. Drawing a blank: the first cell in the selected range won’t change color. 
Time to explain why. The first cell in a selected range maintains its original white 
appearance to let you know that when you start typing, the data will enter that cell. 
Moreover, if you conclude that data entry by pressing the Enter key, the range remains 
selected—and the next cell turns white: 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
46 
 
Figure 2–21. Type now and the data will once again enter the white cell. 
You get the idea. Each tap of the Enter key turns the next cell white, designating the cell 
into which you’ll be entering data. 
But you may have a question about this sequence of events, because we don’t appear 
to be learning anything new here. After all, pressing Enter always takes you down one 
row—so what’s really different here? Good question. 
The answer can be gleaned by considering this range selection, in this case L9:M18 (just 
to get you accustomed to range references): 
 
Figure 2–22. A two-columned range selection 
Here’s the point. If you enter data in each cell and press Enter, you’ll once again bump 
down the column, for example: 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
47 
 
Figure 2–23. Right now you’re in cell L18. 
Now if you type a number and press Enter, you won’t descend down a row; rather, you’ll 
shoot up to cell M18—the first cell in the second selected column: 
 
Figure 2–24. Staying in range 
That’s what it’s about. Press the Enter key after you enter each item in a selected range 
and the white cell stays within the range bounds, rather than simply plunging down the 
column as it normally does. And again, after you’ve entered all the data in the range, 
click anywhere onscreen; the blue disappears, and the range is de-selected. 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
48 
Using Auto Fill to Speed Up Data Entry 
By now you may have taken notice of the small rectangle holding down the lower right 
corner of the cell pointer. It’s called the fill handle: 
 
Figure 2–25. There it is. 
Why is the fill handle so named? It’s because, among other things, you can fill a range 
with a collection of sequenced data—but what does that mean? 
Copying a Value with Auto Fill 
First, if you enter just one value or text item in a cell and drag on that cell’s fill handle, 
you’ll copy that item to as many cells as you drag. Thus if I enter 2 in a cell, click back 
into that cell and drag on the fill handle down its column, I’ll copy the 2 into as many 
cells as I want: 
 
Figure 2–26. One way to use the fill handle: to copy a value  
Auto Filling a Numeric Sequence 
To see what I mean: 
1. Type the values 1 and 2 anywhere in a column in adjacent rows.  
2. Then select those two cells and release your mouse—an important step 
in an auto fill, which is what we’re about to do:  
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
49 
 
Figure 2–27. Having your fill—selecting the cells 
3. Then glide the mouse directly over the fill handle. You’ll see a slender 
black cross: 
 
Figure 2–28. A new kind of cursor 
4. When you see it, click on it, and drag it down the column for as many 
rows as you wish. You should see: 
 
Figure 2–29. Value-added: auto fill at work 
Pretty cool, no? What we did is start with just two values, which established a fill 
interval—in this case an interval of 1 (the 2 minus the 1). That tells Excel that every 
subsequent value will receive an increment of…1.  
But you can really stipulate any increment you want. Start by entering say, the values 2 
and 5 instead, and you’ll auto fill 8, 11, 14, 17, etc. Enter 1 and 2.78 and you’ll wind up 
with additional values of 4.56, 6.34, 8.12, etc.—that is, values pumped by 1.78. 
Remember that to execute this kind of auto fill you need to enter the two starting values, 
select them and then release your mouse, without dragging. Only then do you return to 
the selection and start dragging. 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
50 
Using Auto Fill with Text 
But there’s more. Enter the word Tuesday in any cell. Return to the cell, grab onto the fill
handle, and start dragging to the right (as opposed to down the column. You can always
drag the fill handle vertically or horizontally). You’ll see: 
Figure 2–30. Those were the days. 
You see what’s happened, and it isn’t magic. Excel supplies the user with four built-in
auto fill sequences— 
 Days of the week 
 Three-lettered abbreviations of days of the week (e.g. Tue, Wed) 
 Months of the year 
 Three-lettered abbreviations of months of the year (e.g., Jul, Aug).  
And you can start any of these sequences at any point—that is, you needn’t start with
January, for example; and when you run out of months or days the sequence starts over
again. Start with July, and when you reach the 13th cell in the sequence you get July
again.  
NOTE: For appearance’s sake you may need to tinker with the column widths, because each day 
consists of different word lengths—look at Wednesday in the above screen shot, for example. 
Using the Auto Fill Option Button 
When you drag the fill button and complete a filled list, you’ll notice a button neighboring
the fill handle, entitled Auto Fill options. If you had dragged a list featuring values spaced
two apart by starting with the numbers 1 and 3, you see: 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
51 
 
Figure 2–31. The Auto Fill Option button 
Click it and you’ll see these options: 
 
Figure 2–32. Fill options 
The default selection, Fill Series, really identifies what you’ve just done. If I click Copy Cells, 
a curiously retroactive thing happens—the initial values, 1 and 3, are simply copied 
down the range: 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
52 
 
Figure 2–33. The Copy Cells option 
The Fill Formatting option only copies the formatting associated with the original cells 
you’ve copied. Thus if the values 1 and 3 had exhibited a yellow background (we’ll see 
how to do that in Chapter 5: "Formatting Your Data") selecting Fill Formatting will result in 
this: 
 
Figure 2–34. Fill Formatting—here, the values aren’t filling down the range; only the formatting in the source 
cells carries over to the selected cells. 
The last option, Fill Without Formatting, executes the fill, but doesn’t copy the formatting 
along with it:  

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
53 
 
Figure 2–35. Fill Without Formatting—only the numerical sequence is carried out, without bringing the 
formatting along for the ride.  
Customizing Auto Fill Lists 
Want more? You can also customize an auto fill list, say of friends or clients. That means 
that if you type one of the names in your customized list and drag it with your mouse, all 
the other names in the list will appear—just like the built-in days of the week list.  
To devise a customized auto fill list: 
1. Click the File tab  Options  Advanced  Edit Custom Lists... button: 
 
Figure 2–36. The Edit Custom Lists button 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
54 
2. You’ll see the following. Note the four built-in lists we discussed earlier. 
To start composing your own, just type the names in the List entries 
area, and press Enter after each entry: 
 
Figure 2–37. The Custom Lists dialog box  
3. When you’re done, click the Add button. You’ll see: 
 
Figure 2–38. Your own custom list 
4. Click OK. 
Now when you enter any one of those names in a cell (again, it doesn’t have to be the 
first in the list) and drag it with the fill handle, all the other names will appear across a 
row or down a column, depending on the direction in which you drag, of course. Your 
friends—and maybe even your boss—will be impressed. 
Data Validation: Bringing Quality Control to the 
Worksheet 
It isn’t exciting, but data entry is at the heart of every worksheet. The most ingenious, 
jaw-droppingly-brilliant melange of formulas and charts won’t be worth a pixel if the 
information it works with is suspect, and Excel recognizes that critical point by providing 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
55 
its users with a series of data entry-control, or validation, options that help reduce the 
likelihood that bad data will compromise your results.  
Here’s a simple example: Suppose you need to enter the names of states in a range by 
their two-character abbreviation, the way the post office codes them. You could devise 
a data validation rule that restricts any data entry in a range of cells to exactly two 
characters—meaning that if you were to accidentally type CAL instead of CA, you’d be 
prevented from doing so. 
You see the point. By engineering a data validation rule requiring two, and only two, 
characters in the designated cells your chance of inadvertently making a data entry 
mistake is narrowed. Of course, our rule wouldn’t stop you from erroneously entering NY 
when you really wanted to type CA, because both have two characters, but it’s a start. 
So let’s try to set up that two-character data validation rule to see how it works.  
1. Select any cell and click the Data tab  Data Validation button in the 
Data Tools button group. This sounds strange, but click either the upper 
half of the button or click the lower half or the small arrow and then click 
Data Validation. Quirky, but that’s how this, and some other Excel 
buttons, work.  
2. Now click the drop-down arrow by 
Allow in the Data Validation dialog. 
You’ll see: 
 
Figure 2–39. Granting permission: The Data Validation 
Allow menu lets you decide what sort of data to allow 
in the selected cells. 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
56 
3. Click Text length and then “equal 
to” after you click the drop-down 
arrow by Data. You’ll now see: 
Figure 2–40 Character test—specifying a two-
character data entry requirement. 
NOTE: Clicking the button at the right end of the 
Length field will temporarily collapse, or shrink, the 
dialog box when you click it. Collapsing will allow 
you to see more of the worksheet. Just click the 
button a second time and the dialog box will return 
to its original size: 
 
Figure 2–41. Selected short subject: collapsing the 
dialog box, an option you’ll see in many dialog boxes. 
4. Remember—we want to restrict the data in the selected cell to entries of 
exactly two characters, so just type 2 in the Length field and click OK. 
5. Then try to type CAL in your 
selected cell and press Enter. You 
should see: 
 
Figure 2–42. Oops—we’ve typed one character too 
many. 
6. Because we’ve violated the data validation rule we established—by 
attempting to enter three-characters—Excel reminds us we can’t do it. 
Either click Retry or Cancel and give it another go, this time restricting 
the input to two characters. This time, it’ll work. 
Just keep in mind that by clicking on “equal to” in the Data field we do mean exactly two 
characters. Entering one character in the cell will also provoke an error prompt. Had we 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
57 
wanted to specify a maximum two characters we could have selected the “less than” 
data option and typed 3, or “less than or equal to” and typed 2. 
But note that Data Validation rules work with a kind of grandfather clause. If you’ve 
already entered CAL in a cell in which you then institute a two-character limit, Excel will 
let the current entry stand. Just don’t try typing ARI in the cell now, though. 
NOTE: Establishing a text length data validation rule also affects the data entry of values. Thus 
the rule we‘ve devised would also allow you to type 34, but not 3 or 344. 
Once you understand how that example works you can try out some of other data 
validation options, such as between or greater than; these should now be pretty easy to 
work out. 
And if you want to remove a data valuation rule, just select the relevant cells and click 
Data Validation  Clear All  OK. 
NOTE: If you want to change a data validation rule for a range of cells, just click one of the 
cells click Data Validation, make the change, and tick the “Apply these changes to all other 
cells with the same settings” check box. All the cells affected by the original rule will take on 
the rule change. 
Making a List—Personalizing a Drop-Down Menu 
One of the cooler data validation options is the ability to let you construct your own 
drop-down menu, from which you can choose from your own list of data. Thus instead 
of having to type Department names for each employee in our little database, you could 
batch up something that looks like this, and just click: 
 
Figure 2–43. Fast-track data entry: Drop-down personalized menu 
It’s easy to devise, too: 
1. Enter the items that will populate the 
menu in consecutive cells. For 
example, in cells A2:A5 you could 
enter HR, Marketing, Sales, VP. 
 
Figure 2–44. These names will populate the drop-
down data entry menu. 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
58 
2. Select the range of cells where you want to use the drop-down menu (this is a 
different range from the one containing the options). That is, you want to select 
the cells in which the menu will actually appear when you click in any of its cells. 
In the figure below we’d select the cells in the Department column (you’ll see this 
collection of data again in Chapter 7), but you can really select any column of cells 
to illustrate the point. 
 
 
Figure 2–45. These cells will exhibit the drop-down menu.  
3. Click Data Validation. Select List in the Allow field. 
 
Figure 2–46.  Here’s where you select the data that will appear in the drop-down menu.  
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
59 
4. Click in the Source field, and select the range containing the drop-down 
menu items—in our case =$A$2:$A$5, or whatever range you’re using. 
Note the dollar signs appear automatically when you select the range, 
because the drop-down menu will likely appear in a whole range of 
cells—and Excel doesn’t want the drop-down source range for each of 
the cells to change as a result of relative cell addressing (see Chapter 4), 
i.e., A2:A5, A3:A6, A4:A7. Also remember that if you name the source 
range—to say Dept—all you need do is type =Dept in the Source field, 
and that’s it. 
5. Click OK. 
6. The drop-down menu should be ready to go in the selected cells. Just 
click the drop-down arrow in each cell. 
If you change any of the data whose entries appear in the drop-down—say VP to Vice-
President—that new phrase will appear in all subsequent data entry using the drop-
down menu. But existing records displaying VP won’t be changed. 
NOTE: Instead of entering the range which contains the drop-down items in Source, you can 
also enter the actual drop-down items directly in the Source field instead, by typing HR, 
Marketing, etc., each separated by a comma. With this technique there are no dollar-sign 
issues. 
Explaining Data Validation Errors with Error Alerts 
Once you’ve subjected a range to a data validation rule you may want to provide the 
user with some information about what the rule does. We’ve already seen that Excel 
does that by default, by broadcasting the “The value you entered is not valid” message 
we saw in Figure 2–42. But you can customize that message via the Data Validation 
Error Alert feature, so that the user is told exactly what sort of data is and is not 
permitted in the cell. Thus you can compose a prompt that declares: “You must enter 
two characters in this cell”—and you can also provide an Error Alert that warns the user 
that the cell entry is wrong, but the cell will accept it anyway if the user wants to go 
ahead anyway. 
There are three sorts of Error Alerts: 
 Stop—Excel’s default, which blocks entries that violate the data 
validation rule 
 Warning—This notifies the user that the data entry violates the rule, 
but allows her either to try again or to override the rule 
 Information—This one sounds like the others, but it just tells the user 
the data entry violates the rule—and goes ahead and accepts it 

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
60 
Let's see how to customize a data validation prompt: 
1. Select the range of cells to which you’ve assigned the Data Validation
rule. 
2. Click Data Validation and click the Error Alert tab. 
3. Select the Error Alert type you want to apply from the Style drop-down
menu.  
4. Type a Title and customized message. For example—if you select the
Warning type, you could entitle the message Character Limit, and write:
Only two characters permitted in this cell.  
5. Click OK. 
Once that’s done, enter CAL—that is,
three characters, and press Enter; you’ll
see 
Figure 2–47. Don’t say we didn’t warn you: A Warning
Error Alert. The user will still be allowed to enter three
characters anyway. 
Note the Continue? prompt, which is supplied by Excel. 
Adding Data Entry Instructions with Input Messages 
We’ve seen that Error Alerts tell the user if they’ve violated a data validation, and what
they’ve done wrong. Input messages tell the user what sort of data is permitted in cells
before the data is entered.  
To demonstrate how this works: 
1. Select that same range of cells with which you’ve been working.  

CHAPTER 2:  Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry 
61 
2. Click Data Validation  
Input Message. You’ll see: 
 
Figure 2–48. Delivering the message: The Input 
Message dialog box. 
3. Type Two-character limit in the Title field and “You must enter exactly 
two characters in this cell” in the Input Message field, and click OK.  
4. Click in any cell in the selected 
range; you’ll see: 
 
Figure 2–49. Proactive prompt: an input message 
The idea is to pre-empt possible data entry mistakes, by letting the user know in 
advance what’s allowed in the cells. 
Summary 
We’ve covered lots of ground in this chapter—literally. We’ve learned how to travel the 
length and breadth of the spreadsheet and how to introduce data into cells, once we’ve 
parked ourselves inside the ones we want, and we’ve learned how to fend off potential 
data enty miscues with an array of data validation techniques. 
Knowing how to get around the worksheet, select its cells, and post data to them rank 
among the most essential Excel skills—and as you’ve seen, they’re pretty easy. But 
sometimes you need to change what you’ve already done, and in the next chapter we’ll 
see how to go about editing the contents of cells. It’s pretty easy, too. 

 
 
63 
63 
 
 
 
Chapter 
Editing Data  
Once you’ve gotten the principles of data entry nailed down, you’ll need to learn about 
the ways in which you can modify, or edit, the information you’ve posted to their cells. 
I’m going to introduce those editing techniques now, because, as someone once said, 
“Change is good” (when you need to make a change). And when you’re working with 
Excel, it’s easy too. 
Changing Your Data 
Needless to say, there will be times when you’ll need to make changes to at least some 
of the data you’ve posted to your worksheet. For example, you may have made an error 
or two, or a data update may be in order. Excel makes editing easy, too, and as usual, 
presents you with a couple of options. 
First and most simply, you can edit the contents of a cell by simply typing over what’s 
already there. If you’ve entered the number 7 and discover you needed a 77 instead, just 
select the cell and type 77. Excel overwrites the original number. 
However, if you’ve entered a lengthy expression that contains one small error into a cell, 
retyping all the contents of the cell for the sake of one correction doesn’t seem terribly 
efficient. For example, say you typed ”Now is the time for all good mean,” but you meant 
men. Again, you could retype the whole phrase, but there are less troublesome ways to 
get what you want. Here’s a more efficient tack:  
1. Select the cell. 
2. Click in the formula bar, right next to the a you want to remove, as 
shown in Figure 3–1. 
 
Figure 3–1. Nobody’s perfect—I didn’t mean “mean.” Note that this correction is being made to the phrase in cell 
V15. 
3 

CHAPTER 3:  Editing Data 
64 
3. Remember the formula bar—that strip in the upper reaches of your 
screen that affords you a view of exactly what you entered in the cell. 
Among other things, the formula bar gives you a place to very easily edit 
a cell. Here you can click precisely at the place in the phrase you want 
to change. and do some basic word processing. If you click to the left of 
the a, press the Delete key once and the letter will disappear. If you click 
to its right, press Backspace instead.  
4. When you’ve finished your edits, press Enter or click the green check 
mark, and the edit is completed. Simple!  
You can also add text to the cell in much the same way:  
1. Click in the formula bar at the appropriate point in the text and just type. 
As with Word, the text will push the adjoining words aside.  
2. Then press Enter or click the green check.  
You can also edit data in a cell by deploying an ancient spreadsheet keystroke: the F2 
key. Here, instead of clicking inside the formula bar, click the cell and press F2. The 
cursor will be placed at the end of text, as shown in Figure 3–2. 
 
Figure 3–2. Using the F2 key to get inside the cell 
Once the cursor is in the cell, you can press the left arrow key to make your way back to 
that surplus a. Once you’re there, just backspace or delete, and then press Enter, and 
the deed is done.  
Note as well that when you start to edit 
cells, the mode indicator lurking in the 
lower left of the status bar changes, as 
shown in Figure 3–3. 
 
Figure 3–3. The Edit mode indicator turns on when you 
begin the cell-editing process. 
Undoing an Edit 
There’s yet another way to revise the 
contents of your cells, though you might 
not think of it as an editing command—it’s 
the Undo button, stored in the Quick 
Access toolbar (shown in Figure 3–4). 
 
Figure 3–4. The Undo button 

CHAPTER 3:  Editing Data 
65 
By clicking that button (or utilizing its 
keyboard equivalent, Ctrl+Z), you can 
nullify the command you’ve just executed 
(note that a small number of commands 
can’t be undone, such as adding a new 
worksheet to the workbook). Moreover, if 
you click Undo repeatedly, each previous 
command will be repealed in succession. 
And if you click the small drop-down to the 
right of Undo, a history of the commands 
you’ve carried out this session will be 
shown on the screen, something like 
Figure 3–5. 
 
Figure 3–5. Long memory: The Undo drop-down menu  
Drag your mouse through those 
commands you want to undo, as shown in 
Figure 3–6. Click your mouse, and those 
selections will be undone.  
 
 
Figure 3–6. Choosing which commands to undo 

CHAPTER 3:  Editing Data 
66 
NOTE: You can’t skip over commands in the Undo history, undoing just some of them out of 
sequence. You can only undo consecutive commands. 
Undoing What You’ve Just Undone with the Redo Button 
There’s a flip side to the Undo command, 
too: Redo, represented by that right-
curling arrow just to the right of Undo, as 
shown in Figure 3–7. 
 
Figure 3–7. Having second thoughts? Undo the undos 
with Redo. 
 
When clicked (keyboard equivalent: Ctrl+Y), Redo can undo your undos, if that’s not too 
discombobulating. That is, if you execute an undo and instantly regret it, then click Redo 
and that undo will be forgotten. And as with Undo, Redo also sports its own history via a 
drop-down menu (revealed by clicking the little arrow to the right of the Redo button), 
recording the commands you’ve undone. It works the same way as the Undo drop-
down. 
Deleting Cell Contents 
Of course, the most dramatic way to edit a 
cell is to delete its contents—and if that’s 
what you want to do, just select the cell 
and press the Delete key. But bear in mind 
that if you want to delete a group of cells, 
select them by using one of the methods  
already described in Chapter 2, and then 
press Delete, as shown in Figure 3–8. 
 
Figure 3–8. First select the range of cells, and then 
press Delete. 
Copying and Moving: Duplicating and Relocating 
Your Data 
There will be times—probably many times—when you’ll want to make a copy of a range 
of data. The basic means for doing so are pretty basic and easy, and resemble the ways 
you’d carry out the process in Word. At other times you’ll want to move a range—an 
equally easy process that also goes under the storied name of cut-and-paste.  

CHAPTER 3:  Editing Data 
67 
Copying Data 
As usual, Excel presents the user with several ways in which to copy data, but we’ll start 
with the textbook approach. To copy, do the following: 
1. Select the range you wish to copy. 
2. Click Home tab, and choose Copy 
from the Clipboard button group 
(see Figure 3–9). 
 
Figure 3–9. The Copy button 
3. Your range will be surrounded by 
what are called marching ants 
(really), those animated dashes 
trooping around the range (see 
Figure 3–10). 
  
 
Figure 3–10. On the march: The ants are part of the 
copy process. 
4. Click in the first cell of the 
destination range—that is, the area 
in the worksheet to which you want 
to paste the copied data (see Figure 
3–11). 
Figure 3–11. You only have to click in the first cell of 
the destination range. 

CHAPTER 3:  Editing Data 
68 
5. Click Home, and then click Paste in 
the Clipboard button group (see 
Figure 3–12). 
 
Figure 3–12. The Paste button 
You’re done (see Figure 3–13). The 
keyboard equivalents for copy and paste, 
by the way, are Ctrl+C and Ctrl+V, 
respectively. 
 
Figure 3–13. The destination range receives all the 
copied cells. 
To summarize, the copying process asks you to select what it is you want to copy, and 
then to indicate where the copy is going to be pasted on the worksheet. Note that when 
you paste, you need only click in the first cell of the destination range, because Excel is 
smart enough to know that if you’re copying 12 cells, you’re going to paste 12, too (see 
Figure 3–14). And note there’s another keyboard equivalent to Paste available in this 
context—pressing the Enter key. 
 
Figure 3–14. The first cell in the destination range determines where the rest will be pasted. 

CHAPTER 3:  Editing Data 
69 
Moving Data 
Moving data isn’t much different from 
copying and pasting it. Select the range, 
but this time click Home  Cut (see Figure 
3–15). The keyboard equivalent for cut is 
Ctrl+X. 
 
Figure 3–15. The Cut button 
Note that, curiously, clicking Cut doesn’t cause the range to disappear from the screen 
immediately; the data stays there until you click in the first cell in the destination range 
and then click Paste (or press Ctrl+V). Only then does it get uprooted from its original 
position and move to its new range. 
NOTE: Deleting data is not an equivalent to cutting it. When you press the Delete key, the data 
you’ve erased cannot be pasted elsewhere on the worksheet—it’s gone. Pasting is possible only 
when you cut the data first. 
The Clipboard: The Storage Area for Copied and Cut 
Data  
By now, you may have taken note of the 
button image characterizing the Paste 
command: a clipboard, in the Clipboard 
button group (see Figure 3–16). 
 
Figure 3–16. The Paste button 
The image alludes to an area in Excel’s brain, naturally enough called the Clipboard, in 
which data that you’ve copied and/or cut is stored until you decide to paste it. The 
Clipboard can warehouse up to 24 different copied or cut items, all of which can be 
pasted to your worksheet when you wish. To see what I mean, let’s try it out. 
1. On a blank worksheet, type the text shown in Figure 3–17 (i.e., the text 
in cells C9:C12 and the values in cell I11:I13. 
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 3:  Editing Data 
70 
 
Figure 3–17. The Fab Four and three values 
2. Then click the dialog box launcher in 
the Clipboard button group. That’s 
the small arrow by the Clipboard 
title, as shown in Figure 3–18. 
 
Figure 3–18. The Clipboard dialog box launcher 
3. The Clipboard dialog box will 
appear, as shown in Figure 3–19. 
Select the text in cells C9:C12. 
 
Figure 3–19. The Clipboard area 
3

CHAPTER 3:  Editing Data 
71 
4.
Click Copy, and the text shown in
Figure 3–20 will appear in the
Clipboard area.  
Figure 3–20. Your copied text, stored and ready to
paste 
5.
Then immediately select the values in
cells I11:I13, and copy them as well.
The Clipboard should now displays
what’s shown in Figure 3–21. 
Figure 3–21. Your choice: You can paste either—or
both! 
The Clipboard now records two entries, either one of which can be pasted by simply
clicking in a destination cell and then clicking the Clipboard item you need.  
Note as well that by clicking Clear All you can empty the Clipboard, and by clicking the
X in the Clipboard’s upper-right corner you stop it from being displayed. 
Summary 
Once you build up your data entry and editing chops, you’ll want to start learning about
the ways you can do something with the data—that is, writing formulas and using other
means for gleaning something new from the information you’ve posted to the workbook.
Entering test scores is one thing; but calculating a test average—ah, that’s what Excel’s
about. Just turn the page. 

 
 
73 
73 
 
 
 
Chapter 
Number Crunching 101: 
Functions, Formulas, and 
Ranges  
What makes Excel so powerful, and maybe even exciting, is its ability to bring 
something to the worksheet that wasn’t there before. Taking a column of sales figures 
and finding their average or determining the highest score on a test—automatically—is 
really what Excel is about. If all you’re doing is entering names and values on the 
worksheet without doing something to that information, you’re probably using the wrong 
application—sort of a souped-up Word, only with cells instead of paragraphs. Learning 
how to compose your own Excel formulas and use Excel’s built-in calculations, called 
functions, allow you to use some of Excel’s real potential. 
And you’ll see that formulas tie into ranges—because your formulas often work with 
many cells at the same time (e.g., for computing sums, averages, and many other 
mathematical operations).  
Of course, this is a mighty big subject, and learning all the things Excel can do in this 
area would require a book a whole lot larger—and more expensive—than you’d be 
prepared to pay for. What we’re going to do here introduce the essentials—the things 
you have to know in order to get your money’s worth—both from this book and from 
Excel.  
Automatic Calculations with Functions 
We’ll start with functions and see how to carry out all sorts of calculations on your data. 
4 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
74 
Adding a Column of Numbers 
So let’s cut to the chase. Say you need to add that column of numbers—the classic 
Excel task.  
1. In cells H3:H7, enter the values 
shown in Figure 4–1. 
 
Figure 4–1. It will all add up: The numbers we want to add. 
NOTE: Don’t get the wrong idea—the actual values we’ve entered don’t particularly matter, and 
more importantly the number of values populating in the column doesn’t really matter either. The 
procedure for adding 50,000 values in a column works the same way as adding just 5.  
2. Next, click in cell H8, click the Home 
tab, and choose AutoSum from the 
Editing button group (see Figure 4–2).  
 
Figure 4–2. The Editing button group 
You should now see what’s shown in Figure 4–3. 
 
Figure 4–3. In summation: We’re about to add all those numbers. 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
75 
Let’s take note of what we’re looking at. Clicking the AutoSum button in H8 installs the 
expression shown in Figure 4–3. This expression uses Excel’s built-in SUM function: 
=SUM(H3:H7) 
And what is that expression telling us? It’s telling us that Excel plans to add all the 
values in the range H3:H7. Press Enter and you’ll see the result, 267, in cell H8. Voila! 
This expression is called a formula (you can tell a formula because it starts with an equal 
sign (=), and this formula displays the result of the SUM function. You can read the 
formula as “The contents of this cell equal the result of the SUM function.” In the 
“Customizing the Worksheet with Formulas” section later in this chapter, I will teach you 
how to write formulas from scratch. For now we are going to use the built-in functions, 
which make writing formulas quick and easy (and it’s the functions that we really care 
about, because they do the hard work for us). 
NOTE: If you double-click the AutoSum button, it will display its result immediately in its cell, 
without stopping to reveal its formula as in Figure 4–3. 
Now type 71 in cell H4, replacing the original 67. Cell H8 will now show 271. This 
demonstrates what’s perhaps the single greatest contribution of spreadsheets to 
Western civilization: automatic recalculation. Once a formula has been placed on a 
worksheet, any change in the values used in the formula will immediately change the 
formula’s result. There’s no need to rewrite the formula—it delivers the new result 
automatically. Just change the contributing values, and the answer changes. 
Returning to our example, we see that it works because SUM is programmed to add all 
the values in the cells directly above it (or to its left, if you’re adding values in a row); that 
is, it adds the cells that actually contain a value. And that means that if we had 
encountered this range shown in Figure 4–4 in H3:H7 instead, and had clicked AutoSum 
again in H8, we’d have seen the result shown in Figure 4–5. 
 
Figure 4–4. Something’s missing: Adding (or trying to add) the values in this range 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
76 
 
Figure 4–5. Same range, different result: Excel adds the cells containing values, until it encounters a cell that’s 
either blank or contains text. 
What Excel does here is incorporate each cell directly above H8 into its formula, until it 
lands upon a cell that’s vacant—in this case, H5. Thus, Excel here would plan to add 
only the values in H6 and H7. 
This is interesting, but it presents us with a problem—what do we do if we still want to 
add all the values in the range H3:H7?  
Selecting the Range You Need 
To remedy this, instead of pressing Enter as in the previous example—which produced 
the result 267—this time click and drag H3 through H7, as shown in Figure 4–6. Now the 
expression in H8 should read as follows =SUM(H3:H7), just as it did in our original case. 
Then press Enter. 
 
Figure 4–6. Selecting the entire range you want 
What you should learn from this second case—the case of the missing value in cell H5—
is that the user can always override Excel’s decision about which cells are going to be 
added with SUM. When you click AutoSum, Excel first displays the range it’s about to add, 
as per the screenshots; and if you approve, just press Enter. But if you want to add the 
cells in a different range—which can be anywhere in the worksheet—not just in the 
same column—then click and drag across that range, and only then press Enter (see 
Figure 4–7).  

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
77 
 
Figure 4–7. Note that SUM is being calculated in a different column here, and that the range to be summed spans 
two columns. 
NOTE: Another AutoSum button is available on the Formulas tab in the Function Library 
button group, and it works in precisely the same way.  
Now here’s another question: what does 
AutoSum do when you place it in a cell 
that’s both at the bottom of a column 
and to the right of a row of data, as in 
Figure 4–8? 
 
Figure 4–8. Placing the cursor at the bottom right of 
the data 
In this case, AutoSum adds the values in the column, on the assumption that people 
more typically add values in the vertical direction. 
Viewing and Editing Your Formula: Back to the Formula 
Bar 
We’ve already talked about the formula bar—that long white strip bordering the upper 
rim of the worksheet, used for recording the contents of the cell in which you’ve clicked. 
Now you’re going to see what the formula bar is really about. Click in cell H8 and direct 
your attention to the formula bar. You’ll see what’s shown in Figure 4–9. 
 
Figure 4–9. Compare and contrast: Look at H8 and its contents in the formula bar. 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
78 
Quite a contrast! The value 267—the result of the SUM we carried out—appears in H8, 
and of course that’s what we want to see on the screen. But the formula bar displays the 
formula in H8 that gave rise to that 267. That’s an important difference, because it lets 
you—or someone else—know that we didn’t merely type the value 267 in cell H8; rather 
we performed a mathematical operation that brought about that total, and the formula 
bar verifies that claim. So if you really want to know what’s going on in a cell, click in it 
and look to the formula bar. 
NOTE: Clicking the Formulas tab and then Formula Auditing  Show Formulas displays 
formulas in the cells in which they’ve been written, instead of the formula results you normally 
see. To get back to the results, just click Show Formula again. This option is a useful way to see 
all the formulas you’ve written, if you need to edit them. 
And the formula bar provides an easy 
place in which you can edit the formula, 
too. For example, as in Figure 4–10, you 
can edit the range in the formula bar to 
add the cells in the range H3:I7 instead. 
Just click in the bar containing a formula, 
make the changes you need, and press 
Enter or click the Enter check mark 
alongside the formula bar. 
 
Figure 4–10. Editing the formula 
In a nutshell, that’s how to use AutoSum, a fast way to execute probably the most 
important mathematical operation you’ll need to perform in a worksheet. But Excel has 
many more functions in its bag of tricks (including some additional ones that appear 
when you click the arrow alongside AutoSum), which calculate all sorts of things, most of 
which you probably won’t need to know. It’s not likely, for example, that you’ll ever have 
to calculate the inverse matrix for a matrix stored in an array—whatever that might 
mean. But while you and I might not be concerned about that kind of capability, there 
are people out there who are, and there’s probably a function in there that does just 
what they’re looking for. 
However, the more functions you know, 
the better, and there are at least a few that 
you should know about. If you click the 
drop-down arrow alongside AutoSum you’ll 
see the list shown in Figure 4–11. 
 
Figure 4–11. Additional popular functions 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
79 
These work in an identical manner to AutoSum itself; that is, you can click in a cell 
directly beneath a range of values if you want Excel to automatically use that range, and 
then click any of the functions shown in the figure. Let’s look at each one in turn.  
Table 4–1 summarizes them. 
Table 4–1. Additional Functions You Can Access Directly by Clicking the AutoSum Button 
Name 
What It Does 
Average 
Calculates the average of a range of values; 
ignores cells containing text 
Count Numbers  
Counts the number of cells in a range 
containing values 
Max 
Calculates the highest value in a range of 
values 
Min 
Calculates the smallest value in range of values 
NOTE: The functions described in Table 4–1 ignore any blank cells they encounter in the 
designated range. That means, for example, that AVERAGE won’t treat a blank cell as if it were 
equal to zero. 
Calculating an Average 
So, let’s see how to calculate an average, with the blank-cell rule from before in mind. 
Now, if you were to click Average, you’d get the AVERAGE function in cell H8, and you’d 
see what’s shown in Figure 4–12. 
 
Figure 4–12. Just your AVERAGE Excel function 
Press Enter and you’ll see 56.6 in cell H8.  

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
80 
NOTE: Don’t worry yet about decimal points and how to round them off; that’s covered in 
Chapter   
And as with SUM, you can always drag your mouse across an alternative range if you 
don’t like the one that Excel suggests. And there’s no reason why you can’t drag across 
several columns as well as down many rows. This expression is perfectly legal, then: 
=AVERAGE(A12:C32) 
Displaying Values Based on a Certain Condition 
Again, there are a couple of hundred other functions out there for you to explore, but 
we’re going to illustrate just one more. It’s called IF, and it carries out an action in a cell 
provided another cell meets a certain condition (or conditions) that you establish. 
What does that mean? Consider this simple scenario: you’re a teacher who’s given an 
exam with a passing grade of 65. You want to be able to list your class scores on a 
worksheet and automatically determine at a glance which students have passed. 
In cell I12, enter the grade 66. OK, we know the grade is a pass, but we could be 
assessing dozens, or even hundreds, of scores at the same time, where the pass/fail 
evidence in every student’s case wouldn’t be quite so clear, because you might miss a 
score as you visually scan a long column of scores. 
Click in cell J12 and type =I. I know that’s a rather cryptic thing to write, but we’re 
stopping there because you’ll notice that something is already happening on the screen, 
as shown in Figure 4–13. 
 
Figure 4–13. What starts to happen when you begin to enter the IF function (or any function) 
What’s happening is that Excel already knows you’ve started to write a function. It 
knows because you’ve begun the expression by typing the = sign plus a letter (in this 
case I). This has triggered what’s called the Formula AutoComplete, that drop-down 
menu that lists function names, narrowing down the selection as you continue to type 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
81 
letters. Since IF happens to be the first function starting with the letter I, the blue 
highlight you see in the screenshot lands on it. Then press Tab (not Enter), and you’ll see 
what’s shown in Figure 4–14. 
 
Figure 4–14. The caption identifies the elements of the function. 
The Formula AutoComplete is trying to tell you the kinds of things that make up the IF 
statement—things like logical tests. But for now we’re going to just type. Inside that 
open parentheses type the following, and then press Enter:  
I12>=65,"Pass","Fail") 
You should see the word Pass in cell J12, as shown in Figure 4–15. We’ve done it. The 
student has passed the exam—and again, while we knew that already, we’ve let the cell 
make that decision, not us.  
 
Figure 4–15. A passing grade—barely 
Now type 60 in cell I12; the word Fail will now appear in cell J12. 
Now I’ll explain what we’ve written. The IF statement in its entirety reads as follows: 
=IF(I12>=65,"Pass","Fail") 
 I12>=65 is called a logical test, which is the condition that the value in 
cell I12 is asked to meet; that is, is the test score equal to or greater 
than 65? If it is, then what? Well, then the word Pass appears in cell 
J12—the cell in which we’ve placed this function.  
 Pass—or "Pass", as it has been written, is called the value if true (see 
the caption in Figure 4–14), which is the result that will appear in J12 if 
the condition is met. Since in our first case, in which the student 
scored 66, the condition is indeed met, Pass appears in the cell.  

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
82 
 In our second try, in which the student scored 60, the word Fail
appears instead. This is because the score hasn’t met the condition
(the logical test), and failure to meet that condition triggers the value if
false (see Figure 4–14.—in this case, the word Fail. 
Got all that? If not, with a bit of playing around with the expression (e.g., you could edit it
to enter a different passing score), it will start making more sense. As usual, practice is
the hidden ingredient. 
Revisiting Function Structure 
Now I’ll offer a few general observations about how to use functions: 
 You must write an equal sign (=) before you can use the function 
(functions can only appear in formulas). 
 The equal sign is always followed by the function’s name (e.g., SUM or 
AVERAGE). 
 A parenthesis always comes next in the expression, and the function
always concludes with a closed parenthesis, like so:
=AVERAGE(A23:A72) 
 The kind of information you enter between the parentheses varies,
from ranges to logical tests. 
NOTE: You can also always type the function if you wish, instead of clicking button options. 
Locating Functions in the Function Library 
As already stated, Excel has hundreds of functions that do all kinds of things. When I
was first exposed to functions sometime during the last century, I was mystified why
anyone would actually want to use these curiously named things, and they seemed
bewilderingly obscure. But as I began to learn more about spreadsheets, I began to
appreciate the many uses to which functions can be put, and the more you know about
them, the more you’ll be able to do in Excel. 
All of Excel’s functions are stored in a collection of buttons in the Function Library button
group on the Formulas tab, as shown in Figure 4–16. 
Figure 4–16. Good reading: The Function Library 
Table 4–2 briefly summarizes the types of functions contained in each group. 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
83 
Table 4–2. Function Types 
Group Name 
Kind of Function  
AutoSum 
Contains the same function list you’ll see when you click the AutoSum 
button on the Home tab. 
Recently Used 
Lists the last ten functions you’ve used. 
Financial 
Lets you perform many kinds of financial calculations, including interest 
projections and investment yields. 
Logical 
Includes IF and other functions that help you decide between 
alternatives (e.g., AND and OR). For example, the statement 
=IF(OR(A2>=65,A3>=65),"Pass","Fail") means that if either score in 
cell A2 or A3 equals 65 or higher, then the student passes. 
Text 
Contains functions that let you learn information about cells containing 
text. For example, =RIGHT(D12,2) will yield an answer of AB in a cell 
containing the text XYZ-AB, by identifying the two rightmost characters 
in the cell. 
Date & Time 
Lets you work with chronological data. For example, the function NOW(), 
which has nothing between its parentheses, will tell you the precise time 
when you enter new data in the spreadsheet, and will update whenever 
you enter new data. 
Lookup & Reference 
Lets you find particular data in a range, among other tasks. The VLOOKUP 
function, for example, can look up a person’s income in a table and tell 
her how much tax she owes. 
Math & Trig 
Contains many mathematical and trigonometric functions, including SUM. 
More Functions 
Contains a host of additional functions, including ones that perform 
statistical and engineering tasks. 
By clicking the arrow at the bottom of 
each button, you’ll be able to view a list of 
all the functions assigned to that group; 
hovering your arrow over any name yields 
a brief description of what that function 
does. Figure 4–17 shows what you’ll see if 
you rest your mouse over IF, stored in the 
Logical group. 
 
Figure 4–17. Excel describes the function when you 
scroll over it. 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
84 
If you go ahead and click IF, you’ll be brought to a dialog box that prompts you to fill in 
the blanks—blanks consisting of precisely the parts of the function between the 
parentheses shown in Figure 4–18. 
 
Figure 4–18. Look familiar? The dialog box prompts you to enter data in the three IF elements between the 
parentheses. In our test example, "Pass" is Value_if-True, and "Fail" is Value_if_False. 
Thus, if you look back to that exercise, you would type I12>=65 in the Logical_test field, 
and 

	 
(note that these between-the-parentheses elements are called arguments), and when 
they’re all filled, you’d click OK. And as you click in each of the fields, a small explanation 
what the field does appears in the dialog box. If you click the Help on this function link in 
the lower left of the dialog box, you will be delivered a lengthier discussion of how the 
function works and is written. Just remember that each function will ask you to fill in a 
different set of blanks, depending on what it does.  
Customizing the Worksheet with Formulas 
While functions are an integral part of the spreadsheet process, there may be times 
when you need to do something more specific to your data, something that a built-in 
function can’t anticipate. For example—what if you wanted to give every student a 
bonus of three points after a challenging exam? Or what if you needed to calculate the 
local sales tax on a series of purchases? Excel can’t supply a function to carry out just 
those intentions, and so you may have to write a formula—or a series of formulas—
which do the work you need done. 
Formulas can be very simple, or can get very complicated. They can incorporate Excel 
functions, or they can exist in a stand-alone capacity. Here we’re going to explore the 
essentials of formula writing, so you can get going and do real work with them. 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
85 
Writing a Basic Formula 
Formulas always begin with the equal sign. They follow with cell references, actual 
values, and one or more mathematical operators. OK—what does that all mean? 
Let’s see. Here’s an example of a very simple formula: 
=6+8 
And here’s another one: 
=D3/R9 
In the first case, we’re adding 6 and 8—pretty obvious, but just remember to include 
that equal sign. Leave it out, and all you’ll see in the cell is 6+8. 
In the second case, we’re dividing the contents of cell D3 by the contents of cell R9. 
Change the contents in either or both cells, and the result automatically recalculates, as 
usual. You can simply type that formula or click the respective cells—that is, type =, 
click cell D3, type the division sign (/), click cell R9, and press Enter
	 
 
Figure 4–19. Note that the two cells referenced by the formula are surrounded by borders as you write it. 
Table 4–3 shows how Excel represents mathematical operators. 
Table 4–3. Excel Operators 
Operator 
What It Does 
+ 
Addition 
- 
Subtraction 
/ 
Division 
* 
Multiplication 
^ 
Exponentiation (4^2 means 4 squared, or 16) 
And by the way, it’s perfectly fine to combine functions with your own formula elements 
in the same expression; and as you grow more experienced, you’ll probably be doing 
that sort of thing often. For example—you could write 
=SUM(A12:A68)/7 
This formula would add all the values in cells A12:A68, and divide that result by 7. 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
86 
You could also write 
=7/SUM(A12:A68) 
This would divide 7 by the sum of all the values in cells A12:A68. 
And that’s just for starters. When you begin to see and appreciate how these various 
parts can interact, you’ll be making a leap in your Excel understanding. 
NOTE: Remember, formulas are subject to automatic recalculation, so any change in the values 
contributing to the formula will immediately change the formula’s result.  
Working Out the Order of Operations in a Formula 
Once you start writing formulas, you need to keep something else in mind—something 
you may not have thought about since high school. Ask yourself, what result does this 
formula deliver? 
=32+4/3 
Hmmm. You could be adding 32 and 4 and then dividing that result by 3, yielding 12—or 
are you starting with 32 and simply adding 4/3 to it? 
That sort of ambiguity leads us to Excel’s order of operations—a priority listing of which 
sort of mathematical operation is carried out first when a formula encounters the kind of 
mixed message just shown. Here’s the listing, arrayed in order of priority (don’t worry, I’ll 
explain): 
1. Parentheses 
2. Exponentiation 
3. Multiplication 
4. Division 
5. Addition/subtraction 
Consider this formula:  
=(54+6)*3-2 
Here, Excel takes the two values between the parentheses, 54 and 6, and adds them, 
yielding 60. It then multiplies that result by 3, and then subtracts 2 from 180, winding up 
with 178. Finally, 60 times 3 equals 180, and 180 minus 2 yields 178. The order of 
operations is confirmed:  
1. Treat the values within parentheses as a unit. 
2. Then give priority to multiplication, and then to subtraction.  

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
87 
What Excel won’t do, then, is take the 60 and multiply it by 3 – 2, yielding 60. Play 
around with some of your own examples and the order of operations will become 
clearer. 
Copying Formulas: More Than Just Duplication 
I’ve already discussed how to copy data and formats through the format painter. But 
copying formulas introduces something new, something important. Let’s see what that 
means. 
1. Enter the test data shown 
in Figure 4–20 in a blank 
spreadsheet, starting at 
cell J7. 
 
Figure 4–20. Tough test 
2. Save the file under the name Student Scores.  
3. Now let’s say that, because the scores are on the low side (these could 
be scores relative to a test score maximum of say, 120, but it doesn’t 
much matter), the teacher decides to award a five-point bonus—and as 
a result, needs to write a formula that will impart that bonus to all the 
students. Enter the word Bonus to serve as a heading in cell L7, and in 
L8, write 
=K8+5 
That little formula delivers a score of 82 to John, boosting his original 77. The question is 
how to award the same bonus to all the students, along with the implied question of 
what would happen if the class consisted of 100 students instead of just the five in our 
example. 
The one thing the teacher won’t do is write the formula for each student—that’s way too 
inconvenient. The alternative is to copy the original formula down the L column, but we 
need to describe how that works. 
There are several ways to copy a formula; we’ll look at two of them. The first is very 
similar to the technique discussed in Chapter 2. 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
88 
The Classic Copy-and-Paste Method 
1. Click the cell you want to copy—in this case L8. 
2. Click the Copy button via Home  Clipboard  Copy sequence. 
3. Select the destination cells—in this case L9:L12. 
4. Click the Paste button (in the 
Clipboard button group) or press 
Enter. You should see what’s shown 
in Figure 4–21. 
 
Figure 4–21. Teacher with a heart: There’s that five-
point bonus. 
Note that we obviously haven’t copied John’s grade to the other students—we’ve 
copied his formula; and when you copy a formula, Excel changes the cell references in 
the destination cells to reflect their distance from the source cell. That means that since 
our source formula reads 
=K8+5 
Bill’s formula is going to read  
=K9+5 
because his data sits one row beneath John’s. That one row down brings about a one-
row change in his formula—from K8 to K9. And since Ed’s grade-bonus formula is 
positioned in cell L12, it reads 
=K12+5 
to reflect its distance in rows—four rows, to be exact—from John’s source formula. 
This property of copied cell references—the fact that they record their degree of 
distance from the original source cell—is called relative cell addressing (or referencing), 
because the copied cells change their addresses relative to the source cell—the one 
that’s being copied. 
And that also means that if you were to copy a source formula horizontally (i.e., across a 
series of columns, not down a series of rows as per our example), relative cell 
addressing would change the column element of the cell address—its letter. Thus, if you 
copy =K8+5 one column to the right, the destination cell will read 
=L8+5 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
89 
Relative cell addressing is one of those Excel features you have to know, because 
copying formulas to destination cells is an extremely common part of the spreadsheet 
construction process. Relative cell addressing requires that you write just one formula in 
one cell—all you need to do next is copy that one formula to all the other cells with 
which you’re working. Thus, if our hypothetical class consisted of 100—or even 1,000—
students, you’d still need only construct one formula, which you’d then copy to all the 
other cells. 
Next I’ll discuss the second way in which to copy a formula. First, delete cells L9:L12, 
because we’re trying out copy method number two. Then do the following: 
1. Click back in the source cell, L8. 
2. Click the fill handle—that small 
square holding down the lower-right 
corner of the cell pointer (see Figure 
4–22). 
 
Figure 4–22. The fill handle revisited 
3. Click the fill handle and drag it through cell L12. 
Different technique, same result. And there’s a cool, very useful variation on that 
technique you’ll want to know about. If you click L8 and double-click the fill handle 
instead of dragging it, the source formula will be copied to all the cells through L12, too. 
This double-click method works when consecutive cells to the immediate left or right of 
the formula column have values in them. Thus, if K10 had been blank in our case, this 
technique would have copied the formula only through L9.  
NOTE: When I introduced copying in Chapter 2, I stated that you only have to click one 
destination cell when you copy multiple source cells, because Excel knows that all the source 
cells have to be pasted. But here, because you’re only copying one cell to multiple cells, you 
need to go ahead and select all those cells to which you’re copying. 
Moving Formulas: An Important Difference 
You can move formulas with the techniques described in Chapter 2: 
1. Select the formula-bearing cells you want to move. 
2. Click the Cut command. 
3. Click in the first destination cell. 
4. Click Paste.  

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
90 
But when you’re moving formulas, you’re moving cell references, and here’s where the 
difference lies. When you move a formula, the cell references in the formula don’t 
change. That’s because Excel assumes you want that formula to continue to refer to the 
same cells, even though it’s being relocated. 
Thus, if you write 
=A2+C2 
in cell D2 and move it somewhere—anywhere—else, Excel will think that you still want 
the formula to add cells A2 and C2 (see Figure 4–23). 
 
Figure 4–23. Moving the formula won’t change its cell references.  Notice it’s fjrst been posted in cell D2, and in 
the second screenshot has been moved to I7 without an change in its cell references. 
On the other hand, say you leave your formula in place in cell D2 but move the number 
in A2 instead, to cell B6. The formula will now state 
=B6+C2 
That is, it will reflect the new destination of the values that contribute to a formula.  
The bottom line is this: if you move a formula, or any of the cells that contribute to the 
formula instead, Excel assumes either way that you won’t want to change the result of 
the formula—and so it makes the adjustments necessary to see to it that the result is 
unchanged by any changes in cell addresses. 
Keeping a Cell Reference Constant with Absolute Addressing 
As stated, understanding relative cell addressing is one of those must-know features 
that Excel depends on in order to, well, make it Excel. But there’s an additional aspect 
to copying formulas that’s just about as important.  
Let’s say our teacher isn’t yet sure how large that grade bonus should be, and wants to 
try out different point awards to see how they affect the test grades. In cell N7, the 
teacher enters the number 4 instead, and rewrites the original formula in cell L8 to read 
=K8+N7 
As you see, we’ve removed the number 5 and replaced it with a cell reference—cell N7, 
which currently contains the value 4. Thus, John’s bonus score right now stands at 81, 
as shown in Figure 4–24.  
 
Figure 4–24. John’s bonus-awarding formula 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
91 
The advantage of using the cell reference is that if the teacher decides to change the 
grade bonus, all she needs to do is type that new bonus in cell N7 and John’s grade will 
change automatically. The next step, then, is to copy this new formula to all the other 
students down the L column, as before, using any of the methods described previously. 
But this time something is going to go wrong. 
When you go ahead with our formula copy, you’ll see the content of Figure 4–25. 
 
Figure 4–25. Not much of a bonus! Note the 4 points in cell N7. 
What went wrong is that it appears that only John received the bonus. Why hasn’t 
anyone else received it? 
Absolute Addressing: When We Don’t Want It to Work 
Here’s the answer. If you look at cell L9—the cell containing Bill’s “bonus” grade (all you 
have to do is click L9 and look at the formula bar)—you’ll see the following: 
=K9+N8 
Well, that’s supposed to happen, because of the relative cell addressing feature 
introduced previously. But what value is in cell N9? Nothing; cell N9 is blank. And 91 
plus nothing is 91. Bill’s score is unchanged. 
And if you look at Dorothy’s cell, L10, you’ll see 
=K10+N9 
Same problem. Both cell references have changed as we would expect, but again, 
there’s nothing in cell N10—and so on for all the other students. Only John’s bonus has 
kicked in. It’s all because here we want all the students’ formulas to refer to cell N8, the 
cell in which the bonus is stored. But because copied formulas exhibit relative cell 
addressing, they change their references relative to their distance from the source cell. 
What to do? 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
92 
Introducing an Absolute Cell Address 
What we do is edit the original source formula in cell L8—the cell containing John’s
bonus—to read 
=K8+N$7 
Note the obvious change: the addition of a dollar sign to the left of the 7, which identifies
the row in the cell reference of N7. The dollar sign doesn’t represent a currency format;
rather, it freezes the 6 so that when you copy this formula down the L column, the cell
reference N7 won’t change.  
To see what that means, delete the bonus data in the L column and enter 
=K8+N$7 
in John’s bonus score cell of L8. Copy that formula down the column again. You should
see the data shown in Figure 4–26. 
Figure 4–26. That’s more like it! 
Save the workbook. At last, the bonus has been applied to all the students, because all
the bonus cell formulas now reveal the N$7 reference, which won’t change, even if you
were to copy it down 1,000 rows. Check any bonus cell out to see what I mean. 
And by the same token, if the test scores had been entered this way—that is, horizontally
(with the data beginning in cell J9), you’d see the results shown in Figure 4–27. 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
93 
 
Figure 4–27. The grades organized horizontally, starting at cell KJ9. Note John’s formula in the formula bar. 
John’s bonus formula would now read 
=$N7+K11 
See why? Here, the dollar sign has been inserted to the left of the N, that part of the cell 
reference that indicates the cell’s column letter. And we need to freeze the column letter 
here because John’s formula has to be copied across a set of columns—and without the 
dollar sign, Bill’s bonus formula would read 
=O7+L11 
And there’s nothing in cell O7. 
In fact, you can freeze both parts of a cell reference (e.g., $N$7). Copying this reference 
in either direction—down a column or across a row—won’t change the reference at all. 
This is good to know if you need to refer to that cell in a variety of locations in the 
worksheet. 
It’s true that newcomers to Excel sometimes find the subject of relative and absolute cell 
addressing a bit daunting at first, so don’t be discouraged if you’re feeling the same. Just 
bear in mind that you need that dollar sign only when formulas in different cells have to 
refer to the same cell over and over again—as with our last example, in which all the test 
scores need to refer to the same bonus-point cell—N7. Again, the advantage here is that if 
you need to change the bonus, you need only change the value in N7, rather than having 
to edit every student’s formula. You could even recolor N7 to remind users that it’s the 
only cell they need to change (recoloring will be discussed in Chapter ). 
Copying a Formula’s Result Only 
There may be times when you need to save a value on a worksheet that’s been 
generated by a formula. For example—suppose you needed to record those student test 
scores with their bonuses to a different area of the worksheet for future reference. Well, 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
94 
that causes a bit of a problem—because the bonus-adjusted scores were brought about 
by a series of formulas. John’s bonus-score cell (in the Student Scores workbook) 
doesn’t really say 81—it says =K8+N7, and if we copy that expression to another cell, 
both the K8 and the N7 are going to change, due to relative cell addressing—and we 
won’t see 81 in the destination cell as a result.  
One way out of this problem is to copy the test scores as usual, but to paste them into 
destination cells using the Paste Values option, which pastes only the results of 
formulas, not the formulas the themselves. Let’s try it out, and the concept will become 
clearer. 
1. First, open the Student Scores workbook if you haven’t done so already.  
2. Then select and copy cells L8:L12, which contain the bonus grades.  
3. Then click in cell P8, which will serve as the first of the destination cells 
to which we want to paste the scores ( Figure 4–28).  
 
Figure 4–28. A different kind of copy and paste  
4. Then, instead of clicking the 
standard Paste command in the 
Clipboard button group, click the 
down arrow beneath Paste. You’ll 
see what’s shown in Figure 4–29. 
 
Figure 4–29. Various paste options 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
95 
5. Click Paste Values (the first button in the Paste Values group). The bonus 
test scores will appear in cells P8:P12 in addition to their original 
location—and they will appear as values, as if you had simply typed 
them There are no formulas in the destination range, and that means 
simply that the values in those cells won’t be changed by data entry 
anywhere else in the workbook. They’ve been fixed. 
NOTE: Notice the two other Paste Values buttons in Figure 4–29. The middle button, Values 
and Number Formatting, will paste cell values plus any special formatting brought to those 
values (e.g., currency formatting). The right button, Values and Source Formatting, pastes the 
cell values along with any new formatting imparted to those cells (e.g., a different font or 
color). Again, we’ll discuss formatting in Chapter 5. 
Clarifying Cell References by Naming a Range 
I’ve already introduced the pivotal concept of ranges, and you’ve already worked with 
quite a few of them besides. But there are a few additional aspects of ranges that are 
useful to know about. 
For one thing, ranges can be named. That is, instead of working with a set of cell 
references such as C23:C42 and using that reference in a formula, you can substitute a 
name for it and use the name in the formula. For example, if this range contained test 
scores, you could name the range Scores—and instead of writing 
=MAX(C23:C42) 
you could write 
=MAX(Scores) 
Naming a range helps you and other people who view your worksheet to better 
understand exactly what sort of data has contributed to the range. Scores is a lot more 
revealing than C23:C42—and probably easier to write, too. And there are other 
advantages to naming a range, which we’ll discuss here too. 
Naming a range is easy, although as usual, Excel grants us several ways in which to 
carry out this task. 
Naming a Range in the Name Box 
The simplest technique is to name a range with the Name box: 
1. Select the range you want to name. 
2. Then click in the Name box—that field in the upper left of your 
worksheet—type your name, and press Enter. (see Figure 4–30) 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
96 
 
Figure 4–30. Cells C23:C42, now named Scores 
Try this with the preceding cells. It makes 
no difference whether the cells in a named 
range are empty or populated with data. 
Either way, you can name it. And if you 
click the drop-drown arrow to the right of 
the Name box, you’ll see a list of all the 
range names you’ve added to the 
worksheet, as shown in Figure 4–31. 
 
Figure 4–31. Where range names are listed—one of 
several places 
Click any range name in that drop-down list, and Excel will select, or highlight, that 
range. It’s a handy way to remind you exactly where a named range is located, and to 
navigate to it too. 
NOTE: A range name can consist of several words, but those words must be joined by an 
underscore. Thus, Test Scores is an illegal range name; TestScores or Test_Scores are 
acceptable, though. 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
97 
Again, once a range is named you can apply it to a formula—and Excel helps you with 
that process, through the Formula AutoComplete feature discussed earlier. If, for 
example, you wanted to calculate the average of the Scores range, you’d do the 
following: 
1. Begin by typing =AVERAGE (or really, =A, after which Formula 
AutoComplete will take you to functions starting with the letter A).  
2. After you’ve gotten as far as =AVERAGE(, start to type the range name 
Scores. You’ll see what’s shown in Figure 4–32. 
 
Figure 4–32. Keeping scores: Note the Scores range listed. 
3. Formula AutoComplete is at it again, this time supplying you with the 
name of a range, instead of its usual functions. Now press the Tab key 
to select Scores, type the closed parenthesis to complete the 
expression, and press Enter. 
You can also define a range name with the 
Define Name option, available through the 
Formulas tab  Defined Names button group 
 Define Name. Click the button and you’ll 
see the dialog in Figure 4–33. 
 
Figure 4–33. The New Name dialog box 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
98 
Here you can type the range name, and even add a descriptive comment about the 
range if you like. The Refers to: field lets you type the range coordinates (e.g., C23:C42) 
without having to actually select those cells first, unlike the first technique.  
NOTE: The =Sheet1! prefix identifies the sheet in which the range was drawn.  
Scope refers to the worksheets in the workbook in which you can use the range. By 
default, the scope of a range is defined as Workbook, and that means that you can use 
the range name in any of the worksheets that make up the book—so even if you’ve 
devised Scores on Sheet1, you’ll be able to write the following in Sheet2 as well: 
=AVERAGE(Scores) 
But if you confine the scope of Scores to 
Sheet1, you’ll only be able to use Scores in 
formulas in Sheet1 (see Figure 4–34). 
 
Figure 4–34. You can’t get there from here: don’t try 
using Score in Sheet2 now. 
But why would you want to bother imposing such a restriction? Because you might be 
working with different sets of test scores on different worksheets, and you might want to 
use the range name Scores on each sheet—to represent only that sheet’s scores. True, 
that’s not a likely scenario, but Excel makes the option available.  

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
99 
Naming Ranges from the Data in Your Worksheet 
Now let’s look at yet a third way to construct range names, an approach that lets you 
derive the names from data you’ve already entered on the worksheet.  
1. On a blank workbook, enter grades shown in Figure 4–35 in cells I9:L13. 
 
Figure 4–35. Title search: They’re soon to become range names. 
2. Save the workbook as Test Scores. Now select all the cells in that range 
and click Formulas  Defined Names  Create from Selection. You’ll see 
what’s shown in Figure 4–36. 
 
Figure 4–36. Range finder: Excel suggests range names culled from the titles in your data. 
3. Click OK. Nothing will seem to have happened on the screen, but if you 
click the down arrow by the Name box, you’ll see what’s happened (see 
Figure 4–37). 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
100 
 
Figure 4–37. Range names, batched up directly from the data—the titles in the left column and the top row 
True to the Create Names from Selection dialog box, Excel has composed range names 
from the data in the left column and top row, by assuming that those areas are likely to 
contain header information that you could use as range names. That means that you can 
now write a formula like this: 
=AVERAGE(Walt) 
NOTE: These ranges don’t include the cells in which the range names themselves appear. 
Thus, the range called Walt spans J10:L10, not I10:J10. Note as well that even though the 
subject heading Poli. Sci. consists of two words, Excel calls its range Poli._Sci.. 
Naming A Range Containing One Cell: Why Bother? 
Now here’s an important tip. You can assign a range name to exactly one cell—but why 
would you want to? Because when you copy a formula with a range name, that range is 
treated as an absolute reference—that is, the cells the range refers to don’t change 
relative to their movement from the source cell that’s being copied.  
Thus, if we look back at our bonus-grade example, we could have named the bonus cell 
N7 Bonus. Our original source formula in L8 (John’s score) would then have read 
=K8+Bonus 
And if we had then copied that expression down the column, all the other students’ 
bonuses would have been correctly figured right away—without the need for those 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
101 
dollar signs. And that’s because the range name Bonus would always mean N7—no 
matter where it’s copied. 
The Name Manager: Where They’re All Ar-ranged 
If your worksheet has many named ranges—and take it from me, it can—you’ll find them 
all listed and inventoried in the Name Manager. You get there by clicking the Formulas tab, 
and choosing Name Manager from the Defined Names button group. Continuing with the 
preceding example, the Name Manager will look like Figure 4–38.  
 
Figure 4–38. The Name Manger. Note the range coordinates indicated for the range Ann, which has been 
selected. 
All the workbook range names are cataloged (along with names of any tables, which we 
haven’t discussed yet; that’s coming up in Chapter ). You can edit the cell coordinates 
of any range by clicking its name in the list and typing new cell references in the Refers to: 
area. And by clicking the Edit… button, you’ll be brought to a dialog box in which you 
can change the name of an existing range (see Figure 4–39). 

CHAPTER 4:  Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges 
102 
Figure 4–39. Misspelled it? Call the range Anne instead. 
And by clicking the New… button you’ll be brought to the same New Name dialog box
shown earlier when you clicked the Define Name button—so that’s still one more way to
initiate a new range name. 
There’s one more feature of the Name Manager you may want to know about: its ability to
let you delete range names. Click the Delete button (or press the Delete key on your
keyboard) on any range name in the list and you’ll spark a prompt that asks if you’re
sure you want to go ahead. Click OK and the name will disappear. But don’t worry—the
data in the range remains in its cells—you’ve only deleted the range name. 
Summary 
Call it number crunching or whatever you please—but however you characterize it,
knowing how to write formulas and deploy Excel functions takes you to the heart of the
spreadsheet enterprise. The more you know about Excel’s capabilities, the more you’ll
be able to do with your spreadsheets, and while acquiring that knowledge takes a bit of
practice, the investment should pay off. Once you get the hang of it, you’ll come to
realize there isn’t much you can’t do with Excel. 
Next you’ll see how to make all those numbers look good by learning about Excel’s
many formatting features. Just turn the page, and you’ll see how to give your data a
makeover. 

 
 
 
103 
103 
 
 
 
Chapter 
For Appearance’s Sake: 
Formatting Your Data 
Now that you’ve gotten a handle on some of the ways you can make all that data work 
for you, through Excel’s functions and your own self-devised formulas, you’ll want to go 
on and think about how all those results should look—because you’re likely to have to 
show your work to someone else, and you know what they say about first impressions. 
Excel makes a huge assortment of formatting options available to its users, and we’re 
going to take a look at some of these important, easy-to-apply options now. 
What Formatting Does (and Doesn’t Do) 
The first thing you need to bear in mind about formatting in Excel is that when you dab 
at its palette of possibilities you’re not “doing” anything to the data. That is, when you 
reformat a value, you merely change the way it looks; you don’t modify the value itself. 
Thus, whether 72 looks like Figure 5–1 or 5–2, it’s still equal to 36  2.
 
Figure 5–1. Either way…A number using one type of formatting 
 
Figure 5–2. The same number with different formatting applied 
Reformatting works to change the appearance of your data, and that’s all. That 72 is still 
usable in formulas and the like, no matter how it looks, and that’s a point you’ll want to 
remember as we proceed. 
5 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
104 
Basic Formatting 
Most of Excel’s formatting options have been assigned to the Home  where they’re 
easily accessible. Start with the Font button group (shown in Figure 5–3), each of whose 
buttons introduce a formatting change when clicked. 
 
Figure 5–3. The Font button group 
Many of the buttons here may look familiar to you if you’ve used Microsoft Word, and 
they do similar, though not identical, things here. Note the default Calibri 11-point font, 
the same one that starts you off in Word. Points are units of typographic measurement—
units of height, to be exact—of which there are 72 per inch. Thus, 12-point text is one-
sixth of an inch in height, for example. 
Changing the Font 
The basic principle behind making formatting changes is known as select-then-do; that 
is, you select a cell or cells (or even some of the text in a cell if that’s what you want to 
change), and then execute the change. Thus, to change the fonts in a range of cells 
1. Just select the range. 
2. Click the down arrow beside the font field (where it currently says 
“Calibri” in Figure 5–3). This will present the Font drop-down menu, as 
shown in Figure 5–4. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
105 
 
Figure 5–4. The Font drop-down menu 
3. Just click the font you want, and you’ve made the change (you can 
reveal more fonts by clicking the arrows at the right side of the font 
window and scrolling down the font list). 
NOTE: When you scroll down the Font drop-down menu in search of a new font, simply hovering 
your mouse over a new font will change the selected cells to that font in preview mode, letting 
you know what the cells will look like if you actually click that font. The same previewing feature 
works with many other formatting options, too, such as font size, and fill and font color; but not 
others, such as the bold, italics, or bordering-cells options. 
Notice that Figure 5–4 shows a range that seems to contain nothing in it. It’s true—the 
range is blank, but that’s not a problem. That’s because you can format a range 
prospectively, even before it contains any data. When you actually type the data, it will 
take on the changes you’ve brought about. Note also when you make a formatting 
change on a designated range, the range remains selected in case you want to make 
additional changes there.  

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
106 
Changing the Font Size 
In much the same way, you can change the font size of the data. Just select your range 
and click the down arrow alongside the font size field (currently showing the default 11 
points), and click the desired size.  
NOTE: Remember that if you want all the cells in the worksheet to acquire the same new font 
size, you can click the Select All button. Once all the worksheet cells are selected, enter the new 
size. If you want to change the font for all the cells in a particular row, click its row header; all 
the cells will be selected. To do the same to a column, click its heading. 
Note, on the other hand, that the Font drop-down menu lists 11-, 12-, and 14-point sizes, 
but not 13. That’s not a matter of superstition; rather, it’s because Excel simply lists 
commonly used font sizes. If you really want your range to display 13- or 17-point-sized 
data, you can do the following: 
1. Click in the font size field. 
2. Type the size you want, as shown in 
Figure 5–5. 
 
Figure 5–5. Unlisted number: Entering a 17-point font 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
107 
3. Then press Enter to finalize the change. 
NOTE: When data is enlarged with a new font size, the row heights of the affected data 
automatically increase if necessary to make room for the upgrade. Excel will not allow data to 
barge vertically into a cell above it, even though it does allow text to move horizontally into a cell 
to its right.  
Now what about those two As stationed to the right of the font fields? They’re called 
Increase Font Size and Decrease Font Size, respectively (see Figure 5–6). 
 
Figure 5–6. A pair of quick ways to increase or decrease font size 
Click the larger A on a range of cells, and the data there will receive a font size boost up 
to the next available interval in the font size window. That means that if the current size 
in a cell or cells is 12 points, clicking the large A will pump the size up to 14, which is the 
next higher size recorded in the drop-down menu. If you click the smaller A, those same 
12-point cells with be downsized to 11 points, the next lower interval listed. 
Using Bold, Italics, and Underline 
Now let’s turn to the B, I, and U buttons (see Figure 5–7). 
 
Figure 5–7. B, I, and U (bold, italics, and underline) 
These buttons represent bold, italics, and underline, respectively—and again, to format 
data with any or all of these effects, select the cells in question and just click the 
appropriate button(s). These three buttons behave as toggles, meaning that by clicking 
them in succession you turn their formatting effects on and off. Click the B button once, 
and the cells you’ve selected turn boldface; click it again, and the bold effect 
disappears.  

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
108 
Note, by the way, that the U button is 
accompanied by a drop-down arrow. Click 
it, and this little menu makes its way 
onscreen, as shown in Figure 5–8. 
 
Figure 5–8. Between the (under)lines 
Note the first of the two menu options is 
nothing but the default underline—what 
you’d normally get if you just clicked the U 
straight away. So why do you need it? 
Because if you click the Double Underline 
option, you’ll indeed draw double 
underlines beneath data in the selected 
cells. Additionally, the Double Underline 
button will then appear in the Font button 
group, replacing the standard Underline, at 
least until you exit Excel completely or 
reuse the single underline (see Figure 5–9). 
 
Figure 5–9. Seeing double 
Determining a Cell’s Formatting 
You can learn a lot about the formatting of a particular cell by simply clicking in it and 
then scanning the information conveyed about it in the Font button group. So, if cell C12 
is currently underlined and boldfaced, and features a Bauhaus 93, 12-point font, click 
C12 and you’ll see this information in the Font button group, as shown in Figure 5–10. 
 
Figure 5–10. What’s happening in cell C12. The data there is boldfaced and underlined, and exhibits the Bauhaus 
93 12-point font.  
Notice that the B and U buttons are illuminated, telling us that those effects are activated 
in C12; and we’re also told about the Bauhaus 93 12-point font.  

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
109 
Adding a Border 
To the right of the U button you’ll find the Borders button, which doesn’t format cell data 
as such, but rather lets you inscribe lines around some or all the four borders of cells 
(see Figure 5–11). 
 
Figure 5–11. Borderline call: The Borders drop-down menu 
Again, the technique for drawing borders is the same as for other kinds of formatting:  
1. Select the cells. 
2. Click the Borders button, and select the border option of your choice 
from the drop-down menu. 
Play around with these and you’ll see how they work; particularly the All Borders and 
Outside Borders selections, which you may decide to use often.  

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
110 
All Borders draws borders around all the 
selected cells. This option can be 
particularly useful for emphasizing a 
particular group of cells (see Figure 5–12). 
 
Figure 5–12. We’ve got you covered: The All Borders 
option surrounds all the selected cells’ borders with 
lines. 
 
Outside Borders limns a border around the 
perimeter of a range of cells, not individual 
cell borders. It’s effective for singling out a 
range of cells for emphasis (see Figure 5–13. 
 
Figure 5–13. The Outside Borders option 
You’ll want to know about the No Border option, too, which removes borders around 
selected cells if you decide they’re no longer needed: 
1. Just select cells exhibiting the borders. 
2. Click No Border, and the borders will vanish.  
If you’re wondering why you couldn’t simply click the Undo button to achieve the same 
result, you could—maybe. Remember that Undo works in sequence, and if you decide 
you want to remove some cell borders well after you’ve drawn them, you’ll have to undo 
all the commands you’ve executed in between, too. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
111 
NOTE: You can change the color of the borders by clicking the Line Color option on the Borders 
drop-down menu. You can also modify the texture and appearance of the line with the Line Style 
option, also available on that menu (see Figure 5–14). 
    
 
Figure 5–14. The Line Color and Line Style options 
Adding Color to Your Cells 
That leaves us with two remaining buttons in the Font button group: the Fill Color and Font 
Color buttons. Fill Color, as represented by the pail icon, has nothing to do with the fill 
handle discussed earlier; rather, it fills the selected cells with a color you choose from a 
drop-down menu (see Figure 5–15). 
 
Figure 5–15. Click the arrow alongside the Fill button to produce this drop-down menu and result. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
112 
Use this option when you want to impart emphasis to selected cells. Note that the color
you see right beneath the pail icon (the color underlining the pail) is the current fill default
color—the color that will appear in the selected cells if you click the Fill Color button
instead of its drop-down arrow. And if you want to turn off the current fill color tinting
any cell(s), just select the cells in question and click the No Fill option. 
NOTE: If you’re artistically inclined, you can devise subtler shadings with the More Colors… 
option, which when clicked lets you modulate color values and produce exactly the hue you 
want. 
The Font Color button, represented by the A, changes the color of the data in the selected
cells. It too sports a drop-down menu exhibiting the same color options displayed in the
Fill Color menu, as shown in Figure 5–16. 
Figure 5–16. The Font Color drop-down menu. The Automatic option represents the default font color, black. 
Just select your cells and click away.  
NOTE: The Automatic option, when clicked, returns the cells’ font color to the operative default 
color, black. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
113 
Adding Extra Formatting 
Finally, note that the Font button group has one of those dialog launcher arrows—that 
little indicator squirreled in the lower right of the group (see Figure 5–17). 
 
Figure 5–17. There’s that dialog box launcher again. 
Click it and you’ll bring up what’s called the Format Cells dialog box (shown in Figure 5–18). 
  
Figure 5–18. The Format Cells dialog box. Note the various tabs. 
Note the various font-formatting options 
here, most of which you’ve already seen in 
button form in the button group. There are, 
however, a few additional possibilities 
here—namely in the Effects area, where you 
can draw a strikethrough line through data. 
Figure 5–19 shows an example. 
 
Figure 5–19. The strikethrough effect 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
114 
NOTE: The Format Cells dialog box consists of numerous tabs, each one housing a different 
variety of formatting possibilities. This same dialog box appears again when you click the dialog 
box launcher in the Alignment and Number button groups, but these groups highlight a different 
tab in Format Cells. 
Aligning (and Realigning) Your Data 
The group to the immediate right of the Font button group is called the Alignment group. 
It’s shown in Figure 5–20. 
 
Figure 5–20. The Alignment button group 
Its buttons don’t quite change the appearance of data; rather, they reposition data in its 
respective cells. Recall that numeric data, or values, appear by default at the right edge 
of cells, while text data is positioned, or aligned, at the left. The Alignment buttons allow 
you to relocate the data to different positions, called orientations—both horizontal and 
even vertical—in cells. 
Changing Horizontal Alignment 
The trio of buttons in the lower left of the group (see Figure 5–21) controls the horizontal 
placement of data (you’ll see these in Word, too).  
 
Figure 5–21. The horizontal alignment buttons 
What they do is pretty self-evident. Here’s a quick exercise involving text alignment: 
1. Click the far left button, Align Text Left, after you’ve selected a range of 
cells, and their contents will be shifted to the cells’ left edges (of course, 
if you’re working with text data, that’s where they’ll be anyway).  
2. Click the next button along, called Center, and the data will zip to the 
center of its cells.  
3. Click the third of the three, Align Text Right, to shunt the data to the right 
edge.  

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
115 
Thus, if you’ve entered values, the buttons 
will bring about the kinds of results shown 
in Figure 5–22. 
 
Figure 5–22. Right, left, and centered values 
Keep in mind that many people like to 
center values down a column, enjoying the 
symmetrical effect that centered data 
brings. But you may want to think about 
that decision, because if your data 
contains values of different lengths you 
can wind up with something like what’s 
shown in Figure 5–23. 
 
Figure 5–23. Out of whack: What centered values can 
look like 
You see the problem—but it’s your call. 
Changing Vertical Alignment 
The next set of buttons, Top, Middle, and Bottom Align do something more exotic (see 
Figure 5–24). 
 
Figure 5–24. The vertical alignment buttons 
They let you align data vertically, enabling 
you realize the kind of effect shown in 
Figure 5–25. 
 
Figure 5–25. The sky’s the limit with the Top Align 
button 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
116 
Now, in order to make that happen, you need to learn how to heighten a row. We’ve 
already talked about widening a column; row heightening works in a similar way:  
1. Move your mouse above 
the lower boundary of the 
row you want to heighten 
(see Figure 5–26). 
 
Figure 5–26. Placing the cursor here with let you 
heighten row 15. 
2. Click and drag the boundary down until the row achieves the desired 
height. Release the mouse. 
3. You can heighten multiple rows at the same time by dragging atop 
adjoining row headers (see Figure 5–27). 
 
Figure 5–27. Heightening several rows simultaneously  
4. Then drag any one of the selected row boundaries to the desired height 
and release the mouse. All the rows will acquire the same new height.  
5. Click anywhere to turn off the blue selection color. 
6. If you’ve dragged too far you can also execute a row autofit by double-
clicking a row’s lower boundary. 
Once you’ve completed that task, all you need to do is select your data and click one of 
the Vertical Align buttons to bring about the effect you want. Of course, Bottom Align is 
Excel’s default—data will automatically position itself on the bottom of a row unless you 
decide to make a change. 
Changing Data Orientation 
The next alignment button, called Orientation, will let you do something even more 
unusual: incline data at an angle. Click its drop-down arrow, and you’ll see the options 
shown in Figure 5–28. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
117 
 
Figure 5–28. Everybody’s got an angle: The Orientation drop-down menu  
These options are pretty cool, but need to 
be used judiciously, as they reposition the 
data at severe angles. Select a cell and try 
the various orientations. You’ll get some 
pretty striking results, which can work with 
both text and values. Just make sure that 
your audience will be happy to see a value 
that looks like Figure 5–29, for example. 
 
Figure 5–29. That number—433—can still be used in 
formulas. 
That’s 433, and appearances to the contrary, that value is lodged in only one cell. All you 
need do to achieve this effect is select the cell(s), and select the Vertical Text option 
(shown previously in Figure 5–28). 
The last drop-down option, Format Cell Alignment, will deliver you to the same Format Cells 
dialog box shown earlier—only this time the Alignment tab is pushed to the foreground, 
as shown in Figure 5–30. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
118 
 
Figure 5–30. Even more alignment options 
Among other things, you’ll see an Orientation area at its right edge. If you type in a 
number in its Degrees field, the data in cells you’ve selected cells will be pitched at just 
that angle (note the arrow in Figure 5–31). Also, if you click cells containing angled text 
and type 0 in the Degrees box, the data will be restored to its original, unangled 
appearance. 
 
Figure 5–31. Select the cells you want to restore, type 0 degrees in the Degree field (you have to actively type 0 
even if it’s already displayed), and click OK. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
119 
Indenting Data 
The next two buttons are titled Decrease Indent and Increase Indent, respectively, and all 
they do is push data in their cells slightly to the left or right by small increments, much in 
the way that the indent option works in Word. Each click advances or pulls back the 
data a bit more in their cells. Between you and me, I don’t recall ever having used these 
buttons in an actual worksheet—but they’re there (see Figure 5–32).  
 
Figure 5–32. The Indent buttons 
Wrapping Text 
The next button, Wrap Text, is a good deal more useful. Clicking Wrap Text is the option of 
choice when you enter text in a cell that extends beyond its current column width and 
you don’t want to widen the column. We’ve seen this problem before, of course, but 
Wrap Text proposes a different solution: 
7. Enter the phrase shown in 
Figure 5–33 in cell B19. 
 
Figure 5–33. Getting carried away: Too much text 
8. Click back in cell B19 and click Wrap 
Text. You’ll see what’s shown in 
Figure 5–34. 
 
Figure 5–34. Back where it all belongs 
Wrap Text treats the current column width as a fixed margin and heightens the row 
instead, in order to confine the text within that margin. Wrap Text is thus an option you’ll 
turn to if you need to maintain a column’s width as it presently stands.  

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
120 
Adding a Title with Merge and Center 
The final alignment option, Merge and Center, provides a set of suboptions in its drop-
down menu, as shown in Figure 5–35. 
 
Figure 5–35. Merge and Center: Getting cells together 
Merge and Center was devised to solve an old spreadsheet problem. Say you have a 
worksheet that currently looks like Figure 5–36. 
 
Figure 5–36. Want that title to be centered among the month names? Stay tuned. 
What if you want the Yearly Sales Totals title to be centered across the 12 months? 
Here’s how to do it: 
1. Say the month names you see in the screenshot span the range A2:L2 
(remember, you can enter these names using the fill handle), and that 
the title Yearly Sales Totals appears in cell A1. Select cells A1:L1—that 
is, the range directly above all the months, in the row containing the 
phrase Yearly Sales Totals. 
2. Now click the Merge and Center button directly (no need to activate the 
drop-down menu), and you’ll see what’s shown in Figure 5–37. 
 
Figure 5–37. Middle ground: The title is precisely centered above the months.  
Merge and Center does two things:  
 It combines, or merges, all the selected cells into one megacell. 
 It then centers the text across it. 
This option spares you the challenge of figuring out exactly where to find the center 
point above the months.  

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
121 
NOTE: Merge and Center only works if the data you want to center is in the leftmost cell of the 
range you want to merge, and if the other cells in the range are empty. If any of these cells also 
contain data, their contents will be deleted. 
You’re far less likely to use the other two active merge options—Merge Across and Merge 
Cells.  
 Merge Across lets you select a range consisting of several rows and 
columns, and turns each individual row into a single cell (see Figure 5–38). 
 
Figure 5–38. Note the merge effect: Tuesday and July now each occupy a large, merged cell. 
 Merge Cells lets you turn any range (which can include both rows and/or 
columns) into one supercell.  
But as with Merge and Center, these only work properly when data is positioned in the 
leftmost cell of the selected range (these commands will work with completely empty 
ranges, however).  
Finally, the awkwardly named Unmerge Cells option restores any merged cells back to 
their original state. Select the merged megacell, click Unmerge Cells, and all the original 
cells will reappear (see Figure 5–39). 
 
Figure 5–39. Now Tuesday is back in its original cell, and all the cells that had been merged with it are back, too. 
Inserting, Deleting, and Hiding Columns and Rows 
Merging cells hints at some other important ways in which you can modify the structure of 
the worksheet itself, in addition to the data that the worksheet contains. There may be 
times when you need to insert or delete a row or column in the worksheet. Say you’ve 
constructed a list of employees along with identifying column headings, as in Figure 5–40. 
 
Figure 5–40. The headings for an employee directory. Note the columns have been autofit.  
It then occurs to you that you’ve inadvertently omitted a Salary field, which you want 
sandwiched between Telephone Number and Dept. You’ll need to insert a column. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
122 
Inserting a Column or Row 
As usual, there are several ways in which to do this. Here’s one: 
1.
To insert a column, right-
click anywhere on the
column heading to the
immediate right of where
you want the new column
to be inserted. In the
example in Figure 5–41,
you’d right click the E
column heading, because
you want Salary to be
installed to the left of Dept. 
Figure 5–41. After right-clicking the E heading, click
the Insert option. 
2. Click Insert, and the new column will appear, as shown in Figure 5–42. 
Figure 5–42. Now you can type “Salary.” 
A different method allows you to insert a column by clicking anywhere in the column to
the right of where you want the new one inserted: 
3.
Click a cell in the column to the right of where you want to insert the
column. 
4.
Then click the Home tab, and choose
Insert  Insert Sheet Columns from the
Cells button group, as in Figure 5–
43. 
Figure 5–43. An alternative way to insert a column.
Note the Insert Sheet Rows option, too. 
You’ll get the same result—the new column. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
123 
To insert rows, the procedures are nearly identical:  
5. Here, the first method 
requires you to right-click 
anywhere in the row 
directly beneath where you 
want the new one to 
appear. Thus, if you want 
to insert a new row 
between rows 10 and 11, 
you right-click row 11, as 
in Figure 5–44. 
6. Then just click Insert. 
 
Figure 5–44. Just click Insert, and the new row will 
appear above the current row. 
To apply the second method to rows, do the following: 
1. Click anywhere in the row directly beneath where you want the row to 
appear.  
2. Click the Home tab, and click Insert  Insert Sheet Rows from the Cells 
button group. 
Inserting Multiple Columns or Rows 
If you need to insert several columns or rows at the same time, you first need to select 
as many column or row headings as correspond to the number you want to insert. Thus, 
if you want to insert three columns, select the three column headings to the right of 
where you want the new ones to appear by simply dragging your mouse across the 
headings (not the worksheet cells), as in Figure 5–45. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
124 
  
Figure 5–45. Here, columns C through E have been selected; thus, the three new columns will appear to the right 
of column C. 
You can then utilize either of the two insert methods just described (i.e., clicking Insert or 
Insert Sheet Columns). For rows, select multiple rows directly beneath where you want the 
new rows to appear. 
What Inserting Does to Formulas 
Inserting columns and rows may or may not impact existing formulas on the 
spreadsheet. If cell D12 contains 
=AVERAGE(A12:C12) 
and you insert a column to the left of column D, the expression won’t be rewritten. It will 
continue to read =AVERAGE(A12:C12), even though it now finds itself in cell E12. Excel 
tries to maintain the original formula relationships in the face of row and column 
movement. And that means that if you were to move all the values in cells A12:C12 to 
A5:C5 instead, you’d see 
=AVERAGE(A5:C5) 
Again, that’s because Excel assumes you still want to compute the average of those 
numbers, even though they’ve be moved.  
Deleting Columns and Rows 
The general approach to carrying out column or row deletions is, again, to select the 
columns or rows you want to delete using the selection techniques just described. 
Again, you can call upon either of the two insert methods, but this time of course you’ll 
click Delete (see Figure 5–46). 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
125 
 
Figure 5–46. Where to delete columns or rows. Note that in the second technique you’ll click the Delete button 
alongside the Insert button. 
Just keep in mind that if you’re deleting cells whose data contributes to a formula, that 
formula will suddenly have nothing to work with—and instead of a result, you’ll be left 
with an error message in the cell.  
Hiding Rows and Columns 
It’s not unusual for Excel users to want to hide selected columns or rows—not so much 
in order to maintain the secrecy of the data, but to improve the appearance of a 
spreadsheet; perhaps columns with complex formulas don’t need to be seen, or 
perhaps you’ll want to hide those formulas so that you won’t accidentally overwrite 
them; but if you do hide them, remember that all the data posted there remains active, 
and any cell references to them remain in force, too.  
Again, there are two standard techniques for hiding. Here’s the first: 
3. Right-click the column or 
row heading you want to 
hide.  
4. Click Hide in the resulting 
context menu (again, you can 
drag across multiple 
headings), as in Figure 5–47. 
 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
126 
Figure 5–47. Where to hide columns or rows 
Your worksheet will then exhibit a gap 
where the hide was executed, as shown in 
Figure 5–48. 
 
Figure 5–48. Row 11 isn’t there, but its data is still 
usable. 
The second technique for hiding columns and/or rows is as follows: 
5. Select what you want to hide.  
6. Click the Home tab, and 
then choose Format  Hide 
& Unhide  Hide Rows or 
Hide Columns from the Cells 
button group (see Figure 
5–49).  
 
Figure 5–49. An alternative way to hide columns or 
rows 
NOTE: The second technique lets you select columns/rows to be hidden either by clicking on 
column or row headings or clicking anywhere in the column(s) or row(s) you want to hide. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
127 
Unhiding Columns and Rows 
Unhide is one of those awkward Excel 
verbs, but that’s the description for 
bringing back hidden columns or rows. 
Now, because the hidden areas can’t be 
clicked directly—they’re hidden, after all—
you need to select columns or rows on 
either side of the hidden elements. Thus, if 
column K were hidden, you’d drag across 
headings J and L, as in Figure 5–50. 
 
Figure 5–50. Trying to get back column K 
Then right-click anywhere in that blue 
selection area and click Unhide (see Figure 
5–51).  
 
Figure 5–51. Just click Unhide, and K will reappear. 
Alternatively, click the Home tab, and choose Format  Hide & Unhide  Unhide Rows or 
Unhide Columns from the Cells button group. 
NOTE: If you‘ve hidden the A column, there will be no column to its left that you can select. Thus, 
you need to click the Select All button to the left of A, which selects the entire workbook. Then 
right-click anywhere and click Unhide on the context menu. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
128 
Inserting and Deleting Cells 
You can also insert and delete selected cells, not just entire rows and columns—a 
possibility that isn’t quite as obvious. If you click in cell A12 and carry out the Insert Cells 
command, for example, you’ll push A12 down a row—but you won’t push down row 12 
in its entirety. Only the A column will be affected by the command. Any data in cell B12 
will remain there, for example.  
To insert or delete cells, select in the cell 
or cells with which you’re working and 
either right-click the selected area and 
click Insert…, or click the Home tab and 
select the Insert  Insert Cells… option from 
the Cells button group (see Figure 5–52). 
 
Figure 5–52. Here, cells N8:N12 have been selected. 
 
You’ll see the dialog shown in Figure 5–53. 
If you click OK on the Shift cells down option, 
cells N8:N12 will be bumped down five 
rows—equal to the number of rows in N8 
through N12. But no cells in other columns 
in the worksheet will be affected.  
 
Figure 5–53. The Insert cells dialog box 
To delete selected cells, select the cells you wish to delete and either right-click the 
selection and click Delete… or click Delete Cells… in the Cells button group (see Figure 5–54). 
 
Figure 5–54. Where to begin deleting selected cells 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
129 
Either way, you’ll see the dialog shown in 
Figure 5–55. Just click the desired choice. 
Note that in the screenshot selection the 
cells’ deletion would move the cells 
currently in	one column to the left
so thatthey become	. You may 
have to think about this one—or better yet, 
experiment on a worksheet. 
 
Figure 5–55. The Delete cells dialog box 
NOTE: Deleting cells does exactly that—the command deletes entire cells, not just the contents 
of the cells.  
Formatting Values: Making the Numbers Look Good 
Most of the work you’ll do with Excel will likely be numbers-based, and many of the 
formatting options you need to know about impact numerical data only. Excel’s Number 
button group (see Figure 5–56) contains a raft of ways to represent values that will make 
your data more meaningful. 
 
Figure 5–56. The Number button group 
NOTE: Unlike the B, I, and U font format buttons, the first three buttons in the Number button 
group (Accounting Number Format, Percent Style, and Comma Style) are not toggles—that is, 
clicking any of these twice does not alternately turn their effects on and then off. We’ll get to 
some ways you can remove them soon. 
Turning Values into Currency 
When you need to format numerical data so that it appears in currency form—dollars, 
pounds, euros, or just about any other denomination you can think of—just go to what’s 
called the Accounting Number Format option, represented by the button shown in Figure 5–57. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
130 
 
Figure 5–57. Where to turn values into currency formats; note the dollar sign. 
Just select the cells you want and click that button. The values should take on the 
currency format of your country (that country-specific setting should have been 
established by your computer’s control panel before you purchased or when you first 
configured your PC), and exhibit these default characteristics: 
 The indigenous currency symbol 
 A comma for any value exceeding 999 
 Two decimal points to signify cents, pence, or whatever the case may 
be 
Click the Accounting Number Format button on cells containing the values 4523, 75, and 2, 
and you’ll see what’s shown in Figure 5–58. 
 
Figure 5–58. Cashing in: Where to initiate the Accounting Number Format  
Looking for additional currency symbols? 
Click the down arrow alongside the button 
and you’ll see what’s shown in Figure 5–59. 
 
Figure 5–59. Currency exchange: Additional currency 
symbols  

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
131 
And here we need to issue a reminder. Substituting a $ for a £ in a value does not alter 
the numerical value of the data you’ve originally entered. In strictly mathematical terms, 
$4,523.00 is equal to £4,523.00; Excel won’t calculate any currency exchange rates or 
anything of the sort. The currency symbol is just an embellishment of the number you 
wrote (as is the comma and the two decimal points). These are all format changes, and 
to repeat the declaration I issued at the outset of the chapter, formatting only changes 
the way a number looks. 
If you need additional proof, do the following: 
1. Enter 4523 in any cell. 
2. Dress it up in a currency format. 
3. Click back in the cell and direct your attention to the formula bar.  
While your cell will display $4,523.00, the formula bar will reveal 4523. 
And if you need still more symbols—if you’re trading in Latvian lats or Bulgarian levs or 
any of a host of other international currencies, click the More Accounting Formats… option, 
shown previously, and you’ll be brought to the dialog shown in Figure 5–60. 
 
Figure 5–60. Scrolling for dollars . . . and other currencies 
Scroll that ample list, and select your currency. Then click OK. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
132 
NOTE: The Currency format option in Figure 5–60 is distinguished from the Accounting format 
option by the way it positions the currency symbol. In the accounting format, the symbol is 
always lined up in the same place. With currency, the symbol is always placed right alongside 
the value. In Figure 5–61, the first column of values exhibits the accounting format, and the 
second shows the currency format. 
Figure 5–61. Symbolic gestures: Accounting and Currency formats 
Working with Percentages 
The next number button, Percent Style, is represented by—surprise—the percent symbol
(see Figure 5–62). 
Figure 5–62. The Percent Style button 
Percent Style represents a number as a percentage, and as a result can be a bit tricky.
Again, you just select the desired cell(s) and click the Percent Style button. Thus, the
number 0.34 would appear as follows: 
34% 
That’s easy enough, but keep in mind that the number 1 expressed in percentage terms
is 100%, not 1%. If you’re expecting that result, you’ll have to enter .01 in the cell before
you click Percent Style. 
NOTE: If you actually type the percent symbol alongside a value instead of clicking Percent 
Style, you can type 1% and it will mean 1%, and will appear that way in the formula bar. 
Punctuating Values 
The Comma Style button actually does two things to the values you select: 
 It adds a comma to any value exceeding 999. 
 It posts two decimal points. 
Thus, click the button on a cell containing 56802, and you’ll get 56,802.00. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
133 
Formatting Decimal Points 
The final two buttons on the lower tier of the Number button group are Increase Decimal 
and Decrease Decimal, important options that require a bit of introduction. As its name 
suggests, Increase Decimal adds a decimal point to a value with each click. In the case of 
a whole number, say 74, clicking Increase Decimal point results in 
74.0 
in which no real additional value is expressed. But if you had written the formula =4/7 
instead, you’d originally see 
0.571429 
However, click Increase Decimal here, and you’ll see 
0.5714286 
This adds a degree of additional precision to this repeating decimal. 
NOTE: The number of decimal places you’ll initially see depends on the current width of the cell, 
the current font size, and the nature of the fraction you’re working with (e.g., 1/2 vs. 1/3. The 
former will appear by default as 0.5). 
On the other hand, if you narrow the column in which the preceding number appears, 
Excel will reduce its number of decimals so that you can continue to see the number. 
But it will also round the decimal off. Narrow the column here and you’ll see 
0.57143 
Narrow it some more and you’ll see 
0.5714 
and so on. 
By the same token, type 4.67 in a cell followed by Decrease Decimal and you’ll see 
4.7 
Click Decrease Decimal again and you’ll see 
5.0 
But mathematically, that value is still really worth 4.67. Multiply it by 2 in a formula and 
the answer will come to 9.34, not 10. Again, we’re only formatting the value, not 
changing its actual quantity. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
134 
Working with Dates: Dates Are Numbers Too 
Enter the expression 3/4 in a cell and you may be in for a surprise. You know that 3/4 
can’t qualify as an actual fraction, because you’ve written it without the equal sign. So 
maybe it’s just a bit of text, you may surmise. But it isn’t; Excel will treat is as a date. 
Depending on where in the world you live, that expression will be treated as either 
March 4 or April 3—but either way, it’s a date. That’s because Excel has decided that 
3/4 and expressions like it will be regarded by default as a date, and assumes the date 
occurs during the current year—because people often like to write dates that way.  
Treating 3/4 as a date is one instance of what’s called Excel’s general format, the default 
worksheet setting. The general format tries to understand what you have in mind when 
you enter data in a cell—before you’ve carried out any of the formatting changes 
discussed previously. Thus, Excel makes an educated guess about that 3/4, assigning it 
the status of a date unless and until you tell it otherwise. 
But what you really need to know about dates is that they’re numbers. In fact, March 4, 
2011 is actually 40606—but what in the world does that mean? It means this: each date 
is assigned a sequenced number denoting the total days separating that date from 
January 1, 1900. Thus, March 4, 2011 arrived 40606 days after the baseline January 1, 
1900—and that’s a very good thing to know, because now you can determine the 
number of days between any two dates.  
Here’s an example: 
1. Enter 3/4 in cell A2.  
2. Then enter 1/15 in A3.  
3. In cell A4, write =A2-A3, and you answer will be 48. 
The 48 represents the number of days between January 15, 2011 and March 4, 2011, a 
result made possible because the later date has that numerical value of 40606, and the 
January date is really 40558. And 40606 – 40558 = 48. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
135 
Excel is well stocked with additional ways to format dates:  
1. Click that January 15 entry 
in cell A3. 
2. Then click what’s called the Number 
Format drop-down menu (see Figure 
5–63). This menu shows you what 
A3—which again is really 40193—
would look like as per some of 
Excel’s other formatting options.  
3. Click the second Date 
option on the menu, and 
A3 will then display 
1/15/11, replacing the 
current 1/15. 
 
 
Figure 5–63. The Number Format menu: Different 
guises for the same value 
4. If you click the More Number Formats… options at the bottom of the menu, 
you’ll be returned to the trusty Format Cells dialog box, this time with the 
Date option already selected (see Figure 5–64). 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
136 
 
Figure 5–64. Dates on the menu: Date options in the Format Cells dialog box 
5. Choose whichever option you like, and then click OK. They’re all different 
guises for the same number. And note that when you click any of the 
formatting possibilities, you’ll see a preview of what the date is going to 
look like if you click OK, as in Figure 5–65. 
 
Figure 5–65. What you see is what you are going to get: Previewing a data format. The Sample area reveals the 
preview (see arrow). 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
137 
Here’s another tip: instead of directly entering 1/15 in a cell, you could have also entered 
1-15. Excel’s general format will also treat that expression as a date. And if you enter a 
date from the current year, you don’t need to enter any reference to the year; 1/15 will 
be read as 1/15/11. But if you want to enter the same date from, say, two years ago, 
you’ll need to enter 1/15/09. 
Customizing Number Formats 
If you’re not quite happy with any of the formatting suggestions supplied by the Number 
Format drop-down menu, there are still more ways to remake the appearance of values.  
The Special Formats Option 
The Format Cells dialog box lists a Special option, which automatically formats values with 
four built-in looks that you can apply to values (see Figure 5–66). 
 
Figure 5–66. The Special formatting option 
The Social Security Number option, for example, lets you type the nine-digit numbers 
without those pesky dashes that punctuate the numbers. Thus, if you select the desired 
cells and click Social Security Number, you’ll be able to type 123456789, and have it 
automatically rewritten as 123-45–6789, sparing you the slightly odious task of 
remembering exactly where to enter those dashes.  

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
138 
Similarly, the Phone Number option will allow you to type 1234567 and immediately revise 
it to 123-4567. 
The Custom Option 
But there’s still more. Excel’s Custom option gives you the freedom to fine-tune numerical 
appearances precisely to your liking. While some Custom options are rather complex, 
there’s one I use often that’s quite simple. 
You’ve probably noted by now that when you type a decimal value—say, .37—Excel 
ascribes this default format to it in its cell: 
0.37  
I don’t know about you, but I don’t like that leading zero; I want to see .37, and nothing 
more.  
1. To achieve that appearance, select the cells you want to reformat and 
select Custom. You’ll see the dialog shown in Figure 5–67. 
 
Figure 5–67. Decimal derring-do: About to excise that leading zero 
2. Then click the 0.00 option, the third one down the Type list (see the 
arrow in Figure 5–68). 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
139 
 
Figure 5–68. Note that the Type field records the current format in the cell, with the leading zero in place. 
3. Then click in the Type field and simply delete the leading zero. Note the 
Sample area shown in Figure 5–69. 
 
Figure 5–69. The zero has been zapped. 
4. Click OK, and all decimal values in the selected cells will lose that zero. 
NOTE: The preceding customization won’t change a value such as 3.37; it will only eliminate the 
zero on decimals that have no values to the left of the decimal point (e.g., 0.37or  0.98). 
Experimenting with the Custom options and observing how the content in the Sample area 
changes should prove instructive and useful.  

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
140 
Copying Formats (Not Data) with the Format Painter 
Let’s say you’ve formatted a cell with these characteristics:  
 Using an Algerian 19-point font  
 Colored red 
 Italicized 
 Festooned with an orange background  
Something like Figure 5-70. 
 
Figure 5-70. Have it your way: Your customized format 
Hey—it’s your worksheet. And you’re so enamored with this collection of 
embellishments that you want to bring it to other cells. Of course, you could select those 
cells and then click the various options that gave rise to that thing of beauty in the 
preceding screenshot—but that’s a lot of clicks. What you can do instead is copy and 
paste the format of that cell to other cells with the format painter. Here’s how: 
1. Select a source cell 
containing the formats you 
want to copy to other cells, 
as in Figure 5-71. 
 
Figure 5-71. The source and destination cells 
2. Click the Format Painter button 
in the Clipboard button group 
(on the Home tab). The cursor 
will be accompanied by a 
paintbrush icon, as in Figure 
5-72. 
  
 
Figure 5-72. Given the brush-off: The format painter cursor 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
141 
3. Click and drag onto 
destination cells, as in  
Figure 5-73. 
 
Figure 5-73. Paint job: The format painter at work 
4. Release the mouse. The 
destination cells should 
display the source 
formatting, as in Figure 5-74. 
 
Figure 5-74. The destination cells, after the source format has 
been copied to them. You might now want to widen their 
column. 
The format painter copies only the formats characterizing the source cell, not the cell’s 
data. It provides a handy way to export the formats into other cells, while leaving the 
destination-cell data intact. 
NOTE: After you apply the format painter once to destination cells, the paintbrush disappears, 
and you’re back to the normal data entry mode. If you want to use the format painter to copy 
formats repeatedly to different ranges of cells, double-click the Format Painter button. The paint 
brush will remain in effect, and you can drag on as many different ranges as you wish. To turn 
the paintbrush off, just press the Esc key.  
Applying Ready-Made Formats with Styles 
There may be times when you’re having difficulty coming up with a nicely designed 
format that suits your data, and you may need something quickly—say, for a meeting or 
a presentation. Excel’s Cells Styles option presents a large series of style options at the 
click of a mouse. 
1. First select the cell(s) you want to restyle. 
2. Click the Cell Styles drop-down arrow in the Styles button group, and 
you’ll be presented with the dialog shown in Figure 5–75. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
142 
Figure 5–75. Out of style? Choose one here. 
3.
Click any of these and see how your data looks (or just hover your
mouse over the style option that interests you; the cell preview mode
operates here, too).  
4.
If you reconsider your style selection, just summon that style gallery
again and click another one (see Figure 5–76). 
  
Figure 5–76. Just click a different style if you’re not happy with the first one. 
Customizing Your Own Style 
You can also design your own styles. Let’s say you want to turn that lovely Algerian, 19-
point concoction into a style:  
1. Format a cell as you wish. Here I’ve used 

An Algerian 19-point font  

The color red 

Italics 

An orange background  

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
143 
2. Select it. 
3. Click the Cell Styles  New Cell Style… option (in the lower left of the Cell 
Styles dialog box). You’ll see the dialog shown in Figure 5–77. Note that 
the cell’s formatting attributes are recorded in the Style Includes area. 
 
Figure 5–77. DIY style  
4. Type your own style name in the Style name field and click OK.  
5. Click the Cell Styles button again and you’ll see the dialog in Figure 5–78. 
 
Figure 5–78. My style, duly recorded 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
144 
Not a catchy name, but you see the style listed under the Custom heading at the top of 
the dialog box. To delete a user-devised style, right-click its name and click Delete. 
Applying Styles Quickly: Another Way to Access 
Formatting Options 
As already stated, Excel isn’t stingy about providing the user with various ways to do the 
same thing, and one way to carry out important formatting options uses the right mouse 
button click. Right-click a cell you want to format and you’ll see what’s shown in Figure 
5–79. 
 
Figure 5–79. The mini-toolbar, featuring formatting’s greatest hits 
Two objects suddenly appear:  
 What’s called the context menu, that tall column listing various 
command options, which by and large you can also access on the 
ribbon (e.g., Cut and Copy) 
 The mini-toolbar, a collection of commonly applied formatting options 
gathered from various button groups. Just click the one you need (with 
the left button, by the way).  
Note that the previewing feature described previously works here, too—rest your mouse 
over a formatting command before you click it, and the selected cells will show what the 
formatting change will look like. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
145 
Conditional Formatting 
There may be times when you want to call special attention to certain cells. For 
example, you may be working with a list of test scores and want to quickly be able to tell 
which tests exceed a certain score, fall below that score, or both. Excel’s conditional 
formatting feature lets you format cells so that they change their appearance only when 
they meet conditions you specify. 
To continue with our example, with conditional formatting you can instruct any cell with 
a value greater than, say, 90 (a high test score) to turn blue—but only if it tops 90. 
Otherwise, the cell will continue to exhibit its original appearance. Thus, conditional 
formatting is an effective, and pretty easy, way to highlight certain cells scattered among 
a large mass of data (imagine reviewing 5,000 test scores!). 
In fact, Excel gives the user many different ways to engineer conditional formats, some 
more complex than others. But many can be quite simple, even almost self-evident. 
Let’s demonstrate one now, by turning to our test example. 
1. Start by entering the test 
results from Figure 5–80 in 
cells C5:D15. 
 
Figure 5–80. Testing, testing . . . looking for scores 
above 90 
NOTE: Remember our objective: we want to be able to quickly identify all those scores that have 
achieved 90 or higher by having their cells turn blue.  
2. Select the range of scores we want to conditionally format: D5:D15. 
3. Click the Conditional Formatting button in the Styles button group on the 
Home tab (see Figure 5–81). 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
146 
 
Figure 5–81. The Conditional Formatting drop-down menu 
4. Click the first option, Highlight Cells Rules. You’ll see the conditional 
formatting rules shown in Figure 5–82. 
 
Figure 5–82. Conditional formatting rules 
5. Select Greater Than…, and you’ll see the dialog in Figure 5–83. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
147 
 
Figure 5–83. We’re looking for cells greater than 90. The 80.5 is a default selection, which Excel computed by 
averaging the highest and lowest scores in the range. 
6. Type 90 in the Format Cells that are GREATER THAN: field. We’ve established 
our condition: test scores above 90. 
7. Click the drop-down arrow along the Light Red Fill with Dark Red Text entry. 
That’s Excel’s default, telling you that if any selected cell meets your 
condition, it will turn light red, and its text will appear as dark red. But 
we want our cells to turn blue instead, so click the Custom Format… 
option. You’ll see the Format Cells dialog box, as shown in Figure 5–84. 
8. Click the Fill tab, because we want the cells that meet our condition to 
turn blue, not the text in those cells.  
9. Click a blue color in the resulting palette. Click OK. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
148 
 
Figure 5–84. Color scheme: Selecting a cell formatting color  
10. You’ll be brought back to the Greater Than dialog box. Click OK. 
11. Turn off the blue selection color 
surrounding the test score range 
D6:D15. You’ll see the content 
shown in Figure 5–85. 
 
Figure 5–85. Well done, Quincy! 
To summarize, we used the conditional formatting feature to highlight all the cells that 
meet a condition we specified—in this case, all test scores over 90. We selected the 
cells we wanted to analyze, clicked the appropriate conditional formatting option (in this 
case the Greater Than… option), entered our greater-than-90 criterion, and then chose the 
color we wanted to apply to the cells that met the condition. And we see that only 
Quincy surpassed the 90 mark. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
149 
Looking for Scores Equal to or Greater Than 90 
Now, what if we’re looking instead for all scores equaling or bettering 90? There’s more 
than one option here. We could click Highlight Cells Rules  Between… instead of the 
original Greater Than…, which would reveal the dialog box shown in Figure 5–86. 
 
Figure 5–86. One approach to looking for scores equal to or greater than 90 
We’d then enter 90 in the first field, and 100 in the other, and then click OK. The rest of 
the process would be identical to the first exercise. 
An Alternative Approach to the Same Result 
The second option would take us to this command sequence: 
1. Select Highlight Cells Rules  More Rules…, as shown in Figure 5–87. 
 
Figure 5–87. Rules are made to be . . . followed. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
150 
2. Then select Format only cells that contain, and then greater than or equal to, as 
in Figure 5–88. 
 
Figure 5–88. Plan B 
3. Click and then type 90 in the blank field to the right of greater than or 
equal to.  
4. Then click Format and OK, and once again you’ll be brought back to the 
Format Cells dialog box. And as with the other examples, you need to 
decide which sort of formatting change to introduce. 
Just keep in mind that when you institute a conditional format, you can change the 
appearance of the text in cells (e.g., its font, color, or boldface/italics status) that meet 
your condition, as well as the color of the cell itself. 
Some Additional Conditional Formatting Options 
Again, Excel makes many other conditional formatting options available. Let’s just look 
at two more. 
1. Select the test data cells again and click Conditional Formatting  
Top/Bottom Rules. You’ll see the options shown in Figure 5–89.  

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
151 
 
Figure 5–89. Average white cells: Finding test scores above the class average 
2. Click Above Average…, and you’ll be brought to the dialog shown in 
Figure 5–90. 
 
Figure 5–90. Note that the above-average scores are tinted red in preview mode even before you click OK. 
3. Click OK now, meaning that you’re accepting Excel’s Light Red Fill with 
Dark Red Text default conditional format. You’ll see that all test scores 
exceeding the class average will exhibit exactly that—their cells will 
appear in light red, and the text in those cells will appear in dark red. 
And conditional formats are dynamic, meaning that if you change the data with which 
you’re working, the formats will change correspondingly. If you enter 100 for Edith’s 
grade, for example, her cell will immediately turn light red with dark red text, because it 
now exceeds the class average—and Sally’s grade of 80 will lose that formatting, 
because her grade will now fall below the average. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
152 
Turning Off Conditional Formatting 
If you want to turn off your conditional formats and restore the cells to their original,
black-text-on-white-background appearance, do the following: 
1.
Select the cells. 
2.
Click Conditional Formatting  Clear Rules  Clear Rules from Selected Cells (or
from Entire Sheet, if that’s what you want to do). 
Using Data Bars: A Different Kind of Conditional Format 
1.
Here’s one more conditional format option of a very different sort. Instead of
coloring cells or their backgrounds on the basis of specified conditions, data bars
occupy conditionally formatted cells with mini bar charts, which are proportioned
to the values in those cells.Select the test data. 
2.
Click Conditional Formatting  Data Bars.
3.
Hover the mouse over the first Gradient Fill option, and you’ll see the
options shown in Figure 5–91. 
Figure 5–91. Grades and gradients: Applying gradient bars to the test scores 
What’s happened—or what will happen if you go ahead and click—is the application of a
mini–bar chart inside each cell displaying a test score. Note that the bar in Quincy’s 93—
the highest score in the class—fills the entire cell, and the other bars are sized in
proportion to that 93. If you enter 100 in Edith’s cell again, her bar that will occupy the
entire cell, with the other cells proportioned to her grade.  
NOTE: If you widen the column in which the data bars appear, the disparity in bar lengths 
between various grades will seem more pronounced. 

CHAPTER 5:  For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data 
153 
Summary 
Making your worksheets look good is an important part of the spreadsheet-building 
process. Excel’s formatting options provide you with a heap of ways to do just that. Now 
we can move to another way—really, a group of ways—to present your data with 
striking visual appeal. The next chapter will introduce you to the world of charts. 

 
 
155 
155 
 
 
 
Chapter 
Charting Your Data 
People like to see information presented visually. Looking at data in graphical form lets 
readers—and spreadsheet viewers—quickly and vividly understand what’s going on, in a 
way that hundreds or thousands of rows worth of data can’t. Compare the two 
portrayals of test scores shown in Figure 6–1. 
 
Figure 6–1. Two points of view 
Same data, two different looks. The column chart (that’s what shown in Figure 6–1, and 
once you learn a bit about how charts are constructed, you’ll be able to fashion one in 
about 10 seconds) conveys a sense of proportion among the scores that the cells to its 
left can’t.  
Excel makes it easy to conjure charts that can embellish your worksheets in productive 
and appealing ways. Needless to say, the more you know about its wide inventory of 
charting options the better, but Excel’s charting basics are simple and will enable you to 
make crisp, lucid presentations of your data—even if you don’t get to the all the bells 
and whistles. 
6 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
156 
A FEW WORDS OF CAUTION 
Once you begin to get the hang of charting, don’t give in to the temptation to show off your newfound 
talents by crafting charts that toss in all the cool charting effects you’ve learned. You want your charts to 
be attractive, of course, and maybe even ingenious—that’s part of the charting enterprise, after all. But if 
you get carried away with all the adornments Excel makes available to its charts, you run the risk of 
obscuring the message you want to convey. Think of the kinds of charts you’re likely to view in 
newspapers and magazines; they’re usually straightforward representations of the data—easy to 
understand and right to the point. Most charts are meant to deliver information in no-frills packages, the 
sorts of things you’d be prepared to place atop a boss’s desk—without fear.  
Defining Chart Elements 
In order to better understand how Excel charting works, let’s take a closer look at some 
of charting elements (see Figure 6–2). 
 
Figure 6–2. Basic chart elements 
Table 6–1 describes these in more detail. 
Table 6–1. Basic Chart Element Descriptions 
Chart Element  
What It Does  
Vertical value (y) axis 
Draws up a scale measuring the source data to be charted. In our 
example, the values on the y-axis represent the span of test 
scores in the source data. 
Horizontal category (x) axis 
Lists the variables by which the data is being plotted. In our case, 
the x-axis consists of the names of the students whose grades 
are being plotted. 
Data series 
Groups of the data being plotted. Figure 6–2 displays three data 
series, each representing a subject and denoted by a different 
color: blue for Soc., red for Poli. Sci., and green for Phil. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
157 
Chart Element  
What It Does  
Legend 
Lists the chart data series in color-coded form. 
Chart area 
Provides the background of the chart. 
Data point 
An individual value in the data series. For example, Walt’s 
philosophy score is a data point in the Phil. data series. 
Plot area 
The area in which the data is actually charted. 
Vertical (value) axis major 
gridlines 
The lines that intersect the values on the vertical axis and run 
across the plot area. 
TIP: The data series are always identified in the chart legend. But as you’ll see, the same data 
can be reorganized into different data series. 
Note that when you rest your mouse over any chart element, Excel supplies an 
identifying caption, as in Figure 6–3. 
 
Figure 6–3. Identifying the chart legend 
Choosing a Chart Type 
Perhaps the first thing you need to do once you start chart-making is identify exactly 
what type of chart you want to use. Click the Insert ribbon tab and you’ll be brought to 
the Charts button group (see Figure 6–4). 
 
Figure 6–4. The Charts button group 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
158 
Here you’re shown a collection of basic chart types, each of which offers several 
subtypes that let you portray your data in different ways, with different looks. Table 6–2 
briefly describes them. 
Table 6–2. Chart Types 
Chart Type  
What It Does   
When to Use It 
Column 
Depicts data as vertical bars; perhaps the 
most commonly used type 
 
When you need to present 
individual sets of data (e.g., sales 
totals by different departments) 
Line 
Depicts data as a series of lines 
 
When you want to present data 
that varies over time (e.g., a 
student’s test scores) 
Pie 
Characterizes only one data series as a 
series of slices, each contributing to a 
whole 
 
If, for example, you need to portray 
different departments’ percentages 
of an overall company budget 
Bar 
Basically depicts a column chart whose 
data series are presented horizontally 
instead of vertically 
 
As per a column chart, but here the 
data bars extend sideways 
Area 
Depicts a line chart whose data fills in the 
areas between the lines and the x-axis 
(take a look at the Area button) 
 
When you want to convey the 
relative depth of data (e.g., a test 
score of 90 will cover more area 
than a score of 75) 
Scatter 
Portrays data along two value axes (that 
term will be defined shortly), thus treating 
data as paired values., 
When you want to look at data 
organized by two quantitative 
variables at the same time, e.g., 
plotting marathon times by age of 
the runners. 
Other 
Encompasses a collection of less-
commonly used charts. 
When you need a specialized 
chart, such as for a stock market 
comparison 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
159 
Creating a Column Chart 
Now that we’ve gotten oriented, let’s try our hand at producing a column chart. First, 
open the Test Scores workbook, and then perform the following steps: 
1. Click anywhere within the data. There’s no need to select the whole 
range of data, and in fact you shouldn’t. 
2. Click the Insert tab, and then choose 
Column from the Chart button group. 
You’ll see the options shown in 
Figure 6–5. 
 
Figure 6–5. Column chart subtypes 
3. Click the chart subtype you want to choose. We’ll click the first option, 
in the upper-left corner of the menu. You’ll see the chart that was shown 
in the earlier figures. 
For starters, that’s all there is to it; click in the data to be charted, select a chart subtype, 
and you’re done—maybe. If you’re happy with what you see, then you are done. Note 
that the chart looks at the grade data and makes some decisions on its own about how 
the vertical value axis will be scaled—in this case, with values ranging from 0 to 100, 
spaced at 10-point intervals (see Figure 6–6). 
 
Figure 6–6. Note the vertical value axis scaled at 10-point intervals. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
160 
NOTE: You can delete a chart by clicking in the chart area and pressing the Delete key. 
Creating a Chart in 2 Seconds 
No, that heading isn’t a typo. You really can drum up a chart in about 2 seconds, give or 
take a millisecond, like this: just click in the data you want to chart, and press the F11 
key. You’ll see something like Figure 6–7. 
 
Figure 6–7. Where’s the stopwatch? There’s the chart. Note the new worksheet on the far left. 
It’s done. Excel latches onto the data and launches a column chart pronto. Note that 
Excel throws the chart onto a new worksheet, here called Chart2 (because we’ve 
already produced a chart in the workbook).  
Changing a Chart 
If you want to change some or all of the aspects of your chart, all those options await; 
and while some of these changes are purely aesthetic, other options will let you bring 
about a real change in the way in which the chart communicates its data, as you’ll see. 
And Excel gives you the tools to change virtually any aspect of your chart. 
Moving and Resizing the Chart 
Possibly the two simplest ways in which you can change a chart is to move it and resize 
it. You can move a chart by clicking in the chart area only (but nowhere else) and 
dragging the chart to a new location in the worksheet. Clicking anywhere else in the 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
161 
chart will only select the element on which you clicked, and you won’t be able to drag 
the chart. You’ll know that you’ve selected the entire chart when the chart acquires that 
thick border, as shown in the right of Figure 6–8. 
 
Figure 6–8. The chart on the right displays the selection border. 
You can also move the chart to a more distant location, such as a different worksheet or 
even a different workbook, by clicking the chart area so that it’s selected in its entirety, 
and then clicking the standard Cut command, clicking in the destination worksheet or 
workbook, and clicking Paste (or pressing Ctrl+V). 
You can resize the chart by 
selecting it and releasing the 
mouse, and then clicking back a 
second time in one of the chart 
borders’ dotted areas (in the center
	 and at the corners of 
the borders, which are 
characterized by a set of dots), 
and dragging in the desired 
direction, as you would with any 
graphic object in the Microsoft 
Office suite. You should see a 
double-sided arrow atop the 
border when you’re about to click 
to start dragging (see Figure 6–9). 
 
Figure 6–9. Where to click in order to begin to resize the chart 
If you select the chart and then click one of its corners and drag, you’ll maintain the 
current proportion of chart height to chart width. Resizing a chart can distort the 
appearance of the data, thus skewing the impression you want the chart to make. 
Resizing your chart by narrowing it can engineer the kind of look shown in Figure 6–10. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
162 
 
Figure 6–10. Tight squeeze: Pinching the chart can make Brian’s 93 in Poli. Sci. look more impressive. 
There are other ways in which you can introduce chart distortion too (see the 
“Reformatting the Vertical Axis section” later in this chapter for another example). 
Changing the Chart by Changing Its Data 
Another way to change the chart is by changing the data that’s contributing to it. Excel 
charts are dynamic; in our case that means that if you change any of the test scores in 
the original set of scores, the column bar(s) will change accordingly. If, for example, 
Brian’s 93 had been entered by mistake and he had really scored a 63, typing that 63 
would automatically resize Brian’s Poli. Sci. score (see Figure 6–11). This dynamic 
feature remains in force even if you move the chart to another worksheet. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
163 
Figure 6–11. Sorry about that, Brian; that 93 was really a 63. 
Changing the Chart Type 
Of course, there are more dramatic ways to change a chart than simply relocating or
resizing it. You can also change the chart type—or chart subtype—at the click of a
mouse.  
When we composed our grade column
chart, we encountered a drop-down menu
sporting a wealth of column subtypes,
each equally accessible via one click (see
Figure 6–12). 
Figure 6–12. Note the various column motifs. 
But our chart is already on the worksheet. How do we change what’s already there? As
usual, there’s more than one way. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
164 
1. Click anywhere on the 
chart. Then take note of 
what are called contextual 
tabs. These are tabs that 
spring onto the screen 
only when you click a 
specific object, in this 
case a chart (see Figure 6–
13). 
  
Figure 6–13. The Chart Tools button groups, appearing 
beneath the Chart Tools contextual tab 
2. Click the Design tab. 
3. Click the Change Chart Type button in 
the Type button group. You’ll see the 
Change Chart Type dialog box (Figure 
6–14). 
 
Figure 6–14. Spoiled for choice: Change Chart Type 
options 
NOTE: The current chart subtype is selected. Click any of the other column subtypes or scroll 
down the dialog box to see the other chart options and their respective subtypes.  
4. Click your selection, click OK, and the chart will be changed. 
You can also change chart types by right-clicking in the chart area (again, click only 
there, not on any other element in the chart) and clicking Change Chart Type… in the 
resulting context menu (not to be confused with the context tabs described previously). 
You’ll be brought to the Change Chart Type dialog box, as shown in Figure 6–15. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
165 
 
Figure 6–15. An alternative route to the Change Chart Type dialog box. Just click Change Chart Type… in the 
context menu.  
As you experiment with the chart options, you’ll discover that many offer a 3D look, as in 
Figure 6–16. 
 
Figure 6–16. Adding a new dimension to the data: The 3D look 
That’s cool, but again, prudence is the watchword when you start getting fancy. 
Sometimes a cool head should outweigh a cool effect. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
166 
Now let’s quickly see what happens when we call on the other major chart types to 
depict the data, as shown in Figure 6–17. 
 
 
 
Figure 6–17. The major chart types (from top to bottom, a bar chart, a line chart, and an area chart) 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
167 
Where’s the Pie Chart? 
Good question. I’ve omitted that chart type quite intentionally here because of the 
observation I made in Table 6–2, back when I defined a pie chart. Pie charts can only 
capture data one data series at a time, and our data has three series—Soc., Poli. Sci., and 
Phil. You could construct a pie chart of only Walt’s grades, for example, as in Figure 6–18. 
 
Figure 6–18. The higher the grade, the larger the slice 
Here Walt’s grades are treated as a data series (we’ll look past the question of whether 
grades are the sort of thing you’d best portray with a pie chart; but just note that it can 
be done)—and that means if we’re pie-charting Walt’s grades, we can’t chart Sally’s, 
Brian’s, and Ann’s as well on the same chart. Pie charts treat their slices as parts of one 
whole—and that whole consists of one data series. 
NOTE: The pie chart automatically adds a title to the chart. You’ll soon see how you can add a 
title to any chart. 
Changing the Default Chart 
What you should have learned from this exercise is that the standard column chart 
shown previously serves as Excel’s default chart. After all, we didn’t select that chart 
when we pressed F11; Excel chose it for us. But what if you want to see a different chart 
by default?  
It’s easy. Recall that when 
you execute the Change 
Chart Type sequence you 
trigger the dialog box shown 
 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
168 
in Figure 6–19. To change 
the default chart, just click 
the chart you want to 
designate and click Set as 
Default Chart. Then click OK, 
and the chart you’ve chosen 
will appear from now on 
when you press F11. 
 
Figure 6–19. Second thoughts: Where to reset your default chart 
Switching Rows with Columns: A Different Kind of 
Change  
Here’s another way to change your charts—one that doesn’t change chart types or their 
colors, but rather does something very different. It’s called the Switch Row/Column 
option. Switching a chart’s rows and columns flips the chart’s axes at right angles to 
one another, so that the current data series switches places with the data on the 
horizontal axis. For example, in our charts so far, the student names have occupied the 
horizontal axis, and the subjects have served as the data series and appear in the 
legend. By switching the row and column, the subjects will now populate the horizontal 
axis, with the student names holding down the legend.  
So why would you want to do this? To give the data a different perspective. Instead of 
seeing how each student has performed in the three subjects—as with the original chart 
setup—by switching row and column you can see how the four students’ grades are 
bundled by each subject instead. 
Now, if that still leaves you dazed and confused, actually trying the option out on our 
chart should clarify.  
1. Click the chart. 
2. Turn it back to a column chart if you need to. 
3. Click the Chart Tools tab and then the Design tab, and then click the Switch 
Row/Column button in the Data button group. You’ll see what’s shown in 
Figure 6–20. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
169 
 
Figure 6–20. Trading places: The student names now serve as the data series, replacing the subjects. Remember 
that the legend always records the data series. 
See the effect? The chart has been stood on its head, so to speak, or maybe its side. 
While it was the test subjects that served as the chart’s original data series, now it’s the 
student names playing that role—each student is now a data series. The data being 
charted is exactly the same as before, but it’s being characterized by a new 
perspective—sort of at a right angle to itself. Of course, if you click the Switch Row/Column 
button a second time, you’ll be back where you started, and the subjects will be 
reinstated as the data series. 
Formatting Charts 
Just as you can format your data, you can format and reformat your charts. And as with 
data in cells, there are plenty of ways to modify chart appearances: by changing colors, 
text fonts, or borders around the plot area, or by introducing data labels, chart titles, and 
the like.  
Of course, you need to know how to get to all these options—and in keeping with 
Excel’s general approach, there are several ways available. Let’s take a look at them. 
The first step in the formatting process, as usual, is to click the object you want to 
format (depending on which approach you use, that click might utilize the left or right 
button, as I’ll discuss). You need to be clear about exactly which object you have in 
mind, because it’s easy to think you’re about to click the major gridlines when you’ve 
really hovered your mouse over the plot area. That’s where Excel’s chart captions come 
in; again, resting your mouse over a chart object triggers an identifying caption. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
170 
Formatting with the Mini-Toolbar 
I introduced the mini-toolbar in Chapter 5. Note that the same-right-click that brings the 
context menu onto the screen takes the mini-toolbar along for the ride in chart 
formatting. The mini-toolbar provides a selection of popular formatting options. In fact, 
the options shown on the mini-toolbar are always the same, no matter which object you 
click (see Figure 6–21): 
 The Font and font size buttons 
 The increase- and decrease-font-size buttons 
 A chart element button (which reads Chart Area in Figure 6–24), whose 
drop-down arrow allows to you select any other chart object 
 The bold and italic font options 
 The three basic cell alignment options: left, right, and center 
 The font color button 
 The shape fill button, which lets you color the object you’ve selected. 
 
The shape outline button, which lets you select a color for the border of the 
object. 
 The format painter button 
 
Figure 6–21. Mini-toolbar options 
Which of the toolbar’s options will be active on the toolbar, however, depends 
on the object you click. Thus, if you click column bars, for example, you won’t 
be able to change any fonts with the mini-toolbar, because there’s no text on 
the bars to change. 
NOTE: When you want to select a particular data 
series, just click one of the series’ bars. All the 
other bars will be selected as well. And keep in 
mind exactly what gets selected. If you select the 
Phil. data series, you’ll see something like Figure 
6–22. 
 
Figure 6–22. Select group: Note the selection handles 
at the corners of each Phil. bar. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
171 
Formatting with the Context Menu 
We visited the context menu back when we explored that alternative way to access the 
Change Chart Type dialog box. Again, right-clicking the object you want to format calls up 
that menu, the last option on which is always the format-object option (see Figure 6–23).  
 
Figure 6–23. Note the last option. Here we’re about to reformat the x-axis. 
Formatting with the Current Selection Button Group 
Clicking the Layout tab beneath the Chart Tools context tab heading calls up the Current 
Selection button group on the tab’s left edge, as shown in Figure 6–24. 
 
Figure 6–24. The Current Selection button group. Note that the vertical (value) axis has been selected. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
172 
Click Format Selection to work with that object’s formatting options; and whether you 
bring up the context menu or turn to the Current Selection button, you’ll be brought to the 
same dialog box.  
Say you want to reformat the chart area. Either of the two methods described previously 
will bring you to a format dialog box (see Figure 6–25); 
 
Figure 6–25. Take your choice: you’ll get here either with the context menu and the Current Selection button 
group. 
That’s how the standard format-any-chart-object dialog box looks. 
Exploring the Format Dialog Box 
The contents of the format dialog box will vary with the object you’ve selected. The 
formatting options for data series, chart, and plot areas are basically of the change-their-
color variety. For example, if you want to recolor a data series, do the following: 
1. Click one of the data series’ bars to select it.  

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
173 
2.
Then either click
Format Selection or
right-click the bar and
click Format Data Series.
You’ll see the dialog
shown in Figure 6–26. 
Figure 6–26. Filling Phil.: Changing that data series’ color 
3.
Then click Fill, click
the Solid Fill radio
button, and click the
down arrow by Fill
Color, as shown in
Figure 6–27. 
Figure 6–27. True colors: Select the color you wish. 
4.
Select your color, click Close, and you’re done (note again that your new
data series color will appear on the chart in preview mode even before
you click Close). 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
174 
You can also fill data series bars with interesting gradient fills—textured sweeps of color 
that spread across the bars. Clicking Gradient fill  Preset colors instead of Solid fill will give 
you the options shown in Figure 6–28. 
 
Figure 6–28. An alternative to solid fills 
After you’ve selected one of those built-in options (here, Rainbow II was clicked) and 
clicked Close you’ll get something like Figure 6–29. 
 
Figure 6–29. Technicolor data series. But would your boss want to see that? Note that Phil.’s color has also 
changed accordingly in the legend. 
Try playing around with the other gradient options, too.  

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
175 
NOTE: You can also access the gradient and other options with the mini-toolbar, by clicking the 
arrow to the right of those toolbar buttons accompanied by the arrow. In our example, if you click 
the arrow by the fill button, you’ll see what’s shown in Figure 6–30. 
 
Figure 6–30. Note the gradient option. 
NOTE: If you’ve introduced all kinds of formatting variations into the chart and are beginning to 
have second thoughts about it all, return to the Current Selection button group, select the 
changed object(s) in sequence, and click Reset to Match Style. All the default formatting settings 
will be restored. 
Reformatting the Vertical Axis 
Now that we’ve talked about some of those color-based formatting options, we need to 
turn to some different kinds of formatting possibilities. Let’s turn to the vertical (value) 
axis, the leftmost area of the chart, which lists the values against which the chart data is 
measured. When you devise a chart, Excel makes an educated guess as to which values 
best characterize the data. In our chart we see a scale of values running from 0 to 100 at 
10-point intervals, reflecting the test scores we’re charting.  
But you can change the scale. For example, you could space the intervals differently—
say, at 5-point intervals, so that the 0 to 100 scale could display 0, 5, 10, 15, and so on, 
instead.  
Say you wanted the value axis to read 0, 20, 40, 80, and 100. 
1. Right-click right atop the axis and click Format Axis, and you’ll be taken to 
the dialog shown in Figure 6–31. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
176 
  
Figure 6–31. Value axis options  
NOTE: The fact that Major Unit field is dimmed means that the 10.0 value was automatically 
selected by Excel. 
2. Click the Fixed radio button by the Major Unit field.  
3. Enter 20 to replace the 10.0. 
4. Click Close, and you should 
see the chart shown in 
Figure 6–32. 
 
Figure 6–32. A decent interval: Each value on the axis is now 
spaced at 20 points apart. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
177 
Also notice that you can change the maximum and minimum values at either end of the 
scale. Thus, if you click the Fixed radio button alongside Minimum (it’s called “fixed” 
because you’ve chosen and fixed that value, overriding Excel’s automatic decision) and 
type 40, your chart will look like Figure 6–33. 
 
Figure 6–33. Raising the bottom line: A new minimum chart value 
OK—why would you want to do this? The fact is that many charts adopt a minimum 
value greater than 0, because the values being charted aren’t likely to go anywhere near 
that numerical point. Think about the stock market charts you’ve seen; they’ll practically 
never start at 0, because the Dow Jones index is up there in the five figures (at least it is 
now), and a daily change of 100 points looks far more striking when the chart minimum 
is set at 10,000 than it would if it were 0. On the other hand, establishing a new 
minimum will change the visual relation of the bars to one another. Brian’s 93 will seem 
even more masterly as a result. You need to think about how, or if, that distortion will 
impact your audience. 
Color-Coordinating Your Data Using Chart Styles 
Remember I stated a while back that virtually every element of a chart can be changed, 
and changing chart colors is probably one of the principal changes you’re likely to make. 
Excel gives you plenty of opportunities to fine-tune your chart, one element at a time. 
But you can also revamp the appearance of a chart in one fell swoop with the Styles 
option, a very easy-to-apply feature that recolors all the chart data series and, 
depending on the option you choose, the plot area too. Just click Chart Tools, and click 
Chart Styles on the Design tab (click the More drop-down arrow—the third of the three 
drop-down arrows) to reveal all the selections (see Figure 6–34). 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
178 
 
Figure 6–34. The Chart Styles option 
Just click the style you want, and that’s it. Note that the options in the last two rows of 
styles will also recolor the plot area, in addition to the data series. Just remember that 
even if you do use styles, you can still continue to make additional changes to any 
element of the chart on your own, including the colors of a style. 
Formatting a Chart Object Using Shape Styles 
Don’t confuse shape styles with chart styles. Unlike chart styles, shape styles enable you 
to reformat just one chart object in particular (axis text, plot area, one data series, etc.). 
Also unlike chart styles, the Shape Styles option shows you how the reformatted object 
will look in preview mode, when you rest your mouse over a style before you click it. 
Let’s see how shape styles are used: 
1. Select the chart element for which you want to add a shape style. In this 
case, let’s format the horizontal (category) axis, so select it.  
2. Click Chart Tools, click the Format context tab, and then click the Shape 
Styles More drop-down arrow (that’s the third of the three arrows in that 
button group). Shape Styles will reveal the options shown in Figure 6–35. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
179 
 
Figure 6–35. Shapes of things to come: The Shape Styles option 
3. Click the style you want to apply. In this case, let’s use Intense Line - 
Accent 2 (see Figure 6–36). 
 
Figure 6–36. Notice the embossed names. The axis line above the names has been recolored, too. 
Formatting Text Elements with WordArt 
If you select a text-based chart element, you can try out the WordArt Styles options to the 
right of Shape Styles. If you select the horizontal (category) axis again and then click the 
WordArt More down arrow, you’ll see the options shown in Figure 6–37. 
 
Figure 6–37. The next text option: WordArt 
Try out these effects. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
180 
Adding Extra Chart Elements with Chart Layouts 
The Chart Layouts button group is to the immediate left of Chart Styles on the Design tab. 
Chart layouts introduce an array of elements to your charts above and beyond color 
changes (see Figure 6–38). 
 
 
Figure 6–38. Chart Layout options 
Experiment with these and you’ll discover some new and informative ways to tweak your 
chart. For example, layout 5 (each layout is identified by a numbered caption; just rest 
your mouse above any layout choice to see it) presents the chart variation shown in 
Figure 6–39. 
 
Figure 6–39. The chart, accompanied by what’s called a data table 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
181 
This layout exhibits a data table, which displays all the data contributing to the chart on 
the chart itself. It also adds two title boxes—one to describe the chart, and the other to 
identify the vertical (value) axis. To replace the title text with titles of your own, just click 
the titles (you’ll see a selection border around it), type your title, and press Enter. 
NOTE: Data tables and other extras take space from the actual chart in order to make room for 
themselves. That means the chart itself will shrink as the extras surrounding it (such as titles and 
data tables) are added. As result, you’ll have to resize the chart yourself if you want the original 
chart size to be restored with its new additions. Needless to say, if you don’t like how the chart 
looks in its resized state you can execute an undo, or you can simply delete the extras. 
Adding Extra Chart Elements with the Layout Tab 
The buttons on the Layout tab let you add and modify many of the chart elements already 
discussed, such as chart and axis titles, data tables, and legends, as well as some 
objects we’ve yet to discuss, such as data labels. Each button sports a drop-down 
menu whose options are pretty clearly explained in caption form. And if the captions 
don’t help, simply clicking each option should answer all your questions. Let’s survey 
these buttons. 
Chart Title 
To add a chart title, go to the Layout tab and 
click Chart Title, as shown in Figure 6–40. 
 
Figure 6–40. Title search: The Chart Title button 
As its name suggests, Chart Title lets you install a title on the chart in one of two 
positions:  

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
182 
 As a centered overlay, in 
which the chart 
superimposes the title 
right on top of the chart 
(see Figure 6–41). 
 
Figure 6–41. Atop the charts: The centered overlay position 
 Above the chart. This one 
is pretty obvious, but 
note that the caption 
says that this option 
resizes the chart—that is, 
it grabs territory from the 
chart itself and 
downsizes it (see Figure 
6–42). 
 
Figure 6–42. Unobstructed view: The chart title is placed above 
the data. 
Now, you’re not going to be happy with a chart title whose text declares “Chart Title.” to 
substitute your own title, just click the title to select it, type your title in the formula bar, 
and press Enter. 
TIP: You can always delete a title (and most other chart objects) by selecting it and pressing the 
Delete key. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
183 
Axis Titles 
This option lets you enter and position a title for the vertical (value) axis and/or the
horizontal (category) axis.  
The vertical axis choices are
shown in Figure 6–43. 
Figure 6–43. Vertical axis title options. Note that all of these will
contract the actual chart size by grabbing space for themselves. 
The rotated, vertical, and horizontal titles look like Figure 6–44. 
  
Figure 6–44. From left to right, the rotated, vertical, and horizontal title orientations  

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
184 
Legend 
The Legend options (shown in Figure 6–45) let you position the legend at various points 
across the chart. 
 
Figure 6–45. The stuff of which legends are made 
Data Labels 
The Data Labels options allow you to post on the chart the actual values that contribute to 
the chart, in various positions. Figure 6–46 shows an example. 
 
Figure 6–46. Designer labels: Data labels, placed inside column bars 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
185 
TIP: Just remember that if you find that black-text-on-blue-bar color contrast too weak (as per 
the Soc. data series in our chart), you can always recolor the bar by reformatting that data series. 
You can also recolor the data labels by right-clicking any one of the values in that data series, 
and recoloring the font via the mini-toolbar. 
Data Table 
We’ve discussed data tables before; they’re included in some of the chart layouts we 
reviewed earlier, and they display the data from which the chart is fashioned onto the 
chart in table form. For example, the Show Data Table with Legend Keys option installs the 
table in the position shown in Figure 6–47. 
 
Figure 6–47. Setting the Table: Where the data table goes 
The legend keys are the identifying text at the data table’s left, which you may find a bit 
redundant, because the legend itself is out there as usual to the right of the chart. That’s 
why Excel offers the Show Data Table option as well, which omits the legend keys. 
NOTE: Again, adding a data table to the chart reduces the size of the actual chart.  
Axes 
The Axes option contains some selections you’ll likely never use, and some you very well 
might. The Axes  Primary Horizontal Axis  Show Right to Left Axis option switches the 
vertical axis to the right edge of the chart, and reverses the order of the names shown 
beneath the horizontal axis (see Figure 6–48). 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
186 
 
Figure 6–48. Spinning the axis: Compare the order of the names beneath the axis to the previous screenshot.  
OK—that’s one you’re likely not to use—unless you’re working with a right-to-left 
language such as Hebrew or Arabic. However, the Primary Vertical Axis options are ones 
you may want to know, even in English (see Figure 6–49). 
 
Figure 6–49. Orders of magnitude: Options for displaying large values on the vertical axis 
Let’s see an example of what these options do: 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
187 
1. Start by typing 
the set of data 
shown in Figure 
6–50, listing the 
top ten tourist 
locations. 
 
Figure 6–50. Parlez-vous Francais? Top tourist countries 
2. Chart this and you get what’s shown in Figure 6–51. 
 
Figure 6–51. The tourist data charted 
3. The problem is that the chart is congested with all those zeros. To 
remedy this, select Show Axis in Millions from the Vertical Axis drop-down, 
and you’ll see the version in Figure 6–52. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
188 
  
Figure 6–52. Note the Vertical Axis Millions title, which appears automatically. 
All those millions have been trimmed from the axis, but that change is purely formatting 
in nature. The axis title reminds the viewer that 50 really still means 50 million, expressed 
in neat charting shorthand. 
Plot Area 
The Plot Area options (see Figure 6–53) are 
rather simple, comprising two basic 
selections, though the second of the two 
requires a bit of explanation.  
 
Figure 6–53. The Plot thickens: Plot Area options 
Clicking None restores the fill area color to its original, native white. The caption to the 
second option, Show Plot Area, states that it will “Show Plot Area with default color fill.” 
That sounds like the None option, doesn’t it? But it isn’t—not quite. What Show Plot Area 
does is return the plot area to the color it acquires if you select one of the chart styles 
discussed earlier (i.e., one of those styles that recolors the plot area in addition to the 
data). It’s only when you go ahead and recolor this plot area that Show Plot Area comes 
into play, as it reprises the chart style plot color you selected—not the original, default 
white. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
189 
Introducing Sparklines: Mini-Charts Placed in Cells 
One of the most celebrated new features of Excel 2010 is the sparkline, a charting tool 
that enables you to capture your data with a different, cell-based approach. The 
brainchild of renowned visual information expert Edward Tufte, sparklines have actually 
been around for a while, but they made their Excel debut with this version. 
Sparklines are unlike standard Excel charts in that they actually occupy cells in the 
worksheet. Standard charts are slapped on top of the worksheet like sticky notes—
that’s why you can drag them around when you want to move them. Sparklines, on the 
other hand, lock themselves into individual cells, so they actually have addresses. And 
because each sparkline occupies one cell, it tends to be rather small, at least for 
starters. The only way to enlarge one is to either widen its column or heighten its row. 
But what can sparklines do for you that Excel’s standard charts can’t? The answer is 
that with sparklines you can select a range consisting of rows of data, such as our 
grades, and batch up a sparkline for each row—something like Figure 6–54. 
 
Figure 6–54. Mini-charts, one per student 
That’s the sparkline advantage—allowing the user to chart many sets—or rows—of data 
individually. Let’s have a go: 
1. First, select the range 
in which you want the 
sparklines to appear—
in this case M10:M13 
(see Figure 6–55). (You 
can either delete or 
move any existing 
charts on your 
workbook that may be 
obscuring your view of 
the range.)  
 
Figure 6–55. We’ll place a sparkline alongside each 
student’s set of grades. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
190 
2. Click the Insert ribbon tab, and click 
the Line button in the Sparklines 
button group (see Figure 6–56; note 
the Win/Loss option, which I’ll explain 
later). You’ll then see the dialog in 
Figure 6–57. 
 
Figure 6–56. The Sparklines button group 
 
Figure 6–57. Selecting the data: Each row will yield its own sparkline. 
3. Now select the range containing all the test data, as shown in Figure 6–58. 
 
Figure 6–58. Selecting the data that will contribute to each sparkline 
NOTE: You may see the name Student posted to the Data Range field. That’s a range name we 
produced in the course of the create-from-selection range-naming exercise we carried out in 
Chapter 3. It stands for cells J10:L13, the cells we need to select now.  
4. Click OK. The sparklines should appear alongside each student’s grades 
in the location range, as shown previously in Figure 6–54. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
191 
Now imagine 1,000 rows of data instead of our 4, each one representing a student’s test 
scores. It would be no problem to establish a sparkline corresponding to each set of 
grades, affording a teacher or administrator a quick, enlightening read on every 
student’s progress. 
Modifying Sparklines 
There are several ways you can change the sparklines you’ve ushered into your 
workbook. Click any sparkline and you’ll fire up the Sparkline Tools context tab. Click the 
tab, and the roster of sparkline options will report for duty (see Figure 6–59). 
 
Figure 6–59. Sparkline styles 
Note the Style option, which emulates the Chart Styles drop-down menu; clicking here will 
enable you to recolor the sparklines. 
NOTE: By default, sparklines are grouped, meaning that any changes you carry out will affect all 
the sparklines in the range. If you want to reformat just one sparkline, click the individual 
sparkline and then click the Ungroup button in the Group button group (if that doesn’t sound too 
redundant). 
The Show button group lets you post 
markers (dots, actually) that denote key 
data points on the sparklines. For 
example, if you click the High Point option, 
the sparkline will mark the highest test 
score for each student (see Figure 6–60). 
 
Figure 6–60. Dotted lines: Each student’s highest 
grade is punctuated by a dot. 
TIP: You can also change a sparkline color by clicking the Sparkline Color drop-down arrow 
and selecting from the color palette. You can also change the sparkline background by clicking 
the standard Font Fill Color button on the Home ribbon.  

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
192 
Representing Binary Values with Sparklines 
Sparklines come in only three chart types: 
line, column, and what’s called the 
win/loss type (see Figure 6–61). 
 
Figure 6–61. Sparkline chart types 
We’ve been working with the line type, and clicking the column button generates, well, 
columns of data. But what if you wanted to capture a strictly binary, one-or-the-other 
data relationship, such as whether each of a series of transactions yields a profit or a 
loss, or whether each of the games a team plays across a season results in a win or 
loss? That’s where the win/loss sparkline comes in. 
Win/loss represents all positive values as columns above a virtual horizontal axis, and all 
negative values as below-the-axis columns. Thus, values such as these:  
5, –6, 9, 11 –3 
would be translated by the win/loss chart as shown in Figure 6–62. 
 
Figure 6–62. Can’t win ’em all: How the win/loss chart captures data 
There’s no proportion here either; all the positive and negative values are characterized 
by identically sized columns. 
So when would you use win/loss? You could turn to win/loss when you need to depict 
data in up/down or yes/no terms—say, for profit/loss data comparisons, or pass/fail test 
scores; you could enter a 1 for every passed exam, and a –1 for a failure, for example. 
This chart type is called “win/loss” because it was inspired by sporting outcomes. With 
win/loss you could chart a team’s fortunes across a season by entering 1 (or really any 
positive value) for every victory, and –1 (or any negative value) for every loss. After all, 
wins and losses are either/or. 
NOTE: You can delete one sparkline by clicking its cell, clicking the Clear drop-down arrow in 
the Group button group, and clicking Clear Selected Sparklines. To delete the entire sparkline 
group, just click Clear Selected Sparkline Groups instead. 

CHAPTER 6:  Charting Your Data 
193 
Summary 
As with most Excel capabilities, charting is an acquired taste, and learning its subtleties
takes a bit of practice. But just the same, knowledge of charting essentials will empower
you to cook up a perfectly presentable chart in about 10 seconds. Next, we’ll take a look
at Excel’s database features. 

 
 
195 
195 
 
 
 
Chapter 
Sorting and Filtering Your 
Data: Excel’s Database 
Features 
You hear the term database all the time, even in everyday conversation, but the concept 
is rarely defined. People tend to rely on a common sense understanding of databases, 
and that’s usually good enough—and the reality is that even Excel has found the task of 
deciding what it really means by database a bit troublesome. That doesn’t have to 
concern us, but on the other hand, since we need to use the term throughout this 
chapter, we’ll plunge ahead and define a database as a collection of records (i.e., rows) 
organized into fields, all of which are topped by titles. 
And as it turns out, that’s pretty close to the common sense understanding. Thus, the 
very standard collection of data shown in Figure 7–1 would qualify as a database. 
 
Figure 7–1. A garden-variety database 
Pretty standard, no? Note that the first row—called a header row—contains the titles of 
each field, or column. And it doesn’t matter if the database contains 30,000 records or 3. 
Either way, it’s a database. 
Databases serve as the starting point for many of the tasks users can carry out in Excel. 
For starters, databases can be sorted, either in numerical or alphabetical order, and 
either ascending or descending—that is, A to Z, or Z to A, or 1 to 100, or 100 to 1. And 
the same can be done with dates that you want to sort in chronological order, because 
remember, dates are values. 
7 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
196 
In addition, users can pose all sorts of questions of databases, such as 
 How many people work in HR? 
 What’s their average salary? 
 How many people in the company make more than $50,000? 
 How much money did each salesperson earn each month? 
In order to answer these questions, databases can be asked to produce a subset of 
their records—that is, only those records that meet a certain criterion or criteria that the 
user establishes. Excel offers a range of ways in which these kinds of questions can be 
asked—and answered—and we’ll look at some of them in this chapter. 
And because databases depend on accurate data entry, Excel provides a set of controls 
on the data entry process, through which the user can at least minimize the likelihood of 
making mistakes. Called data validation techniques (introduced previously in Chapter 2), 
these are fast and easy ways to place limits on the kinds of data that can be entered in 
cells. You’ll learn about some of these too. But first, let’s take a look at sorting. 
Sorting Data: Instilling Order in Your Data 
When I did my thing as a corporate trainer in New York, our in-house training manuals 
described sorting as an advanced topic. It isn’t. Spreadsheets nowadays make the job 
of arranging values and/or text in order an easy task. Here’s an example:
1. Enter the records from Figure 7–2 in a blank workbook, starting at cell 
H7 (note the header is formatted differently from the rest of the 
database; this will be important later). 
 
Figure 7–2. Out of sorts: Our workforce, ready to be sorted 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
197 
2. Save the workbook as Sort. Note that the first and last names have 
been assigned separate fields; this is a good thing to do when working 
with databases.  
3. Now let’s suppose we want to sort 
this database by the last names of 
the staff. Start by clicking anywhere 
in the Last Name column. Don’t try 
to select the entire database; that’s 
totally unnecessary at best and will 
cause problems at worst. Then click 
Home  Sort & Filter in the Editing 
button group. You’ll see the drop-
down shown in Figure 7–3. 
               
 
 
Figure 7–3. Where to start sorting 
4. Click Sort A to Z, and you’ll see the content shown in Figure 7–4. 
 
Figure 7–4. All done! 
That’s it. The last names are sorted in A-to-Z order, and the deed is done.  
v

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
198 
NOTE: You’ll find another set of sort buttons with 
a slightly different appearance on the Data tab, as 
shown in Figure 7–5. 
Figure 7–5. Sort of the same: Another set of sort buttons 
Any questions? You may well have a few. To answer one right away: Yes, when you sort 
by a field, all the other fields in the database get sorted too, so that all the data fields will 
continue to be aligned with each other. Thus, Zachary will still lined up with Quincy; he 
won’t be randomly paired with someone else’s first name.  
Another question might involve the header row, which remains in position. Why wasn’t 
that row sorted along with the others? How does Excel know that the phrase Last Name 
really doesn’t signify someone’s last name? 
There are two answers to this question: 
 Excel won’t sort the first row in a database if it’s formatted differently 
form the other database rows. 
 In addition, Excel won’t sort a top row if there’s a data type disparity 
somewhere in the database. That means that if a heading in the 
database is text and the cells beneath it consist of values, Excel 
assumes the heading is just that—a heading, not data—and is not to 
be sorted. As you can see, there’s a data-type disparity in our 
database—in the Salary field. 
Once you understand how sorting works, you should be able to sort any field in either 
direction. Thus, if you want to sort salaries in descending order, just click anywhere in 
the Salary and click Sort Largest to Smallest on the Sort & Filter drop-down menu. And 
yes, we’ve just seen something new. When Excel recognizes a field filled with values, it 
converts its sort options into the largest-to-smallest variety. Sort a text field and Excel 
presents you with its A-to-Z choices instead. Just note that if you happen to click the 
header cell of a value field that happens to be text (e.g., Salary), the drop-down will state 
Sort A to Z, even though the actual data consists of values. 
NOTE: Remember that although we’re working with a small database, the principles of sorting I 
describe here work equally as well with 15,000 records as they do with just 15. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
199 
Sorting by Two Fields: The Hows and Whys 
Consider this scenario: you’re the instructor of a large, lecture-hall-sized class, and 
you’ve entered the names of all your students on a worksheet. You want to sort them in 
the standard last-name alphabetical order, but a quick scan of the data turns up several 
students with identical last names. You’d then probably want to sort the first names as 
well, so that Edna Arnold will appear in the sort before Gary Arnold.  
And that introduces a classic sorting issue. Sorting by a second field is something you 
may want to do when, and only when, you have duplicate data in the first field—that is, 
when you discover at least two entries in that field with the same contents. There’s 
simply no point in sorting by a second field unless you have duplicate data in the first. 
And as it turns out, our own database exemplifies this point. Suppose we want to sort 
our records by department. The Department field exhibits numerous duplicates, so we 
could sort by a second field as well—say, salary. In other words, we want to wind up 
with the results shown in Figure 7–6. 
 
Figure 7–6. Tilling two fields: Sorting by Department and Salary 
Note that Department is sorted in A-to-Z sequence but Salary is sorted largest to 
smallest—kind of the opposite direction—because we wanted to see who were the 
highest earners in each department. And how do we do all this? Here’s how: 
1. First click in the first field by which you want to sort. You need to decide 
which field gets sorted first. In our case, we want to sort the Last Name 
field first, and then Salary, so click in the Last Name field. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
200 
2. Click Home  Sort & Filter 
 Custom Sort, and you’ll 
see the dialog shown in 
Figure 7–7. 
 
Figure 7–7. The Sort dialog box 
NOTE: The Sort by field is filled with Last Name, because that’s the field in which we click to 
start the process. If you click in the wrong field by mistake, you can just click the accompanying 
drop-down arrow, which lists all the fields in the data base. Note in addition the Order field 
displays A to Z, the default sorting option selected by Excel. If you want to sort the field as per 
the Z-to-A ordering, click the drop-down arrow and select that option (there’s a bit more to say 
about the other Sort On options; we’ll get to that a bit later). 
3. We want to sort by two fields—so where’s the second one? Click the 
Add Level button, and you’ll see a second entry beneath the Column entry, 
entitled Then by.  
4. Click the drop-down 
arrow and click Salary, 
the second field by 
which we want to sort 
(see Figure 7–8). 
 
Figure 7–8. The second sort field comes into view. 
NOTE: By default, Excel checks the My data has headers check box, thus telling the application 
not to sort the first row in the database. 
5. Now that we’ve added the second field to be sorted, we need to look at 
Order, which reads Smallest to Largest. Click that down arrow and select 
Largest to Smallest, the direction in which we want to sort Salary. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
201 
6. Click OK. 
You can also click any field in the dialog box and click Delete Level if you decide you want 
to remove it as a sorted field. The up and down arrows alongside the Copy Level button 
allow you to promote or demote fields in the sort order. Thus, if you wanted to sort 
Salary first you’d click in that field and then click the up arrow. Salary will move above 
Department in the dialog box and be sorted first.  
NOTE: The Copy Level button concerns yet another level of sorting, where you can sort by the 
format of a cell as well as its value. That is dealt with in the next section. 
Sorting by Cell Format 
Now what about those additional options on the Sort On drop-down menu—namely, Cell 
Color, Font Color, and Cell Icon? These are choices you’re far less likely to select; they relate 
to conditional formatting, allowing you to tell Excel to sort cells (or the text in them) that 
have been, for example, formatted green before cells that have been formatted red.  
Thus, if you were to click Cell Color, 
additional buttons asking you to 
identify which color is to be sorted 
first would appear in the dialog 
box; or in the case of Cell Icon, 
which conditionally formatted icon 
would receive sorting priority (see 
Figure 7–9). 
 
 
Figure 7–9. Two different sorts of sorts based on conditional 
formats (the first by cell color and the second by cell icon) 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
202 
NOTE: What about the Copy Level button? If you click Copy Level on a field in the dialog box, 
that same field will be instated again in the Sort dialog box. That’s right—the same field will 
appear twice. But how can you sort the same field twice? 
Again, the answer takes us back to conditional formats. If, say, you wanted to sort the 
database by Salary in largest-to-smallest direction, and at the same time you conditionally 
formatted the data so that some of the Salary cells turned red and others didn’t (for whatever 
reason), you could instruct Excel to sort the red $50,000 cells before the uncolored $50,000 
cells in that copied level. (No, you’re not likely to use this one.) 
Finding What You Want with Filters 
In the introduction of this chapter I pointed out that a great deal of the work people do 
with databases involves asking questions of a database’s records; questions whose 
answers are usually supplied by just some of the records—such as which people in the 
company earn more than $50,000, or who works in the Sales department. Excel offers a 
very easy way to ask and answer these kinds of questions—through its filter feature. 
Filters have been around in Excel for quite some time, but they’ve been improved, 
without compromising ease of use—as you’re about to see. 
1. To begin filtering your 
data, just click anywhere 
in your database, and then 
click the Filter button in the 
Data tab’s Sort & Filter 
button group (see Figure 
7–10). 
 
Figure 7–10. Where to start the filtering process 
2. Click the Filter button and you’ll see the results from Figure 7–11. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
203 
 
Figure 7–11. Note the filter arrows.  
NOTE: The filter drop-down buttons will not print, even if they are visible on the screen. If the 
arrows obscure part of a field heading, you can widen that column.  
3. Now let’s say we want to view only 
those employees who work in Sales. 
Just click the filter down arrow by 
Department, as shown in Figure 7–12. 
 
 
Figure 7–12. All the departments in the  
                company are listed. 
4. Then click the Select All check box, which removes the check marks next 
to all the department names. Then click the Sales check box and click 
OK. You’ll see the results shown in Figure 7–13. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
204 
Figure 7–13. The Sales department 
I told you it was easy. We’ve just isolated—or filtered—the members of the Sales staff.
In order to bring that outcome about, Excel has hidden the rows of all the employees in
the database who aren’t in Sales. Note the gaps in row numbers in Figure 7–14. 
Figure 7–14. Something’s missing—rows. 
Notice that the Sales department records occupy rows 8, 9, 14, 19, and 20. The other
rows are occupied by members of different departments, and are thus obscured from
view. 
TIP: You can also filter the Sales staff by typing Sales in the search field right above the check 
boxes shown previously in Figure 7–12, and clicking OK. 
It’s easy to miss, but when you filter a database, the number of records you’ve pulled
out is recorded in the lower left of the status bar, as shown in Figure 7–15. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
205 
 
Figure 7–15. The number of records you’ve filtered is tallied in the lower-left corner of the screen. 
Moreover, you can filter multiple departments simultaneously. If you wanted to filter both 
Sales and HR staff, you could check the boxes in Sales and HR (again, after deselecting 
Select All in order to tell Excel you don’t want to see all the staff), and click OK. You’ll then 
see both Sales and HR people listed on the screen, but no other staff. 
Clearing a Filter 
Now it’s time for an obvious question: if the filter works by hiding rows that don’t meet 
the current filter criterion, how do you get those hidden rows back on the screen? That’s 
easy, too: just click the Clear button to the right of the Filter button in the Sort & Filter 
group, and all the database records will reappear. And in order to do this, you don’t 
even have to click in the database first. The Clear command works no matter where 
you’ve clicked in the worksheet. (And don’t be fooled by the word Clear here; it doesn’t 
mean erase or delete—it refers to clearing the filter.)  
NOTE: To turn the filter off completely, just click the Filter button a second time. 
Text and Number Filters: Filters Within the Filter 
Sometimes you need to filter a database on the basis of a part of a field. Consider this 
example: you want to filter all the HR staff, but each employee has a department code 
that looks something like this: 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
206 
 HR-103 
 HR-561 
and so on. The kind of filter we’ve worked with so far won’t corral all these HR members, 
because each staffer is uniquely identified; they’re no longer just HR, but rather HR-274, 
and so on, and our method won’t pull all the staffers out in one shot. But Excel’s text 
filter will let you filter all staff who have HR somewhere in their ID, even of those IDs 
aren’t exactly the same. 
1. Start by clicking the filter drop-down arrow and then clicking Text Filters. 
You’ll see the options shown in Figure 7–16. Clicking any of these 
options will take you to what’s called the Custom AutoFilter dialog box, as 
you’re about to see. 
 
Figure 7–16. Text filters: Giving you more filtering options 
2. In view of the preceding example, 
let’s say that you’re interested in 
filtering all the department records 
that contain the letters HR—no 
matter what other text appears in 
each record. In that case, select 
Contains… in the Text Filters drop-
down menu, and you’ll see what’s 
shown in Figure 7–17. 
 
Figure 7–17. This one’s pretty easy too. Just enter the 
text the filter needs to look for. 
3. Type HR in the field to the right of the field with the word contains, and 
click OK. Doing so will filter all the records containing the HR letter 
sequence, even if it appears with other letters (e.g., HR-403). 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
207 
NOTE: The term AutoFilter is really equivalent to the term filter, even though Excel switches 
between the two. 
And once you see how that works, you’ll 
see that the other text filter options 
(Equals..., Does Not Equal..., etc.) are easy to 
figure out. Clicking any of these takes you 
back to that same Custom AutoFilter dialog 
where the appropriate option appears. In 
fact, if you click the down arrow to the 
right of the contains entry (shown previously 
in Figure 7–17), you’ll see all the text filter 
options, as shown in Figure 7–18. 
Figure 7–18. No matter which text filter option you 
choose, the drop-down menu can always take you to 
the others.  
NOTE: If you take a close look at Figure 7–18, you’ll notice the is greater than option, which 
sounds like an odd choice to be offered when you’re filtering text. But here, “greater than” refers 
to text in the field starting with letters in the alphabet coming after the text you’ve specified. For 
example, if you enter the letter D under the is greater than option, the text filter will locate all 
names starting with letters appearing after D in the alphabet, as well as names such as 
Dreiser—because Dre . . . is more than, or greater than, just plain D. 
But what’s probably going to serve you more productively than text filters are the 
number filters. These let you filter all workers earning more than $30,000, or all 
employees making more than the company salary average, for example. 
The following steps show you how to apply a number filter.  
1. Click in a field populated with 
values such as salaries, and then 
click the field drop-down arrow 
(again, after you’ve clicked Clear 
to return all the records to the 
screen). You’ll see the options 
shown in Figure 7–19. 
 
Figure 7–19. Number filters 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
208 
2. These are pretty easy, too. 
Clicking any of these options will 
again unfurl the Custom AutoFilter 
dialog box (except the Top 10... 
option, which will call up its own 
distinct dialog box), as shown in 
Figure 7–20. 
 
Figure 7–20. By the numbers: Just type a value and 
click OK. 
3. This should be pretty self-evident by now. If you want to see all the 
staffers earning more than $30,000, just type 30000 and click OK.  
You may also want to take special note of the Top 10… option, which lets you filter the 
top (or bottom) 10 values in the field—or the top 20, or the top 5, or any value you 
specify (see Figure 7–21). 
 
Figure 7–21. The Top 10... option: Better than a Letterman list 
Just click (or type) in the field exhibiting the default 10 and replace it with any other 
value, if you want to. And think big: imagine a set of test grades for a lecture class of 
200 students, and think how simple would be to determine its top 10 highest scores. 
Also, if you click the drop-down arrow by Items field, you’ll call up a Percent option, which 
lets you find out the top 10 percent of all scores instead. 
Filtering Multiple Fields 
In addition, you can filter the filter results. That means, for example, that starting with the 
result in which the Sales staff has been filtered, we could then execute a second filter—
say, to find all the Sales personnel who earn more than $35,000. We’d do that by next 
clicking the Salary drop-down arrow and filtering for salaries above $35,000—using the 
number filters from the previous section. After that double filter is completed, only Ned 
Paulson would remain on the screen, because he’s the only salesperson who earns over 
$35,000 (see Figure 7–22). 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
209 
 
Figure 7–22. First we filter the Sales personnel, and then we filter those results by Salary. 
Tables: Adding User-Friendliness to Your Database  
Working with a database and adding records to it is generally a pretty easy task, but 
Excel provides the user with a way to make the process even easier—by transforming 
the database into a table. A table is a database to which some ease-of-use features 
have been added—features that spare the user from some of the drudgery associated 
with data entry (e.g., automatically copying a new formula to all the rows in the table). 
Let’s turn our database into a table, and we’ll see how it works: 
1. Click anywhere in the database. 
Then click the Insert tab and select 
Table from the Tables button group. 
Doing so brings up the dialog box 
shown in Figure 7–23. 
 
Figure 7–23. Turning the tables on a database 
2. Click OK, and then click anywhere in the worksheet to deselect the 
database. You’ll see the results shown in Figure 7–24. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
210 
 
Figure 7–24. The database, now a table 
TIP: You can also begin the table-making process via its keyboard equivalent, Ctrl+T. 
You’ll also see a Table Tools contextual tab, which we’ll discuss shortly. The most obvious 
change produced by the table is the data’s new format, in which the database records 
are colored alternately blue. These are called banded rows, an effect that makes the 
records easier to read. But there are features to a table that aren’t quite so obvious, 
including these: 
 The filter is turned on (although you can still turn it off in the standard 
way by clicking the Filter button). 
 The header row in a table always remains on the screen. That means 
that if the table contains hundreds or even thousands of rows, and you 
scroll down the table, that first row will nevertheless stay in view. Take 
a look at the example shown in Figure 7–25. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
211 
 
Figure 7–25. The header row’s still on the screen—but look at the row numbers! 
 The table receives a name—by default, Table1. (These names proceed 
in sequence; your second table will be called Table2, your third 
Table3, etc.) Whenever you click in the table, its name will appear in 
the Table Name field in the  Properties button group on the Table Tools 
Design tab. You can also rename a table by clicking in the table and 
clicking in the Table Name field, typing a new name, and pressing Enter. 
The table name will appear when you click the drop-down arrow in the 
Name box; click the name and the table will be selected. 
 
Figure 7–26. A table renamed. Note the Name box. 
 If you enter additional records (or rows) to the table, they too will 
automatically exhibit the same format. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
212 
 If you add a new field (or column) to the table, it too will display the 
new format.  
 This one is important. If a field has formulas in it, any new records 
added to the table will automatically receive the formula, too (with the 
appropriate absolute or relative cell addressing figured in).  
For example, suppose our pre-table database had a Raise field, in which every salary 
was awarded a boost of 5 percent (see Figure 7–27). 
 
Figure 7–27. Pay day. Note the formula in the formula bar. 
Once those raise formulas are in place and the database is then converted into a table, 
any new records you enter will also display the 5 percent raise, because the formula in 
the Raise field will write itself. Moreover, if you edit any one of the formulas in the Raise 
field, the table will rewrite all the formulas in the column correspondingly—a very cool 
feature. 
NOTE: The preceding example assumes you’ve written the raise formulas before you converted the 
database into a table. But if you write them after converting to a table, they may look very different. 
For example, if you transform your database into a table and then add the Raise field, and proceed 
to write the raise formulas by clicking in the cells in the Salary column, they’ll all read 
=[@Salary]*1.05 
without a specific cell reference. That’s how tables write formulas—they refer to fields, not cell 
references. But however the formula appears, its mathematical outcome will be identical. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
213 
There are a few other table features that are good to know. For one thing, it’s easy to 
add columns to tables; and for another, when you click anywhere in the table, the Table 
Tools context tab is triggered (see Figure 7–28). 
 
Figure 7–28. What you see when you click the Table Tools context tab. Note that the entire ribbon is now 
occupied with table options. 
Note the Table Styles button group. Clicking its drop-down arrows reveals a collection of 
predesigned styles that you can apply to the table (see Figure 7–29). 
 
Figure 7–29. Table styles: Just click one 
You can inspect any of the table styles in preview mode by resting your mouse over it 
before you click. The table will exhibit the style. 
NOTE: You can also click the Format as Table button in the Styles button group, located on the 
Home tab. Clicking this will do two things: change a database into a table and let you choose a 
table style. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
214 
To the left of Table Styles, you’ll see the
Table Style Options button group (see Figure
7–30). 
Figure 7–30. The Table Style Options button group 
Its check boxes let you change specific elements of the table’s appearance. If you
uncheck Banded Rows and check Banded Columns, for example, you can realize the effect
shown in Figure 7–31. 
Figure 7–31. Banded table columns 
And if you click the First Column and/or Last Column options, special effects (e.g.,
boldfaced text) will be imparted only to those columns, which you may want to
emphasize. 
The Table Style Options group also features an important Total Row selection. Click its
check box and you’ll see something like Figure 7–32. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
215 
 
Figure 7–32. The table, with a Total row appended at the bottom. If the total is too large to be seen, just widen 
the Salary column with autofit. 
By default, the Total row adds the values in the rightmost field of the table, as shown in the 
figure. If that column contains textual data, the number of records is counted instead. And 
if you click in any other cell in the Total row, a drop-down arrow will appear, letting you 
select a mathematical operation for the data in that field (see Figure 7–33). 
 
Figure 7–33. The Total row lets you perform a calculation on any field in the table.  
What Excel is really doing here is enabling you to use one of its functions, which will 
calculate a result for the field in which you’ve clicked. Note the array of options made 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
216 
available; in Figure 7–33, in which we’ve clicked in a text field, we’ll be able to tally a 
count of the number of last names in the table column. Click the down arrow by Salary 
and you can select a different calculation—say, an average. If you decide you need to 
add additional records to the table, you can click the Total Row check box a second time 
to remove it. You can then continue adding records. 
Finding Duplicate Records in the Table (and Removing 
Them) 
A classic data entry problem, one particularly besetting large databases, is the specter 
of duplicate records. It’s not uncommon to discover the same names appearing 
repeatedly in large lists, and if you’re the person charged with maintaining the database, 
you’ll need to do something about it. Excel’s tables are equipped with a Remove 
Duplicates feature, which speeds the task of winnowing those doubles from the data. 
The first order of business in removing duplicates is deciding exactly what constitutes a 
duplicate. After all, Jane Walsh and John Walsh share a last name, but you’re not likely 
to declare them duplicate entries. What you usually want to sift out are entire records 
that are identical—that is, two John Walshes—although it always isn’t that simple. J. 
Walsh and John Walsh, both of whom record an address of 123 Broadway, might very 
well qualify as duplicates, too.  
1. To see how Excel helps you with 
this task, pick out an empty area of 
the worksheet and enter the simple 
database shown in Figure 7–34. 
Remember that the size of the 
database is irrelevant. The Remove 
Duplicates options works the same 
way in every case. 
 
Figure 7–34. Double take: Searching for duplicates 
2. Then convert the database to a table. Note that the “My table has 
headers” check box won't be checked, and that’s because all the data 
in the database, including that in the top row, is text, so Excel can’t tell if 
there’s anything special or different about that top row. We thus need to 
tick the check box in order to let Excel know that we do want a header 
row. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
217 
3. Then click the Remove Duplicates 
button in the Tools button group, 
which will bring up the dialog shown 
in Figure 7–35. 
 
Figure 7–35. The Remove Duplicates dialog box 
4. You can probably figure out what to 
do next—just click OK. Because our 
table contains two people with the 
same last name but different first 
names, we leave both columns 
checked, which means that Excel 
will search the data only for records 
in which both fields are identical. 
When you click OK, you’ll see the 
message shown in Figure 7–36. 
 
Figure 7–36. Yeah, “1 duplicate values” needs a 
grammar check . . . but it worked! 
5. Click OK and you’ll be left with three records, as one of the two John 
Walshes has been deleted.  
Converting a Table to a Range 
If you want convert a table back to the standard database with which you started, click 
Convert to Range in the Tools button group on the Table Tools tab. You’ll be prompted to 
convert the table back to a “normal” range (as Excel puts it)—just click OK. Remember, 
after all, that a database is also just a range, too. 
NOTE: When you convert a table back to a range, any table formatting you may have applied, 
such as banded rows and/or columns, will remain. 
And given the advantages of turning a range into a table, why would you want to return 
it back to standard range status? That’s a good and subtle question, and while you’re 
not likely to convert it back to a normal range, there are some potential reasons why you 
might. For one, if you delete a record in a table—even the last record—the records on 
either side of the deleted row still remain in the table, and that means the blank rows will 
appear in pivot table reports. 

CHAPTER 7:  Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features 
218 
Summary 
Excel’s sorting, filtering, and table features make the tasks of ordering and tracking 
down information from your data easy. But the techniques discussed so far may not 
answer all the questions you’d like to ask of your data. For example, what if you want to 
learn the average salary of your employees not across the whole company, but broken 
out by department? Or what if you need to know how much money each salesperson 
has earned per month? Or how much money you spend per month by budget category? 
Or perhaps you need to determine university students’ grade point averages by their 
major. In the next chapter we’re going to explore a powerful Excel feature that will help 
you with these questions and more: pivot tables. 

 
 
219 
219 
 
 
 
Chapter 
PivotTables: Data 
Aggregation Without the 
Aggravation 
PivotTables provide a potent and flexible way to organize—and reorganize—the records 
in a database or table, by letting you break out the data into a variety of visual 
arrangements. And once you’ve done so, you can quickly transform the results into a 
PivotChart. 
PivotTables also let you group data; for example, you can bundle test score results in 
groups of 10 points—that is, tally the number of students who score between 100 and 
91, 90 and 81, and so on. 
And starting with Excel 2010, Microsoft has introduced a new PivotTable feature called 
the Slicer, which gives you a clearer presentation of filtered data. I’ll explain the Slicer 
soon, although it’s similar to the filters discussed in Chapter 7. 
Looking at Some PivotTables 
In this section, we’ll take a look at some specific examples of how PivotTables are used. 
8 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
220 
Imagine that you’re planning a dinner for 
your organization and you need to assign 
the invitees to their tables. You start with a 
database that looks like Figure 8–1. 
 
Figure 8–1. The A list? Dinner guests and their table 
assignments 
Now while it’s true that you could simply 
sort the data by table number, that 
approach won’t tell you how many guests 
are seated at each table. What you really 
want to see is something like Figure 8–2. 
 
Figure 8–2. Guests per table: One way you can 
organize data with a PivotTable 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
221 
Once you’ve compiled the data in this way 
with a PivotTable, you can determine if 
you’ve over- or underassigned guests to 
particular tables. But you may also want to 
see the data displayed as in Figure 8–3. 
 
Figure 8–3. Who’s where: Guests identified by their 
table. Note that the guest names are automatically 
sorted, too. 
Here, you’ve learned exactly who’s seating where.  
These are the sort of things that PivotTables (technically called PivotTable reports) can 
do: they can organize—or again, break out—your data in all sorts of combinations and 
modes of presentation. They’re particularly good for identifying patterns and tendencies 
in the data that might otherwise escape your attention, particularly when you’re working 
with a large database.  
Here’s one more example, adapted from a Microsoft practice database. In this example, 
you have a collection of sales records, each of which cites the salesperson, country in 
which the sale was transacted, transaction date, and amount of each sale (see Figure 8–4). 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
222 
 
Figure 8–4. Salesperson data, ripe for pivot tabling 
One obvious question you might want to 
ask of the data is: how much money each 
salesperson earned? A PivotTable will tell 
you (see Figure 8–5). 
 
Figure 8–5. Salesperson earnings, with the grand total 
besides 
There’s your answer—or at least one answer. But with PivotTables, you can also come 
up with something like what’s shown in Figure 8–6. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
223 
 
Figure 8–6. Sales data broken out, not by salesperson, but by month and year instead 
Now that’s a radically different take on the same sales figures—organized here by time 
frame, with no mention of the salespersons. But we could also do something like 
Figure 8–7. 
 
Figure 8–7. Turnabout: Now the years are occupying the rows 
Bet that one got your attention! What you’re seeing now is precisely the same data from 
Figure 8–6, but it’s been pivoted, or flipped on its side, as it were. Now the years run 
down the column, with the months streaming across. And that’s what PivotTables can 
do: pivot the information across their rows and columns to give the user a variety of 
ways of presenting the information.   
Pretty impressive—and as with Excel’s other data management capabilities, the 
methods for designing PivotTables are identical for databases of 100 or 100,000 
records. And once you get the hang of them, you can batch one up in a matter of 
seconds. 
Now take another look at Figures 8–6 and 8–7, and notice that they organize the sales 
data by months and years, even though the original source data only records each sale 
on the particular day on which it was transacted. But PivotTables let you group the data 
into larger categories, allowing you to easily see the bigger picture.  
Again, you can’t really produce these kinds of results with the filters discussed 
previously. PivotTables afford the user a larger and more effective set of tools for 
analyzing data, and though some newcomers to Excel view them as mysterious, slightly 
scary, and perhaps user-hostile, a bit of practice and reflection will pay off—because 
PivotTables are definitely worth knowing about.  

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
224 
It’s true that there’s a lot to learn about PivotTables if you’re interested in turning
yourself into the company guru. In fact, there are two Apress books out there devoted
exclusively to the subject, Beginning PivotTables in Excel 2007 and Excel 2007
PivotTable Recipes, authored by PivotTable expert Debra Dalgleish. But as with many of
Excel’s features, there’s a set of the basics you have learn in order to make PivotTables
do productive work, and I’m going to introduce them here. 
NOTE: Because a PivotTable works with a copy of the original database, any mistakes you may 
make in the course of your PivotTable design will nevertheless leave the database intact. And you 
can always apply the Undo command to PivotTables, just as you can with any other Excel 
feature.   
Creating a PivotTable 
So let’s try to construct some PivotTables, by working with the first 15 records of the
sales data we’ve been looking at.  
1. In a blank workbook, copy the records shown in Figure 8–8, starting in
cell A1. 
Figure 8–8. Sales data: Working with text, date, and currency fields 
2. Save the workbook as PivotTables.  

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
225 
3. To start with, we want to break out 
the sales figures—that is, the data in 
the Order Amount field—by 
salesperson to see how much each 
has earned. The first step is to click 
anywhere in the database, as we did 
with sorting and filtering. Then click 
the Insert tab, and choose PivotTable 
from the Tables button group (click 
the top half of the button). You’ll see 
the dialog shown in Figure 8–9. 
 
Figure 8–9. The Create PivotTable dialog box 
4. Note that by default Excel will manufacture a new worksheet in which to 
place the PivotTable. Click OK, and you’ll see Figure 8–10. We’ve put 
what could be termed the scaffolding of the PivotTable in place, but all 
we see so far is a curious, empty space holding down the left side of the 
worksheet; we obviously haven’t generated any results yet. (Note also 
that a PivotTable Tools contextual tab also appears at the top of your 
screen.) Now look at the area in the lower half of the PivotTable Field List, 
in the area captioned “Drag fields between areas below.” This is where 
you’ll be doing most of the work of designing and redesigning your 
PivotTables. 
 
Figure 8–10. The PivotTable grid. Note the PivotTable Field List on the right. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
226 
NOTE: You can remove the PivotTable Field List from view by clicking PivotTable Tools Options, 
and clicking the Field List button in the Show button group. Clicking this button a second time 
will bring the list back onscreen.  
5. Next, tick the check box alongside Salesperson in the Choose fields to add to 
report area near the top right of the PivotTable Field List. Two things will 
happen, as shown in Figure 8–11: the names of the salespersons will be 
arrayed in the Row Labels area of the PivotTable on the left, and a bar 
representing that field will appear in the Drag fields between areas below 
section in the lower half of the PivotTable Field List. Note also that the 
salespersons are each listed once, no matter how many times they’re 
listed in the source database. 
 
Figure 8–11. The salespersons, listed uniquely in the Row Labels area 
6. Then tick the check box alongside 
Order Amount. You’ll see the data 
shown in Figure 8–12. 
 
Figure 8–12. There it is—your first PivotTable 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
227 
We’ve done it. While it may not yet be suitable for framing, the PivotTable tells us what 
we wanted to know—exactly how much money each salesperson has earned. Note that 
the data from Order Amount has been automatically shipped to the Values area of the 
PivotTable Field List, as shown in Figure 8–13. This was Excel’s decision, a point that will 
be taken up shortly. 
 
Figure 8–13. The order amount data inhabits the Values area 
For now, don’t worry about how to recast the values into currency format. That’s coming 
up a bit later.  
Choosing Which Data to Work On 
Note again the four areas occupying the lower region of the PivotTable Field List: Report 
Filter, Column Labels, Row Labels, and Values. The idea is to place the information from the 
database’s fields into these areas, with each area doing something different with the 
data. Since we just worked with the Row Labels and Values areas—probably the two most 
important areas—I’ll first explain what they do. 
The data from any field placed in the Row Labels area is listed uniquely. And that’s exactly 
what happened in our PivotTable; when we ticked Salesperson, all the salespersons in our 
database were listed in Row Labels—and listed once. It makes no difference how often 
they’re actually cited in the original database; place the field in Row Labels and each 
name appears only once. 
On the other hand, the data from any field in the Values area is always subject to a 
mathematical operation—it’s added, counted, averaged, and the like. And again, this is 
consistent with our previous example. The Order Amount data—individual sales in 
dollars—was added, and was broken out by the salesperson data in the Row Labels 
area. 
And that in a nutshell is really what PivotTables are about. Any data in the Values area is 
broken out by the data in the Row Labels area. Consider the collection of PivotTable 
examples in Table 7-1 (which of course assume you have these kinds of data in a 
database). 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
228 
Table 7-1. Examples of PivotTables: What Data Gets Broken Out, and What Data Does the Breaking Out 
PivotTable Example 
Data in Row Labels (What Does 
the Breaking Out) 
Data in Values (What Gets 
Broken Out) 
Sales data broken out by 
salesperson (our PivotTable) 
Salesperson 
Order amount 
Student aggregate GPAs 
broken out by major 
Major subjects (e.g., 
sociology, chemistry) 
Student GPAs 
Total budget expenditures, 
broken out by budget category 
Budget categories 
Amount spent on purchases 
Dinner seating totals, broken 
out by table 
Table numbers 
Table numbers (I’ll explain this 
shortly) 
So the essential PivotTable question asks 
what information you want to see broken 
out, and by what variable. If you wanted to 
break out the sales figures by country 
instead of salesperson, you’d place 
Country in the Row Labels area, and you’d 
wind up with what’s shown in Figure 8–14. 
 
Figure 8–14. International comparison: Sales by 
country 
Getting the Fields Where You Want Them 
And how do you move, or place, the field data into either the Row Labels or Values 
areas? In our first PivotTable, we ticked the check boxes alongside Salesperson and Order 
Amount, and Excel decided by default into which areas they’d go. However, you can 
manually place a database field in any of the four areas in the PivotTable Field List by 
clicking in the field and dragging it into the desired area. 
Let’s say you’re starting the PivotTable again from scratch. Once you’ve clicked through 
the Insert  PivotTable sequence, you can start to drag on the desired fields instead of 
resorting to the check boxes. If, for example, you want to lodge the Salesperson field in 
the Row Labels area, you can click, drag, and drop it, as in Figure 8–15. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
229 
  
 
Figure 8–15. Just click Salesperson, and drag and drop it into the Row Labels area. 
And you can do the same to Order Amount. Again, the reason you want to know about 
this drag-and-drop technique is that it will let you move any database field to any of the 
four areas. To remove a field from an area, just click the field, drag it into the worksheet 
area (or back into the upper area of the PivotTable Field List), and release the mouse; the 
field will disappear from the PivotTable (but not from the source data). 
TIP: You can also remove a field from the PivotTable by unchecking the box alongside the field 
you want to remove. Note that the box becomes checked whenever you place a field in an area, 
regardless of whether you do so by ticking the box or dragging the field into the area. 
Pivoting the Data Sideways Using the Column Labels Area 
The Column Labels area does exactly the same thing as Row Labels, except that it breaks out 
the data horizontally. Thus, this time if you drag Salesperson into the Column Labels area 
instead, and leave Order Amount in the Values area, the PivotTable will look like Figure 8–16. 
 
Figure 8–16. Change of direction: The sales data reading across, instead of down 
Filtering Items Using the Report Filter Area 
That takes us to the fourth PivotTable area: Report Filter. There’s a familiar word in there, 
of course, and report filters work similarly to the filters you’ve already learned about, but 
you need to understand what they do in a PivotTable. 
Report filters give a different look to a PivotTable. As with the Row Labels and Column 
Labels areas, the Report Filters area also breaks out the data in the Values area, but lets you 
isolate the impact of one item in the field doing the breaking out. The following short 
exercise will show you what that means. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
230 
1. Drag and drop the 
Salesperson bar into the 
Report Filter area. In the 
PivotTable, you’ll see the 
data shown in Figure 8–17. 
 
Figure 8–17. The PivotTable report filter: Just click the 
drop-down arrow and select a salesperson  
2. Click the drop-down arrow 
and you’ll be presented 
with a list of the 
salespersons, as shown in 
Figure 8–18. 
 
Figure 8–18. The salespersons: Just click one 
3. What happens next is pretty 
obvious: click one salesperson 
name, and click OK. You’ll see, for 
example, the data shown in Figure 
8–19. 
 
Figure 8–19. The sales data for Callahan, and only 
Callahan. Note the filter symbol alongside Callahan’s 
name. 
As with the standard table filters discussed in Chapter 7, we’ve singled out one 
salesperson for his or her sales totals. Want to see the totals for another salesperson? 
Just click the drop-down arrow again and click someone else. 
You can also filter two or more salespersons at the same time:  
1. Click the filter drop-down arrow. 
2. Tick the Select Multiple Items check box. 
3. Click the salespersons you want. 
Thus, if you click both Callahan and 
Levering, you’ll filter their combined 
sales totals, as in Figure 8–20. 
Figure 8–20. Double duty: Filtering two salespersons’ 
data 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
231 
Good to know, but you’ll probably find this option slightly uninformative, because it 
doesn’t allow you to see the name of the salespersons you’re filtering. Microsoft is 
aware of this issue, and has supplied an alternative to this approach that you’ll learn 
about later: using the Slicer. 
Creating a Report Worksheet for Each Item in a Filter 
There’s another report filter feature you may want to check out, too: the Show Report Filter 
Pages option. Let's see what this does: 
1. Drag the Salesperson field into the filter area without selecting any 
particular salesperson, so that you see (All), as shown previously in 
Figure 8–17. 
2. Click the PivotTables Tools Options tab, 
and then click the Options drop-down 
arrow. You’ll see the options shown 
in Figure 8–21. 
 
Figure 8–21. The Show Report Filter Pages… option 
3. Click Show Report Filter Pages…, and then click OK when you see the Show 
Report Filter Pages dialog box. That click will trigger a rapid-fire production 
of new worksheets, each named after and bearing a filtered report for 
each salesperson (see Figure 8–22). 
 
Figure 8–22. All accounted for: Each salesperson is assigned a separate worksheet, each containing a report 
filter for that person 
4. Click any worksheet tab and check it out (see Figure 8–23). 
6

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
232 
 
Figure 8–23. The report filter for Dodsworth 
This is an impressive option, but truly you could get away with one filter, and simply 
click any particular salesperson when you need to. But if you need to break out each 
salesperson’s data in separate sheets, the Report Filter Pages command is a worthwhile 
one. 
Counting Records: A Way to Break Out Text Data 
Recall our introductory PivotTable example—that hypothetical dinner in which, among 
other things, we wanted to tally the number of guests assigned to their tables. So how 
would we go about constructing a PivotTable for this? Well, we want to break out the 
number of guests by their table numbers, so the Table Number field will be posted in the 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
233 
Row Labels area. But what field is going to go into the Values area? The database in Figure 
8–1 consists of exactly two fields: Guest and Table. And believe it not, even though the 
Guest field comprises text—that is, the names of the guests—we can still drag it into the 
Values area, because Excel will go ahead and perform the only mathematical operation it 
can on text; it will count the guests by their table numbers. 
And that’s how it works. If you drag a text-based field into the Values area, its contents 
will be counted, and broken out by whatever field populates the Row Labels area. Thus, 
with the dinner example, the guests will be counted by their table assignment—that is, 
how many have been assigned to Table 1, Table 2, and so on. 
But let’s try to illustrate this point with our salesperson data. Suppose we now want to 
determine not how much money each salesperson has earned, but how many sales 
each one has recorded. This exercise will demonstrate two important aspects of 
PivotTables: your ability to place a text-based field into the Values area, and the fact that 
you can apply the same field to a PivotTable twice. 
First, make sure that the Salesperson field is positioned as usual in the Row Labels area. 
Nothing new there; but now, we’re going to also drag and drop Salesperson into the 
Values area, demonstrating that you can use the same field twice in a PivotTable. Once 
you maneuver Salesperson into the Values area, you’ll see the data shown in Figure 8–24. 
 
Figure 8–24. Counting, not adding, sales. Note the Salesperson bars populating both the Row Labels and Values 
areas. 
The Salesperson bar in the Values area is recorded as Count of Salesperson, again 
because Excel has no choice but to count text data (it can’t be added or averaged). In 
effect, what we’ve done is count the number of times each salesperson’s name appears 
in the database—which is another way of stating how many sales each one has 
executed. And again, this will work the same way even if each salesperson has made 
hundreds or even thousands of sales. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
234 
Grouping Related Items Ussing Two Fields 
Up to now we’ve traveled the basic route to designing a PivotTable, in which one field in
the Row Labels area breaks out the data in a field in the Values area. But you can also
place two fields in the Row Labels area, to carry out a kind of double-breakout. 
The PivotTable in Figure 8–25 illustrates what that means. 
Figure 8–25. National pride: Sales, broken out both by country and salesperson 
Here, the sales data is broken out by two fields, first by country and then by
salesperson. We can see that 4 sales were conducted in the United Kingdom and 11 in
the United States. Within the United Kingdom, it’s Buchanan, Dodsworth, and Suyama
who’ve compiled the sales, while Callahan, Davolio, Leverling, and Peacock have done
their sales work in the States.  
This double-breakout enhances the viewer’s understanding of the sales activity, by
introducing Country into the analysis and indicating which salespersons worked in which
country. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
235 
How is this done? Simple; you just drag 
and drop Country into the Row Labels area, 
too (see Figure 8–26). 
 
Figure 8–26. Table for two: Two fields occupy the Row 
Labels area  
When you drag Country into Row Labels, 
you need to carefully to position it above 
Salesperson. If you don’t, and Salesperson 
winds up above Country, the PivotTable 
will look like Figure 8–27. 
 
Figure 8–27. Another look at the same data 
Here the data is broken out first by salesperson and then by country, reversing the order 
of the initial breakout. This view might be particularly informative if a salesperson worked 
in both countries, because you’d see the sales data for both UK and USA under the 
salesperson’s name. In any case, you can easily drag one field above the other in the 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
236 
Row Labels area if you need to, and then just release your mouse when the fields have 
been properly positioned.  
There’s another point about breaking out 
the data by two fields. Note that each 
salesperson’s total—which is a subtotal of 
all the sales, of course—appears alongside 
his or her name in bold text. If you want 
the subtotals to appear at the bottom of 
each salesperson’s group instead, you can 
click the PivotTable Tools Design tab, and 
then click Subtotals  Show all Subtotals at 
Bottom of Group, as in Figure 8–28. 
 
Figure 8–28. It all adds up: PivotTable subtotal options 
First, let’s return Country to a position above Salesperson in the Row Labels area, 
because subtotaling by country will illustrate the point more clearly (there’s more to 
subtotal this way; because each salesperson works in but one country, there’s nothing 
to subtotal if you group by Salesperson). Then click Show All Subtotals at Bottom of Group, 
and the PivotTable will be redesigned to take on the appearance shown in Figure 8–29. 
 
Figure 8–29. Another new look to the same data: Subtotals at the bottom of each salesperson group 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
237 
Using the Row and Column Value Areas to Group Items 
There’s still another approach to engineering a two-field breakout of the data. If you 
click and drag on the Country bar and drop it into the Column Labels area, you get what’s 
shown in Figure 8–30. 
 
Figure 8–30. The fields, pivoted: Again, the data is exactly the same, but organized differently 
We’ve orchestrated still another look to the data—kind of a matrix, in which the two 
fields intersect in the Values area. Note the field positions in the Drag field between areas 
below section—one in Row Labels, the other in Column Labels. 
Changing the Calculation 
By default, PivotTables will add, or sum, numerical fields in the Value area. But you may 
want the table to calculate a different kind of result—say, an average or a maximum. 
Changing to the kind of calculation you need is easy. 
The following example will show you the amount of the average sale each salesperson 
has made: 
1. First, remove the Country field from the Column Labels area if you’ve 
dragged it there. Remember, you can remove the field by clicking its bar 
in the Drag field between areas below area and dragging into the worksheet; 
release your mouse and the field will disappear. This will leave you with 
your original, basic PivotTable result, in which sales are broken out by 
salesperson. 
TIP: You can also remove a field by clicking the bar itself and clicking Remove Field on the 
menu that appears. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
238 
2. Then click inside the Values area in 
the actual PivotTable—not the Values 
area in the PivotTable Field List—and if 
necessary click the PivotTables 
Tools contextual tab, and then 
Options  Summarize Values By. You’ll 
see the options shown in Figure 8–
31. 
 
Figure 8–31. Where to change the mathematical 
operation for your PivotTable data 
3. Click Average, and you’ll see the data 
shown in Figure 8–32. 
 
Figure 8–32. Average sale size, by salesperson 
That’s it—though you probably won’t like all those nasty decimal points swelling the 
numbers. But that’s a formatting issue, and we’re going to discuss that later in the 
chapter.  
TIP: You can select different mathematical operations by either right-clicking in the Values area 
in the PivotTable itself and clicking Value Field Settings on the context menu, or clicking the 
Options tab and then clicking Field Settings in the Active button group. Either way, you’ll be 
brought to a Value Field Settings dialog box, from which you can choose the operation you want. 
You can also get to the same destination by right-clicking in that PivotTable value area and 
selecting Summarize Values By.  

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
239 
Grouping PivotTable Data: Organizing Your Time(s) 
Earlier in this chapter, Figure 8–6 showed the salesperson data broken out by time—
more specifically, the months in which the various sales were conducted. Yet the 
Salesperson database says nothing about months as a unit of time; each record only 
notates the precise day on which a sale was completed. But Excel lets you group time 
data into time units of your choosing, a most useful capability that can give you a big 
picture of financial activity over time, particularly when you’re working with many 
records. 
To illustrate, let’s devise a PivotTable for the Salesperson database in which we break 
out sales (Order Amount) by Order Date, a field we’ve yet to use.   
1. First, remove the Salesperson field from the Row Labels area. Then drag Order 
Date into the Row Labels area, and you’ll see something like Figure 8–33. 
 
Figure 8–33. Sales data, organized by date of transaction 
NOTE: Before we continue, remember that data placed in the Row (or Column) Labels area is 
listed uniquely. Figure 8–33 lists 11 dates even though our database has 15 records because 
some of the sales were carried out on the same date—and hence that date is listed only once. 
2. In any case, say we want to break out 
the sales activity by month. Click 
anywhere among the dates, then click
the PivotTable Totals Options tab, and 
then click Group Selection in the Group 
button group (see Figure 8–34). 
 
Figure 8–34. The Group Selection option 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
240 
3. After clicking Group Selection, you’ll 
see the dialog shown in Figure 8–35. 
 
Figure 8–35. The Grouping dialog box: Organizing your 
date data into the units of time you want 
4. Then click Years (Months will remain 
selected as well). If you don’t click 
Years, all the January sales figures, 
for example, will be totaled 
together—and that might include 
Januarys in different years (and the 
same would of course apply to all 
the other months). Click OK, and 
you’ll see the display shown in 
Figure 8–36. 
Figure 8–36. Getting it all together: The data organized 
by months and years 
Now the sales data is grouped, and we can easily tell how sales have proceeded by 
month. Again, while our database is small, grouping will work with any collection of 
dates, no matter how large. To ungroup the data and return it to its original row label 
appearance, just click within the date data and click Ungroup in the Group button group. 
Refreshing the PivotTable: Changing the Data 
So far our PivotTables have worked with the same 15-record database throughout, but 
in the real world, of course, you may need to enter additional records and/or make 
changes to existing ones, while at the same time seeing to it that your PivotTable results 
reflect those changes. How does that happen? 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
241 
Well, the first thing to understand is that, unlike Excel formulas, PivotTables do not 
perform automatic recalculation. That is, if you change data in your database, the 
PivotTable will not immediately incorporate the changes and update existing results. You’ll 
have to refresh the PivotTable instead, by clicking the Refresh button on the Options tab.  
To see this, click back into the Salesperson database and change Davolio’s sales 
amount to $2,000. Then click anywhere in the PivotTable and click the Refresh button. 
You’ll see the new data, as shown in Figure 8–37. 
 
Figure 8–37. Davolio’s sales total has now changed from the original $1614.88. 
If you’ve modified an existing record—that is, one already in the database—all you need 
to do is click Refresh. But if you’ve added a completely new record, clicking the Refresh 
button won’t update the PivotTable. The next section discusses what to do in this case. 
Adding New Records to a PivotTable  
The easiest way out of this little dilemma is to convert the database into a table. New 
table records are automatically processed by PivotTables, and clicking Refresh will then 
update your results. Let’s try it. 
1. First, click anywhere in the database, click the Insert tab and choose 
Table from the Tables button group, and then click OK. 
2. Then add a new record containing the information shown in Figure 8–38. 
 
Figure 8–38. New recruit: Walters joins the sales force 
3. Click Refresh. Walters’ data will be automatically incorporated into the 
PivotTable, as shown in Figure 8–39. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
242 
  
Figure 8–39. The current PivotTable. Note that Walters’ record is included, and sorted, too. 
NOTE: The Data Source button identifies the current range of data being processed by the 
PivotTable, and you can see that Table1 now appears as the source table, thus incorporating 
Walters' record. 
Now you can enter as many new records as you like into the Salesperson database, and 
whenever you click Refresh those new records will appear in the PivotTable. 
NOTE: If your PivotTable shows Sum of Order Amount instead of the  Average Amount as 
shown in Figure 8–39, it doesn’t matter. Adding and refreshing PivotTable data works no matter 
what mathematical operation you’ve selected. 
Viewing Which Records Are Filtered: Using the Slicer 
Recall that when we filtered multiple items, I noted that filtering more than two 
salespersons at the same time doesn’t let you know exactly who’s been filtered (see 
Figure 8–40). 
 
Figure 8–40. Anyone’s guess: Which salespersons have been filtered? 
As mentioned, Microsoft recognized this problem, and introduced the Slicer feature in 
Excel 2010 as a way to solve it. The Slicer is a kind of free-floating filter that enables you 
to see exactly which records have been selected. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
243 
For example, in Figure 8–40 I’ve filtered the sales data for Buchanan and Peacock. With 
the Slicer, you’ll be able to see what’s shown in Figure 8–41. 
 
Figure 8–41. Filter, no longer out of kilter: With the Slicer you can see exactly who’s been filtered 
Note that the Slicer isn’t exactly in the PivotTable, and if you click it the PivotTable Tools 
contextual tab won’t appear on the screen. You can drag the Slicer anywhere on the 
worksheet, and even change its color and style.  
How the Slicer Works 
Before I demonstrate how to use the Slicer, make sure that the Order Amount data is 
placed in the Values area of your PivotTable, and place Salesperson in the Report Filter 
area (for this exercise, it doesn’t matter if you’ve added Walters’ data or not).  
1. Click anywhere in the PivotTable. 
Then click the PivotTable Tools Options 
tab, and click the Insert Slicer button 
in the Sort & Filter button group. 
You’ll see the options shown in 
Figure 8–42. 
 
Figure 8–42. Slice of life, PivotTable style. Note that 
all the database fields are listed. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
244 
2.
Click Salesperson, and then click OK.
The Slicer will appear, with all the
salespersons listed and colored
blue, as in Figure 8–43. 
Figure 8–43. Don’t worry if you don’t have Walters
listed. 
3.
This is the equivalent of the (All)
indicator shown in the report filter—
that is, all the salespersons are
currently selected. But if you click
any one salesperson’s name, only
his or her data will appear in the
Value field. If you click one
salesperson, hold down the Ctrl key,
and click a second name (see Figure
8–44), the data for both will be
totaled in the Value field. 
Figure 8–44. Two salespersons selected with the
Slicer. Their combined sales data will appear in the
Values area. 
This is the Slicer solution to that report filter multiple-items problem—it allows you to
clearly see which salespersons have been filtered. If you want to deselect a salesperson,
hold the Ctrl down again and click that salesperson’s name. 
Note that our PivotTable now has the Order Amount data in the Values area, the
Salesperson field in the Report Filter area, and the Slicer in place (see Figure 8–45). 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
245 
 
Figure 8–45. The Salesperson field in two places: The Report Filter area and the Slicer 
And that’s a bit redundant, because now the salespersons are being filtered in two 
places. As a consequence, you can drag Salespersons off the PivotTable, leaving you 
with what’s shown in Figure 8–46. 
 
Figure 8–46. There’s no need to use the Report Filter area now, because the Slicer is doing the same job. 
And now you can see exactly who’s being filtered. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
246 
The Clear Filter button—that funnel image accompanied by an X in the upper right of the 
filter—will turn off the current filter when you click it, but that doesn’t mean that it will 
remove the filter from the PivotTable. It means that it will no longer single out or filter any 
particular salesperson, but rather combine all the salesperson data in the Value area (see 
Figure 8–47). 
 
Figure 8–47. The Clear Filter button has been clicked, combining all the salesperson data in the Value area result. 
Restyling the Slicer 
You can also restyle the Slicer by clicking the Slicer title (i.e., the upper area that reads 
“Salesperson”—see the arrow in Figure 8–47), and calling up the Slicer Tools contextual 
tab. Click the Options tab, followed by the Slicer Styles drop-down arrow, and click a style 
(see Figure 8–48). 
 
Figure 8–48. Selecting Slicer styles 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
247 
To remove a Slicer, click in the Slicer title area so that the Slicer is surrounded by a gray 
border (see Figure 8–49). Then just press the Delete key. 
 
Figure 8–49. Click the Slicer area to trigger that gray border and press Delete. 
NOTE: You can also resize the Slicer by clicking a dotted area on that gray border and dragging 
in the desired direction, just as you would resize a chart.  
Formatting the PivotTable 
Excel offers many options for formatting PivotTables. Perhaps most importantly, you can 
easily reformat the values in the Value area, which, after all, contains data you need to 
know. Now, about all those decimal points. 
As usual with Excel, there are several ways to access the commands that will enable you 
to change the appearance of PivotTable values. I’ll describe two.  
1. First, right-click anywhere in the Values area in the actual PivotTable, 
and click Value Field Settings on the context menu. You’ll see the dialog 
shown in Figure 8–50. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
248 
 
Figure 8–50. Note the Number Format button. 
2. Just click the Number Format button, and you’ll be brought to a familiar 
dialog box (see Figure 8–51). 
 
Figure 8–51. Déjà vu: The good old Format Cells dialog box 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
249 
3. You’ve seen this collection of options in Chapter 5. We want the values 
to display just two decimal points, so click Number in Category list shown 
in Figure 8–51, and type 2 in the Decimal Places field you’ll see in the next 
dialog box (see Figure 8–52). Then click OK twice. 
 
Figure 8–52. The number formatting options; you’ve seen it all before 
NOTE: What’s different about formatting PivotTable values is that, unlike a standard range, you 
don’t select every cell in the Values area before you select the formatting options; all you do is 
right-click in the area and execute the commands, and all the values will be reformatted. It’s an 
all-or-nothing procedure here. 
Styling Your Report 
You can also draw upon a large collection of PivotTable styles that resemble the styles 
available in Excel tables. To view these, just click the PivotTable Tools Design tab, select 
PivotTable Styles, and click the More drop-down arrow (the lowest of the arrows you’ll see). 
You’ll be presented with the options shown in Figure 8–53. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
250 
 
Figure 8–53. Stylish options: PivotTable styles 
And as with their table cousins, these styles will display themselves in preview mode 
when you simply place your mouse over them before clicking. You can also introduce 
row and column banding in the PivotTable just as you can in Excel tables by clicking in 
the PivotTable Style Options button group just to the left of PivotTable Styles. 
NOTE: Remember, in order to access the PivotTable button group options, you must click in the 
PivotTable first. 
Changing PivotTable Headers 
Note that Figure 8–53 sports a “Row Labels” header above the Salesperson field, and 
you might opt for something a bit more specific. If so, all you have to do is click in that 
header cell directly in the PivotTable, type whatever replacement header you wish, and 
press Enter. You can do the same to the Values header as well; just note that in the 
Values case your customized header will also appear in the Values area in the PivotTable 
Field List. 
NOTE: Changing PivotTable field headers won’t change the corresponding headers in the 
database source you’ve used to produce the PivotTable. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
251 
Layout Options 
The PivotTable warehouse of design options stocks three principal layouts:  
 Compact (the default, 
shown in Figure 8–54)  
 
Figure 8–54. The Compact PivotTable layout option 
 Outline (see Figure 8–55) 
 
Figure 8–55. The Outline PivotTable layout option 
 Tabular (see Figure 8–56) 
 
Figure 8–56. The Tabular PivotTable layout option 
These can be easy to confuse, and exactly what distinguishes them becomes clearer 
when you break out the data by two fields. There are a few differences that separate the 
three layouts, however: 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
252 
 The Compact layout tucks the Salespersons data beneath the Country 
field in the same columns, whereas the other two layouts assign 
Salesperson a separate column. 
 The Outline and Tabular layouts title the columns with the actual 
names of the fields being broken out, unlike Compact, which can’t do 
that—because it presents two fields in one column.  
 The Tabular layout presents the UK and USA subtotals beneath the 
data, while the other two align the subtotals with the Country titles. 
You access the various layout options by 
clicking the PivotTable Tools Design tab, and 
clicking the Report Layout button in the Layout 
button group, as shown in Figure 8–57. 
 
Figure 8–57. PivotTable layout options 
And what about those minus signs stationed to the left of the country names in all the 
layouts? When clicked, those buttons conceal, or collapse, the salesperson data 
beneath the country (see Figure 8–58). 
 
Figure 8–58. Now you see it, now you don’t: UK salespersons hidden, or collapsed, beneath the UK category 
Note that the minus has reverted to a plus sign alongside the UK in the figure. Click it 
now and the UK salesperson records return to view. This plus/minus option gives you a 
way to streamline the PivotTable’s appearance by temporarily obscuring the detail data 
under a global category—in our case, Country. (Of course, you could achieve a similar 
effect by simply removing the Salesperson field from the PivotTable.) 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
253 
In addition, you can collapse and expand the entire PivotTable by clicking the Expand 
Entire Field/Collapse Entire Field buttons in the Options  Active Field button group (see  
Figure 8–59). 
 
Figure 8–59. The Expand and Collapse Entire Field buttons 
Clicking the Collapse Entire Field button, for example, would be equivalent to clicking the 
minus signs alongside UK and USA simultaneously, yielding the results shown in 
Figure 8–60. 
 
Figure 8–60. The entire Salesperson field has been collapsed, impacting both countries. 
Clicking Expand Entire Field now would restore all the salesperson names to view. 
Creating Charts from PivotTables Using PivotCharts 
Just as you can summarize database data with a chart, you can chart PivotTable results 
too. The principles behind pivot charting are very similar, but not identical, to the 
techniques we’ve already discussed for charting database data. 
Let’s say we want to turn our basic PivotTable—in which sales data is broken out by 
salesperson totals—into a chart (see Figure 8–61).  
 
Figure 8–61. Back where we started: Sales figures broken out by salesperson. If your data still shows averages 
instead of sums, it won’t affect the chart-making process. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
254 
1.
If necessary, restore your PivotTable to the appearance shown in Figure
8–61, in which Salesperson occupies the Row Labels area and Order
Amount is in the Values area.  
2.
Then click anywhere in the PivotTable, click the PivotTable Tools Options
tab, and choose PivotChart from the Tools button group. You’ll see the
familiar dialog box shown in Figure 8–62. 
Figure 8–62. The Insert Chart dialog box, again 
3.
Note that you’ve already seen this box in Chapter 6. Go ahead and click
OK to Excel’s default selection, that redoubtable Column chart, and
you’ll see the data presented as in Figure 8–63. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
255 
 
Figure 8–63. A PivotChart. Note the difference from a standard Excel chart: the appearance of what are called 
field buttons. 
It isn’t a thing of beauty yet, but the chart has captured the PivotTable data. The chart 
takes the salesperson names (the data in the Row Label), applies them to the horizontal 
(category) axis, and draws its vertical (value) axis from the sales figures.  
NOTE: When you click in a PivotChart, the Row Values area in the PivotTable Field List is named 
Axis Fields (Categories). Click back in the PivotTable, and the Row Values label is restored. 
And once the PivotChart makes its appearance in the worksheet, the means for 
modifying and reformatting it are nearly identical to the options described in Chapter 6. 
When you click in the chart, a PivotChart Tools contextual tab is ushered onto the screen, 
offering some familiar selections (see Figure 8–64). 
 
Figure 8–64. PivotChart options available via the PivotChart Tools contextual tab: The Design, Layout, Format, and 
Analyze tabs 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
256 
Filtering Data in the Chart with Field Buttons 
Click the PivotChart tabs and you’ll recognize nearly all the button groups, because 
you’ve seen them on the Chart Tools contextual tab, too. There is, however, a fourth tab—
Analyze—that contains buttons you won’t see associated with standard Excel charts (see 
Figure 8–65). 
 
Figure 8–65. The contents of the PivotChart Tools Analyze tab 
NOTE: Clicking the Clear drop-down arrow on the Analyze tab will reveal a Clear All option, 
which when clicked will remove both the PivotChart and the PivotTable but leave the underlying 
grids for the two objects. It’s a way allowing you to start all over again by selecting a new set of 
fields for the PivotTable, which in turn immediately generate a PivotChart. The Clear button is 
also available in the PivotTable Tools Action button group. 
But PivotCharts themselves reveal an element that is nowhere to be found in 
conventional charts: field buttons. These represent the PivotTable fields that contribute 
the source data to the chart, and when they’re clicked they enable you to make various 
changes to the chart.  
For example, clicking the arrow on the Salesperson button on the chart triggers the menu 
shown in Figure 8–66. 
 
Figure 8–66. Ticking any check box will remove that salesperson’s name—and column—from the chart. 
To illustrate, if you click Peacock and then OK, Peacock’s column bar will be banished 
from the chart (see Figure 8–67). 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
257 
 
Figure 8–67. The salespersons, minus Peacock. Note the filter symbol that now appears on the Salesperson field 
button, indicating that a name has been filtered out of the chart. 
Peacock has flown the coop, and as a result, the value axis, which had established a 
maximum of 10,000 in order to be able to record Peacock’s high sales total, has been 
reset to 3,000, now that Leverling is the leading salesperson. But more importantly, take 
a look now at the source PivotTable (see Figure 8–68). 
 
Figure 8–68. Peacock’s missing here, too. 
What we see is that filtering the data in the PivotChart changes the source PivotTable 
correspondingly. If you make a change in the data recorded by the chart, you’ll also 
change the PivotTable that gave rise to the chart in the same way. And, needless to say, 
the reverse is true, too; any data change in the PivotTable changes the PivotChart as 
well.  
And if you don’t want to see those field buttons on the chart, right-click any button and 
select the Hide All Field Buttons on Chart option on the resulting menu. You can also delete a 
particular field button by right-clicking it and selecting Remove Field (see Figure 8–69). 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
258 
 
Figure 8–69. Removing just one field button from a PivotChart 
NOTE: You can also remove individual PivotChart field buttons by clicking the PivotChart 
contextual tab, choosing Analyze, and clicking the Field Buttons arrow. 
If you want to delete the PivotChart, click in its chart area so that you see that gray 
border surrounding the chart, and press Delete—just as you would with a standard 
Excel chart. 
Creating a PivotTable and PivotChart Together 
You can also produce a PivotTable and chart simultaneously, by clicking anywhere in 
the source data (meaning the original database), and then clicking Insert  Tables  
PivotTable  PivotChart. You’ll see what’s shown in Figure 8–70. 
 
Figure 8–70. Note that the PivotChart and PivotTable areas appear at the same time. 
Now if you drag Salesperson into what’s now called the Axis Fields (Categories) area and 
drag Order Amount into the Values area, both the PivotChart and PivotTable will 
materialize onscreen. 

CHAPTER 8:  PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation 
259 
Summary 
PivotTables are an acquired taste, to be sure, but one worth acquiring, as they can 
greatly enhance your analyses of spreadsheet data. Understanding basic PivotTable 
principles will go a long way toward empowering you to fashion them on your own.  
Next we’ll direct our attention to another analytical enhancement—working with multiple 
worksheets and how they can work together. 

 
 
261 
261 
 
 
 
Chapter 
Managing Your Workbook  
Some worksheet tasks require you to step back from those molecule-sized cells that 
occupy the better part of your attention and take a larger look instead at the entire 
worksheet—or sometimes, the entire workbook. You may, for example, decide you need 
to supplement those default three worksheets with a fourth, or write a formula that 
reaches over into a second sheet and references a data cell from there. Or you may 
want to subject several sheets to the same formats for the sake of uniformity, or protect 
a sheet so that no one will be able to overwrite all the intricate work you’ve committed to 
its cells. Well, we’re going to address that grab bag of worksheet- and workbook-wide 
topics right here.  
Adding Worksheets to Your Workbook 
A worksheet is a big place—over 16 billion cells are at your disposal, offering you way 
more space than you’ll likely ever need to ply your data management tasks. And that’s 
just for starters, because Excel is happy to grant you even more room than that—a lot 
more room if you need it, in the form of additional worksheets.  
Remember that by default Excel supplies the user with three worksheets, each outfitted 
with that same 16-billion cell allotment; each with the same addresses (i.e., every 
worksheet has a cell A4, a cell Z235, etc.); each available to receive values, text, 
formulas, charts—all the data you can conjure. Moreover, you can add even more 
sheets as events warrant—as many sheets as your computer’s memory can support, in 
fact. The question is why you’d want to. 
After all, if you can’t make do with 16 billion cells, you must be doing something more 
than a little out of the ordinary—like giving a name to every grain of sand in Coney 
Island, or assigning tracking numbers to all of Imelda Marcos’s shoes. Short of that, the 
question remains: why would you ever need more than one worksheet? 
We’ll start with the usual answer to that question: it depends. For a great many 
spreadsheet tasks, one sheet will suffice; but there may be good reasons to assign your 
data to several sheets. 
9 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
262 
For example, you may want to compose a collection of complex formulas on one 
worksheet and present the results on another. That’s what Excel dashboards do; these 
are workbooks in which complex number crunching is performed on one sheet, and an 
assortment of charts built on those numbers is laid out on another worksheet—the one 
that viewers will see (and as you’ll see, worksheets can be completely hidden from view, 
too, even as the data on them remains usable). 
Another reason you might want to deploy more than one worksheet is to place the same 
kind of data in the same addresses across worksheets. That means something like this: 
If you’re running a small business, you could assign each employee his or her own 
worksheet and enter the same information for each in the same cell on the respective 
worksheets—say, every employee name in that sheet’s cell A1, the social security 
number in cell A2, salary in A3, and so on. This approach gives your data entry a 
uniformity that enables you to easily find equivalent information in the same location 
across sheets. 
Still another reason to use multiple worksheets is a practical one. You may need to enter 
a large variety of information—say, several different tables—and rather than commit all 
of these to one worksheet (which would require considerable scrolling up and down the 
sheet in order to see it all), you could place some tables on another sheet, which you 
could access more efficiently by just clicking a sheet tab and viewing that data straight 
away. 
But let’s now turn to a workbook and introduce a few features of worksheets—in the 
plural. 
Clicking Through the Worksheets 
As indicated, Excel starts you off with three worksheets, called Sheet1, Sheet2, and 
Sheet3 by default, though you can rename any sheet, as you’ll see. You’ll find tabs 
representing the sheets in the lower left of your screen, as shown in Figure 9–1. 
 
Figure 9–1. Keeping tabs on your sheets: The three default sheets  
TIP: You can change the three-sheet default allotment for all new workbooks by clicking File  
Options and entering a different value in the Include this many sheets field.  
Click any tab and you’ll be taken to that worksheet, which should look just like any other 
one. As already indicated, all the addresses on the sheets are identical, meaning that 
their cell references are the same (which raises a question I’ll answer in a little while: 
How exactly does one differentiate between cell S12 on Sheet1 and cell S12 on 
Sheet2?). 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
263 
Adding and Moving New Worksheets 
To add, or insert, a new sheet into the workbook, you can click the Insert Worksheet 
button (or use its keyboard equivalent, Shift+F11) to the immediate right of Sheet3 (see 
Figure 9–2). 
 
Figure 9–2. The Insert Worksheet button 
That click will install another sheet to the right of the existing sheets (to be called 
Sheet4, etc.). If you right-click a sheet tab, however, you can click Insert on the resulting 
context menu (see Figure 9–3). 
 
Figure 9–3. Another way to insert a new sheet 
That click will call up an Insert dialog box, in which the Worksheet option will be selected 
by default (see Figure 9–4). Click OK to add the new worksheet. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
264 
 
Figure 9–4. An oldie-but-goodie dialog box: That Excel icon dates back a few versions 
Note that this sequence isn’t exactly equivalent to using the Insert Worksheet button 
demonstrated earlier, because here the new worksheet will be inserted to the left of 
whichever worksheet you right-click. Thus, if you right-click and click Insert on Sheet3, 
the new Sheet4 will appear between Sheet2 and Sheet3, even though it’ll be numbered 
out of sequence. 
There’s even a third way to insert a new sheet, by clicking the Home  Insert  Insert Sheet 
in the Cells button group (see Figure 9–5). 
 
Figure 9–5. Yet another way to insert a new worksheet 
Thistoo will insert a new sheet to the left of the sheet tab that’s been clicked  
But whatever method you choose, don’t worry. If you decide a worksheet tab isn’t 
where you want it to be, you can move it by clicking the tab and dragging it to a new 
position. As you drag, you’ll see a page symbol accompanied by a black down arrow, 
indicating where the sheet will land when you release the mouse. In Figure 9–6, Sheet3 
will be moved between Sheet1 and Sheet2. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
265 
Figure 9–6. On the move: Sheet3, en route to a new location 
But if you’ve added many sheets to the workbook, you won’t be able to see all the sheet
tabs at the same time (see Figure 9–7). 
Figure 9–7. Not all there: You can’t see sheets 1 through 5 
By clicking the arrows shown on the left in Figure 9–8, you can reveal additional sheets
in either direction. 
Figure 9–8. Exposing hidden sheet tabs by clicking the arrows 
The left-pointing arrow accompanied by the vertical bar will, when clicked, reveal the
first sheet tab; the right-pointing arrow with the vertical bar will reveal the last tab in your
current complement. But these arrow maneuvers don’t take you “into” another sheet;
they just reveal the sheet tabs. If you’re currently working on Sheet10 when you start
clicking, you’ll stay inside Sheet10. 
Deleting Sheets 
If you want to delete a sheet, right-click the sheet tab and select the Delete option on the
context menu. If the sheet has data on it, the prompt in Figure 9–9 will appear. 
Figure 9–9. Note this prompt well—if you click Delete, the data on the sheet will be permanently deleted. 
That prompt means business. What it’s saying is that if you click Delete, the sheet will be
dispatched irrevocably to the digital void—that is, you won’t be able to undo the
deletion. What you’d have to do, then, if you did delete the sheet in error, is resort to the
ancient plan B—just close the workbook without saving it, and then reopen it. That
strategy is messy, because you may lose other changes you may have wanted to save,
but at least you’ll get your sheet back. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
266 
Copying a Sheet 
You can also copy a sheet in its entirety by right-clicking that sheet tab, clicking Move or 
Copy…, and clicking Create a copy in the resulting dialog box (see Figure 9–10). 
 
Figure 9–10. Yes, this dialog box gives you another option for moving a sheet, too. 
Click the sheet before which you want the copy to appear, and click OK. The copy will 
then install itself there. If you make a copy of Sheet3, it will be named Sheet3(2). But as 
you’re about to learn, you can rename sheets, too. 
Renaming and Recoloring the Worksheet Tabs 
You can also rename the worksheet tabs in one of two ways. For one, you can right-
click the tab you want to change and click Rename in the context menu. The text appears 
selected in black, and you just type the new name and press Enter (see Figure 9–11). 
 
Figure 9–11. Once the text is highlighted in black, type a new name and press Enter. 
Alternatively, you can double-click the tab. That will likewise select the tab directly, 
again turning it black. Then type the new name and press Enter. 
NOTE: You can devise multiword names for the tabs, such as 2010 Data. Tab names can be up 
to 31 characters long. 
If you want to recolor a tab, right-click the tab and click Tab Color. You’ll see the options 
shown in Figure 9–12. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
267 
 
Figure 9–12. You’ve heard of tab collars? These are tab colors.  
Just click the color you prefer, and the tab will take on that hue. Keep in mind, though, 
that when you click the recolored tab, it more or less reverts to its original white color. 
It’s only when you click on a different tab that you’ll see the new color you’ve selected 
(see Figure 9–13). 
  
 
Figure 9–13. Changing tab colors 
Notice that on the left in Figure 9–13, the Sheet3 tab has been clicked, making it appear 
mostly white. On the right in the figure, Sheet2 has been clicked, which allows Sheet3’s 
color to appear fully. 
Hiding Sheets 
You can also easily hide a sheet, and there may be good reasons for wanting to do so, 
though top-secret confidentiality isn’t one of them. For example, you may want to hide a 
sheet containing complex formulas that other viewers don’t need to know about. Also, 
when you hide a sheet, no one—including you—will be able to accidentally overwrite 
any of the formulas or inflict any other inadvertent damage. To hide a sheet, just right-
click its tab and select Hide. Presto, the sheet disappears. 
When you want to restore the sheet to view, just right-click any available sheet tab and 
click Unhide…, and you’ll see the dialog shown in Figure 9–14. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
268 
 
Figure 9–14. Where to get your hidden sheet(s) back 
Click the name of the sheet you want to reveal (you can hide more than one), click OK, 
and it will be back in plain sight. 
NOTE: The data on hidden sheets can still be used, and its cells can still be referred to in 
formulas. 
Grouping Sheets: Changing Multiple Sheets at the 
Same Time 
Excel makes it easy to group several sheets simultaneously, so that changes made to 
any one sheet will affect the others in the same way; and this option applies both to data 
entry and formatting. 
To get a grasp on what this means, suppose you’ve designed a workbook, each of 
whose sheets is devoted to a different employee in a small business. You want every 
sheet to look the same, with cell A3 containing the caption “Employee Name” in each 
sheet and A4 displaying the phrase “Social Security Number.” Once you group the 
sheets, all you have to do is enter these captions on just one sheet—and “Employee 
Name” will appear in every cell A3, and “Social Security Number” in every A4. That’s a 
very efficient way to work, because your business might have a staff of 50 people—and 
why should you enter the same things 50 times if you can get away with entering them 
just once? 
By the same token, you might want these captions to exhibit a 24-point font size on all 
the sheets. Again, by grouping the sheets you need only make that change on one 
sheet, and the change will be automatically extended to all the others. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
269 
How to Group Sheets 
There are a few ways to group sheets, and they’re all pretty easy. If you want to group 
all the sheets in your workbook, just right-click any sheet tab and click Select All Sheets (in 
this context, the word select is identical to group) on the resulting menu. That’s it. Your 
worksheet title will now be accompanied by the word [Group], too, as shown in Figure 
9–15. 
 
Figure 9–15. What you’ll see alongside your workbook title when you group sheets 
When sheets are selected, their tabs turn white (of course, one sheet will always appear 
white, because you have to always be “in” at least one sheet), as shown in Figure 9–16. 
  
 
Figure 9–16. Before grouping all the sheets (left) and after (right). The boldfaced text represents the active 
sheet—the one you’re currently working with. 
That’s the quickest way to group all the sheets in a workbook. If you want to group just 
some sheets, click the first sheet tab you want to group, and then hold down the Ctrl 
key and click any other sheet(s). In Figure 9–17, Sheet1 and Sheet3 have been selected. 
Note that Sheet2 displays the default gray color because it hasn’t been selected. 
 
Figure 9–17. Selecting multiple sheets 
If you want to group several consecutive sheets, but not all the sheets in your workbook 
(say, sheets 1 through 5 in an 8-sheet workbook), click the first sheet tab you want to 
select, and then hold down the Shift key and click the last in the series (in our case 
Sheet5). All the sheets between 1 and 5 will be selected as well. 
One you’ve carried out the grouping you can start to enter data on the sheet you’re 
currently viewing—and whatever data you entered will appear in the same cells in the 
other grouped sheets. And the same applies to any formatting changes. 
Ungrouping the Sheets 
Sooner or later you’ll want to ungroup the sheets—because you’ll probably need to 
enter data in a particular sheet that you won’t want reproduced in another. For example, 
once you’ve entered the “Employee Name” caption in grouped-sheet mode, you’ll 
naturally want to go on and enter specific employee names on specific sheets. But if you 
don’t ungroup the sheets first, the first name you enter will appear on all the sheets. The 
standard way to ungroup sheets is to right-click any grouped sheet and click Ungroup 
Sheets on the resulting menu. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
270 
Referring to Cells in Other Worksheets: Using Them in 
Formulas  
Worksheets are, as the name suggests, analogous to pages or sheets in a book. But 
unlike the hard-copy variety, the information contained on these sheets can be referred 
to and actively used by other sheets in formulas. 
For example, you may want to add the salaries of two or more employees in your 
company, and that information may be stored in different sheets. How then would you 
go about adding them in one formula?  
The problem is, as already indicated, every sheet has the same bundle of 16 billion 
addresses; so if each salary is placed in cell its respective cell A3, how is each 
distinguished from the other and utilized in the same formula besides? 
This short exercise will show you how: 
1. On a blank spreadsheet, type 23000 in cell A3 on Sheet1, and type 
32500 in A3 on Sheet2 (don’t worry about formatting here).  
2. Now, we want to add these two 
values—let’s say in a formula in D5 
on Sheet1. Click in D5 and type =, 
and then, as usual, click cell A3 and 
type +, as shown in Figure 9–18. So 
far, we haven’t done anything new.  
 
Figure 9–18. Starting to write the formula on Sheet1. 
First we use cell A3 from Sheet1. 
3. Then click the Sheet2 tab and click 
cell A3 on that sheet, as shown in 
Figure 9–19. 
  
Figure 9–19. Now Sheet2. Note the formula in the 
formula bar. 
4. Then press Enter, or click the check mark by the formula bar. The result, 
55500, appears in D5 of Sheet1—where you wanted it to go. The 
formula reads 
=A3+Sheet2!A3 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
271 
The formula first refers to the value on Sheet1, 23000. We then clicked the other cell 
whose value we wanted to add, also called A3, but on Sheet2, and that’s why we had to 
click the Sheet2 tab first. In order to distinguish between the two A3s, Excel added the 
Sheet2! prefix when we clicked that sheet’s A3.  
That’s how Excel works with cells in different sheets—by supplementing cell addresses 
with the name of the sheet in which the cell is positioned. And if you’re asking why the 
first A3 wasn’t preceded by the prefix Sheet1! in our formula, good question. It’s 
because Excel assumes by default that any cells referred to in a formula are on the same 
sheet as the formula. It’s only when a cell is located elsewhere that the prefix is needed. 
Using Ranges on Other Sheets in Formulas 
Your ability to write formulas and functions that call upon cells in other sheets isn’t 
restricted to individual cells. It’s easy to work with whole ranges, too.  
Say you have a range of values on Sheet2, C11:C15, whose sum you want to calculate 
on Sheet1 (see Figure 9–20). 
 
Figure 9–20. Values on Sheet2 
1. To start the process, click in the cell on Sheet1 in which you want the 
answer to appear.  
3

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
272 
2. Now, because we’re working with a 
range, we could use the SUM 
function. Let’s say you click in cell 
C12 on Sheet1, where you want the 
answer to appear. You can then 
click the AutoSum button, and you’ll 
see what’s shown in Figure 9–21. 
 
Figure 9–21. Where’s the range between the 
parentheses? 
3. You won’t see any cell references 
yet, because there are no values in 
the column above C12, nor are there 
any in the row to C12’s left (values 
that AutoSum is programmed to 
look for—but that doesn’t bother us, 
because the values we want to add 
are on Sheet2 anyway). Next, click 
the Sheet2 tab and simply drag the 
range you want, as in Figure 9–22. 
 
Figure 9–22. Dragging the range on Sheet2. Again, 
note how the formula bar records this expression. 
4. Then just click OK or click the check mark. On Sheet1, you’ll see the 
answer, as shown in Figure 9–23. 
 
Figure 9–23. The answer, recorded in cell C12 on Sheet1 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
273 
Again, the range referenced between SUM’s parentheses is on Sheet2, and that Sheet2! 
prefix is Excel’s way of declaring that this range is not C11:C15 on Sheet1, in which the 
function has been written.  
Using the View Context Tab to Show and Hide Basic 
Screen Elements 
The Excel worksheet features a number of characteristics that are so basic you probably 
don’t even think about them—namely, the gridlines that demarcate each cell, and the 
row and column headings that help you identify cell addresses. But if you want, you can 
remove these elements from the worksheet (though of course you can always return 
them to the screen when you want). 
So why would you want to do this? After all, the cell gridlines and row and column 
headers help you line up cells visually. The answer to the question, then, is 
presentational. Once you’ve completed a worksheet and finished your design work and 
formula-writing, and you need to show it to others, eliminating the gridlines and headers 
imparts a cleaner look to your data. Compare the two views shown in Figure 9–24. 
   
 
Figure 9–24. The same worksheet, with and without cell gridlines and row and column headers 
Turning these elements off and back on is easy. Just click the View tab, and click Gridlines 
and/or Headings in the Show button group (see Figure 9–25). 
 
Figure 9–25. Show and tell: Where to turn gridlines and headings on and off 
Just uncheck the boxes to turn the features off, and check the boxes again to turn the 
features back on. And as you see, you can even hide the formula bar, too. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
274 
NOTE: These options are sheet specific. That means that if you turn off the gridlines on Sheet1, 
they will still remain visible on the other sheets. Remember also that if your turn the gridlines off, 
you can still draw borders around selected cells (see Chapter 5). 
Showing Formulas in Cells 
If you’ve constructed a workbook with lots of formulas, you may need to inspect the 
formulas for mistakes, or at least review them to remind yourself exactly how you put the 
worksheet together. With that in mind, you can tell Excel to show the formulas in their 
cells instead of the results of those formulas.  
To show the formulas in a particular worksheet’s cells, click File  Options  Advanced, 
and then check the Show formulas in cells instead of their calculated results box in the Display 
options for this worksheet area (see Figure 9–26). 
 
Figure 9–26. Where to display worksheet formulas in their cells 
Click OK. All your worksheet’s formulas will now appear in their cells, something like 
Figure 9–27. 
 
Figure 9–27. What you’ll see in the cell instead of the result 
To turn this visual effect off, return to the Advanced area of the File tab and uncheck the 
Show formulas in cells instead of their calculated results option. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
275 
NOTE: You can also turn the show-formulas option on and off via the keyboard, by pressing 
Ctrl+` (i.e., the character usually positioned right beneath the Esc key).  
Hiding the Ribbon 
To take matters even further, if you right-click any tab and click Minimize the Ribbon on the
ensuing menu, the ribbon will disappear, too (see Figure 9–28). And if you’re looking for
a keyboard equivalent, try Ctrl-F1. 
Figure 9–28. The ribbon—nowhere to be found 
Needless to say, you can get the ribbon back by right-clicking the context tab heading
and deselecting Minimize the Ribbon (see Figure 9–29), or executing Ctrl-F1 a second
time. 
Figure 9–29. Getting your ribbon back 
A related option is Full Screen, found in the Workbook Views button group within the View
context tab (see Figure 9–30). 
Figure 9–30. The Workbook Views button group 
Click it and your screen will change to look like Figure 9–31. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
276 
 
Figure 9–31. Nothing but screen: The Full Screen view  
To get the normal view back, just press the Esc key, or click the standard  button 
in the upper-right corner of the window(the middle of the three buttons you’ll see there)
or double-click the worksheet’s Title Bar – the border at the very uppermost part of the 
screen bearing the workbook’s title.. 
NOTE: Clicking the Full Screen option will introduce this view to all the worksheets in a 
workbook at the same time. 
Keeping Important Data in View with the Freeze Panes 
Option 
There may be times when you’ll be working with a lengthy worksheet database 
containing many rows and/or columns, and you want to keep the header row—and/or 
column—in view. 
For example, say you’ve devised a worksheet that compiles sales data for salespersons 
by week, across a series of columns—52 to be exact, spanning an entire year (see 
Figure 9–32). 
 
Figure 9–32. A weekly sales data worksheet 
The problem—a classic spreadsheet dilemma—is that once you begin scrolling to the 
right in order to view the later weeks, the first columns disappear (see Figure 9–33). 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
277 
 
Figure 9–33. The salesperson names and weeks 1 through 3 are no longer visible. 
The solution is to click the Freeze Panes button in the Window button group on the View tab 
(see Figure 9–34). 
 
Figure 9–34. The Freeze Panes button 
In order to ensure that the salesperson names persist on the screen no matter how far to 
the right you scroll, click anywhere in the workbook (as long as you can see column A) 
and click Freeze Panes  Freeze First Column. That will draw a black line down the boundary 
between columns A and B (see Figure 9–35). 
 
Figure 9–35. The black line tells you that the first column (A) will be remain in view even when you scroll to the 
right. 
Now if you scroll right, you’ll see what’s shown in Figure 9–36. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
278 
 
Figure 9–36. Can’t stay away: The salesperson names are still there 
And you can do the same for the first row, by clicking Freeze Top Row.  
NOTE: When you click Freeze Top Row or Freeze First Column, Excel will freeze the first row or 
column you can currently see on screen. That is, if you choose Freeze First Column when 
column C is the leftmost column on the screen, it will freeze column C, not A. If row 6 is currently 
the top row you can see, Freeze First Row will keep row 6 at the top of the screen. 
To turn off a freeze view, click Freeze Panes  Unfreeze Panes. 
Freezing Rows and Columns at the Same Time 
There may be other times when you need to freeze some rows and columns 
simultaneously. In our case, we might want to always be able to see both the 
salesperson names and the week numbers as we scroll in either direction—vertically or 
horizontally. Thus, we’d want to freeze the salesperson name column and the row listing 
week numbers, something like Figure 9–37. 
 
 
Figure 9–37. The first two salesperson names and the first five week numbers have disappeared, because we’ve 
scrolled both down and across the worksheet after having clicked Freeze Panes. Note the row header numbers 
and column header gaps (4 through 7 and A through G). 
To achieve this effect, you need to click the Freeze Panes option once you decide exactly 
which rows and columns you want to freeze. The rule is this: to freeze a column you 
click in the column immediately to the right of the one you want to freeze, and to freeze 
a row you click in the row immediately beneath the one you want to freeze. Thus, in this 
case you’d click in the cell shown in Figure 9–38. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
279 
 
Figure 9–38. Clicking directly to the right of the column you want to freeze and directly beneath the row you want 
to freeze 
Once you’ve gotten a handle on where you want to locate the freeze, click Freeze Panes  
Freeze Panes. If you’ve discovered you’ve clicked in the wrong place, just click the 
Unfreeze Panes option and try again. 
NOTE: As mentioned earlier, converting a database to a table will automatically freeze the top 
table row, which is the header of the table. 
Protecting the Worksheet and the Workbook 
Once you’ve put all that work into your workbook, having outfitted it with rows of 
complex formulas and breathtaking charts, you may get a bit nervous about what might 
happen next. What if you were to accidentally overwrite—or delete—a formula? True, 
you might be able to bring it back with an Undo command, but that prospect would 
depend on exactly when you discovered the mishap. Worse yet, what if your five-year-
old nephew began to type some formulas of his own on the sheet? 
Have no fear. Excel has anticipated those calamities, by allowing you to protect your 
workbooks and individual worksheets with a set of options that should help you fend off 
little Timmy’s editorial changes and leave your masterpiece intact. 
By way of introduction, you need to understand what protecting a sheet does and 
doesn’t do. Protecting a sheet won’t seal off your sheet with industrial-strength 
invincibility, foiling the bad guys who want to compromise or steal your data. Not quite, 
because workbook and worksheet protection is more about warding off mistakes than 
disarming hackers who have your formulas in their sights. Still, protection can do a 
pretty good job of, well, protecting your work. 
The process of protecting worksheets and workbooks is actually quite easy, but the 
details get a bit quirky, as you’ll see. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
280 
Protecting a Worksheet 
To start the process of protecting a worksheet (you can try this out on a blank 
worksheet), just click anywhere in the sheet, click the Review tab, and select Protect Sheet 
from the Changes button group (see Figure 9–39). 
 
Figure 9–39. The Changes button group. We want to click Protect Sheet here, not Protect Workbook. 
When you click Protect Sheet, you’ll see the dialog shown in Figure 9–40. 
 
Figure 9–40. The Protect Sheet dialog box 
Note that some check boxes are selected by default, and typically you’ll accept these 
and simply click OK. The various options displayed in the dialog box give you control 
over exactly which operations you’ll allow a user to perform on various worksheet 
elements (e.g., whether a user will be allowed to format cells or insert rows even if the 
worksheet is protected). If you accept all the defaults and click OK, the worksheet won’t 
look any different. But when you try to type anything in any cell, you’ll be greeted with 
the prompt shown in Figure 9–41 even before you can press Enter. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
281 
 
Figure 9–41. Do not enter: What you’ll see when you try to enter data in a cell in a protected worksheet 
You’ll be prevented from entering the data, and that’s what protecting a worksheet 
largely entails—blocking any subsequent data entry to a worksheet. 
NOTE: This type of protection protects only a single worksheet in the workbook. The other 
workbooks are unaffected by this action, and would still have to be protected individually. 
Again, you should understand the limitations of worksheet protection. Even though 
users will be prevented from entering data on the protected sheet, no one will be 
stopped from copying the data on that sheet and pasting it into another workbook. 
Using a Password: Some Extra Protection 
You also can devise an optional password you’ll be asked to enter in order to protect 
the sheet. When you first choose a password, another dialog box will then ask you to 
retype or confirm it (see Figure 9–42). 
 
Figure 9–42. How to enter a sheet protection password 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
282 
Unprotecting a Worksheet 
Needless to say, once you’ve protected the worksheet, you may decide you need to 
return the sheet to its original unprotected state so that it can receive data entries again. 
All you have to do is go back to the Changes button group, where you’ll see that the 
Protect Sheet button has toggled to display Unprotect Sheet (see Figure 9–43). 
 
Figure 9–43. Flip side: The Unprotect Sheet button is the same one you clicked to protect the sheet 
Just click Unprotect Sheet, and the sheet will be unprotected again—type away. 
If you’ve used a password to protect a sheet and later decide to unprotect it clicking 
Unprotect Sheet will call up an Unprotect Sheet dialog box prompting you to reenter your 
password, as shown in Figure 9–44. 
 
Figure 9–44. The Unprotect Sheet dialog box requests your password if you’ve selected one. 
Just make sure you’ve written that password down somewhere, because if you forget it, 
you won’t be able to unprotect the sheet. Remember as well that if you haven’t availed 
yourself of the password possibility, anyone else can unprotect the worksheet—
provided of course they know how to do that. 
Protecting Some, but Not All, of a Worksheet 
In some cases, you may want to be able to enter data in some cells in a worksheet, even 
as the remainder of the cells are blocked or protected. Recall our grading worksheet, in 
which we calculated point bonus awards that supplemented students’ test scoressee 
Chapter 4. In such a case, you might want to protect the cells containing the bonus 
formulas while continuing to leave other cells available, in which you could enter 
additional student test scores. 
So how do you protect some, but not all, of a worksheet? It’s here where some of those 
workbook protection quirks mentioned earlier come into play.  

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
283 
In order to make some cells available to receive data in a worksheet that’s otherwise 
protected, you need first to select those cells and instruct Excel not to protect them.  
NOTE: In order to designate some cells to receive data, the entire sheet has to have been 
unprotected first. 
The following short exercise will demonstrate how this works:  
1. Select cells B7:B16.  
2. Now click Home  Format  Format Cells… in the Cells button group, as 
shown in Figure 9–45. 
 
Figure 9–45. Starting the individual cell protection process by clicking Format Cells…. 
3. After selecting that option, you’ll be reintroduced to an old friend, the 
Format Cells dialog box; only this time, you need to click one of its tabs 
that we haven’t visited before: Protection (see Figure 9–46). 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
284 
 
Figure 9–46. The Protection tab of the Format Cells dialog box 
4. Note that the Locked check box is checked by default. That means 
simply that if you protect the sheet, all its cells will be protected. But 
since you’ve selected B7:B16, uncheck the Locked box. Now, once you 
protect the sheet, cells B7:B16 will still remain unlocked—that is, you’ll 
be able to enter data in only these cells. 
And that’s how unlocking cells works—first you designate those cells to be unlocked, 
and only then do you protect the sheet. So now if you activate workbook protection, it 
will still be possible to enter data in cells B7:B16. 
Hiding Formulas 
Earlier in this chapter I described how you can reveal your worksheet’s formulas in the 
cells in which they’re written. There’s also a kind of flip side to this option—you can hide 
worksheet formulas so that they can’t be seen at all, not even in the formula bar.  
To hide formulas in cells, you have to work prospectively and select those cells before 
you protect the worksheet, just as when unlocking selected cells. The following exercise 
demonstrates: 
1. Enter these values shown in Figure 9–47 in cells D4:D8 and perform a 
SUM in cell D9. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
285 
Figure 9–47. Note the formula bar 
2. Then return to the Format Cells dialog box and click the Protection tab (see
Figure 9–48). 
Figure 9–48. The Format Cells dialog box. Note the caption beneath the Hidden option. 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
286 
3. Click Hidden, and then click OK. Then protect the worksheet, and click in 
cell D9 and observe the formula bar (see Figure 9–49). 
 
Figure 9–49. Drawing a blank: The formula’s no longer visible 
The formula is nowhere to be seen, even though it’s still safely stored in cell D9. To 
restore the formula to view, just unprotect the sheet. 
NOTE: If you want to render all the worksheet formulas invisible, you need to select all the cells 
in the worksheet (via Ctrl+A or by clicking the Select All button) and select Format Cells. Click 
Hidden on the Protection tab, and then protect the sheet. 
Protecting a Workbook 
You can also protect an entire workbook, which does something completely different 
from protecting a worksheet.  
When you protect a workbook, you protect what Excel calls its structure—and that 
means that when workbook protection is turned on, you won’t be able to delete or move 
a worksheet, or restore a hidden worksheet to view. 
Another workbook protection option—a less central one—enables you to protect the 
window arrangement of worksheets. If, for example, you resize a worksheet window and 
you need to maintain precisely that worksheet size and position on the screen, 
protecting the workbook for windows will hold the worksheet right there—and you’ll be 
able neither to move nor resize it (see Figure 9–50). 

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
287 
 
Figure 9–50. A downsized worksheet 
To protect a workbook, click the Review tab, and click Protect Workbook in the Changes 
button group (see Figure 9–51). 
 
Figure 9–51. Protecting a workbook 
You’ll next see the dialog shown in Figure 9–52. 
 
Figure 9–52. Note that the dialog box isn’t titled Protect Workbook, but that’s what it’s about to do.  

CHAPTER 9:  Managing Your Workbook 
288 
Note again that you’re provided with a password option. Whether you use a password 
or not, when you click OK you won’t be able to move, delete, or add any worksheet—but 
you will continue to be able to enter and edit data and formulas.  
Unprotecting a Workbook 
Unprotecting a workbook is about as easy as it gets. Just click the Protect Workbook 
button a second time. Oddly enough, unlike the Protect Sheet button, the Protect Workbook 
button doesn’t appear as “Unprotect Workbook” once you’ve protected the workbook. 
It just doesn’t change. Of course, if you’ve designated a password, you’ll be prompted 
to supply it before you can unprotect the workbook.  
Summary 
Every Excel workbook gives its users a massive amount of territory to work with, and 
knowing how to work with its multisheet character is a valuable asset. Next, we’ll 
explore what you need to know to print your Excel data once you decide to commit all 
the information you’ve compiled in a workbook to hard copy. 

 
 
 
 
289 
289 
 
 
 
Chapter 
Printing Your Worksheets: 
Hard Copies Made Easy 
We hear about the paperless office all the time, but just cast a glance at your office or 
your desk at home—lots of paper still out there, no? 
That’s the reality, of course. Sooner or later, you’ll be called upon to commit your 
spreadsheet data to printed form—for distribution at meetings, or for handing in to 
instructors, or for inclusion in booklets and brochures. 
Once you get to it, you’ll find printing in Excel to be pretty simple—as it should be. In 
some ways it’s almost self-evident, meaning that with just a bit of exposure to the 
feature you’ll probably be able to figure out a good deal of what you need to know by 
yourself. And as usual, Excel gives you more than one way to carry out many of the 
basic printing tasks.  
Deciding What You Want to Print 
The first consideration in printing the data on your worksheet is how much of it you want 
to print. Your intention may be simple: to print everything on the sheet, and that makes 
your job easy. On the other hand, you may want to print just part of the data, but that 
objective only makes the job slightly harder.  
Printing the Entire Worksheet 
Let’s say that for starters you want to print all the data on one worksheet (not the entire 
workbook, though). To illustrate, enter the values from Figure 10–1 in cells C9:D13. 
10 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
290 
 
Figure 10–1. Fit to print: Ten cells worth of data 
The next step is to access the Print command sequence, either by clicking the File command tab 
and choosing Print, or by calling upon the venerable Ctrl+P keyboard shortcut. Either way, you’ll 
be brought to the Backstage (see Figure 10–2). 
 
Figure 10–2. A visit backstage: Your print options (at least most of them). Note the Print button. 
Note the large print review pane to the right. In the simplest-case scenario, all you have 
to do now is click the large Print button and head for your printer to collect your copy.  
OK, it isn’t always quite that easy, but it usually doesn’t get much more challenging than 
that. To delve into something slightly more complex than printing a worksheet, let’s first 
see how to print a selection. 
Printing a Selection 
Let’s call up that Student Scores workbook, in which all those bonus grades were 
handed out. The data there was stored in the range J7:L12, and now we want to print 
the contents of just that range (see Figure 10–3). 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
291 
 
Figure 10–3. Those student scores again, this time to be printed 
First, delete any charts you may have on the sheet. Again, you can activate the Print 
command, but this time you’ll see the screen shown in Figure 10–4. 
 
Figure 10–4. Probably not what you had in mind. There are the names, but where are the grades? Note the Print 
Active Sheets option. 
Well, that’s not terribly satisfactory, is it? All we’re seeing are the student names, which 
aren’t accompanied by their grades. Note as well the legend at the bottom of the screen 
that states 1 of 2, referring to pages; if you click the arrow to the right of the number 2 to 
travel to that page, you’ll see what’s shown in Figure 10–5. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
292 
 
Figure 10–5. There are the scores, but not where we want them. 
So what’s going on? Really, two things:  
 When you instruct Excel to print a worksheet, it searches by default for 
data by proceeding from the beginning of the sheet (i.e., the A 
column), and will include all the blank areas it finds en route to the 
data until it actually finds the data. It’ll thus print this worksheet 
starting at column A up to and including the area containing the data, 
starting in the J column.  
 The Print Active Sheets option will also print everything on the sheet, no 
matter where that data is located. 
For sake of the illustration, this means that if you had devised a worksheet whose data 
starts in the X column, Excel would by default print columns A through W—all of these 
blank—before reaching the actual data to print, meaning you’d end up with a collection 
of empty printed pages before the page you wanted to print rolled out. It also means 
that if you have a small range in A7:B19 that you want to print, and you also happen to 
have squirreled away a bit of data in cell ZA241, Excel will by default print all the blank 
columns between B and ZA too, until it finally stops at ZA241. 
But all that happens by default, when you simply click the Print button without giving any 
additional thought to what you wanted to see on paper, and leave the Print Active Sheets 
option selected. And that default makes sense if you’ve started your data entry in the A 
column and have a confined range of data to print, as is often the case. 
But it doesn’t make sense in our case, where we’d end up with a two-page printout, with 
the student names on one page and their grades on another. 
Needless to say, there’s a way to deal with our little problem—by selecting precisely the 
range you do want to print and then telling Excel to print only that area. You do that by 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
293 
selecting the range (in our case J7:L12), and then returning to the Print dialog and clicking 
Print Selection, thus overruling the default Print Active Sheets option (see Figure 10–6). 
 
Figure 10–6. Printing only want we want to print: Choosing the Print Selection option 
Once you’ve clicked that option, you’ll see what’s shown in Figure 10–7. 
 
Figure 10–7. All the data is on one sheet now, and the print output will only require one page. 
Thus, in order to print some, but not all, of the data on a worksheet, you just select the 
desired range, activate the Print command, and select the Print Selection option. Then just 
click Print. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
294 
NOTE: If you’ve been clicking along with the exercises so far, your print views may not precisely 
correspond with the screenshots. If that’s the case, it’s probably due to having a different page 
size default set up in your system. If you live in the United Kingdom, for example, Excel probably 
assumes you’re working with A4-sized paper, which would yield a different print preview from 
the ones shown. 
Surveying Printing Options: The Print Backstage 
Now let’s take a closer look at the various options you’ll encounter when you enter the 
Print section of the Backstage (see Figure 10–8; also see the Quick Start Guide for a 
reminder of what the Backstage is). 
 
Figure 10–8. The various Print options in the Backstage 
Again, many of these options are easy to figure out on your own: 
 The Print button actually executes the print when clicked. 
 Copies allows you to set the number of copies you want to print. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
295 

The Printer button lets you select the printer to which you want to print,
if you have access to more than device. Clicking the Printer drop-down
arrow reveals a menu enabling you to click the printer to which you
want to direct the print (see Figure 10–9). 
Figure 10–9. Just select the printer you want to use. 

Print Active Sheets, as
mentioned, is the default
option for this command, and
offers the selections shown in
Figure 10–10. You can elect to
print the entire workbook—that
is, all its sheets—or just the
range you’ve selected (Print
Selection). The reference to Print
Active Sheets (in the plural)
means that if you’ve grouped
two or more sheets, their data
will be printed. 
Figure 10–10. These options allow you to choose 
what segment of the workbook you want to print. 

Pages lets you decide which pages on the worksheet you want to print. If
you print a large swath of a workbook, the overall print area may be too
large to capture on one page, so Excel will need to print additional
pages, as in our student grades printout before we selected a specific
range to print. When multiple pages are required, the page boundaries
are represented in the workbook by dotted lines, which appear once
you’ve viewed the imminent printout in the Backstage (see Figure 10–11). 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
296 
 
Figure 10–11. The dotted line indicates where a new page will begin in a printout. 
 The Collated option only applies if you’re printing at least two copies 
(see Figure 10–12). 
 
Figure 10–12. The Collated and Uncollated options 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
297 
By default printouts are collated, meaning that if your output will 
consist of three pages, the pages will appear in sequence (e.g., 1, 2, 3 
and 1, 2, 3 again). But if you select Uncollated, all the page 1s will print 
first, followed by all the page 2s, and so on. You might want to use the 
Uncollated option if you need to make some hand-entered corrections 
on all page 3s, for example.  
 Orientation gives you two print options: Portrait and Landscape (or vertical 
and horizontal, respectively). Landscape orientation is commonly used 
for printouts that contain many columns of data and would spill across 
multiple pages if they were they printed in Portrait mode. 
 The paper size option lets you select the size of paper with which 
you’re working. Obviously, paper size will affect how and where the 
data gets distributed in a printout (see Figure 10–13). 
 
Figure 10–13. Sizing up your printouts with the paper size option. 
 The Margins option is easy to overlook, but it’s important because 
Excel printouts have to work with page margins. Excel’s default 
margins (called Normal) stand at .7 inches left and right, and .75 top 
and bottom (see Figure 10–14). 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
298 
 
Figure 10–14. Print margin settings 
You can select any of the recommended settings shown, including the 
Custom Margins… option, which sits at the base of the menu. Clicking 
that choice presents you with the Margins tab in the Page Setup dialog 
box (see Figure 10–15). 
 
Figure 10–15. Where you can customize print margins 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
299 
Just type the desired margin(s) and click OK. 
Note the Center on page option. Clicking both Horizontally and Vertically will 
position the data you want smack-dab in the middle of the page. Recall 
that our Student Scores print preview indicated that the scores would 
be printed in the upper-left corner of the page (see Figure 10–16). 
 
 
Figure 10–16. The student scores: Ready to print, but leaving a great deal of white space on the page 
Select both Center on page options and the printout will be redesigned, 
as shown in Figure 10–17. 
 
 Figure 10–17. It’s still not a museum piece, but the data is now centered both horizontally and vertically. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
300 
 The scaling options (see Figure 10–18) allow you to modify the size of 
the data to be printed—not by directly changing the font, but rather by 
refitting the data on the page so as to tidy the results. 
 
Figure 10–18. Economy of scale: The print scaling options 
Here’s a classic example: you need to print data consisting of many 
columns, and the print preview reveals that the last column is going to 
have to be shunted to a second page, because the first page has 
simply run out of room. And that’s messy. By selecting Fit All Columns on 
One Page, Excel will slightly downsize all the data on the printout so that 
the renegade column will be able to join the other columns on the 
first—and what is now the only—page. 
Setting the Print Area 
In addition to the printing capabilities you’ll find in the Backstage, there are some 
additional and important options stored in other areas of the worksheet. You’ve already 
seen that by selecting a specific range to print, you can avoid the problem of 
overprinting (i.e., printing blank areas of the worksheet that you don’t need to see in your 
printed results). But selecting a print range may cause a problem or two on its own, 
because once you select that range you need to print it right away. If you decide you 
want to work elsewhere in the sheet before printing, you’ll have to click elsewhere to 
begin your work, which will deselect the range you want to print. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
301 
But Excel lets you have it both ways by letting you designate and save a print area so 
you can go on do to work somewhere else before printing. 
To see how the Print Area option works, 
select the student grades and click the 
Page Layout contextual tab, and then click 
Print Area  Set Print Area in the Page Setup 
button group (see Figure 10–19). 
 
Figure 10–19. Setting the print area 
You’ll see a dotted-line border surrounding 
the area you’ve chosen to print, which will 
remain in place even if you click 
somewhere else on the worksheet (see 
Figure 10–20). 
  
Figure 10–20. The print area is designated by the 
dotted-line boundary. 
Now whenever you’re ready to print, just return to the Backstage and click that large 
Print button.Justmake sure you don’t select Print Selection at the point of actual printing 
though, because if you do anyrange you happen to have currently selected will be 
printed instead of the print areayou designated Click Print Active Sheets or Print Entire 
Workbook instead. If you save the document, the print area will be saved, too. To clear 
the print area, click the Page Layout contextual tab, and then click Print Area  Clear Print 
Area in the Page Setup button group. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
302 
NOTE: When you save a print area and close the workbook, and then retrieve the workbook 
again, the dotted-line print area won’t immediately appear. But when you get back into the 
Backstage the print area will appear in the print preview; and when you leave the Backstage and 
return to the worksheet, the dotted-line boundary will then reappear. Note as well that if you 
want to only temporarily override the print area, click Ignore Print Area in the settings (it’s found 
in the drop-down menu headed by the Print Active Sheets option). To return to the original print 
area you’ve selected, you’ll need to uncheck the box that will now appear alongside Ignore Print 
Area. 
Customizing Your Printing 
In addition to the Print Area button, several other useful print-related options are 
scattered among Excel’s ribbon tabs. The Page Layout tab contains a number of buttons 
that emulate many features available in the Backstage (see Figure 10–21). 
 
Figure 10–21. The Page Layout tab 
Working with Page Breaks 
The first three buttons on the Page Layout tab—Margins, Orientation, and Size, provide 
alternative ways to access the same trio of options in the Backstage; their menus are 
identical to the ones shown earlier (see Figure 10–22). 
 
Figure 10–22. Look familiar? You’ll see the same menu when you work with margins in the Backstage. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
303 
But the button to the right of Print Area (Breaks; see Figure 10–23) does something 
different. 
 
Figure 10–23. Those are the breaks: Where to establish a page break 
Click the arrow beneath the Breaks title and you’ll see the options shown in Figure 10–24. 
 
Figure 10–24. The Insert Page Break option 
What does inserting a page break do to your printout? Well, first consider what Excel 
does by default. When you execute a printout, Excel prints as much of the data as it can 
on the first page, until it runs out of space. It then goes on to print additional pages if it 
needs them. But what the Insert Page Break option does is let you produce a second page 
earlier than necessary; that is, before a second page would naturally have to be printed. 
For example, recall the PivotTables workbook, spanning the range A1:D17 (we had 
added one record in the course of our exercise). Open that workbook and survey the 
data. Because the data encompasses only 17 rows and starts in the A column, we’d 
only require one page to print it all (see Figure 10–25). 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
304 
 
Figure 10–25. Only one page required 
But let’s say that you needed a new, second page, starting with Dodsworth’s sales 
record. If that’s what you want, click in cell A9—where Dodsworth’s record starts, and 
click the Insert Page Break command. You’ll see the data shown in Figure 10–26. 
 
Figure 10–26. Note the dotted line, which signifies where the second page will start. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
305 
Now your printout will result in two pages. If you decide to reconsider this two-page
motif, you can remove the page break by clicking the worksheet where you’ve instituted
the break (in row 9, on Dodsworth’s record), and clicking Remove Page Break—the option
which appears right beneath Insert Page Break on the Breaks button. Doing so will return
you to the original one-page printout. 
NOTE: The Reset All Page Breaks option under the Breaks button allows you to remove multiple 
page breaks at one time, if you’ve introduced more than one break to the printout. 
Previewing the Page Break: Getting a Bird’s-Eye View of
the Printout 
If the data you want to print contains many records and will likely result in a multipage
print, or if you’ve inserted your own page breaks as illustrated previously, you may want
to get a global idea of how the printout will look in its entirety. Realizing that the normal
worksheet view may not be able to display all the data at one time without you having to
scroll down and/or across repeatedly, Excel offers a page break preview, which presents
the printout-to-be in a curiously miniaturized form (see Figure 10–27). 
Figure 10–27. The page break preview: The two-page salesperson printout, with the page break inserted by
Dodsworth’s name 
Note the watermark-like Page 1 and Page 2 indicators, superimposed on the data. The
page break preview does two things: 

It shrinks the print preview so you can see all, or at least considerably
more, of the data on one screen. 

It lets you move the current position of the page break. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
306 
To illustrate, in the PivotTables workbook, click the View contextual tab, and then click 
Page Break Preview in the Workbook Views button group (make sure the page break by 
Dodsworth’s name is in place) (see Figure 10–28). 
 
Figure 10–28. The Workbook Views button group 
TIP: You can also access the page break preview by clicking the Page Break Preview button on 
the status bar (see Figure 10–29). 
 
Figure 10–29. Another Page Break Preview button 
After clicking Page Break Preview, click OK on the introductory dialog box, and you’ll see 
the preview shown in Figure 10–30. 
 
Figure 10–30. Getting the big picture with the page break preview 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
307 
Again, because the view of the data is scaled down, you’ll still be able to see many if not 
all of the records in a large set of data in one glance.  
In addition, note the solid blue line demarcating Page 1 and Page 2. You can click and 
drag that line if you want to readjust the point at which the second page begins. 
To illustrate, say you want to move the page break to a position above Peacock’s record 
in row 11. Click the blue line and drag it down two rows, as shown in Figure 10–31. 
 
Figure 10–31. You can click when you see the double-sided arrow, and then drag. 
Then release the mouse. You’ll see the display shown in Figure 10–32. 
 
Figure 10-32. The newly designated page break 
Note, by the way, that if you have a lengthy collection of records and you examine it in 
the page break preview, you’ll see dotted lines instead (see Figure 10–33). 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
308 
 
Figure 10–33. An excerpt of a larger set of records as portrayed by the page break preview 
The dotted line here represents a natural page break—that is, the point where the page 
simply runs out of room and has to continue the data on a next page. 
When you’ve completed your visit to the page break preview, you can restore the basic 
default view of the worksheet by clicking the View contextual tab, and then clicking the 
Normal button in the Workbook Views button group. 
NOTE: You can continue to enter data even while you’re in the page break preview. 
Printing Titles 
Returning to the Page Setup group, you’ll find another button that deserves your attention: 
Print Titles (see Figure 10–34). 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
309 
 
Figure 10–34. The Print Titles button 
Print Titles offers one way to resolve another one of those classic spreadsheet issues—
one already discussed in a slightly different context. If you print a long set of records 
topped by a header row, that header row will print, naturally, but it’ll only appear on 
page 1. And if you need to print a page 2, 3, and so on, these pages won’t display the 
header—at least not by default. 
But Print Titles offers a kind of a Freeze Panes command for printingseeChapter9. Just 
as Freeze Panes keeps designated rows or columns on the screen even as you scroll 
away from them, Print Titles allows you to print header rows (or columns) on every page 
of a multipage printout, reminding you which data is stored under which heading. 
To illustrate, printing this worksheet with 800 rows of data will display the header row on 
page 1 only, at least at the outset (see Figure 10–35). 
  
 
Figure 10–35. Pages 1 and 2 of a lengthy printout: The header row appears only on the first page 
As a result, you may not be able to easily tell on page 2 which data is associated with 
which heading.  
And that’s where Print Titles comes in. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
310 
1. To try it, go back to the PivotTables workbook and make sure you’ve 
kept that page break in the row right above row 11. In the Backstage 
print preview, you’ll see two pages (see Figure 10–36). 
   
 
Figure 10–36. Again, the header row only displays in page 1. 
2. Click the Page Layout contextual tab, and then click Print Titles in the Page Setup 
button group. You’ll see the dialog shown in Figure 10–37. 
 
Figure 10–37. The Sheet tab of the Page Setup dialog box 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
311 
3. In the Rows to repeat at top field, just click 
anywhere in row 1 on the worksheet. 
You’ll see what’s shown in Figure 10–38. 
 
Figure 10–38. Row 1 will now print at the top of 
every page. 
4. Click OK, and return to the Backstage print review and look at the two pages (see 
Figure 10–39). 
 
Figure 10–39. Now page 2 also exhibits the header row. 
Now every page will display the header row, no matter how many pages are required by 
the printout. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
312 
Adding Headers and Footers 
There’s still another way to engineer your printout so that the same text appears at the 
top (or the bottom) of every page: by adding a header and/or footer. As with Word, 
headers and footers feature recurring text on every printed page, such as the name of 
the designer of the spreadsheet, the current page number, the date on which the 
worksheet was printed, or really anything you want to see there.  
Now, introducing headers and footers into a printout may trigger a question: Doesn’t the 
Print Titles feature just discussed do the same thing that headers do—namely, repeat 
some selected text across the top of every page? 
The answer is, sort of. It’s true that the Print Titles select-a-row selection and page 
headers both emblazon the tops of printed pages with text, but there’s a difference: the 
Print Titles option grabs its data from rows on the actual worksheet, while header and 
footer data is entered in a separate area external to the worksheet, so it won’t be found 
in any cells. Thus, you’ll never see header data in A1. If you do want to see the data in 
row 1 at the top of each page, use Print Titles. 
Adding Headers and Footers in the Page Layout View 
As usual, there are a couple of ways to compose a header or footer. One is to enter it in 
the Page Layout view, which offers another way of viewing a worksheet; it’s accessible 
via the Workbook Views button group (see Figure 10–40). 
 
Figure 10–40. Where to find the Page Layout button. 
Click that button while in the PivotTables worksheet and you’ll see the screen shown in 
Figure 10–41. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
313 
 
Figure 10–41. How the salesperson data looks in the Page Layout view. This is page 1. 
The Page Layout view attempts to portray your data exactly as it will print. Note the 
narrow space representing the physical edge of the page (by the arrow), and the ruler 
atop the page, indicating the dimensions of each column.  
You can enter headers and footers in this view. Note the “Click to add header” area; 
resting your mouse there reveals three subsections: a left, center, and right area, each of 
which turns blue when your mouse is poised atop it (see Figure 10–42). 
 
Figure 10–42. Click where you see the blue tint and simply start to type; the header will appear there. 
Click in any or all of the three blue areas and type whatever text you want. You can also 
scroll to the bottom of the page to the “Click to add footer” caption, which works the 
same way (see Figure 10–43). 
u

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
314 
 
Figure 10–43. Three headers, one each positioned in the left, center, and right header areas 
Once you’ve typed in your text, each header will appear at the top of every printed page. 
NOTE: Remember, you can always return to the standard, default view of the worksheet by 
clicking the Normal button in the Worksheet Views button group, or the Normal button in the 
status bar (alongside the Page Layout button).  
Adding Headers and Footers Using the Page Setup Dialog 
Box 
You can take another route to adding 
headers and/or footers via the Page Setup 
dialog box, which you can access directly 
by clicking the Page Setup dialog box 
launcher (see Figure 10–44). 
 
Figure 10–44. Clicking the dialog launcher button 
brings you to the Page Setup dialog box. 
Once you’ve clicked to activate the dialog box, click its Header/Footer tab. You’ll see the 
screen shown in Figure 10–45. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
315 
Figure 10–45. The Header/Footer tab. Note that the header data entered in the previous exericise is visible. 
The header information entered previously is
still visible, but if you click the arrow by the
header field, you’ll see some additional, built-in
header options (see Figure 10–46). 
  
Figure 10–46. Built-in header options. You’ll see
the same choices if you click the arrow in the
Footer field. 
Among other things, these selections will record the page number in the header, or a
Page 1 of x option, which notes the current page number relative to the total page
printout count. For example, the header on page 1 of a three-page printout would read
Page 1 of 3. Other built-in options provide the user’s name and the date on which the
print was executed in the header/footer. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
316 
Adding Custom Headers and Footers 
You can access even more header/footer options by clicking the Custom Header and 
Custom Footer buttons (see Figure 10–47), though most of these really just offer 
equivalents to the options already discussed. 
 
Figure 10–47. Where you can access additional header and footer options 
Click Custom Header and you’ll see the dialog shown in Figure 10–48. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
317 
 
Figure 10–48. The Custom Header dialog box 
Here you can see three edit boxes, or sections, which correspond to the three header 
areas (that turn blue) in the Page Layout view. Note the existing header data lurking 
behind all those button descriptions, too. This text can be deleted in word-processing 
fashion: just select the relevant header and press the Delete key. 
You can click in any one of the edit boxes and type any header data you wish, and you 
can click any of the buttons above the edit boxes to access additional options. The 
following list reviews what these buttons do (from left to right):  
 Format Text: Clicking this button will call up Excel’s standard Font dialog 
box, enabling you format header text. 
 Insert Page Number: This button posts a page number on each printed 
page. 
 Insert Number of Pages: This places the total number of pages in a printout 
in each page’s header/footer. Thus, in a three-page printout, a 3 will be 
displayed on each page. 
 Insert Date: This records the date on which the printout was executed. 
This means of course that the header/footer will change according to the 
date on which you print.  
 Insert Time: This displays the time when the printout was issued. 
When you click one of these buttons in the desired section, a strange-
looking code is installed in that area. For example, if you click the Insert 
Date button in the right edit box, you’ll see what’s shown in Figure 10–49. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
318 
 
Figure 10–49. Inserting today’s date in the header, whatever today’s date happens to be 
Click OK and you’ll be returned to the Header/Footer tab, where you’ll 
see the date previewed (see Figure 10–50). 
 
Figure 10–50. The date displayed on the Header/Footer tab 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
319 
Click OK again and the date header will be incorporated into the 
printout. 
 Insert File Path: This lists both the workbook name and the folder(s) in 
which the workbook has been saved (e.g., 
C:\Users\Abbott\Documents\PivotTables). This option is widely used 
in the corporate world, because it informs viewers of the workbook 
where it is stored in a network. 
 Insert File Name: This just prints the name of the workbook (e.g., 
PivotTables). 
 Insert Sheet Name: This prints the name of the worksheet whose data is 
being printed (e.g., Sheet1, or any customized name). 
 Insert Picture: A rather exotic option, this lets you position a photo or 
clip art in the header/footer, such as a company logo. The dimmed 
button to its right is Format Picture, which contains options enabling you 
to modify that picture. 
Printing the Gridlines and Headings 
Another pair of options you’ll find in the print repertoire let you print both the gridlines 
that border every cell in the worksheet and the row and column headings themselves—
the actual numbers and letters that identify cells by their addresses. 
Both are easy to do, and the options are alongside one 
another in the Sheet Options button group on the Page 
Layout contextual tab (see Figure 10–51). 
 
Figure 10–51. The Print Gridlines and 
Headings options 
Checking the Print box of the Gridlines option will print the lines around every cell selected 
for printing. This option is not identical to drawing lines around cells with the Borders 
command in the Font button group. That latter option allows you to select exactly those 
cells around which you want to see borders. Print Gridlines, however, will automatically 
print gridlines around all the cells in your printout. 
Thus, if you select the range to print shown in Figure 10–52 and click the Print box of the 
Gridlines button, the results will look like Figure 10–53. 
 
Figure 10–52. Six cells selected for printing 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
320 
 
Figure 10–53. The gridlines around each cell will print. No borders have been drawn around the cells. 
If you click the Print Headings (that’s Headings, not Headers) option, you’ll see something 
like Figure 10–54, for example. 
 
Figure 10–54. Printing row and column headings 
You might want to print headings when you want viewers of the printout to see exactly 
which cells contain particular data. 

CHAPTER 10:  Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy 
321 
Summary 
As stated at the outset of the chapter, printing is generally a simple task: select the 
range you want to print and print exactly that selection, or set the print area and print. 
The embellishments—printing titles at the top of your pages or headers and/or footers—
are simple too. 
Now that you’ve learned how to convert your data to hard-copy form, we’re going to 
return to Excel’s native electronic environment and talk about macros, which provide a 
surprisingly easy way to automate tasks you’d just as soon have someone else do. And 
that someone else is Excel 

 
 
323 
323 
 
 
 
Chapter 
Automating Your Work 
with Macros 
In the course of your work with Excel you may find yourself having to carry out the same 
data entry tasks repeatedly, such as entering your company’s name and address at the 
top of many of your spreadsheets. Rather than having to perform that recurring (and 
irritating) chore over and over again, you can compose a macro instead to enter that 
information. 
A macro is a little program saved to your spreadsheet, one that automatically executes a 
set of Excel commands at your instruction and thus spares you the need to execute 
them. At the click of a mouse or the tap of a keyboard shortcut, the commands play 
themselves out—and do so far more swiftly than you could type or click them.  
For example, you may have put together a custom list (see Chapter 2) of your business 
clients, and if you’re doing well, the list may be lengthy. A macro can copy that list into 
your workbook in a flash, without asking you to drag that fill handle down 50 rows worth 
of names. Or perhaps you want to be able to apply a set of formatting changes to a 
range. A macro can handle that assignment pronto, too. 
The Two Kinds of Macros 
A macro can be constructed in one of two ways. One is to put it together by deploying 
the Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) programming language built into Excel, a method 
that can let you build highly complex sequences of commands, including actions you 
can’t execute through Excel’s standard complement of buttons. But breathe easy—
we’re not going to turn you into a VBA honcho here (though you’ll be happy to know that 
the Apress catalog lists several books on just this subject if you want to learn more 
about it). 
The other approach—which is whole lot easier—is to activate the macro-recording 
process, and then simply execute the commands you want the macro to play back, just 
11 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
324 
as you would under normal data entry conditions. Once you’re done you can save the 
macro and play it back whenever you wish. Let’s see how that works. 
Composing a Macro 
In order to see what macros have to offer, 
let’s return to the example with which we 
introduced the chapter. Your company 
often identifies its workbooks by posting 
its name and address somewhere near the 
top of Sheet 1, something like what’s 
shown in Figure 11–1. 
 
Figure 11–1. It pays to advertise: Your company logo 
Again, this set of information appears at the top of many of your spreadsheets, and 
you’re getting slightly fed up with having to type it all those times. 
That’s where the macro comes in, and here’s how it works: 
1. Click the View tab, choose Macros, 
and then click the Macros drop-down 
arrow, as in Figure 11–2. 
 
Figure 11–2. Click that arrow to reveal the Macros 
drop-down menu.  
2. Click Record Macro…, and you’ll see 
the dialog shown in Figure 11–3. 
 
Figure 11–3. The Record Macro dialog 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
325 
3. Type a name for the macro in the Macro name field. A multiword name 
must be linked by an underscore (e.g., Company_Logo), but in the 
interests of simplicity, we’ll call our macro Logo. We’ll discuss the 
optional Shortcut key and Store macro in fields a bit later, but note here that 
you can enter a summary of what the macro does in the Description field 
(though this is optional). 
4. Then click OK. Note the small blue 
rectangle that appears in the lower-
left corner of the worksheet, an 
indicator that you’ve entered macro-
recording mode; this is the button 
you’ll click to stop recording. Hover 
your mouse over the button and 
you’ll see the message shown in 
Figure 11–4. 
 
Figure 11–4. In the studio: The macro recording is in 
progress 
5. Then simply click in cell A1 (you should click your mouse in A1 even if 
you’re in it already, for technical reasons) and type the logo in cells 
A1:A3, as you would normally. I’ve used Arial Black 14-point font here, 
but you can choose your own formatting. If you’ve mistyped a word, just 
correct it and keep going. 
6. When you’ve completed typing the logo, click that blue macro button. 
That stops the recording and saves what you’ve done. The macro is 
now available to use.  
7. Save the workbook under the name “Macro lesson.” Here you need to 
save the workbook as an Excel Macro-Enabled Workbook, which I’ll 
explain next. 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
326 
About Saving a Workbook with a Macro 
Normally, saving an Excel workbook is a pretty straightforward thing: you activate the
Save command (typically by either clicking the Save button on the Quick Access toolbar
or pressing Ctrl+S), call up the familiar Save As window, assign a name to the workbook,
and decide where you want to save it (see Figure 11–5). 
Figure 11–5. You’ve seen it all before: What you see when you save a workbook for the first time. Note the
default Excel Workbook selection by “Save as type.” 
But when you begin to save a workbook containing a macro, something else happens.  
1. Start the save process, and when you click Save, you’ll see the message
shown in Figure 11–6. 
Figure 11–6. You’ll see this message when you try to save a workbook containing a macro.  

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
327 
2. The reference to “VB project” points to the macro(s) in the workbooks, 
which are automatically written in VBA, as discussed. If you want to 
save the workbooks with any macros, click No. You’ll be brought back to 
the Save As window.  
3. When you get there, click 
the Save As type drop-down 
arrow and click Excel Macro-
Enabled Workbook, as in 
Figure 11–7. 
 
           Figure 11–7. Where to save a workbook in which a macro is  
            stored 
4. Then click Save. 
Playing Back the Macro 
Now let’s see how the macro works.  
1. First, because our macro is going to enter the company logo in cells 
A1:A3, delete the logo we’ve just typed there.  
2. Then click View, and click the Macros 
button (or click the down arrow and 
select View Macros, as shown in 
Figure 11–8, but that’s a bit long-
winded). 
 
Figure 11–8. The View Macros option 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
328 
3. You’ll next see the Macro dialog. 
Click Run, as shown in Figure 11–9. 
The macro should execute 
immediately and very swiftly—a lot 
quicker than you could enter the 
logo manually, in fact. 
 
Figure 11–9. There’s the logo macro. 
What We’ve Done   
That’s basically it. Let’s quickly review the process: 
1. Enter macro-recording mode. 
2. Execute the commands on the worksheet you want the macro to 
capture. 
3. Stop recording (you’ll want to remember this step, because if you 
neglect to click the stop-recording button, all your subsequent 
spreadsheet actions will be recorded to the macro, too). 
When you’re ready to play the macro back, open the Macro dialog box shown previously 
in Figure 11–9, click the name of the macro you want to execute (because you can 
record multiple macros on the same worksheet), and click Run. 
Relative References in a Macro 
The macro we’ve just designed transports the cell pointer to A1, where it then begins the 
process of automatically entering the logo. And by default the macro will always travel to 
cell A1, and then start to do its thing. 
Well, of course it will, you’ll likely reply; isn’t that exactly where we want the macro to 
start? Yes it is—and what that means in turn is that no matter where the cell pointer 
happens to be positioned before you trigger the macro, it will start back in cell A1 just 
the same. If you’ve landed the cell pointer in cell ZA458102—or any other cell in the 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
329 
worksheet for that matter—and you then run the macro, the logo will nevertheless return 
to cells A1:A3. And that’s usually just what you want. 
But sometimes you want a macro to start up in a cell that depends on where the cell 
pointer is currently situated. Consider this follow-up example: because your worksheets 
exhibit various layouts, there may be times when you want to place your logo in different 
areas on the worksheet—that is, different ranges. As a result, you’ll want a macro that 
will let you click in the first cell in which you want the logo to appear and have it enter 
the logo starting right with that cell, rather than automatically making its way back to cell 
A1. If you click in cell G3, you’ll want the macro to inscribe the logo in G3:G5. Zoom 
over to R13 instead, and the macro will deliver the logo to R13:R15—in other words, in 
whatever cell you’ve started the process. 
In order to give your macro this sort of 
flexibility, you need to work with the Use 
Relative References feature (shown in 
Figure 11–10). 
 
Figure 11–10. Where to find the Use Relative 
References option 
Take a close look at the caption accompanying the Use Relative References selection. What 
it’s telling you is that this macro option maneuvers the cell pointer (called the cursor in 
the caption) to cells relative to wherever you’ve started the macro. Thus, if you record a 
relative-reference macro in A1 and then click in A3, when you play it back the macro will 
always move two cells to the right of whatever cell you’ve started in. 
Thus, in our case, where we want to be able to post our logo in whichever cell we’ve 
clicked, we need to use the Use Relative References option. Let’s try it. 
1. First, click in any cell on the worksheet—again, any cell, because the 
macro we’re about to record will execute starting in any cell in which we 
click, because of relative referencing.  
2. Then activate Use Relative References by clicking View, clicking the 
Macros drop-down arrow, and choosing Use Relative References.  
3. Then enter macro-recording mode precisely as before, by clicking View 
 Macros (drop-down arrow)  Record Macro.  
4. Name the macro (say, Logo2) in the resulting Record Macro dialog box, 
click OK, and type the logo information as per our first macro.  
5. Click the stop-recording button, and you’re done. 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
330 
Playing back the macro is identical to our earlier macro example, with one difference: 
before running this macro, we need to click precisely in the cell in which we want the 
first line of the logo—Gidget’s Widgets—to appear. That’s because while our first macro 
was programmed to start its logo-writing activity in cell A1—no matter where the cell 
pointer happened to be at the macro’s outset—here, the Use Relative References 
feature instructs the macro not to travel to a specific cell (A1), but rather to begin 
wherever the cell pointer happens to find itself.    
Thus, if you’re currently in cell L3 and click View  Macros  View Macros, click the macro 
name (Logo2), and click Run, the logo will appear in cells L3:L5. Click in a different cell 
(say, B12), run the macro again, and the Gidget’s Widgets logo will install itself in 
B12:B14. 
Saving a Macro to the Personal Macro Workbook 
Whenever you record a macro, it automatically makes itself available to any other open 
workbooks, to be used there as well. Thus, if you’re working with the “Macro lesson” 
workbook, and you open a second workbook and click View  Macros  View Macros 
there, you’ll see the dialog shown in Figure 11–11. 
 
Figure 11–11. The macros from the open “Macro lesson” workbook are usable in any other open workbook. 
You can click Run and activate either of the macros shown in the figure, even as you’re 
working in a different workbook. 
But what if you want a macro to always be available to every workbook, without having 
to actually open any other workbook in particular? You can make that happen by 
recording macros and saving them to what’s called the Personal Macro Workbook, a 
hidden workbook that opens whenever you access Excel. Any macro stored there can 
be called upon by any other workbook that’s currently open. It works like this: 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
331 
1. When you begin to record 
a macro, click the down 
arrow by Store macro in. 
You’ll see the options 
shown in Figure 11–12. 
 
Figure 11–12. How to store a macro in the Personal 
Macro Workbook 
2. Click Personal Macro Workbook and OK, and then record the macro as 
usual.  
You don’t even have to save the actual workbook in which you’ve devised the macro, 
because the macro is being saved to the Personal Macro Workbook (but if you’re 
prompted to save the Personal Macro Workbook itself, you should). 
Now whenever you open any workbook and click View  Macros  View Macros, you’ll 
immediately be presented with the macros saved to the Personal Macro Workbook (see 
Figure 11–13). 
 
Figure 11–13. All that’s left to do is click Run. 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
332 
Deleting a Macro 
If you want to delete a macro, just return to the Macro dialog box, click the macro you 
want to remove, and click Delete (see Figure 11–14). 
 
Figure 11–14. Where to delete a macro 
Once you click Delete, a cautionary prompt 
appears (see Figure 11–15), something 
that often happens when you’re about to 
delete an important Excel object. Click Yes 
if you’re sure you want to delete the 
macro. But click No here, because we want 
do something else with the Logo macro—
namely, edit it. 
 
Figure 11–15. The prompt for deleting a macro 
Editing a Macro by Tweaking It in VBA 
What if your macro contains a mistake, or you just want to change it? What if, for 
example, you really wanted the Gidget’s Widgets logo to exhibit 10-point text instead of 
its current 14-point size? 
The simplest way to modify the macro would be record it over again and delete the 
original. That might work if your macros are likely to be brief, but that scenario is still a 
bit bothersome—and once a macro gets a bit lengthier, the prospect of a do-over is less 
appealing still, in part because in the process of rerecording the macro you might very 
well make another mistake. 
Is there an alternative? Yes—you can edit the macro in VBA. 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
333 
Now, as mentioned, I’m not going to teach you the VBA language here; rather, we’re just 
going to take a look at it and explore some easy ways to tweak it in order to edit a 
macro. 
VBA: Written Behind the Scenes 
It’s far from obvious, but whenever you record a macro of the sort demonstrated here, 
its commands are also transcribed simultaneously in the VBA language, on a separate 
worksheet that’s usually hidden. But once you reveal that worksheet, you’ll see the Logo 
and Logo2 macros as they appear in VBA translation, so to speak, giving you the chance 
to actually rewrite the script and affect the ways in which the macros play out. 
Exposing the VBA Worksheet 
Revealing that hidden VBA worksheet is easy. Just click View  Macros (down arrow)  
View Macros, and in the Macro dialog click Logo, and then click Edit (see Figure 11–16). 
 
Figure 11–16. Clicking Edit will take you to the worksheet’s Visual Basic window. 
When you do, you’ll see the macro as shown in Figure 11–17 (the window here has been 
maximized in the figure). 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
334 
 
Figure 11–17. The Logo macro in VBA 
Now that may look pretty scary at first glance, but take a closer look. Many of the VBA 
entries will start to make more sense when you study the terms they use. Note, for 
example, the reference to "Gidget's Widgets" (see the first arrow in the figure) beneath 
the line that reads Range ("A1").Select. That means that the macro selects cell A1 and 
proceeds to enter “Gidget’s Widgets” there. 
Now look at the line that reads as follows (see the bottom arrow in Figure 11–17): 
.Size = 14  
You’ll probably, and correctly, interpret that bit of programming code as an instruction to 
change the font size of the logo to 14 points, as our macro specified. But what that also 
means is that you can simply click the number 14, delete it, and type, say, 10 instead. 
That editing change will downsize the logo text to 10 points the next time you run the 
macro. And if you delete Widgets and replace it with Gadgets, the next time you run the 
macro you’ll see “Gidget’s Gadgets” in cell A1. Try it. 
NOTE: Keep in mind that after you make such changes, you can close that VBA window; the rest 
of the workbook displaying your logo will nevertheless remain open, and you can try the macro 
again and continue to work on that worksheet. 
Once you study how the VBA code operates, you’ll be able to make small changes like 
these pretty easily. And it beats having to record the whole macro over again. 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
335 
Activating a Macro with a Keyboard Shortcut 
Until now we’ve been triggering our macros with a series of mouse clicks, an ever-so-
slightly tedious routine that can be streamlined by designating a keyboard shortcut to do 
the job instead. You can assign a shortcut key to a macro either during the macro 
design process or retroactively. Let’s look at these options. 
First, recall that when you compose a macro, you’re brought to the Record Macro dialog 
box, shown in Figure 11–18. Notice the Shortcut key option, which enables you to 
designate a key that teams with the Ctrl key. Pressing that combination will start the 
macro. 
 
Figure 11–18. The Shortcut key option: A speedy way to initiate a macro 
You can assign a shortcut key to a macro that you’ve already created as well. Here’s 
how:  
1. Click View  Macros (you needn’t click the arrow), and click the name of 
the macro to which you want to assign the shortcut key. You’ll see the 
dialog shown in Figure 11–19. 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
336 
Figure 11–19. Click the name of the macro to which you want to assign the shortcut key. 
2. Click Options, and you’ll be brought to the dialog shown in Figure 11–
20. 
Figure 11–20. The Macro Options dialog 
3.
Just enter your key selection, and click OK.  
4.
You then have to click the close button on the remaining Macro dialog
box (that X in the upper right-hand corner), because oddly enough,
there’s no Close or OK button available in it. 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
337 
NOTE: You can select any keyboard key as the shortcut key—even one that’s already been 
assigned to an existing Excel action (e.g., C, which in combination with Ctrl serves as the 
standard Copy shortcut key). But don’t worry—if you assign such a key to the macro, the macro 
will only play its shortcut role in that particular workbook. Ctrl+C will continue to work as Copy 
on other workbooks. Ctrl+E and Ctrl+J are unassigned, and thus available without having to 
“borrow” from an existing shortcut. You can also supplement a shortcut with the Shift key—for 
example, you can assign Ctrl+Shift+W to a macro. 
A Note on Macro Security 
You often hear about Internet viruses that infiltrate your computer from a variety of 
sources. Files containing macros are often prime suspects as virus bearers, so Excel 
allows you to decide what kind of defense you want mount against these potentially 
unwanted intruders. 
Excel’s anti-macro-virus defense system is headquartered in what’s called the Trust 
Center, which you can visit by clicking File  Options  Trust Center. Once you get there, 
click the Trust Center Settings… button and then Macro Settings. You’ll see the options 
shown in Figure 11–21. 
  
Figure 11–21. Where to modify macro acceptance settings 

CHAPTER 11:  Automating Your Work with Macros 
338 
The figure shows Excel’s default setting, which will open a downloaded workbook after 
disabling its macros. When this happens, you’ll see the prompt shown in Figure 11–22. 
 
Figure 11–22. By default the macros are disabled. 
By clicking Enable Content, you’ll be able to activate the macros, however. But if you 
select the Disable all macros without notification option in the Trust Center, no macros in 
downloaded workbooks can be turned on. Needless to say, if you’re only working with 
your own macros, or with workbooks sent your way from the proverbial trusted sources, 
you’ll probably want to opt for the disable-with-notification setting, or even enable all 
macros. 
Summary 
A macro is a great way to speed a routine Excel task. Just record and save it, and the 
commands you’ve executed will be played back at your request—and in all your 
workbooks, if you save the macro to the Personal Macro Workbook. Remember the role 
relative references play in the macro-recording process too, and your data entry 
activities will be simplified significantly.  
Also, don’t be too wary about the VBA editing option. Remember that your recorded 
macros are automatically rendered into VBA, and by perusing that code you’ll begin to 
recognize the opportunities it affords to let you make small but important adjustments to 
the macros you’ve already recorded. 

 
 
339 
339 
Index 
■ A 
absolute cell addressing 
keeping cell reference constant,  
90–93 
Accounting Number Format option 
turning values into currency, 129 
adding worksheets, 263–264 
addressing cells, 2 
relative cell addressing, formulas, 88 
alignment 
data in cells, 39–40, 114–121 
data orientation, 116–118 
Format Cell Alignment option, 117 
horizontal alignment, 114–115 
indenting data, 119 
Merge and Center options, 120–121 
vertical alignment, 115–116 
wrapping text, 119 
Alignment button group, fonts, 114 
Alignment tab, Format Cells dialog, 117 
Alt key 
additional shortcut keys, 24–25 
function key shortcuts, 21–22 
key tips, 5 
Analyze tab, Chart Tools 
filtering data in PivotCharts with field 
buttons, 256 
anti-macro-virus defense system, 337 
Area chart type, 158, 166 
arguments, functions, 84 
Arrow keys, 23 
navigating worksheets, 32 
Auto Fill 
auto filling numeric sequence, 48–49 
copying values with, 48 
customizing lists, 53–54 
speeding up data entry, 48–54 
using with text, 50 
Auto Fill Option button, 50–53 
Copy Cells option, 51, 52 
Fill Formatting option, 52 
Fill Without Formatting option, 52, 
53 
AutoComplete feature, 80 
AutoFilter, 207 
auto-fit feature 
altering column width using, 42–43 
automatic recalculation, 75 
formulas, 86 
PivotTables, 241 
AutoSum button 
adding column of numbers, 74 
Average function, 79 
Count Numbers function, 79 
double-clicking, 75 
Formulas tab, 77 
functions, 78, 79 
Max/Min functions, 79 
selecting ranges for formulas, 76 
using ranges on other sheets in 
formulas, 272 
viewing and editing formulas, 78 
AutoSum function group, 83 
Average function, 79 
axes 
adding using Layout tab, 185–188 
Format Axis dialog box, charts,  
175–176 
axis title 
adding using Layout tab, 183 

Index 
340 
■ B 
Backspace key, 23 
Backstage, 7–8 
exiting, 8 
File tab, 7 
Quick Access toolbar, 9 
Print Backstage, 290, 294–300 
banded columns, tables, 214 
banded rows, tables, 210, 214 
Bar chart type, 158, 166 
Between rule, conditional formatting, 
149 
blank cells 
function ranges containing, 79 
bold (B) button, 107 
books see workbooks 
borders 
adding to cells, 109–111 
showing/hiding screen elements, 
274 
Borders drop-down menu, 109 
Line Color/Style options, 111 
breaks, printing 
adding page breaks, 303–305 
previewing page breaks, 305–308 
button groups, 3 
buttons 
accessing with keyboard, 5–6 
adding to Quick Access toolbar, 9 
customizing Quick Access toolbar, 8 
removing from Quick Access 
toolbar, 11 
Select All button, 5 
toggling, 107 
■ C 
calculations 
calculating an average, 79–80 
functions, 73–84 
cell gridlines see gridlines 
cell pointer, 3, 5 
cell references 
absolute cell addressing, 90–93 
clarifying by naming range, 95–102 
Name Manager, 101–102 
range containing one cell, 100 
range in Name Box, 95–98 
range from data in worksheet, 
99–100 
copy-and-paste method, 88 
keeping constant, 90–93 
moving formulas, 89 
relative cell addressing, 88 
Cell Styles option 
applying ready-made formats with 
styles, 141 
customizing styles, 143 
cells, 2 
adding border to, 109–111 
adding color to, 111–112 
addresses, 2, 31 
aligning data in, 39–40, 114–121 
applying formats with styles, 141–
142 
Auto Fill speeding up data entry,  
48–54 
calculating an average, 79–80 
changing data, 63–66 
conditional formatting, 145–152 
copying data, 67–68 
data validation, 54–60 
deleting contents, 66 
deleting columns, 124 
deleting rows, 124 
determining formatting of, 108 
entering data into selected range, 
45–47 
entering numerical data, 44 
entering text and data, 38–39 
Format Cell Alignment option, 117 
Format Cells dialog box, 113–114 
formatting, 34 
formatting numbers/values, 129–137 
inserting and deleting, 128–129 
inserting columns, 122, 123 
inserting rows, 123 
Merge and Center options, 120–121 
moving data, 69 
protecting part of worksheet,  
282–284 

Index 
341 
referring to cells in other worksheets, 
270–271 
selecting multiple cells, 34–37 
reasons for, 34 
selecting all cells, 36 
using keyboard, 36 
using mouse, 34, 35 
using Name Box, 37 
selecting ranges for formulas, 76–77 
showing formulas in, 274–275 
sparklines, 189–192 
spreadsheets, 29 
widening and narrowing columns, 
41–43 
wrapping text, 119 
Center on page option, printing, 299 
centered overlay 
adding chart title using Layout tab, 
182 
centering cell content 
Merge and Center options, 120–121 
Change Chart Type dialog 
changing chart type, 164 
changing default chart, 167 
Changes button group 
protecting workbooks, 287 
protecting worksheets, 280 
changing data see editing data 
chart area, 157 
changing chart type, 164 
deleting charts, 160 
reformatting, 172 
chart elements 
adding elements with Layout tab, 
181–188 
adding axes, 185–188 
adding axis title, 183 
adding chart title, 181–182 
adding data labels, 184 
adding data tables, 185 
adding legend, 184 
adding plot area, 188 
chart area, 157 
data point, 157 
data series, 156, 157 
defining, 156–157 
horizontal category (x) axis, 156 
legend, 157, 184 
plot area, 157, 188 
vertical value (y) axis, 156, 157 
Chart Layouts button group 
adding chart elements with, 180–181 
chart styles 
color-coordination using, 177 
Chart Styles option, Chart Tools, 177, 
178 
chart title 
adding using Layout tab, 181–182 
Chart Tools 
Chart Styles option, 177, 178 
filtering data in PivotCharts with field 
buttons, 256 
Format context tab, 178 
Chart Tools contextual tab, 7 
chart types 
Area, 158, 166 
Bar, 158, 166 
changing, 163–166 
choosing, 157–158 
Column, 158 
Line, 158, 166 
Other, 158 
Pie, 158, 167 
Scatter, 158 
charts, 155–192 
adding elements with Chart Layouts, 
180–181 
changing, 160–167 
changing data, 162 
changing default, 167 
changing type, 163–166 
choosing type, 157–158 
creating column chart, 159–160 
creating from PivotTables, 253–258 
creating quickly, 160 
defining elements, 156–157 
deleting, 160 
formatting see formatting charts 
moving, 160, 161 
PivotCharts, 253–258 
resizing, 161 
selecting entire chart, 161 

Index 
342 
sparklines, 189–192 
switching rows with columns,  
168–169 
using too many adornments, 156 
Charts button group, 157 
Clear command, filters, 205 
Clear Filter button, Slicer, 246 
Clear Print Area option, 301 
Clear Rules option 
conditional formatting, 152 
click-the-tick approach 
entering text and data, 39 
clipboard, 69–71 
copying data, 67, 68 
emptying, 71 
Clipboard button group, 69 
copy-and-paste method, formulas, 
88 
copying formula result only, 94 
Clipboard dialog box, 70 
Collated option, printing, 296 
color 
adding to cells, 111–112 
color-coordination using chart 
styles, 177 
Fill Color button, 111 
Font Color button, 112 
formatting charts, 172 
Line Color option, borders, 111 
recoloring worksheet tabs, 266 
Column chart type, 158 
creating, 159–160 
column headings (A, B, C, ...), 3 
printing, 319, 320 
showing/hiding screen elements, 
273 
Column Labels area, PivotTables, 229 
grouping data, 239 
grouping related items using two 
fields, 237 
removing fields from areas, 237 
columns 
adding numbers in, 74–76 
adding to tables, 213 
altering width manually, 41 
banded columns, tables, 214 
changing font size, 106 
deleting, 124 
effect on formulas, 125 
Freeze Panes option, 276–279 
hiding/unhiding, 125–127 
inserting, 122, 123 
effect on formulas, 124 
widening/narrowing, 41–43 
auto-fit feature, 42–43 
Comma Style button, 132 
command tabs, ribbon, 3 
commands 
macros, 323–338 
Compact layout option, PivotTables, 
251, 252 
conditional formatting, 145–152 
Between rule, 149 
Data Bars, 152 
Greater Than rule, 146 
Highlight Cells Rules option, 146 
More Rules option, 149 
sorting by cell format, 201 
Top/Bottom Rules option, 150 
turning off, 152 
Conditional Formatting drop-down 
menu, 146 
conditions 
displaying values based on, 80–82 
context menu 
changing chart type, 164 
formatting charts, 171 
contextual tabs, 6–7 
changing chart type, 164 
Convert to Range option, tables, 217 
Copy Cells option 
Auto Fill Option button, 51, 52 
Copy Level button 
sorting by cell format, 202 
copy-and-paste method, formulas, 
88–89 
copying 
data, 67–68 
moving data, 69 
storing copied/cut data, 69–71 
formats with Format Painter,  
140–141 

Index 
343 
formulas, 87–95 
copy-and-paste method, 88–89 
formula result only, 93–95 
values with Auto Fill, 48 
worksheets, 266 
Count Numbers function 
AutoSum button, 79 
Create Names from Selection dialog 
box, 99, 100 
Ctrl key shortcuts, 19–21 
additional key combinations, 23–25 
function key combinations, 21–23 
currency 
positioning of currency symbol, 132 
turning values into, 129–132 
Currency format option, 132 
Current Selection button group 
formatting charts, 171 
Custom AutoFilter dialog box 
number filters, 208 
text filters, 206, 207 
Custom Footer button 
Page Setup dialog box, 316 
Custom Header button 
Page Setup dialog, 316 
Custom Lists dialog box 
customizing auto fill lists, 54 
Custom Margins option, printing, 298 
Custom option, Number tab 
Format Cells dialog, 138–139 
Custom Sort option 
Sort & Filter drop-down menu, 200 
cutting data, 69 
■ D 
dashboards, Excel, 262 
data 
adding column of numbers, 74–76 
aligning in cells, 39–40, 114–121 
changing, 63–66 
deleting cell contents, 66 
Redo button, 66 
Undo button, 64 
charting, 155–192 
color-coordination using chart 
styles, 177 
copying, 67–68 
customizing worksheets with 
formulas, 84–95 
entering, 39 
filtering, 202–208 
formatting, 103 
Freeze Panes option, 276–279 
functions, 73–84 
grouping, 219 
indenting, 119 
moving, 69 
orientation of, 116–118 
PivotTables, 219–258 
protecting worksheets, 281 
sorting, 196–202 
storing copied/cut data, 69–71 
wrapping text, 119 
data aggregation see PivotTables 
Data Bars, conditional formatting, 152 
data entry, 38–39 
adding instructions with input 
messages, 60–61 
data validation, 54–60 
into selected range, 45–47 
navigating worksheets, 31 
numerical data, 44 
speeding up with Auto Fill, 48–54 
data labels 
adding using Layout tab, 184 
data point, charts, 157 
data series, charts, 156, 157 
formatting charts, 172 
Pie chart type, 167 
switching rows with columns, 168 
Data tab 
accessing with key tips, 6 
filtering data, 202 
sorting data, 198 
data tables 
adding chart elements with Chart 
Layouts, 181 
adding using Layout tab, 185 
data validation, 54–60 
changing rule, 57 

Index 
344 
customizing prompt, 60 
error alerts, 59–60 
Information error alert, 59 
personalizing drop-down menu,  
57–59 
Stop error alert, 59 
text length rule, 57 
two-character rule, 55 
Warning error alert, 59 
databases 
adding records to, 209 
converting into table, 209–216 
converting table to, 217 
definition of, 195 
filtering data, 202–208 
Format as Table button, 213 
sorting data, 196–202 
Date & Time function group, 83 
Date button, Header dialog, 317 
dates 
formatting, 134–137 
grouping PivotTable data, 239 
decimal points 
formatting, 133 
formatting PivotTable, 249 
Define Name option 
clarifying cell references, 97 
Delete Cells command, 128 
Delete key, 23 
deleting columns, 124 
effect on formulas, 125 
deleting data 
cutting data compared, 69 
deleting cell contents, 66 
deleting rows, 124 
effect on formulas, 125 
deleting worksheets, 265 
Design tab, Chart Tools 
changing chart type, 164 
switching rows with columns, 168 
dialog box launchers, 5 
dollar sign 
absolute cell addressing, 92, 93 
Double Underline option, 108 
drop-down menus, personalizing, 57–59 
■ E 
Edit Custom Lists button 
customizing auto fill lists, 53 
Editing button group, 74 
Sort & Filter drop-down menu, 197 
editing data 
changing data, 63–66 
redoing undone edit, 66 
undoing edit, 64 
elements, screen 
showing/hiding, 273–276 
End key/mode, 24 
Enter key, 24 
entering text and data, 38 
navigating worksheets, 32 
equals sign 
writing formulas, 85–86 
error alerts 
customizing data validation prompt, 
60 
data validation errors, 59–60 
Esc key, 24 
Excel 2010, 27 
Slicer feature, 242–247 
Excel dashboards, 262 
■ F 
F1, F2, … 
function key shortcuts, 21–23 
field buttons 
filtering data in PivotCharts, 256–258 
removing from PivotCharts, 258 
Field List button 
creating PivotTables, 226 
fields 
filtering data, 202–208 
filtering multiple fields, 208 
sorting data, 196–202 
sorting by two fields, 199–201 
fields, PivotTables 
grouping related items using two 
fields, 234–237 
removing fields from areas, 229, 237 
File tab, 7, 9 

Index 
345 
Fill Color button, 111 
Fill Formatting option, 52 
fill handles 
Auto Fill speeding up data entry, 48 
auto filling numeric sequence, 49 
copy-and-paste method, formulas, 
89 
copying values with Auto Fill, 48 
Fill tab, Format Cells dialog, 148 
Fill Without Formatting option, 52, 53 
filtering data, 202–208 
AutoFilter, 207 
clearing filters, 205 
Filter option, 6 
multiple fields, 208 
number filters, 207–208 
tables, 210 
text filters, 206–207 
turning filter off, 205 
filtering data, PivotTables 
creating report worksheet for items 
in filter, 231–232 
in PivotCharts with field buttons, 
256–258 
Report Filter area, 229–231 
Financial function group, 83 
Fit All Columns on One Page option, 
printing, 300 
Font button group, 104 
determining cell formatting, 108 
Fill Color button, 111 
Font Color button, 112 
Format Cells dialog box, 113–114 
Font Color drop-down menu, 112 
Font drop-down menu, 104, 105 
Font tab, Format Cells dialog, 113 
fonts 
aligning data, 114–121 
Alignment button group, 114 
changing, 104–105 
changing font size, 106–107 
strikethrough effect, 113 
using bold/italics/underline, 107–108 
footers 
adding, 312–319 
Page Layout view, 312–314 
Page Setup dialog, 314–315 
adding custom footers, 316 
Format Axis dialog box, charts,  
175–176 
Format Cell Alignment option, 117 
Format Cells dialog box, 113–114 
Alignment tab, 117 
Fill tab, 148 
Font tab, 113 
Number tab, 135 
Custom option, 138–139 
Special option, 137–138 
Protection tab, 283 
Hidden check box, 285, 286 
Locked check box, 284 
Format context tab, Chart Tools, 178 
Format Data Series dialog box, charts, 
173 
format dialog boxes, charts, 172–175 
Format Painter 
copying formats with, 140–141 
Format Text button, Header dialog, 317 
formatting, 103–152 
cells 
adding border to, 109–111 
adding color to, 111–112 
determining formatting, 108 
Format Cells dialog, 113–114 
sorting by cell format, 201–202 
charts see formatting charts 
conditional formatting, 145–152 
copying formats with Format Painter, 
140–141 
Font button group, 104 
fonts 
changing font, 104–105 
changing font size, 106–107 
using bold, italics, and underline, 
107–108 
general format, 134 
mini-toolbar options, 170 
numbers/values, 129–137 
Custom format option, 138–139 
customizing number formats, 
137–139 
dates, 134–137 

Index 
346 
decimal points, 133
percentages, 132 
punctuating values, 132
Special formats option, 137–138
turning values into currency,  
129–132 
PivotTables, 247–249
select-then-do principle, 104
styles, 141–144 
formatting charts, 169–188
adding chart elements 
with Chart Layouts, 180–181
with Layout tab, 181–188 
color-coordination using chart
styles, 177 
context menu, 171 
Current Selection button group, 171
Format Axis dialog, 175–176
Format Data Series dialog, 173
formatting text elements with 
WordArt, 179 
mini-toolbar, 170 
reformatting vertical axis, 175–177
restoring default formatting settings, 
175 
shape styles, 178–179 
Formula AutoComplete feature, 80
formula bar, 3 
changing data, 63 
revealing text in cells, 40
showing/hiding screen elements, 
273 
viewing and editing formulas, 77–79 
formulas, 73, 75 
absolute cell addressing, 90–93, 100
adding column of numbers, 75
automatic recalculation, 75, 86
clarifying cell references by naming 
range, 95–102
copy-and-paste method, 88–89
copying, 87–95 
copying result only, 93–95
customizing worksheets with, 84–95
dollar sign in, 92, 93 
effect of deleting columns/rows, 125
effect of inserting columns/rows, 124 
hiding, 284–286 
hiding worksheets, 267
mathematical operators, 85
moving, 89 
order of operations in, 86–87
referring to cells in other worksheets, 
270–271 
relative cell addressing, 88
selecting ranges for, 76–77
showing in cells, 274–275
tables, 212 
using ranges on other sheets in, 
271–273 
viewing and editing, 77–79
writing, 85–86 
Freeze Panes option, 276–279
Full Screen option, 275, 276
function groups, 83 
function key shortcuts, 21–23
Function Library 
locating functions in, 82–84
types (groups) of functions, 82 
functions, 73–84 
adding column of numbers, 74–76
arguments, 84 
AutoSum button, 78, 79
calculating an average, 79–80
displaying values based on 
conditions, 80–82 
Formula AutoComplete feature, 80
locating in Function Library, 82–84
parentheses in, 82 
ranges containing blank cells, 79
selecting ranges for formulas, 76–77
structure of, 82 
functions, list of 
Average, 79 
Count Numbers, 79
If, 80, 81
Max/Min, 79 
Sum, 75
■G 
general format, 134
Gradient fill 

Index 
347 
formatting charts, 174 
Greater Than rule, conditional 
formatting, 146 
grid 
size of, 31 
gridlines 
printing, 319–320 
showing/hiding screen elements, 
273, 274 
group of cells see ranges of cells 
grouping data, PivotTables, 219,  
239–240 
related items using two fields,  
234–236 
with row and column value areas, 
237 
grouping worksheets, 268–269 
■ H 
hash marks (UK) 
viewing numerical data, 44 
header rows 
changing PivotTable headers, 250 
Freeze Panes option, 276–279 
printing titles, 309 
sorting data, 198 
tables, 210 
headers 
adding, 312–319 
Page Layout view, 312–314 
Page Setup dialog, 314–315 
adding custom headers, 316 
Print Titles compared, 312 
headings 
printing actual row/column headings, 
319, 320 
showing/hiding screen elements, 
273 
heightening rows, 116 
Hidden check box, Protection tab 
Format Cells dialog, 285, 286 
hiding formulas, 284–286 
hiding ribbon, 275–276 
hiding rows and columns, 125–126 
clearing filters, 205 
hiding worksheets, 267 
Highlight Cells Rules, conditional 
formatting, 146 
Between rule, 149 
Greater Than rule, 146 
More Rules option, 149 
Home key, 24 
Home tab 
formatting, 104 
horizontal alignment, 114–115 
horizontal category (x) axis, charts, 156 
adding axes using Layout tab, 185 
adding axis titles using Layout tab, 
183 
switching rows with columns, 168 
Horizontally center page option, 
printing, 299 
■ I, J 
If function, 80, 81 
arguments, 84 
Ignore Print Area option, 302 
indenting data, 119 
Information error alert 
data validation, 59 
input messages 
adding data entry instructions with, 
60–61 
insert buttons, Header dialog, 317 
Insert Cells command, 128 
inserting columns, 122, 123 
effect on formulas, 124 
inserting rows, 123 
effect on formulas, 124 
inserting worksheets, 263–264 
italics (I) button, 107 
■ K 
key tips, 5, 6 
accessing Data tab with, 6 
keyboard 
accessing buttons with, 5–6 
Arrow keys, 23 
Backspace key, 23 

Index 
348 
Delete key, 23 
End key, 24 
Enter key, 24 
Esc key, 24 
Home key, 24 
Page Down key, 25 
Page Up key, 25 
Spacebar key, 25 
keyboard shortcuts see shortcuts 
■ L 
Landscape option, printing, 297 
layout options, PivotTables, 251–253 
plus/minus option, 252 
Layout tab 
adding chart elements using,  
181–188 
axes, 185–188 
axis title, 183 
chart title, 181–182 
data labels, 184 
data tables, 185 
legend, 184 
plot area, 188 
left-alignment 
aligning data in cells, 39 
legend, charts, 157 
adding data table using Layout tab, 
185 
adding using Layout tab, 184 
Line chart type, 158, 166 
Line Color/Style options 
Borders drop-down menu, 111 
lists 
personalizing drop-down menu,  
57–59 
Locked check box, Protection tab 
Format Cells dialog, 284 
Logical function group, 83 
logical tests 
If function, 81 
Lookup & Reference function group, 83 
■ M 
Macro Options dialog 
activating macros with keyboard 
shortcut, 336 
macros, 323–338 
activating with keyboard shortcut, 
335–337 
anti-macro-virus defense system, 
337 
deleting, 332 
editing in VBA, 332–334 
exposing VBA worksheet, 333–334 
making available to all workbooks, 
330 
playing back, 327, 328 
recording, 323–325, 328 
relative references in, 328–330 
saving to Personal Macro Workbook, 
330–331 
saving workbook with, 326–327 
security, 337–338 
VBA programming language, 323 
Margins option, printing, 297 
Math & Trig function group, 83 
mathematical operators, formulas, 85 
Max function 
AutoSum button, 79 
Merge and Center options, 120–121 
Microsoft Excel 2010 see Excel 2010 
Min function 
AutoSum button, 79 
mini-toolbar 
accessing gradient and other 
options, 175 
applying styles quickly, 144 
formatting charts, 170 
formatting options, 170 
More Functions function group, 83 
More Rules option, conditional 
formatting, 149 
moving data, 69 
moving formulas, 89 
moving worksheet tabs, 264, 266 

Index 
349 
■ N 
Name Box, 3 
clarifying cell references by naming 
range in, 95–98 
navigating worksheets, 33 
selecting multiple cells, 37 
Name Manager, 101–102 
navigating worksheets, 31–34 
going to cell A1 (home), 32 
moving cell pointer rapidly, 32 
scroll buttons, 32 
summary of options, 33 
using Name Box, 33 
Normal button 
Workbook Views button group, 314 
Number button group, 129 
number filters, 207–208 
filtering multiple fields, 208 
Number Format button 
formatting PivotTable, 248 
Number Format drop-down menu, 135 
Number of Pages button, Header 
dialog, 317 
Number tab, Format Cells dialog, 135 
Custom option, 138–139 
Special option, 137–138 
numbers 
see also values 
adding column of, 74–76 
aligning data in cells, 39 
auto filling numeric sequence, 48–49 
customizing formats, 137–139 
dates, 134–137 
entering numerical data, 44 
formatting decimal points, 133 
formatting values, 129–137 
percentages, 132 
punctuating values, 132 
turning values into currency, 129–132 
■ O 
Office 2007 button, 7 
operations 
order of operations in formulas,  
86–87 
operators 
mathematical operators, formulas, 
85 
order of operations in formulas, 86 
Orientation drop-down menu, 117 
Orientation option, printing, 297 
orientation, data, 116–118 
Outline layout option, PivotTables, 251, 
252 
■ P 
Page Break Preview, 306 
page breaks, printing 
adding, 303–305 
previewing, 305–308 
Page Down key, 25 
Page Layout tab, 302 
Breaks options, 303–305 
clearing Print Area, 301 
Print Gridlines and Headings 
options, 319 
printing titles, 310 
setting Print Area, 301 
Page Layout view 
adding headers and footers,  
312–314 
Page Number button, Header dialog, 
317 
Page Setup dialog box 
adding headers and footers,  
314–315 
margin options, 298 
printing titles, 310 
Sheet tab, 310 
Page Setup group 
printing titles, 308–311 
Page Up key, 25 
Pages option 
deciding pages to print, 295 
paintbrush, Format Painter, 140, 141 
Paper Size option, printing, 297 

Index 
350 
parentheses 
functions, 82 
order of operations in formulas, 86 
passwords 
protecting workbooks, 288 
protecting worksheets, 281 
unprotecting worksheets, 282 
Paste Values option 
copying formula result only, 94, 95 
pasting data 
copy-and-paste method, formulas, 
88–89 
copying and pasting data, 68 
Percent Style button, 132 
percentages 
formatting numbers/values, 132 
Personal Macro Workbook 
saving macros to, 330–331 
PgDn/PgUp keys 
navigating worksheets, 32 
Phone Number option 
formatting numbers, 138 
Pie chart type, 158, 167 
PivotChart Tools contextual tab, 255 
PivotCharts, 253–258 
creating with PivotTable, 258 
deleting, 258 
filtering data with field buttons,  
256–258 
removing field button from, 258 
PivotTable areas, 227 
removing fields from, 229 
PivotTable Field List, 225, 226 
creating PivotTable, 226 
moving field data, 228 
removing fields from areas, 229 
PivotTable Tools contextual tab, 225 
removing fields from areas, 238 
PivotTables, 219–258 
accessing button group, 250 
adding records to, 241 
automatic recalculation, 241 
changing data, 240 
changing headers, 250 
choosing data to work on, 227–228 
collapsing/expanding, 253 
Column Labels area, 229 
grouping related items using two 
fields, 237 
Compact layout option, 251, 252 
counting records, 232–233 
creating, 224–227 
creating charts from, 253–258 
creating with PivotChart, 258 
filtering using Report Filter area, 
229–231 
formatting, 247–249 
grouping data, 239–240 
related items using two fields, 
234–237 
layout options, 251–253 
plus/minus option, 252 
moving field data, 228–229 
Outline layout option, 251, 252 
pivoting data sideways, 229 
refreshing, 240 
removing fields from areas, 229, 237 
Report Filter area, 229–231 
creating report worksheet for 
items in filter, 231–232 
Row Labels area, 226, 227, 228, 
234–236 
Slicer feature, 242–247 
styling reports, 249–253 
Tabular layout option, 251, 252 
Undo command, 224 
Values area, 227, 228 
changing calculation, 237–238 
grouping with row/column value 
areas, 237 
selecting mathematical 
operations, 238 
viewing filtered records, 242–247 
playing back macros, 327, 328 
plot area, charts, 157 
adding using Layout tab, 188 
plus/minus layout option, PivotTables, 
252 
Portrait option, printing, 297 
pound signs (US) 
viewing numerical data, 44 

Index 
351 
precedence 
order of operations in formulas,  
86–87 
presentation of worksheets 
showing/hiding screen elements, 
273 
previewing page breaks, printing,  
305–308 
previewing printing see print preview 
Print Active Sheets option, 290, 291, 
292, 295 
Print Area 
clearing, 301 
Ignore Print Area option, 302 
setting, 300–302 
Print Backstage, 290, 294–300 
Print Gridlines and Headings options, 
319 
print preview 
Fit All Columns on One Page option, 
300 
page size affecting, 294 
positioning print on page, 299 
previewing page breaks, 305–308 
Print Selection option, 293 
Print Titles, 308–310 
headers compared, 312 
printing 
actual row/column headings, 319, 
320 
adding headers and footers,  
312–319 
adding page breaks, 303–305 
collating copies, 296 
customizing, 302–311 
deciding pages to print, 295 
deciding what to print, 289–294 
default Print Active Sheets option, 
295 
fitting all columns on one page, 300 
gridline, 319–320 
margins, 297, 298, 302 
options, 294–300 
orientation, 297, 302 
page centering, 299 
Page Layout tab, 302 
paper size, 297, 302 
previewing page breaks, 305–308 
printing entire worksheet, 289–290 
printing part of worksheet, 290–294 
scaling, 300 
selecting printer, 295 
setting number of copies, 294 
setting Print Area, 300–302 
titles, 308–311 
printing options, 294–300 
Center on page, 299 
Clear Print Area, 301 
Collated, 296 
Copies, 294 
Custom Margins, 298 
Fit All Columns on One Page, 300 
Landscape, 297 
Margins, 297 
Orientation, 297 
Pages, 295 
Paper Size, 297 
Portrait, 297 
Print Area, 301 
Printer button, 295 
scaling, 300 
Set Print Area, 301 
Uncollated, 297 
Protect Sheet dialog box, 280 
protecting workbooks, 286–288 
protecting worksheets, 279–282 
hiding formulas, 284–286 
part of worksheet, 282–286 
Protection tab, Format Cells dialog, 283 
Hidden check box, 285, 286 
Locked check box, 284 
punctuating values, 132 
■ Q 
Quick Access toolbar, 4 
adding button to, 9 
customizing, 8–12 
removing button from, 11 

Index 
352 
■ R 
ranges of cells 
calculating an average, 79–80 
changing font, 104 
changing font size, 106 
clarifying cell references by naming, 
95–102 
Name Manager, 101–102 
range containing one cell, 100 
range in Name Box, 95–98 
ranges from data in worksheet, 
99–100 
converting table to, 217 
copying data, 67–68 
deleting cell contents, 66 
entering data into selected range, 
45–47 
function ranges containing blank 
cells, 79 
Merge and Center options, 120–121 
moving data, 69 
printing part of worksheet, 290–294 
scope of, 98 
selecting for formulas, 76–77 
sparklines, 189, 190 
using on other sheets in formulas, 
271–273 
Recently Used function group, 83 
Record Macro dialog box 
activating macros with keyboard 
shortcut, 335 
recording macros, 323–325 
records 
adding to PivotTable, 241 
adding to tables, 209–216 
counting, PivotTables, 232–233 
databases, 195 
filtering data, 202–208 
finding/removing duplicates,  
216–217 
sorting data, 196–202 
viewing filtered records, PivotTable, 
242–247 
Redo button 
changing data, 66 
Refresh button, PivotTables, 241 
relative cell addressing, formulas, 88 
relative references in macros, 328–330 
relocating data, 69 
Remove Duplicates feature, 216, 217 
renaming worksheet tabs, 266 
Report Filter area, PivotTables, 229–232 
reports see PivotTables 
ribbon, 3 
command tabs, 3 
hiding, 275, 276 
row headings (1, 2, 3, ...), 2 
printing, 319, 320 
showing/hiding screen elements, 
273 
Row Labels area, PivotTables 
choosing data to work on, 227 
creating PivotTable, 226 
grouping data, 239 
grouping related items using two 
fields, 234–236 
moving field data, 228 
Row values area, PivotTables 
PivotCharts, 255 
rows 
banded rows, tables, 210, 214 
changing font size, 106 
deleting, 124 
effect on formulas, 125 
Freeze Panes option, 276–279 
header rows sorting data, 198 
heightening, 116 
hiding/unhiding, 125–127 
inserting, 123 
effect on formulas, 124 
Total Row selection, tables, 214 
rules see conditional formatting 
■ S 
scaling options, printing, 300 
Scatter chart type, 158 
scope 
ranges of cells, 98 
screen elements 
showing/hiding, 273–276 

Index 
353 
scroll buttons, 4 
navigating worksheets, 32 
scrolling 
Freeze Panes option, 276, 278 
security 
anti-macro-virus defense system, 
337 
macros, 337–338 
Select All button, 5 
selecting worksheets, 269 
select-then-do principle, formatting, 
104 
Set Print Area option, 301 
shape styles 
formatting charts, 178–179 
Sheet Options button group 
Print Gridlines and Headings 
options, 319 
Sheet tab, Page Setup dialog 
printing titles, 310 
sheets see worksheets 
Shift key shortcuts 
additional key combinations, 23–25 
control key combinations, 19 
function key combinations, 21–23 
shortcuts, 18–25 
activating macros, 335–337 
arrow keys, 23 
Backspace key, 23 
copying data, 68 
creating table, 210 
Ctrl key, 19–21 
cutting data, 69 
Delete key, 23 
End key, 24 
Enter key, 24 
Esc key, 24 
function keys, 21–23 
hiding ribbon, 275 
Home key, 24 
Page Down key, 25 
Page Up key, 25 
pasting data, 68 
printing entire worksheet, 290 
redoing undone edit, 66 
selecting all cells, 36 
showing formulas in cells, 275 
Spacebar key, 25 
to home cell (A1), 32 
undoing edit, 65 
Slicer feature, PivotTables, 242–247 
Clear Filter button, 246 
resizing, 247 
restyling, 246 
Social Security Number option 
formatting numbers, 137 
Sort & Filter button group 
filtering data, 202 
sorting data, 198 
Sort & Filter drop-down menu, 197 
sorting by two fields, 200 
Sort A to Z option, 197 
sorting data, 196–202 
by cell format, 201–202 
by two fields, 199–201 
Spacebar key, 25 
sparklines, 189–192 
deleting, 192 
grouping of, 191 
modifying, 191 
representing binary values with, 192 
Special option, Number tab 
Format Cells dialog box, 137–138 
spreadsheets, 28–29 
see also workbooks; worksheets 
automatic recalculation, 75 
macros, 323–338 
status bar, 5 
Stop error alert 
data validation, 59 
strikethrough effect, fonts, 113 
structure 
protecting workbooks, 286 
styles 
applying formats with, 141–142 
applying styles quickly, 144 
color-coordination using chart 
styles, 177 
customizing, 142–144 
formatting charts using shape styles, 
178–179 
formatting with, 141–144 

Index 
354 
Line Style option, borders, 111 
styling reports, PivotTables, 249–253 
Table Style Options button group, 
214 
Table Styles button group, 213 
Sum function 
adding column of numbers, 75 
selecting ranges for formulas, 76 
■ T 
Tab key 
navigating worksheets, 32 
Table Style Options button group, 214 
Table Styles button group, 213 
Table Tools context tab, 213 
Table Tools Design tab, 211 
tables 
adding columns to, 213 
adding records to, 209 
banded columns, 214 
banded rows, 210, 214 
converting to range, 217 
filtering data, 210 
finding/removing duplicate records, 
216–217 
Format as Table button, 213 
formulas in, 212 
header row, 210 
naming, 211 
PivotTables, 219–258 
Total Row selection, 214 
turning database into, 209–216 
tabs, worksheets, 4 
contextual tabs, 6–7 
File tab, 7 
grouping sheets, 269 
moving, 264, 266 
moving between sheets, 262 
recoloring, 266 
renaming, 266 
selecting sheets, 269 
viewing, 265 
Tabular layout option, PivotTables, 251, 
252 
text 
aligning in cells, 39 
entering, 38–39 
formatting chart elements with 
WordArt, 179 
revealing in cells, 40 
using Auto Fill with, 50 
wrapping, 119 
text filters, 206–207 
Text Filters drop-down menu, 206 
Text function group, 83 
Time button, Header dialog, 317 
titles 
adding with Merge and Center,  
120–121 
printing, 308–311 
toggling 
formatting buttons, 107 
toolbars 
Quick Access toolbar, 4 
Top 10 AutoFilter, 208 
Top/Bottom Rules, conditional 
formatting, 150 
Total Row selection, tables, 214 
Trust Center 
anti-macro-virus defense system, 
337 
■ U 
Uncollated option, printing, 297 
underline (U) button, 107, 108 
Undo button 
changing data, 64 
Undo command, PivotTables, 224 
ungrouping worksheets, 269 
unhiding rows and columns, 127 
unhiding worksheets, 267 
■ V 
validation, data, 54–60 
Value Field Settings dialog box 
selecting mathematical operations, 
238 

Index 
355 
values 
see also numbers 
auto filling numeric sequence, 48–49 
copying formula result only, 93–95 
copying with Auto Fill, 48 
dates, 134–137 
displaying based on conditions,  
80–82 
formatting decimal points, 133 
formatting, 129–137 
percentages, 132 
punctuating, 132 
turning into currency, 129–132 
using Auto Fill with text, 50 
Values and Number Formatting option, 
95 
Values and Source Formatting option, 
95 
Values area, PivotTables 
changing calculation, 237–238 
choosing data to work on, 227 
creating PivotTable, 227 
formatting PivotTable, 247 
grouping with row and column value 
areas, 237 
moving field data, 228 
selecting mathematical operations, 
238 
VBA programming language 
editing macros in, 332–334 
exposing VBA worksheet, 333–334 
macros, 323 
vertical (value) axis major gridlines, 
charts, 157 
vertical alignment, 115–116 
vertical value (y) axis, charts, 156 
adding axes using Layout tab, 186 
adding axis titles using Layout tab, 
183 
Column chart type, 159 
reformatting vertical axis, 175–177 
Vertically center page option, printing, 
299 
View tab 
showing/hiding screen elements, 
273–276 
Workbook Views button group, 275 
viruses 
anti-macro-virus defense system, 
337 
■ W 
Warning error alert 
data validation, 59 
window arrangement of worksheets 
protecting, 286 
WordArt 
formatting text-based chart 
elements with, 179 
Workbook Views button group, 275, 
306 
Normal button, 308, 314 
Page Break Preview button, 306 
Page Layout button, 312 
workbooks, 2 
see also spreadsheets; worksheets 
adding worksheets, 263–264 
creating PivotTable, 224 
deleting worksheets, 265 
grouping worksheets, 268–269 
hiding worksheets, 267 
making macros available to all, 330 
moving between worksheets, 262 
printing entire workbook, 301 
protecting, 286–288 
protecting worksheets, 279–282 
recording macros, 323–325, 328 
referencing other worksheets,  
270–273 
saving macros to Personal Macro 
Workbook, 330–331 
saving with macro, 326–327 
scope of ranges, 98 
unprotecting, 288 
worksheet tabs, 4 
worksheets, 1–5 
see also spreadsheets; workbooks 
adding, 263–264 
adding column of numbers, 74–76 
adding headers and footers,  
312–319 

Index 
356 
aligning data in cells, 39–40
applying formats with styles,  
141–142 
Auto Fill speeding up data entry,  
48–54 
automatic recalculation, 75
button groups, 3 
calculating an average, 79–80
cell addresses, 31 
cell pointer, 5 
cells and addresses in, 261
changing data, 63–66 
changing default number of, 262
changing font size, 106 
column headings (A, B, C, ...), 3
command tabs, 3 
conditional formatting, 145–152
copying, 266 
copying data, 67–68
customizing with formulas, 84–95
data validation, 54–60 
deleting, 265 
deleting columns, 124 
deleting rows, 124 
dialog box launchers, 5 
editing macros in VBA, 333
entering data into selected range, 
45–47 
entering numerical data, 44
entering text and data, 38–39 
Excel dashboards, 262 
exposing VBA worksheet, 333–334
filtering data, 202–208 
formatting numbers/values, 129–137
formula bar, 3 
Freeze Panes option, 276–279
functions, 73–84 
grid, 31 
grouping, 268–269 
hiding, 267 
hiding formulas, 284–286
hiding/unhiding rows and columns, 
125–127 
inserting and deleting cells, 128–129
inserting columns, 122, 123
inserting rows, 123 
moving between sheets, 262
moving charts between, 161
moving data, 69 
moving sheet tabs, 264, 266 
Name Box, 3 
naming ranges from data in, 99–100
navigating, 31–34 
Print Active Sheets option, 290, 291, 
292 
Print Selection option, 293
printing entire worksheet, 289–290
printing part of, 290–294
protecting, 279–282 
protecting part of, 282–286
protecting window arrangement of, 
286 
Quick Access toolbar, 4
reasons for multiple sheets, 261
recoloring sheet tabs, 266
referring to cells in other sheets, 
270–271 
renaming sheet tabs, 266 
ribbon, 3 
row headings (1, 2, 3, ...), 2 
scope of ranges, 98 
scroll buttons, 4 
Select All button, 5 
selecting, 269 
selecting multiple cells, 34–37
selecting ranges for formulas, 76–77
showing formulas in cells, 274–275
showing/hiding screen elements, 
273–276 
sorting data, 196–202 
status bar, 5 
ungrouping, 269 
unhiding, 267 
unprotecting, 282 
using ranges on other sheets in 
formulas, 271–273 
viewing and editing formulas, 77–79
viewing sheet tabs, 265 
widening and narrowing columns, 
41–43 
writing formulas, 85–86 

Index 
357 
Wrap Text option, 119 
wrapping text, 119 
■ X 
x-axis see horizontal category (x) axis, 
charts 
■ Y, Z 
y-axis see vertical value (y) axis, 
charts 

 
 
 
i 
Excel 2010 Made Simple 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
■ ■ ■ 
Abbott Katz 
 

Excel 2010 Made Simple 
Copyright © 2011 by Abbott Katz 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information 
storage or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the copyright owner and the 
publisher. 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-3545-3 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-3546-0 
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark 
symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos, 
and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no 
intention of infringement of the trademark. 
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if 
they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not 
they are subject to proprietary rights. 
President and Publisher: Paul Manning 
Lead Editor: Steve Anglin 
Development Editor: Matthew Moodie 
Technical Reviewer: Greg Kettell 
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell, Jonathan 
Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Michelle Lowman, James Markham, Matthew Moodie,  
Jeff Olson, Jeffrey Pepper, Frank Pohlmann, Douglas Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, 
Dominic Shakeshaft, Matt Wade, Tom Welsh 
Coordinating Editor: Kelly Moritz 
Copy Editor: Damon Larson 
Compositor: MacPS, LLC 
Indexer: John Collin 
Artist: April Milne 
Cover Designer: Anna Ishchenko 
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, 233 Spring 
Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505, e-mail 
orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com.  
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit www.apress.com.  
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or 
promotional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more 
information, reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at 
www.apress.com/bulk-sales. 
The information in this book is distributed on an “as is” basis, without warranty. Although every 
precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the author(s) nor Apress shall 
have any liability to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused or alleged to 
be caused directly or indirectly by the information contained in this work. 

 
iv 
 
Contents 
Contents at a Glance .......................................................................................... iii
About the Author ................................................................................................ xi
About the Technical Reviewer ........................................................................... xi
Acknowledgments ............................................................................................ xii
 
■Quick Start Guide ............................................................................................. 1
The Excel Worksheet: What You’re Looking At ....................................................................................................... 1
Key Tips: Accessing Buttons with the Keyboard ..................................................................................................... 5
Contextual Tabs ...................................................................................................................................................... 6
A Visit Backstage .................................................................................................................................................... 7
Customizing the Quick Access Toolbar ................................................................................................................... 8
Where to Learn More ............................................................................................................................................ 12
Excel Keyboard Equivalents .................................................................................................................................. 18
■Chapter 1: Introducing Excel 2010 ................................................................ 27
The Advantages of Learning More ........................................................................................................................ 27
Spreadsheets Defined ........................................................................................................................................... 28
Excel Can Be Fun .................................................................................................................................................. 30
Summary .............................................................................................................................................................. 30
■Chapter 2: Getting Around the Worksheet and Data Entry ............................ 31
The Journey Starts Here ....................................................................................................................................... 31
Looking Around ..................................................................................................................................................... 31
Getting Around a Worksheet ................................................................................................................................. 31
Selecting Multiple Cells ........................................................................................................................................ 34
Selecting Cells Down and Across the Worksheet ............................................................................................ 35
Selecting Cells with the Keyboard ................................................................................................................... 36
Selecting All the Cells ...................................................................................................................................... 36
Still One More Selection Technique—The Name Box ...................................................................................... 37
Entering Text and Data ......................................................................................................................................... 38
Aligning Your Data—Where It Appears in the Cell ................................................................................................ 39
Widening and Narrowing Columns ....................................................................................................................... 41
Altering a column manually ............................................................................................................................. 41
Using the Auto-fit Feature ................................................................................................................................ 42

■ CONTENTS 
v 
Entering Numerical Data—How it’s Different ....................................................................................................... 44
Entering Data into a Selected Range .................................................................................................................... 45
Using Auto Fill to Speed Up Data Entry ................................................................................................................. 48
Copying a Value with Auto Fill ......................................................................................................................... 48
Auto Filling a Numeric Sequence ..................................................................................................................... 48
Using Auto Fill with Text .................................................................................................................................. 50
Using the Auto Fill Option Button ..................................................................................................................... 50
Customizing Auto Fill Lists ............................................................................................................................... 53
Data Validation: Bringing Quality Control to the Worksheet .................................................................................. 54
Making a List—Personalizing a Drop-Down Menu .......................................................................................... 57
Explaining Data Validation Errors with Error Alerts .......................................................................................... 59
Adding Data Entry Instructions with Input Messages ........................................................................................... 60
Summary .............................................................................................................................................................. 61
■Chapter 3: Editing Data .................................................................................. 63
Changing Your Data .............................................................................................................................................. 63
Undoing an Edit ................................................................................................................................................ 64
Undoing What You’ve Just Undone with the Redo Button ............................................................................... 66
Deleting Cell Contents ...................................................................................................................................... 66
Copying and Moving: Duplicating and Relocating Your Data ................................................................................ 66
Copying Data .................................................................................................................................................... 67
Moving Data ..................................................................................................................................................... 69
The Clipboard: The Storage Area for Copied and Cut Data ................................................................................... 69
Summary .............................................................................................................................................................. 71
■Chapter 4: Number Crunching 101: Functions, Formulas, and Ranges ......... 73
Automatic Calculations with Functions ................................................................................................................. 73
Adding a Column of Numbers .......................................................................................................................... 74
Selecting the Range You Need ......................................................................................................................... 76
Viewing and Editing Your Formula: Back to the Formula Bar .......................................................................... 77
Calculating an Average .................................................................................................................................... 79
Displaying Values Based on a Certain Condition ............................................................................................. 80
Revisiting Function Structure .......................................................................................................................... 82
Locating Functions in the Function Library ...................................................................................................... 82
Customizing the Worksheet with Formulas .......................................................................................................... 84
Writing a Basic Formula ................................................................................................................................... 85
Working Out the Order of Operations in a Formula .......................................................................................... 86
Copying Formulas: More Than Just Duplication .............................................................................................. 87
Clarifying Cell References by Naming a Range ..................................................................................................... 95
Naming a Range in the Name Box ................................................................................................................... 95
Naming Ranges from the Data in Your Worksheet .......................................................................................... 99
Naming A Range Containing One Cell: Why Bother? ...................................................................................... 100
The Name Manager: Where They’re All Ar-ranged ........................................................................................ 101
Summary ............................................................................................................................................................ 102
■Chapter 5: For Appearance’s Sake: Formatting Your Data .......................... 103
What Formatting Does (and Doesn’t Do) ............................................................................................................. 103
Basic Formatting ................................................................................................................................................. 104
Changing the Font .......................................................................................................................................... 104
Changing the Font Size .................................................................................................................................. 106

■ CONTENTS 
vi 
Using Bold, Italics, and Underline .................................................................................................................. 107
Determining a Cell’s Formatting .................................................................................................................... 108
Adding a Border ............................................................................................................................................. 109
Adding Color to Your Cells ............................................................................................................................. 111
Adding Extra Formatting ................................................................................................................................ 113
Aligning (and Realigning) Your Data ................................................................................................................... 114
Changing Horizontal Alignment ..................................................................................................................... 114
Changing Vertical Alignment .......................................................................................................................... 115
Changing Data Orientation ............................................................................................................................. 116
Indenting Data ................................................................................................................................................ 119
Wrapping Text ................................................................................................................................................ 119
Adding a Title with Merge and Center ........................................................................................................... 120
Inserting, Deleting, and Hiding Columns and Rows ............................................................................................ 121
Inserting a Column or Row ............................................................................................................................ 122
Inserting Multiple Columns or Rows .............................................................................................................. 123
What Inserting Does to Formulas ................................................................................................................... 124
Deleting Columns and Rows .......................................................................................................................... 124
Hiding Rows and Columns ............................................................................................................................. 125
Unhiding Columns and Rows ......................................................................................................................... 127
Inserting and Deleting Cells ........................................................................................................................... 128
Formatting Values: Making the Numbers Look Good .......................................................................................... 129
Turning Values into Currency ......................................................................................................................... 129
Working with Percentages ............................................................................................................................. 132
Punctuating Values ........................................................................................................................................ 132
Formatting Decimal Points ............................................................................................................................. 133
Working with Dates: Dates Are Numbers Too ................................................................................................ 134
Customizing Number Formats ............................................................................................................................ 137
The Special Formats Option ........................................................................................................................... 137
The Custom Option ......................................................................................................................................... 138
Copying Formats (Not Data) with the Format Painter ......................................................................................... 140
Applying Ready-Made Formats with Styles ........................................................................................................ 141
Customizing Your Own Style .......................................................................................................................... 142
Applying Styles Quickly: Another Way to Access Formatting Options ................................................................ 144
Conditional Formatting ........................................................................................................................................ 145
Looking for Scores Equal to or Greater Than 90 ............................................................................................ 149
An Alternative Approach to the Same Result ................................................................................................. 149
Some Additional Conditional Formatting Options .......................................................................................... 150
Turning Off Conditional Formatting ................................................................................................................ 152
Using Data Bars: A Different Kind of Conditional Format ............................................................................... 152
Summary ............................................................................................................................................................ 153
■Chapter 6: Charting Your Data ..................................................................... 155
Defining Chart Elements ..................................................................................................................................... 156
Choosing a Chart Type ........................................................................................................................................ 157
Creating a Column Chart ..................................................................................................................................... 159
Creating a Chart in 2 Seconds ............................................................................................................................ 160
Changing a Chart ................................................................................................................................................ 160
Moving and Resizing the Chart ...................................................................................................................... 160

■ CONTENTS 
vii 
Changing the Chart by Changing Its Data ...................................................................................................... 162
Changing the Chart Type ............................................................................................................................... 163
Where’s the Pie Chart? .................................................................................................................................. 167
Changing the Default Chart ............................................................................................................................ 167
Switching Rows with Columns: A Different Kind of Change ............................................................................... 168
Formatting Charts ............................................................................................................................................... 169
Formatting with the Mini-Toolbar .................................................................................................................. 170
Formatting with the Context Menu ................................................................................................................ 171
Formatting with the Current Selection Button Group ..................................................................................... 171
Exploring the Format Dialog Box .................................................................................................................... 172
Reformatting the Vertical Axis ....................................................................................................................... 175
Color-Coordinating Your Data Using Chart Styles .......................................................................................... 177
Formatting a Chart Object Using Shape Styles .............................................................................................. 178
Formatting Text Elements with WordArt ........................................................................................................ 179
Adding Extra Chart Elements with Chart Layouts .......................................................................................... 180
Adding Extra Chart Elements with the Layout Tab ......................................................................................... 181
Introducing Sparklines: Mini-Charts Placed in Cells ........................................................................................... 189
Modifying Sparklines ..................................................................................................................................... 191
Representing Binary Values with Sparklines ................................................................................................. 192
Summary ............................................................................................................................................................ 193
■Chapter 7: Sorting and Filtering Your Data: Excel’s Database Features ..... 195
Sorting Data: Instilling Order in Your Data .......................................................................................................... 196
Sorting by Two Fields: The Hows and Whys .................................................................................................. 199
Sorting by Cell Format ................................................................................................................................... 201
Finding What You Want with Filters .................................................................................................................... 202
Clearing a Filter .............................................................................................................................................. 205
Text and Number Filters: Filters Within the Filter .......................................................................................... 205
Filtering Multiple Fields ................................................................................................................................. 208
Tables: Adding User-Friendliness to Your Database ........................................................................................... 209
Finding Duplicate Records in the Table (and Removing Them) ..................................................................... 216
Converting a Table to a Range ....................................................................................................................... 217
Summary ............................................................................................................................................................ 218
■Chapter 8: PivotTables: Data Aggregation Without the Aggravation ........... 219
Looking at Some PivotTables .............................................................................................................................. 219
Creating a PivotTable .......................................................................................................................................... 224
Choosing Which Data to Work On .................................................................................................................. 227
Getting the Fields Where You Want Them ...................................................................................................... 228
Pivoting the Data Sideways Using the Column Labels Area .......................................................................... 229
Filtering Items Using the Report Filter Area ................................................................................................... 229
Creating a Report Worksheet for Each Item in a Filter ................................................................................. 231
Counting Records: A Way to Break Out Text Data .......................................................................................... 232
Grouping Related Items Using Two Fields ......................................................................................................... 234
Using the Row and Column Value Areas to Group Items ............................................................................... 237
Changing the Calculation ............................................................................................................................... 237
Grouping PivotTable Data: Organizing Your Time(s) ...................................................................................... 239
Refreshing the PivotTable: Changing the Data .............................................................................................. 240
Adding New Records to a PivotTable ............................................................................................................. 241

■ CONTENTS 
viii 
Viewing Which Records Are Filtered: Using the Slicer ........................................................................................ 242
How the Slicer Works ..................................................................................................................................... 243
Restyling the Slicer ........................................................................................................................................ 246
Formatting the PivotTable ................................................................................................................................... 247
Styling Your Report ............................................................................................................................................. 249
Changing PivotTable Headers ........................................................................................................................ 250
Layout Options ............................................................................................................................................... 251
Creating Charts from PivotTables Using PivotCharts .......................................................................................... 253
Filtering Data in the Chart with Field Buttons ................................................................................................ 256
Creating a PivotTable and PivotChart Together ............................................................................................. 258
Summary ............................................................................................................................................................ 259
■Chapter 9: Managing Your Workbook .......................................................... 261
Adding Worksheets to Your Workbook ................................................................................................................ 261
Clicking Through the Worksheets .................................................................................................................. 262
Adding and Moving New Worksheets ............................................................................................................ 263
Deleting Sheets .............................................................................................................................................. 265
Copying a Sheet ............................................................................................................................................. 266
Renaming and Recoloring the Worksheet Tabs ............................................................................................. 266
Hiding Sheets ................................................................................................................................................. 267
Grouping Sheets: Changing Multiple Sheets at the Same Time ......................................................................... 268
How to Group Sheets ..................................................................................................................................... 269
Ungrouping the Sheets .................................................................................................................................. 269
Referring to Cells in Other Worksheets: Using Them in Formulas ................................................................. 270
Using Ranges on Other Sheets in Formulas ................................................................................................... 271
Using the View Context Tab to Show and Hide Basic Screen Elements ............................................................. 273
Showing Formulas in Cells ............................................................................................................................ 274
Hiding the Ribbon .......................................................................................................................................... 275
Keeping Important Data in View with the Freeze Panes Option ..................................................................... 276
Freezing Rows and Columns at the Same Time ............................................................................................ 278
Protecting the Worksheet and the Workbook ..................................................................................................... 279
Protecting a Worksheet ................................................................................................................................. 280
Using a Password: Some Extra Protection ..................................................................................................... 281
Unprotecting a Worksheet ............................................................................................................................. 282
Protecting Some, but Not All, of a Worksheet ................................................................................................ 282
Hiding Formulas ............................................................................................................................................. 284
Protecting a Workbook .................................................................................................................................. 286
Unprotecting a Workbook .............................................................................................................................. 288
Summary ............................................................................................................................................................ 288
■Chapter 10: Printing Your Worksheets: Hard Copies Made Easy ................. 289
Deciding What You Want to Print ........................................................................................................................ 289
Printing the Entire Worksheet ........................................................................................................................ 289
Printing a Selection ........................................................................................................................................ 290
Surveying Printing Options: The Print Backstage ............................................................................................... 294
Setting the Print Area .......................................................................................................................................... 300
Customizing Your Printing .................................................................................................................................. 302
Working with Page Breaks ............................................................................................................................. 302
Previewing the Page Break: Getting a Bird’s-Eye View of the Printout ......................................................... 305

■ CONTENTS 
ix 
Printing Titles ................................................................................................................................................. 308
Adding Headers and Footers ............................................................................................................................... 312
Adding Headers and Footers in the Page Layout View .................................................................................. 312
Adding Headers and Footers Using the Page Setup Dialog Box .................................................................... 314
Adding Custom Headers and Footers ............................................................................................................. 316
Printing the Gridlines and Headings ................................................................................................................... 319
Summary ............................................................................................................................................................ 321
■Chapter 11: Automating Your Work with Macros ........................................ 323
The Two Kinds of Macros ................................................................................................................................... 323
Composing a Macro ............................................................................................................................................ 324
About Saving a Workbook with a Macro ............................................................................................................. 326
Playing Back the Macro ................................................................................................................................. 327
What We’ve Done ........................................................................................................................................... 328
Relative References in a Macro ..................................................................................................................... 328
Saving a Macro to the Personal Macro Workbook .............................................................................................. 330
Deleting a Macro ................................................................................................................................................. 332
Editing a Macro by Tweaking It in VBA ............................................................................................................... 332
VBA: Written Behind the Scenes .................................................................................................................... 333
Exposing the VBA Worksheet ......................................................................................................................... 333
Activating a Macro with a Keyboard Shortcut .................................................................................................... 335
A Note on Macro Security ................................................................................................................................... 337
Summary ............................................................................................................................................................ 338
Index ............................................................................................................... 339 
 

x 
About the Author 
Abbott Katz A New Yorker living in London, Abbott Katz has introduced Excel
to thousands of students in both university and corporate settings. The author
of Beginning Microsoft Excel 2010 (Apress), he has a doctorate in sociology and
has contributed to numerous publications on a range of topics. 

 
xi 
 
About the Technical 
Reviewer 
Greg Kettell is a professional software engineer with a diverse career that 
has covered everything from game programming to enterprise business 
applications. He has written and contributed to several books about 
software applications, operating systems, web design, and programming. 
Greg, his wife Jennifer, and their two children currently reside in upstate 
New York. 
 

 
xii 
 
Acknowledgments 
The Made Simple series sports two sets of authors: the ones whose names make it to the books’ 
covers, and the ones whose labors earn their appreciations in sections such as these.  
Thus, many thanks go to an international coterie of helpers, including development editor 
Matthew Moodie for his spot-on tweaks and knowing recommendations, coordinating editor 
Kelly Moritz for her redoubtable coordination of the publication process, technical editor Greg 
Kettell for his sage commentaries, and what is doubtless a set of literally silent partners—the able 
players on Apress’s production team. And thanks to Dominic Shakeshaft for encouraging this 
project’s inception. A Made Simple book isn’t so simple. 
An here’s an additional and special thanks to my wife, Marsha, for affording me the space to 
ply the time that might have been otherwise spent on less literary chores. Constructing 
spreadsheets is one of the few things I do better than her. 
 
 

