
Excel Quick 
3E
Gaylord N. Smith, MBA, CPA
Professor
Albion College, Albion, MI

Excel Quick, 3rd Edition
Gaylord N. Smith 
VP/Editorial Director: 
Jack W. Calhoun 
VP/Editor-in-Chief:
Rob Dewey
Acquisitions Editor: 
Matt Filimonov 
Marketing Manager: 
Steve Joos
Assoc. Content Project Manager:
D. Jean Buttrom 
Manager of Technology, Editorial: 
John Barans
Technology Project Manager:
Robin Browning
Website Project Manager:
Brian Courter 
Manufacturing Coordinator: 
Doug Wilke 
Production House: 
Pre-Press/PMG
Art Director: 
Linda Helcher
Cover Designer: 
Kim Torbeck, Imbue Design 
Cover Image(s): 
© Getty Images 
Printer:
West Group
Eagan, MN
COPYRIGHT © 2008, 2004  
Thomson South-Western, a part of The 
Thomson Corporation. Thomson, the Star 
logo, and South-Western are trademarks 
used herein under license. 
Printed in the United States of America 
1  2  3  4  5  10  09  08  07
ISBN 13:
978-0-324-37904-4 
ISBN 10: 0-324-37904-8 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
No part of this work covered by the 
copyright hereon may be reproduced or 
used in any form or by any means—
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, 
taping, Web distribution or information 
storage and retrieval systems, or in any 
other manner—without the written 
permission of the publisher. 
For permission to use material from this 
text or product, submit a request online 
at http://www.thomsonrights.com.
Library of Congress Control Number:  
2007940273 
For more information about our 
products, contact us at: 
Thomson Learning Academic Resource 
Center
1-800-423-0563 
Thomson Higher Education 
5191 Natorp Boulevard 
Mason, OH 45040 
USA

 
 
 
iii
Contents
INTRODUCTION 
v 
SECTION I: Excel 97, Excel 2000, Excel 2002 XP, and Excel 2003 
Lesson 1  Basic User Skills 
1 
Lesson 2  Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
18 
Lesson 3  Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
29 
Lesson 4  Top Ten List 
42 
Lesson 5  Charts 
54 
Section II: Excel 2007 
Lesson 1  Basic User Skills 
66 
Lesson 2  Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
85 
Lesson 3  Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
98 
 
Lesson 4  Top-Ten List 
111 
Lesson 5  Charts 
124 
Appendix A  Functions for Business 
136 
Appendix B  Data Commands 
146 
Appendix C  Pivot Tables 
151 

This page intentionally left blank 

 
 
 
v
Introduction
Excel Quick is designed for busy people. People who need to get something done 
today—this morning. People who do not want to read 100 pages before learning how to 
enter some data and print out a simple spreadsheet model. 
Most tutorials take days to complete. The goal of Excel Quick is to get users productively 
up and running within one hour (Lesson 1). Completing all the lessons will take the rest 
of the morning. You should find the lessons tightly sequenced and thorough. Grueling 
details have been kept to a minimum. 
This book uses a TEACH BY EXAMPLE approach. As little time as possible is spent 
discussing; as much time as possible is spent doing.
Will you learn all there is to know about Excel using this book? Absolutely not. But it is a 
safe bet that most of what you will ever need to know about Excel is contained in 
this book. After completing all of the lessons in this manual, you will be able to design 
some relatively complex spreadsheet models. When you reach the point where you 
need to learn about some advanced command or feature in detail, go to a more 
comprehensive user’s guide. In the meantime, Excel Quick will serve you well! 
Section I of this book provides a tutorial for Excel 97, Excel 2000, Excel 2002 XP, and
Excel 2003.  Section II covers Excel 2007.  Although each version of Excel has added 
new features, the basics are the same.  Excel 2007 has its own section because of 
extensive changes in the Excel command structure and icons, but again, the basics are 
the same. 
Lesson 1 of each section provides the minimum that you will need to know to use Excel 
productively. This lesson takes longer to complete than any other lesson (about an 
hour), but it may be all you will ever need. It covers starting and ending Excel; entering 
text, numbers, and formulas on a worksheet; correcting errors; using toolbar buttons; 
saving your work for later retrieval; and printing worksheet files. It also introduces “what-
if” analysis. 
Lesson 2 introduces you to the mathematical capabilities of Excel. Lesson 3 shows you 
how to quickly expand, modify, and enhance worksheets. These lessons should be 
completed before attempting the remaining lessons. 
Lessons 4 and 5 may be completed in any order. Lesson 4 provides extra information on 
several specific areas of worksheet design, including using artwork. Lesson 5 covers 
how to create, modify, and use charts and graphs. 
Appendix A covers several Excel functions that are helpful in creating spreadsheet files 
that can be utilized in business and finance.  The website that supports this book is 

Introduction 
vi
found at www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith. This site contains many additional 
resources and examples of simple, but useful spreadsheet models. Appendix B covers 
basic commands to manipulate an Excel database. Appendix C is a quick look at an 
extraordinary report and summarization tool in Excel called a pivot table. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Sincerest thanks go to my editorial team at South-Western. Although the composition of 
the team has changed over the years, new members always step in with the same level 
of enthusiasm and support as their predecessors. The continuous professionalism and 
dedication to the success of this series is both an inspiration and a comfort to me. 
Thanks guys! 
A particular note of thanks goes to Shaun Bonnell, Albion College student, for his 
extensive assistance with this revision. 
FINAL COMMENT 
Enough said. Let’s get started! 

 
1 
SECTION I: Excel 97, Excel 2000, Excel 
2002XP, and Excel 2003 
 
Lesson 1 
BASIC USER SKILLS 
 
 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
In this lesson, you will learn to: 
 
• 
Start the Microsoft® Excel program 
• 
Move the active cell around the worksheet 
• 
Enter text and numbers 
• 
Modify and delete entries 
•  
Change column widths 
•  
Use toolbar buttons to italicize, bold, align, and underline data; to undo 
errors; to place borders in cells; and to total the values in a column 
• 
Save worksheets for later recall 
• 
Perform what-if analysis  
• 
Print files 
• 
Exit the Microsoft® Excel program 
 
 
COMPUTER SPREADSHEETS 
 
Imagine a large sheet of accounting paper with many columns and rows. In the 
business world, this is often referred to as a worksheet or spreadsheet. Paper 
spreadsheets are commonly used to gather large amounts of financial data and 
to accumulate the results using a pencil and a calculator. 
 
Computer spreadsheets are similar to paper spreadsheets in structure and 
format. One big difference with computer spreadsheets is that the columns and 
rows appear on a computer screen rather than on paper. Another difference is 
that arithmetic calculations (totals, averages, etc.) can be performed 
automatically by the computer. In fact, the real benefit to using a computer 
spreadsheet comes when you start taking advantage of the programs ability to 
automatically perform calculations using different sets of numbers (called what-if 
analysis) and to create charts (graphs) based on data contained in the 
worksheet. A computer spreadsheet program such as Microsoft® Excel lends 
itself perfectly to just about any application that requires the analysis and 
manipulation of numbers. 
 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
2 
Go to the www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith website to see some simple 
and useful Excel applications. 
 
BEFORE BEGINNING 
 
1. 
Necessity of Saving Your Work. During the lessons in this tutorial, you will 
be asked occasionally to save your work for use in a later lesson. Files 
should be saved on your hard drive, removable flash drive or network. If 
access to these is not available, you will need to save your work on a 
properly formatted diskette. 
 
2.  ESC (Escape) Key. As you work through this tutorial, you will be asked to 
enter commands using the mouse or various keys on the keyboard. 
Occasionally, you may make a mistake by clicking the wrong spot or 
pressing the wrong key. When this occurs, you can use the ESC (Escape) 
key to escape from the incorrect entry. Pressing the ESC key once or twice 
will eliminate the error. This will allow you to start over with the proper entry. 
 
3.  Getting Help. Excel uses the function key marked F1 as a help key. The 
same help system is available by clicking the Help command in the Menu 
Bar at the top of the screen. 
 
 
STARTING MICROSOFT® EXCEL 
 
The Section I tutorial covers four versions of Excel: Excel 97, Excel 2000, Excel 
2002XP, and Excel 2003. Although each version of Excel has added new 
features, the basics are the same. There may be some minor differences 
between the illustrations shown in this book and what you see on your screen.  
Where major differences exist, they will be thoroughly discussed in the tutorial. 
 
 
To start Excel, simply double-click the Microsoft® Excel icon. You will see the 
Excel opening logo for a few seconds followed by a screen containing a blank 
worksheet window. If necessary, maximize the worksheet screen so that the work 
area is as large as possible. Illustration 1.1 identifies some important elements of 
the screen that are unique to Excel. Please take a minute to note the names of 
the various parts of the Excel screen. Many of these names will be referred to 
later in the tutorial. Each version of Excel will look slightly different. 
 
Before beginning this tutorial, you should write in the space provided below which 
version of Microsoft® Excel you are using (Excel 97, Excel 2000, Excel 2002XP, 
and Excel 2003). To find out which version you are using, click About Microsoft 
Excel (Help menu). 
 
I am using Version ________
Excel 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
3 
 
 
 
  Illustration 1.1 
  Worksheet Terminology 
 
For Excel 2000 and Excel 2002XP, if you have an annoying little paperclip 
character on your screen, you can remove it by selecting Hide the Office 
Assistant (Help menu). For Excel 2002XP, the default screen may show a 
Startup Task Pane on the right side of the screen under the heading New 
Workbook. Close it for now by clicking the “X” to the right of the words New 
Workbook. (To eliminate the Startup Task Pane on a more permanent basis, click 
on Options (Tool menu) and select View. Under the Show category, uncheck the 
Startup Task Pane and click OK.) 
 
 
THE WORKSHEET 
 
Excel uses a grid of columns and rows to frame a work area that is known as the 
worksheet. Each worksheet is displayed in its own worksheet window. The top 
border of the worksheet window contains a row of sequential letters (A, B, C, 
etc.). These are the column headers. The left border of the worksheet window 
contains a column of sequential numbers (1, 2, 3, etc.). These are the row 
headers. The intersection of a column and row is known as a cell. Currently the 
worksheet is completely empty except for an outlined rectangular box in cell A1. 
This box is known as the active cell. The active cell indicates where text or 
numbers may be entered on the worksheet. You will also notice that the position 
of this cell is indicated in the Name box just above the worksheet. 
 
 
 
Font
information
Name box
Row
headers
Column headers
Formula bar
Title bar
Menu bar
Active cell
Status bar
Sheet tabs
Formatting  toolbar
Standard tool bar

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
4 
DIFFERENTIATING BETWEEN WORKBOOKS AND WORKSHEETS 
 
Excel files are called workbooks. Each workbook can contain several pages, 
which are referred to as worksheets. Currently on your screen is a workbook 
named Book1, and it contains several empty worksheets. Notice the workbook 
name in the Title bar at the top of the screen and the Sheet tabs at the bottom of 
the worksheet. Both workbooks and worksheets can be given more descriptive 
names, but for now the default names will be used. 
 
 
MOVING AROUND THE WORKSHEET 
There are several ways to move around the worksheet using either the mouse or 
the keyboard. Both approaches are demonstrated below. 
Using the Mouse 
You can use the mouse to move the active cell around the worksheet simply by 
aiming the mouse pointer at the cell you want to move to and then clicking the left 
mouse button. To demonstrate this, click cell B1 (if you miss, aim and try again). 
After doing this, the active cell should shift to a position under the B column 
(notice the cell address in the Name box changes from A1 to B1). You can use 
this method to move the active cell to any location on the worksheet. 
The actual worksheet is bigger than what is shown on the screen. To 
demonstrate this, click the right scroll arrow once and notice that column A is 
no longer visible and that a new column has been added on the right side of the 
worksheet. 
 
Now for one of the surprises of this program. Repeatedly click the right scroll 
arrow and note that new columns appear in alphabetic sequence (you can speed 
up the scrolling by holding down the mouse button). Stop when you get to column 
BD. You have moved out 56 columns. The far right column is IV. Thats 256 
columns! 
 
The worksheet also has more rows than are shown on the screen. Repeatedly 
click the down scroll arrow to move down the worksheet. Notice the row 
numbers increase each time you click the down scroll arrow (again, hold down 
the mouse button to speed up the scrolling). Stop when you get to row 100. It 
would take a long time for you to find the bottom of the worksheet since it is 
65,536 rows deep. 
 
As you can see, the worksheet is very large. There are millions of cells available 
for use on each worksheet. It is limited only by the memory of your computer. 
What you see on the screen in the worksheet window is only a small portion of 
the entire workbook. 
 
As with other Windows programs, you can use the scroll bar to move quickly 
around the worksheet. Dragging the scroll boxes horizontally or vertically over the 
Right scroll 
 arrow 
 
Down scroll  
arrow 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
5 
scroll bars or clicking the scroll arrows are some common ways of moving 
around. Feel free to experiment with these now. Position the active cell back in 
cell A1 when you are done. 
Using the Keyboard 
You can also use the arrow keys on the keyboard to move the active cell around 
the worksheet. The arrow keys are located on the right side of your keyboard. 
 
Pressing any of the arrow keys will move the active cell in the direction of the 
arrow. This is different than clicking the scroll arrows with the mouse. When you 
click the scroll arrows with the mouse, the active cell remains stationary and the 
worksheet moves. When you use the arrow keys on the keyboard, the active cell 
itself moves. 
 
To demonstrate using arrow keys, press the right arrow () key once. This 
shifts the active cell over to column B. Now press the right arrow () key 
repeatedly and notice that as new columns come on the screen, the active cell 
remains visible. 
 
There are also four common ways to move the active cell quickly around the 
worksheet using the keyboard. These methods are particularly helpful for moving 
the active cell long distances. 
 
1. 
The first way is to simply hold down one of the arrow keys on the keyboard. 
Holding down an arrow key moves the active cell quickly in the direction of 
the arrow. Try it with the down arrow () key. 
 
2. 
A second way is to use the keys marked PG UP (Page Up) and PG DN 
(Page Down) on the keyboard. These move the active cell up and down one 
page at a time, respectively. Try these keys out if you wish. 
 
3. 
The third way to move long distances quickly is to use the END key in 
conjunction with the arrow keys. No matter where the active cell is now, 
press the END key once and then press the down arrow () key. What 
happens? As you can see, the END key/arrow key combination moves the 
active cell to the end of the column or row that the active cell is on. The 
active cell will stop if it bumps into a cell that isnt empty. Practice using the 
END key. See if you can get the active cell positioned in the lower right 
corner of the worksheet. 
 
4. 
The fourth way is to hold down the CTRL key and then press the HOME 
key. Try this CTRL+HOME key combination now and watch what happens. 
This moves the active cell back to cell A1. This is a rather limited, but very 
helpful, key combination. 
 
If this does not work for you, try the HOME key by itself. 
 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
6 
DATA ENTRY 
 
You are now ready to learn how to enter data on the worksheet. All data entered 
on a worksheet are classified as either text or values. You must be in the Ready 
mode to enter data on the worksheet. Check the mode indicator on the left-hand 
corner of the Status bar. If it does not say Ready, press the ESC key (repeatedly 
if necessary). 
 
Text 
 
Text is cell input that is either letters or words. In some cases, numbers can  
be entered as text. Excel does different things with values (i.e., mathematical 
operations, special number formats, etc.) than with text so it is important that it 
knows which cells contain text and which are values. By default, text is aligned to 
the left side of a cell. As you will see later, the alignment of text can be changed 
so that it is right-aligned or centered. 
 
Values 
 
Values are cell inputs that are either numbers, user-created formulas, or built-in 
formulas (called functions). By default, values are aligned to the right side of a 
cell, but this too can be changed. 
 
 
ENTERING TEXT ON THE WORKSHEET 
 
There are many conventions that relate to entering text and numbers that you 
need to be aware of. Since the easiest way to introduce you to these is with a 
demonstration, lets begin entering some data on the worksheet. You will create a 
simple financial plan for a consulting firm for the first quarter of the year. 
 
To begin with, you will enter the label Consulting fees in cell A2. To do this, move 
the active cell to cell A2 (use arrow keys or the mouse) and type the letter C. If 
you make any typing errors, press the ESC key and start over. As soon as you 
type the letter C, the word Enter appears in the mode indicator on the Status bar. 
 
 
 
 
Now finish entering your label by typing the letters onsulting fees. You will see 
the words “Consulting fees” appear in the cells and in the Formula bar. 
 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
7 
Storing Input in a Cell 
 
Input is not actually stored in the cell until you (1) press the ENTER key, or (2) 
press one of the arrow keys, or (3) click the Enter box in the Formula bar, or (4) 
click some other cell. Pressing ENTER will store the input in the cell and move 
the active cell down one row. Pressing one of the arrow keys serves the dual 
purpose of storing input in a cell and moving the active cell in the direction of the 
arrow. This is particularly helpful when entering a large amount of data in a row 
or column. Clicking the Enter box stores the input in the active cell without 
moving it. Clicking the Cancel box serves the same purpose as pressing the ESC 
key. Use any of these four methods now to store the label Consulting fees in cell 
A2. 
 
 
Throughout the rest of this tutorial all instructions for entering input onto the 
worksheet will be condensed. You will simply be instructed to enter input into a 
cell. How you choose to store the entry will be left up to you (using any of the four 
methods just described). 
 
Continue setting up the financial plan categories by entering Expenses in cell 
A4, Salaries in cell A5, Commissions in cell A6, Social security taxes in cell 
A7, Rent in cell A8, Total expenses in cell A9, and Net income in cell A11. If 
you make any typing errors, press ENTER and leave them for now. You will be 
shown how to correct them later. 
 
 
 
 
Entering Long Labels 
Notice that several labels extend over into column B. The extra characters arent 
actually entered in column B, they are just displayed there. Now move the active 
cell to cell B9 and enter the word micro. From the result, you can see that long 
entries in a cell will not be completely displayed if the adjacent cell contains input. 
 
Enter 
Cancel 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
8 
 
 
 
Correcting Typing Errors Before Storing 
If you make a typing error before you press ENTER you can use either the ESC 
key or the BACKSPACE key to change your entry. Pressing the ESC key will 
completely cancel the current entry and return you to the Ready mode so you can 
start over. Pressing the BACKSPACE key will delete the current entry one 
character at a time (working right to left), allowing you to correct your entry 
without having to start over from scratch. 
Correcting Typing Errors After Storing 
There are many ways to correct errors that you catch after you store the input in 
the cell. Two easy methods will be described here. The first method is to simply 
type over the incorrect entry with a new entry. To demonstrate this, you will 
change the label in cell A7 from Social security taxes to Payroll taxes. To do this, 
simply move to cell A7 and enter Payroll taxes. 
 
 
 
 
The second way to correct errors is to directly edit the contents of a cell. Move 
the active cell to cell B9. Lets change the word micro to macro. To activate the 
Edit mode, press the F2 key—or double-click the cell—or move the mouse over 
the word micro in the Formula bar and click once. The mode indicator changes 
from Ready to Edit. Next, use the left arrow ( ) key or the mouse to move the 
insertion bar to the space between the letters i  and c. The position of the in-
sertion bar is important because pressing the DELETE key erases letters to the 
right and pressing the BACKSPACE key erases letters to the left. Since you want 
to change micro to macro, press BACKSPACE now to erase the letter i, type the 
letter a, and press ENTER. 
 
 
 
 
Erasing Cell Contents Completely 
 
Sometimes correcting errors can mean erasing cell contents completely. The 
DELETE key can be used for this. Move to cell B9 and press the DELETE key. 
Goodbye macro! 
 
 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
9 
 
TYPEFACE STYLES (FONTS) 
 
The name of the font currently being used by the worksheet is Arial and 
the size of the type is 10 points. These are shown in the font style and font size 
boxes. If either of these boxes is not shown on the toolbar, they can be found 
by clicking the More Buttons or Toolbar Options button. 
 
To demonstrate how to change fonts within individual cells, move to cell A2. Then 
click the Font style drop-down box. Up pops a menu of other font choices. Click 
one that interests you. The label Consulting fees is immediately presented in the 
new font. The type size can also be changed by clicking the Font size drop-down 
box and selecting another size. The row height will automatically change to 
accommodate larger type sizes. Go ahead and experiment. 
 
When you are done experimenting, set cells A2, A4, and A11 to the Arial font  
with a point size of 12. Your screen should look exactly as shown below before 
proceeding! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHANGING COLUMN WIDTH AND ROW HEIGHT 
 
The titles Expenses, Commissions, Payroll taxes, and Total expenses all spill 
over into column B. Column widths can be changed to accommodate long words 
or numbers. Lets widen column A so that the expense titles are completely 
contained within it. To do this, move the mouse pointer to the line between 
column headers for columns A and B at the top of the worksheet. When 
positioned exactly on the line, the mouse pointer becomes a thick cross with 
arrowheads at both ends of the horizontal bar. When this symbol appears, press 
More options 
Font style box 
 
Font 
size box 
 
Font  
size box 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
10 
the mouse button to grab the right border of column A, drag the column border to 
the right about an inch, and then release the mouse button. Column A is now 
widened and the expense titles no longer overlap into column B. 
 
Another way column widths can be changed is by selecting Column (Format 
menu) and clicking on Width. The standard column width is 8.43 when the font is 
Arial size 10. 
 
There is also a way to size columns automatically. Move the mouse pointer again 
to the line at the top of the worksheet between column headers A and B. When 
the mouse pointer becomes a thick cross with arrowheads again, double-click the 
mouse. This technique automatically makes column A just wide enough to 
include the widest label in that column. See the illustration on the next page. 
 
These same techniques can be used to change the height of any row. 
  
 
 
 
 
ENTERING NUMBERS ON THE WORKSHEET 
 
Now lets give a little substance to your financial plan by adding some numbers. 
 
Entering Numbers  
 
Whenever you need to enter a number on a worksheet, simply enter it using 
either the numerical keypad on the far right side of your keyboard (NUM LOCK 
on) or the number keys across the top of your keyboard. 
 
You do not need to include commas or dollar signs as you type in the value, but 
Excel will accept them. Also, if you enter a decimal point, that will be shown as 
well. You can enter negative numbers either by enclosing them in parentheses or 
by preceding the number with a minus sign. You can enter percentages either by 
typing in the number followed by a % (percent sign) or simply by typing in the 
percentage as a decimal. 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
11 
 
Number Formats 
 
Number formats are the presentation styles for values entered into cells. For 
example, the value 1234 is shown below expressed in several common format 
categories. 
 
 
 
All of these formats can be shown with decimals, too (e.g., 1234.567 or 
$1,234.56). Notice also that some of the values are not aligned exactly below 
each other. Methods to correct this alignment problem are discussed in Lesson 2. 
 
You can designate the number format for cells using the Format command on the 
main menu. In some cases you can also assign number formats to cells 
automatically by the way you enter values for the first time. To demonstrate this, 
enter the following values in the indicated cells (be sure to use dollar signs and 
commas where shown): 
 
 
cell C2: $10,000 
(use dollar sign and comma) 
 
cell C5: $4,400 
(use dollar sign and comma) 
 
cell C6: 600 
(no dollar sign or comma) 
 
cell C7: 500 
(no dollar sign or comma) 
 
cell C8: 1,350 
(use comma) 
 
 
 
 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
12 
Now experiment in cell C8 by entering 1350, $1,350, and $1,350.00. Once a 
number style is established for a cell, all subsequent entries in that cell will show 
up in the established format until you formally change it. Changing formats will be 
demonstrated in Lesson 2. 
 
 
Entering Numbers as Text 
 
Numbers are usually entered as values, but they can also be mixed with letters 
and entered as text. Common reasons for doing this might be to enter inventory 
part numbers, addresses, or calendar dates. When numbers and letters are 
mixed in an entry, Excel is generally smart enough to recognize that entry as text. 
For example, enter 1st Qtr in cell C1. 
 
If you wish to treat an entry that contains only numbers as text, you can precede 
the number with an apostrophe (). The apostrophe itself does not show up in the 
cell. 
 
 
SAVE YOUR WORK 
 
You should get in the habit of saving your work at regular intervals to prevent 
losing it due to a power failure and other unforeseen mishaps. Select Save As 
(File menu). If you can access your hard drive or network, select the drive and 
directory where you want to save it. If you wish to save your file on a diskette, 
insert it into drive A or B and select the appropriate drive. In the File Name text 
box, type the name Plan1 and select Save.  
 
 
USING TOOLBAR BUTTONS 
 
Toolbar buttons are shortcuts that can be used to perform many main menu 
commands quickly. Toolbar buttons are normally placed at the top of the 
worksheet, but they can be moved, hidden, and customized in many ways. 
 
To find out what each toolbar button does, place the mouse pointer on the button. 
A short description of the function of that button appears in a small box below the 
mouse pointer. Take a moment right now and check the function of each button. 
Do not click any toolbar button with the mouse yet. The Help system in Excel is 
another valuable source of information on all the toolbar buttons.  
 
Now lets use some of the toolbar buttons to enhance our preliminary financial 
plan. Again, if these are not on your toolbar, you will find them by clicking More 
Buttons or Toolbar Options button. 
 
1. 
Move to cell C1, then click the Bold button. Instantly the title 1st Qtr is 
changed to bold print.  
 
 
Bold 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
13 
2. 
In cell C1 again, click the Center button. Now the title 1st Qtr is centered in 
the cell. 
 
 
 
3. 
In cell C1 again, click the Borders button drop-down arrow. Select the 
single, thin bottom border (second from left, top row). A line is now drawn 
across the bottom of cell C1. 
 
 
 
4. 
Move to cell C8, then click the Underline button. The number 1,350 is now 
underlined. Notice that Underline is different than Borders. Underline places 
a line directly under the characters within a cell. Borders underlines the 
entire cell. 
 
 
 
5. 
Ugh! That underline doesnt look great. If total expenses turns out to be a 
large number, the underline will look really short. Click the Undo button. You 
can also turn off the underline by clicking the Underline button again. 
 
 
 
6. 
In cell C8, click the Borders button drop-down arrow. Select the same thin 
bottom border you did in step 3 above. Repeat this as well in cell C9. 
 
 
 
7. 
Move to cell C11 and again click the Borders drop-down arrow. This time 
select the double, thin bottom border (far left, middle row). A double line is 
now drawn across the bottom of cell C11. 
 
 
 
 
 
8. 
Lets italicize the expense titles (range A5 to A8). Two methods will 
be used to demonstrate selecting this range. First, move to cell A5. 
Then, hold down the SHIFT key, press the down arrow () key three 
times to expand the range to cell A8. The range A5 to A8 is now 
selected, and cells A6, A7, and A8 should be darkened. (The first cell 
in a range is always outlined while all other cells in the range are 
darkened.) If you were to click the Italic button now (dont do it), all 
four expense titles would be changed to italic. Deselect the range 
now by clicking any where on the worksheet. 
 
 
Now lets use the mouse to select the same range. Aim the mouse pointer at 
cell A5, depress the mouse button, drag the mouse pointer down to cell A8, 
and then release the mouse button. If you have any problems, try again. 
After the range has been properly selected, click the Italic button. The four 
expense titles are now changed to italic print. 
 
9. 
Move to cell A9, then click the Align Right button. This moves the label 
Total expenses to the right side of cell A9. 
 
 
 
Center 
Borders 
 
Underline 
Undo 
Borders 
Borders 
italic 
Align Right 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
14 
FUNCTIONS AND FORMULAS 
 
Two values are needed to finish the financial plan: Total expenses and Net 
income. 
 
Functions 
 
Move to cell C9, then click the AutoSum button and press ENTER. Instantly the 
column of numbers is totaled using a function called SUM (more on this and 
other functions in Lesson 2). Since the top number in this column is in the 
Currency format, Excel places the sum in the same format. 
 
Formulas 
 
Now you are ready to write a formula containing cell references that will be used 
to compute net income. Please note that the formula must be preceded with an = 
(equal) sign. Formulas will be covered in more detail in Lesson 2. 
 
Since net income is revenue minus total expenses, the formula you are going to 
write will tell Excel to take the value in cell C2 (revenue), subtract the value in cell 
C9 (total expenses), and put the result in cell C11. This is easy to do. Move to 
cell C11, type the formula =C2-C9 (you may use either capital or lowercase 
letters when entering formulas), and press ENTER. Excel will instantly perform 
the calculation and the result ($3,150) should appear in cell C11. Note that the 
formula =C2-C9 appears in the Formula bar. 
 
If you had forgotten to type the = (equal) sign when entering the formula, Excel 
would think that you were entering text and C2-C9 would appear in cell C11 
instead of the value $3,150. 
 
Your financial plan should appear as below. 
 
 
 
 
 
AutoSum 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
15 
Note that dollar signs ($) are used only at the top and the bottom, and for items 
being subtotaled. This is the standard professional format for financial 
statements. 
 
 
SAVE YOUR WORKBOOK AGAIN 
 
Since you have made some changes to your file since you last saved it, your new 
version should be saved. On the toolbar, click the Save button (or on the File 
menu, click Save). 
  
 
PRINTING A WORKSHEET 
 
You are now finished with your first spreadsheet model. It looks pretty nice! Lets 
get a printout of it. Click the Print button on the Toolbar and examine your printed 
masterpiece. 
 
A printed spreadsheet page will contain nine normal-sized columns and will 
extend down about 50 rows before going to a second page (if those rows contain 
any data). Because printing a spreadsheet file is not the same as printing a word 
processing document, there are some print options and controls of which you 
should be aware. 
 
To briefly go over these, select Page Setup (File menu), and click the Page tab. 
Two important settings will be discussed here; you can try them later when you 
work with a larger model than the one you currently have. First, spreadsheet 
models are frequently wider than they are tall, so selecting Landscape 
orientation (i.e., printing sideways on a page) can be very helpful. Second, it is 
not uncommon to have spreadsheet models extend beyond one page when 
printing, and yet, if downsized for printing purposes only, they could fit nicely on 
one page with smaller print. Clicking the Fit To 1 Page option works great for this 
purpose. 
 
Click the Margin tab. Here you set your margins as you wish. 
 
Click the Header/Footer tab. Headers and footers are print items that appear at 
the top and bottom of every printed page. Most people want none. To set your 
header to None (if it is not already set that way), click the Header drop-down 
arrow and use the scroll bar to find (none) at the top of the options list. Click on it. 
Use the same process for setting your footer. Do this now for your model if you 
wish. 
 
Click the Sheet tab. The first important option on this tab is Gridlines. Selecting 
this will print the column and row lines when the worksheet is printed. This is 
particularly helpful on a wide worksheet. A second helpful option is Row and 
Column Headings. Selecting this will print the column letters and row numbers 
when the worksheet is printed. Your model does not need the gridline or row and 
column heading options, but you are welcome to experiment later. For now, click 
Save 
 
Print 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
16 
OK to close the Page Setup dialog box.  
 
Before demonstrating some additional print options, click in cell N1 and enter 
your name.  It is always a good idea to preview a document before you print it. 
On the Standard toolbar, click the Print Preview button. A Preview window 
appears and you can see what your worksheet looks like before you print it. On 
the screen you see your financial planning model. Click the Next button and you 
will see page 2 of the printout which contains your name. Now, select the Page 
Break Preview option. The blue borders (solid or dashed) indicate what will be 
printed on each page. For future reference, these blue borders are page breaks 
and can be moved with a mouse to print exactly what you want on each page. 
For now, select View and then Normal to get back to the regular worksheet. 
Other commands you should be aware of are Insert Page Break and Insert 
Remove Page Break. Page break changes are saved when your file is saved. 
 
You can also print just a portion of the worksheet if you wish. For example, lets 
assume you want to print only the expenses shown in your model. On your 
worksheet, select the range A4 to C9 and then click Print (File menu). Under the 
Print What area of the Print dialog box, click Selection and then click OK.  
 
 
WHAT-IF ANALYSIS 
 
One of the most important features of spreadsheet programs is their ability to 
quickly recalculate values when new data are entered. This is often referred to as 
what-if analysis—“What if the value were this? What if the value were that?” 
Although our financial plan model is still very simple, this recalculation ability can 
be easily demonstrated. Suppose rent expense is $1,500 instead of $1,350. 
Enter 1500 in cell C8 now. Instantly, total expenses are changed to $7,000 and 
net income changes to $3,000! Enter 11000 in cell C2 (Consulting fees) now. 
Bingo! Net income changes to $4,000. Experiment with other values if you wish. 
You will find that the total expenses and net income are recomputed each time. 
Think of the possibilities! 
 
 
FINISHING THE LESSON 
 
To continue on directly to Lesson 2, select Close (File menu). If you are going to 
do Lesson 2 at a later time, select Exit (File menu). If you are asked if you want 
to “Save changes,” choose No since you do not want your “what-if” numbers 
saved. You want to keep the original financial plan numbers intact.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Print 
Preview

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
17 
FINAL COMMENT 
 
Give yourself a pat on the back. This first lesson has covered a lot of territory. 
You should feel confident enough at this point in time to construct some simple 
but useful spreadsheet models. You will find the remaining lessons in this tutorial 
are shorter, but no less important.  
 
If you have a disk of Excel files created by other people that you wish to use, you 
are prepared to do this now. However, if you wish to expand your spreadsheeting 
skills so that you can design models like those seen in Appendix C, read on! 

 
18 
Lesson 2 
MATH:  FORMULAS, FORMATS, AND FUNCTIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
In this lesson, you will learn to: 
 
• 
Use Excel to perform arithmetic calculations 
• 
Design Excel formulas 
• 
Distinguish between number formats 
• 
Use Excel functions 
• 
Display formulas and cell contents 
 
 
BEFORE BEGINNING 
 
In this lesson you are going to expand the financial plan that you created in 
Lesson 1 and saved as a workbook named Plan1. You should have that file 
available on your file diskette, hard drive, or network. To begin this lesson, the 
Excel program should be started and a blank worksheet should be on your 
screen (use the File New command if necessary, and then click OK on the 
General tab. Do not open the Plan1 workbook yet. 
 
 
THE IMPORTANCE OF FORMULAS IN EXCEL 
 
The ability to enter formulas on worksheets is one of the most important features 
of Excel. It is what makes spreadsheet programs so flexible and powerful, and so 
appropriate for performing repeated numerical analysis, sometimes called what-if 
analysis. This form of analysis was introduced in Lesson 1. 
 
When you enter a formula in a cell, Excel automatically computes the answer and 
immediately displays it in the cell. The formula itself will be displayed in the 
Formula bar. The worksheet models shown in Appendix C use many formulas. 
 
Writing formulas in Excel is usually very easy, but you can make your formulas 
as complicated as your needs demand. Formulas can include any combination of 
the following: numbers, mathematical operators, cell references, functions, and 
range names. All of these except range names will be covered in this lesson. 
Range names will be covered in Lesson 4. 
 
 
 
 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
 
19 
19
MATH 
 
The simplest type of formula that you can create in Excel is one that only 
contains numbers and mathematical operators. The basic mathematical 
operations that Excel can perform are addition, subtraction, multiplication, 
division, and exponentiation. Table 2.1 indicates the keyboard keys for each 
mathematical operation. You will find all of the operator keys on the keyboard, 
some in more than one place. 
 
Try each of the examples listed in Table 2.1 by entering them on the blank 
worksheet on your monitor. Be sure to include the = sign at the beginning of each 
entry. After you press ENTER for each example, notice that the keys you typed 
appear in the Formula bar and that the answer appears in the cell you used for 
entry. 
 
Table 2.1  Mathematical Operations 
 
Symbol 
Description 
Example 
Explanation  
Answer 
+ Plus Sign 
Addition 
=123+456 
Adds 123 and 456 
579 
- Minus Sign 
Subtraction 
=123-81 
Subtracts 81 from 123 
42 
* Asterisk 
Multiplication 
=123*1.2 
Multiplies 123 by 1.2 
147.6 
/ 
Slash 
Division 
=123/7 
Divides 123 by 7 
17.57143 
^ Caret 
Exponentiation =123^2 
Squares 123 
15129 
 
Order of Precedence 
 
All of the examples in Table 2.1 use only one mathematical operator at a time to 
perform a single operation. You can also combine the operator keys to perform 
several mathematical operations at once. For example, enter =4+6/2-1 in cell A1 
(result is 6). 
 
If you are going to use more than one operator in a formula, you should be aware 
of the sequence that Excel will use to perform computations. This is called the 
order of precedence, and for Excel, it is as follows: 
 
First: 
Exponentiation 
Second: Multiplication and Division 
Third: 
Addition and Subtraction 
 
Just like high school algebra! Within each level of precedence, the calculations 
are performed from left to right. In the formula =4+6/2-1, the first operation 
performed is 6 divided by 2 (result is 3). Next, starting from the left, 4 is added to 
3 (result is 7), and then 1 is subtracted from 7 (result is 6). 
 
Use of Parentheses 
 
If you wish to perform the computations in some other sequence, what can you 
do? Rearranging the mathematical operators is not always the answer. However, 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
 
20 
20
you can control the sequence of computations by using parentheses. There are 
several things that you need to know about the use of parentheses in Excel. 
These are listed below. Try each example on your worksheet. 
 
1. 
Excel will always perform calculations inside a set of parentheses before 
doing any other arithmetic operations. Suppose in the example above that 
you want to add 4 and 6 before dividing by 2. Using parentheses, the 
formula would look as follows: =(4+6)/2-1 (result is 4). 
 
2. 
It is also possible to have several sets of parentheses in a single formula, 
such as = 2*(9+7)/(4-2). Excel will perform the operations inside both pairs 
of parentheses first (left set first), then do the multiplication, and lastly do the 
division (result is 16). 
 
3. 
Parentheses may also be nested as shown in this example: =90/((9+6)*3). 
Excel will perform the operations in the innermost set of parentheses first 
and will then work outward to the next set. In this example, the program will 
add 9 and 6, multiply the result by 3, and then divide that answer into 90 
(result is 2). 
 
4. 
There must always be an equal number of left and right parentheses in a 
formula. The formula =(128/4*(3+81) is incorrect because there are two left 
parentheses and only a single right parenthesis. When you enter this 
formula, Excel will respond with an error message. Click No, then OK, and 
then press ESC. 
 
 
FORMULAS 
 
Open Plan1 
 
Now lets expand and improve the simple financial plan you created in Lesson 1. 
To do this you must close the current workbook that you have been entering 
formulas into and open the Plan1 workbook. Follow the steps listed below: 
 
1. 
Select Close (File menu) and select No when asked “Save changes in 
Book1?” 
 
2. 
Select Open (File menu) and select Plan1 from the drive where you saved it 
in Lesson 1. It should appear as shown in Illustration 2.1. 
 
Expanding the Financial Planning Model 
 
In Lesson 1, you played what-if with your model by entering in different values for 
consulting fees and for the various expenses. You probably noted that when you 
changed only consulting fees it changed net income, but it did not change total 
expenses. This is because none of the expenses are currently linked in any way 
to the value of consulting fees. 
 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
 
21 
21
 
Illustration 2.1 
Plan1 
 
Suppose that for our little company, commissions should be based on consulting 
fees (6% of revenue, hence $600), and payroll taxes should be paid on both 
salaries and commissions (10% of the combined total, hence $500). As you play 
what-if with the consulting fees, these expenses should also change. You can 
enter formulas to do just that. 
 
Formula Pointing 
 
Formulas can be entered from the keyboard as you did in Lesson 1 when you 
typed in the formula for net income. Excel also provides an alternate way to enter 
formulas. Instead of typing in the cell addresses like you did in Lesson 1, Excel 
allows you to simply point to the cells you want to enter. You can use either the 
mouse or the arrow keys on the keyboard to do the pointing. You will now use 
both approaches to enter appropriate formulas for commissions and for payroll 
taxes. 
 
First, you will use the mouse to enter a formula to compute commissions 
expense. Use the following steps to enter the formula =C2*0.06 in cell C6: 
 
1. 
Click on cell C6. 
 
2. 
Type = (equal sign). 
 
3. 
Click cell C2. 
 
4. 
Type * (asterisk). 
 
5. 
Type .06. 
 
6. 
Click the Confirm box in the Formula bar or press ENTER. 
 
The formula =C2*0.06 shows up in the Formula bar and the answer ($600.00) 
appears in cell C6.  

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
 
22 
22
Lets use the arrow keys now to enter a formula to automatically compute payroll 
taxes. Payroll taxes are computed by multiplying the sum of salaries and 
commissions by 10%. Use the following steps to enter the formula =(C5+C6)*0.1 
in cell C7: 
 
 
1. Move to cell C7. 
 
 
2. Type = (equal sign). 
 
 
3. Type ( (left parenthesis). 
 
 
4. Use the arrow keys to move to cell C5. 
 
 
5. Type + (plus sign). 
 
 
6. Use the arrow keys to move to cell C6. 
 
 
7. Type ) (right parenthesis). 
 
 
8. Type * (asterisk). 
 
 
9. Type .1 or 10%. 
 
 
10. Press ENTER. 
 
The formula =(C5+C6)*0.1 shows up in the Formula bar and the answer (500) 
appears in cell C7. 
 
This pointing technique with the mouse or the arrow keys can be used any time 
you use a cell address in a command sequence, formula, or function. Most 
people make extensive use of pointing. However, you should use whichever 
approach you feel most comfortable with (typing cell addresses in, pointing with 
the mouse, or pointing with the arrow keys). 
 
 
NUMBER FORMATS 
 
There are some problems, both visible and hidden, with the number formats in 
cells C6, C7, and C8. To reveal the hidden problem, enter $10,001 in cell C2. 
See Illustration 2.2. 
 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
 
23 
23
 
Illustration 2.2    Plan1 with Inconsistent Alignment, Fortman, and Decimal Places 
 
The problems in the model are: cell C6 was switched to the Currency format by 
Excel when you entered the formula; cell C6 has two decimal places; C7 shows 
three decimal places. The values in C7 and C8 do not line up directly under the 
values in C5 and C6. 
 
All of this makes for a very sloppy, unprofessional presentation. Normal financial 
statements show dollar signs at the top of columns and at the bottom for 
subtotals and totals. Numbers in columns should all have the same decimal 
place. These objectives can be met by using proper number formats. To see all 
the available number formats, select the Cells option (Format menu) and click 
the Number tab. Check out some of the categories by clicking on them. After 
viewing various categories, select Cancel. A description of each option is shown 
in Table 2.2. 
 
Table 2.2  Number Formats 
 
 
Category 
Description 
 
General 
No specific number format; aligns value to far right 
side of cell 
 
 
 
 
 
Number 
Can specify decimal place, use of commas, and 
alignment of value to far right side of cell or one 
space in* 
 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
 
24 
24
 
Category 
Description 
 
Currency 
 
Uses commas; can specify decimal place, use of $ 
(placed directly in front of number), and alignment 
of value to far right side of cell or one space in* 
 
 
 
 
 
Accounting  
Uses commas; can specify decimal place and use 
of $ (placed to far left side of cell). All values are 
aligned one space in from far right side of cell 
 
 
 
 
 
Date 
Various date presentation formats 
 
Time 
Various time presentation formats 
 
Percentage 
Numbers expressed as percentages (e.g., .43 becomes 43%) 
 
Fraction 
Decimals expressed as fractions (e.g., .375 becomes 3/8) 
 
Scientific 
Displays values in scientific notation (e.g., 5.46E+04) 
 
Text 
All entries treated as text 
 
Special 
Zip codes, phone numbers, social security numbers, etc. 
 
Custom 
Specialized formats 
 
* In the Number and Currency formats, to align values one space in from the right 
side of the cell, pick an option for which negative values are shown in 
parentheses. 
 
There are three toolbar buttons that can be used to quickly format values, but the 
names of two of the buttons can be confusing. If these buttons are not on your 
toolbar, they can be found by clicking the More Buttons or Toolbar Options 
button. The Currency Style button places cells in the Accounting (surprise!) 
format with a $ and two decimal places. The Percent Style button places cells in 
the Percentage format. The Comma Style button places cells in the Accounting 
format with no $, but with two decimal places. 
 
Lets use the Comma Style button to uniformly format cells C6 to C8. To 
accomplish this with your model, use the following steps: 
 
1. 
Select the range C6 to C8. 
 
2. 
Click the Comma Style button. 
Currency 
Style 
Percent 
Style 
 
Comma 
Style 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
 
25 
25
3. 
Click the Decrease Decimal button twice. 
 
 
4. 
Click cell C2. 
 
See Illustration 2.3. Your model is now looking very professional! 
 
 
Illustration 2.3   Plan1 with Uniform Alignment, Format, and Decimal Places  
 
 
 
SAVE YOUR WORK 
 
Change the value in cell C2 to $10,000. Before proceeding, save your new and 
improved financial plan as Plan2. To do this, select the Save As command (File 
menu), choose the proper drive and directory, type the name Plan2 in the File 
name text box, and click Save. See Illustration 2.4. 
 
 
Illustration 2.4 
Plan2 
 
 
Decrease  
Decimal 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
 
26 
26
Please note that throughout the rest of Lesson 2, you should not save your file 
again. In the remaining sections of this lesson you will be making some 
experimental changes to your financial plan that are for demonstration purposes 
only. These changes are not intended to become a permanent part of the Plan2 
file. 
 
 
PRINT YOUR FILE 
 
This is a good time to print out your model so that you can have a permanent 
record of your work so far. Review instructions for printing in Lesson 1. On the 
Standard toolbar, click the Print button. 
 
 
WHAT-IF ANALYSIS AGAIN 
 
Lets do a little more what-if analysis. Move to cell C2 and try the values 11000, 
25000, and 5000. Notice now that commissions, payroll taxes, total expenses, 
and net income all change with the different values entered in cell C2, and the 
number formats stay consistent. 
 
Numerical Input Quirks 
 
In spite of proper number formats, certain entries in cell C2 will cause strange 
results. Enter 10,000.52 in cell C2. Notice that the net income answer appears to 
be off by one dollar. This error is an occasional, annoying occurrence in Excel. It 
is caused because number formats change the appearance of the values in cells, 
but not the actual values. For example, the actual value in cell C2 is 10,000.52, 
but because of the number format chosen for this cell (Currency with no 
decimals) Excel rounds off the appearance of the value to the closest whole 
number. This rounding process is perfectly proper, but it does cause occasional 
problems, as in this case. 
 
 
Actual Value 
Appearance 
Consulting fees 
10,000.52000 
$10,001 
 
Salaries 
4,400.00000 
$4,400 
Commissions 
600.03120 
600 
Payroll taxes 
500.00312 
500 
Rent 
1,350.00000 
 1,350 
Total expenses 
6,850.03432 
$6,850 
 
Net income 
3,150.48568 
$3,150 
 
The appearance of a $1 discrepancy on a financial statement isnt much, but it 
can cast doubt on other parts of your model to an uninformed reader. If you are 
interested in correcting this “minor” problem, you may use the ROUND function 
described  in Appendix A. 
 
To demonstrate another input quirk, enter the word HELLO in cell C2. The rea-
son that #VALUE! appears in several cells is because Excel does not know how 
Print 
 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
 
27 
27
to interpret text in a formula. Many error messages in Excel begin with a #. On 
the Help menu Index, they are listed first (except in Excel 2002XP).  
 
Enter =123/0 in cell C2. Dividing a value by zero results in #DIV/0! on your 
worksheet. Be aware that this error will ripple through your formulas. Thus, any 
formula that refers to a cell that contains #DIV/0! will also show #DIV/0!. 
 
Enter =C11 in cell C2. When entering formulas in Excel, you must make sure not 
to enter a formula in a cell that refers to itself either directly or indirectly. This is 
known as a circular reference. In this case the formula in cell C11 uses 
information from C2, and now the formula in cell C2 refers to cell C11. Excel 
warns the user when a circular reference occurs. Click Cancel.  
 
Enter 10,000 in cell C2 and 1234567 in cell C5. Two things happen: (1) column C 
automatically widens to accommodate the long number, and (2) ######## now 
appears in cell C11. When the value of a formula is too large to show up in a cell, 
this is how Excel responds. If you widen column C a bit, the value in cell C11 will 
show up. 
 
Now re-enter 4400 in cell C5. Unfortunately, one of the consequences of entering 
a large number is that column C is now wider than all the other columns. Reset 
the column to its original width by selecting the Column option (Format menu) 
and then clicking Width. Enter 8.43 (assuming your font is Arial size 10) and click 
OK. 
 
 
USING FUNCTIONS  
 
Besides using the five operator keys (+, -, *, /, and ^), there are more complex 
mathematical functions that Excel can perform. They are called functions, and 
they consist of built-in formulas to perform a long list of different tasks 
automatically. A partial list of functions includes SUM (to sum the values in a 
range of cells), SQRT (to find the square root), AVERAGE (to compute the 
average value in a range of cells), MAX (to find the maximum value in a range of 
cells), IF (to enter one value if something is true and another if not), VLOOKUP 
(to look up values in a table), and NPV (to compute net present value). These 
and other functions are discussed in detail in Appendix A of this manual. 
 
Function Basics 
 
Most functions require you to enter additional information in parentheses that will 
allow the function to perform its task. Functions can be entered using either 
capital or lowercase letters. Any cell addresses used in a function may be 
entered by typing them in or by pointing to them. 
 
 
Examine the formula entered in cell C9 now. The formula entered in that cell is 
=SUM(C5:C8). This is the SUM function. C5 is the first cell to be included in the 
total, and C8 is the last. This function was entered when you used the AutoSum 
toolbar button back in Lesson 1. 
 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
 
28 
28
You also could have entered this function by typing in all the characters you now 
see in cell C9. To demonstrate, move to cell B13, type =SUM(C5:C8) and press 
ENTER. The total $6,850 should now appear in the cell.  
 
You also could have entered the formula =C5+C6+C7+C8. Try it in cell B14. This 
method is fine for adding a short series of cells, but using the SUM function is 
certainly quicker for longer ranges. 
 
You can use the pointing technique to enter all cell references used in functions. 
To demonstrate the pointing technique using arrow keys, move to cell B15, type 
=SUM( and use the arrow keys to move to cell C5. Type the : (colon) key to lock 
in the beginning point of the range and press the down arrow (  ) key three 
times to move to cell C8. Finally, type ) (right parenthesis) and press ENTER. 
 
To demonstrate the pointing technique using the mouse, move the cell pointer to 
cell B16, type =SUM( and select the range to be summed by dragging the mouse 
pointer over the range C5 to C8. Type ) (right parenthesis) and then click the 
Confirm box. 
 
For the absent-minded, Excel will automatically add the final right parenthesis if 
you happen to forget to type it in. 
 
Function Help 
 
Help screens are extremely useful as a reference for all the functions that are 
available in Excel. The Help system is available by selecting Help from the main 
menu.  
 
 
A HIDDEN TRICK 
 
There is a quick way to display on the screen all formulas, functions, and other 
cell contents. Press the CTRL key and then press the Tilde (~) key—its right 
above the Tab key. Bingo! All cell contents are displayed. To return to a normal 
display, press this key combination again. 
 
 
FINAL COMMENT 
 
In this lesson, you learned how to construct formulas using numbers, 
mathematical operators, cell references, and functions. You were also warned 
about some typical input quirks. Believe it or not, you are now equipped to 
construct some relatively complicated spreadsheet models. Very few of the 
models in Appendix C have formulas that are more complicated than what you 
have seen in this lesson. So get those creative juices flowing! 
 
Since you are not going to save any of the changes that you made in the last two 
sections of Lesson 2, feel free to experiment with new formulas and functions. 
When you are done, close this file without saving any of the changes that have 
been made to it. To do this, select the Exit or Close command (File menu) and 
then select No when you are asked to save changes in Plan2. 

 
29 
Lesson 3 
EXPANDING AND ENHANCING YOUR MODEL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
In this lesson, you will learn to: 
 
• 
Copy data 
• 
Move data 
• 
Insert new columns and rows 
• 
Delete existing columns and rows 
 
 
BEFORE BEGINNING 
 
In this lesson you are going to take the financial plan that you improved in Lesson 
2 and expand it further. To begin this lesson, the Excel program should be 
started and the workbook Plan2 should be opened on your screen. See 
Illustration 3.1. 
 
 
 
Illustration 3.1 
Plan2 
 
 
EXPANDING THE FINANCIAL PLANNING MODEL 
 
Lets expand the financial plan developed in Lesson 2 to include three more 
quarters and a year total. A single column will be used for each quarter and then 
a final column for the total. Remember, if you make errors as you make the 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
30 
changes to the model, you can use the Undo toolbar button to undo your last 
entry. The DELETE key may also come in handy. 
 
You need to enter data for each of the other three quarters. Since you learned 
about entering text, numbers, and formulas in Lessons 1 and 2, filling in the 
remaining quarters and computing the year totals would be easy for you. On a 
worksheet much larger than Plan2, it would be very time-consuming to enter all 
of this data one cell at a time. Luckily, with computer spreadsheet programs such 
as Excel, it is very easy to copy data, text, and formulas. This saves time by 
reducing the need to perform repetitive entry tasks. 
 
 
COPYING DATA 
 
There are several ways that you can copy data in Excel. Two methods will be 
demonstrated below and a third method will be discussed: 
 
1. 
Using the Fill Handle. 
2. 
Using the Copy and Paste buttons or commands. 
3. 
Using the mouse and CTRL key to drag and copy. 
 
Using the Fill Handle 
 
Select cell C1. Position the mouse pointer over the small black box, called a fill 
handle, in the lower right corner of the cell. The pointer becomes a black cross 
shape. 
 
 
 
 
Next, drag the fill handle over to cell F1 and then release the mouse button. The 
headings are automatically filled in for the remaining quarters. 
 
 
 
 
 
The fill handle has been programmed to recognize numeric and date sequences. 
In this case, it recognized 1st and was able to complete the sequence. If the fill 
handle does not recognize a sequence, youll just have to type it in yourself! More 
about the fill handle in Lesson 4. 
 
The fill handle can also be used to copy formulas. To demonstrate this, assume 
that consulting fees will increase by 5% per quarter. In other words, you want 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
31 
consulting fees to be 5% greater each quarter than in the preceding quarter. To 
compute 2nd Quarter consulting fees, you want to tell Excel to multiply 1st 
Quarter consulting fees (cell C2) by 1.05 and place the result in cell D2. To do 
this, enter =C2*1.05 now in cell D2. 
In Excel 97, the value $10,500 shows in cell C2. This is what we want. In Excel 
2000 and Excel 2002XP, the value $10,500.00 shows in cell C2.  Correct this 
now by using the Decrease Decimal button to eliminate the two decimal points. 
When multiplying by a number with two decimals, Excel will automatically add 
two decimals to the answer. The same is true for one decimal, three decimals, 
etc. Isnt Excel wonderful!   
Next, this 5% increase should be computed for both of the remaining quarters. 
These values will be entered using the fill handle. Select cell D2, grab the fill 
handle in that cell, drag it over to cell F2, and release the mouse button. Instantly 
cells E2 and F2 display a value for consulting fees that is 5% higher than the 
value for each previous quarter.  
 
 
 
 
Relative Cell Addresses  
Notice the sequence of values for consulting fees. Each quarter is a 5% increase 
over the previous quarter. The formula in cell D2 is =C2*1.05. Move to cell E2 
and check the formula in that cell. You will see that the formula is =D2*1.05. 
Move to F2 and note that the formula is =E2*1.05. 
 
 
 
 
Obviously the formula in cell D2 was not copied exactly. As it moved from cell to 
cell, the formula was modified to follow the same pattern as in the original 
formula. In this case, the original formula in cell D2 uses a value from the cell to 
its immediate left (C2). Therefore, the value in cell E2 will use a value from the 
cell to its immediate left (D2), and the value in cell F2 will use a value from the 
cell to its immediate left (E2). When copying formulas unless otherwise specified, 
Excel assumes that all cell addresses are relative and are to be modified from 
cell to cell. 
 
 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
32 
Absolute Cell Addresses 
But what if you want to copy a formula and leave the cell addresses unaltered? 
Excel allows you to make cell addresses “absolute” so they will not be modified 
as they are copied from cell to cell. This is done by adding $ (dollar signs) to any 
cell address used in a formula. To compare the effects of absolute versus relative 
copying of formulas, examine Table 3.1. 
 
 
Table 3.1  Effects of Absolute vs. Relative Cell Addresses 
 
 
C2 Is Absolute 
C2 Is Relative 
 
Formula 
Value 
Formula 
Value 
Original Formula 
D2: $C$2*1.05 
10500 
D2: C2*1.05 
10500 
Copy 
E2: $C$2*1.05 
10500 
E2: D2*1.05 
11025 
Copy 
F2: $C$2*1.05 
10500 
F2: E2*1.05 
11576 
 
 
Mixed Addresses 
 
On some occasions you may not want the whole cell address to be absolute, just 
the column part or the row part. This is called a mixed address. In these cases, 
type a single $ in front of the part of the cell address that you want to be absolute 
(e.g., $C2 or C$2). 
 
F4 Key (A hidden trick) 
 
There is a quick way to add dollar signs to cell addresses, even those already 
entered into formulas. When typing in, editing, or pointing to a cell address, 
pressing the F4 key repeatedly places $ in front of various parts of the cell 
address automatically. 
 
The Fill Handle Again 
 
You can copy several cells at once. To demonstrate this, lets copy all of the 
remaining 1st Quarter values and formulas to the other quarters. Select the range 
C5 to C11, drag the fill handle over to column F, and release the mouse button. 
See Illustration 3.2. 
 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
33 
 
 
Illustration 3.2 
Copying with the Fill Handle 
 
 
Everything looks okay, but examine rows 5 and 8 closely. Notice that the fill 
handle increased these expenses $1 each quarter. The fill handle is programmed 
to increase all numbers by 1 unless it sees some other pattern. This is not the 
result you wanted. A better way to handle this copying is with the normal Copy 
and Paste commands. Click the Undo button to get out of this mess. 
Copy and Paste Buttons and Commands 
The Copy and Paste commands are found on the Edit menu. There are also 
toolbar buttons for each. Since the buttons are easier to use, theyll be used in 
this section. 
Lets begin again the process of copying the first quarter values and formulas to 
the remaining three quarters. 
1. 
Select the range C5 to C11. Use the mouse or the SHIFT+ARROW key 
combination to do this. 
2. 
Click the Copy toolbar button. This places a copy of the values, formulas, 
and formats of the selected range into a part of your computers memory 
called the clipboard. 
 
 
3. 
Select the range D5 to F5 as the destination. Note that only the top row in a 
range needs to be selected. 
4. 
Click the Paste toolbar button. This command copies whatever is in the 
clipboard to those cells. Note that borders and formats are copied along with 
the values and formulas.  
 
 
5. 
Click cell A1 and then examine the formulas in columns D, E, and F. Note 
how they have been updated as you go from column to column. Illustration 
3.3 shows how your screen will appear when you select cells C5 to C11 to 
copy. 
Undo 
 
Copy 
Paste 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
34 
 
Illustration 3.3 
Copy and Paste Quarterly Expenses 
It also should be noted that the dashed outline around the copied range indicates 
that the clipboard still contains a copy of the contents of those cells. The Edit 
Paste command can be used over and over again to paste this data elsewhere 
on the worksheet. The dashed outline will disappear if you press ESC. 
If you ever want to copy an entire column or row, click the column header (a 
letter) or row header (a number) before clicking the Copy button. 
 
It is now time to fill in the Total column. First, move to cell G1 and enter the word 
Total. Then Bold it, Center it, and give it a bottom Border. Then move to cell G2, 
and review the function section of Lesson 2. Use any method you wish to enter 
=SUM(C2:F2) in that cell (quickest way: click the AutoSum toolbar button and 
press ENTER). 
 
 
 
 
 
Finally, use any method you wish (the Edit Copy and Paste commands or the 
toolbar buttons) to copy the formula in cell G2 and paste it to the range G5 to G9 
and then paste it again to cell G11. The results are shown in Illustration 3.4. 
 
   Bold 
  Center 
Borders    Copy
Paste 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
35 
 
Illustration 3.4 
Filling in the total Column 
 
Copying Data with the Mouse and the CTRL key 
 
A third approach to copying data involves using the mouse and the CTRL key. 
When you position the mouse pointer on the border of a selected cell or range, 
the mouse pointer becomes an arrow. You then hold down the CTRL key and 
drag the cell or range to a new location. Wherever you release the mouse button, 
a copy is made. This feature is very handy, but you are limited because copying 
can take place only to a single destination. For example, you can copy from cell 
D2 to cell E2 or to cell F2, but not to both cells at once. 
 
CLEANING UP THE FINANCIAL PLAN 
 
Lets clean up the financial plan so all labels and values are presented in a 
uniform fashion. 
 
1. 
Select the range G6 to G8. Click the Comma button and then click the 
Decrease Decimals button twice to get rid of the decimals. 
 
  
2. 
Move to cell G8, click the Borders button, and put a thin, bottom border in 
the cell. Repeat this with cell G9. 
 
3. 
Move to cell G11, click the Borders button, and put a thin, double bottom 
border in the cell. 
 
See Illustration 3.5. 
Comma Decrease 
Style 
Decimals 
Borders 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
36 
 
 
Illustration 3.5 
Total Column Cleaned Up 
 
Subtraction Error? 
 
Notice that there appears to be a subtraction error in cell G11. Why does cell 
G11 display $15,497 when in fact $43,101 minus $27,605 equals $15,496? Did 
the program make a mistake? The answer is no. This is the same type of error 
discussed in Lesson 2 where formatting a cell may result in some rounding 
differences when it comes to screen presentation of values. This “error” can be 
eliminated with the ROUND function. See Appendix A. 
 
 
SAVE YOUR MODEL 
 
Excel saves the active cells current position when a file is saved. It is a good 
habit to move the active cell back to cell A1 before saving so that you always 
know exactly where you are when you open the file again. Move to cell A1 now. 
 
Since you have made many changes to your model, please use the Save As 
command (File menu) now to save your updated financial plan using the file 
name Plan3. 
 
 
MOVING DATA 
 
In addition to being able to copy data, Excel also allows you to move data. 
Moving data is different than copying data. Copying data involves making a copy 
of the original data and then placing the copy at another location on the 
worksheet. Moving data involves picking up the original data and then placing it 
somewhere else on the worksheet. 
 
There are several ways that you can move data. Two ways will be discussed 
here: (1) using the mouse to drag and drop and (2) using the Cut and Paste 
commands or buttons. 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
37 
 
Moving Data with the Mouse (Drag and Drop) 
 
To demonstrate the first type of move, suppose that you want to move some of 
the quarterly headings and consulting fee projections (range A1 to G2) to a 
section of the worksheet below the quarterly net income figures (range A13 to 
G14). Use the following steps to do this: 
 
1. 
Select the range A1 to G2. 
 
2. 
Position the mouse pointer on the bottom border of this range so the mouse 
pointer changes to an arrow. 
 
3. 
Press and hold down the left mouse button. 
 
4. 
Drag the dashed outline to the range A13 to G14 and then release the left 
mouse button. In a flash the move is completed. 
 
 
 
 
 
It is important to note that all formulas affected by a move are automatically 
updated by Excel. For instance, the formula in cell D11 now reads =D14-D9, 
whereas it used to read =D2-D9. 
 
Lets undo this move now. Click the Undo button on the toolbar. 
 
Moving Data with Cut and Paste 
 
The Cut and Paste commands (or buttons) can be used to move cells to new 
locations. The process is straightforward. You first select a cell or range of cells 
to be moved. Then you click the Cut button on the toolbar. Finally, select the 
Undo 
Cut 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
38 
range where the data is to be moved and click the Paste button. As before, all 
formulas will be automatically updated. This method will not be demonstrated. 
 
 
 
DELETING AND INSERTING COLUMNS, ROWS, AND SHEETS 
 
Edit Delete Command 
 
The Edit Delete command has four options. The options to shift cells left or shift 
cells up are used to delete the cells you specify and the surrounding cells shift to 
fill in the space. Selecting Entire Column will delete an entire column from the 
worksheet. Selecting Entire Row will delete an entire row from the worksheet.  
 
To demonstrate this command, lets delete column B from the worksheet. This is 
an ideal column to delete because there are no entries in it. Move the active cell 
to any cell in column B (the row doesnt matter), select the Edit Delete 
command, select the Entire Column button, and then select OK. Your computer 
screen will look like Illustration 3.6 when you have deleted Column B. 
 
 
 
Illustration 3.6 
Old Column B Is Deleted 
 
Instantly, the column is deleted and the remaining columns containing the 
quarterly financial plan data all shift one column to the left. Before the deletion, 
the 1st Qtr figures were in column C but now they are in column B. All formulas 
affected by the deletion are automatically updated by the program. For instance, 
the formula for 2nd Qtr Net income has been changed from =D2-D9 to =C2-C9 (a 
difference of one column). 
 
Once a column or row is deleted, an easy way to restore it is to use the Edit 
Undo command, but this only works if no additional commands have been 
entered since the deletion. Otherwise, the only way to recover from a mistaken 
deletion is to retype everything. Yuck! 
 
 
Paste 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
39 
Insert Command 
 
Suppose you wish to insert a title at the top of the financial plan. Right now there 
is no place at the top of the worksheet to do this. Lets solve this problem by 
inserting four new rows at the top of the worksheet. To do this, move to any cell 
in row 1 (the column does not matter) and select a range that extends from row 1 
to row 4 (A1 to A4, for example, as shown in Illustration 3.7). Now select the 
Rows command (Insert menu) and instantly four new rows are inserted at the 
top of the financial plan. 
 
 
 
Illustration 3.7 
Inserting Four New Rows 
 
Again, all formulas affected by an insertion are automatically updated by the 
program. For instance, the 2nd Qtr Net income figure used to be calculated by 
the formula =C2-C9 but now the formula has been updated to read =C6-C13 (a 
difference of four rows). 
 
Now enter Fast Track Inc. in cell B2 and Financial Plan in cell B3. To enlarge 
the font size for these titles, select the range B2 to B3, click the Font size drop-
down box, and then select 14. Next, click the Bold and Italic buttons on the 
toolbar. Finally, select the range B2 to E2 (note: this is E2, not E3) and click the 
Merge and Center button on the toolbar. This centers Fast Track, Inc. across 
these columns of your worksheet. The Merge and Center command only works 
on one row at a time. 
 
Now, repeat this step to center the entry in cell B3 to E3 across columns. 
 
Finally, lets add a border around the company name and statement title. Select 
the range B2 to E3, click the Borders drop-down arrow on the toolbar, and click 
the outline border shown in the lower right corner of the option box. A solid 
border now outlines the title. See Illustration 3.8. Plan3 is done! 
     Font 
         Bold 
     Size 
    Italic         Merge 
                      and 
                    Center 
 
Borders 
 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
40 
 
 
Illustration 3.8 
Plan3 is Done! 
 
 
SAVE AND PRINT YOUR WORK 
 
Once again it is time to save your financial plan. Move to cell A1 and click the 
Save button on the toolbar to save Plan3 again. Then, click the Print button to 
print out your financial plan. 
 
 
 
 
 
WHAT-IF ANALYSIS 
 
You were introduced to what-if analysis in Lessons 1 and 2, but this expanded 
model provides a basis for more meaningful exposure to this topic. Notice that 
total net income for the year is $15,497. What would it be if 1st Qtr consulting 
fees were $11,000 instead of $10,000? Try it and see. Enter 11000 in cell B6. 
Notice that the model recalculates and total net income for the year is now 
$19,522. 
 
This model will answer all sorts of what-if questions: What is net income for the 
4th Qtr if 1st Qtr consulting fees are $12,538? What are total expenses for the 
year if 1st Qtr consulting fees are $9,000? Try these out and check your answer 
below. 
 
 
Save 
Print 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
41 
Now try this backwards what-if question: What do 1st Qtr consulting fees need to 
be in order to have net income for the year equal at least $20,000? Answer this 
by trying different values in cell B6 until you get net income for the year to equal 
at least $20,000. Check your answer at the end of the lesson.1 
 
Although this financial plan allows you to answer numerous what-if questions, 
only 1st Qtr consulting fees (cell B6) can be easily changed. It would require 
many steps to change the quarterly growth rate to 7%, the payroll tax rate to 
15%, or rent to $1,500. Models that you use to perform what-if analysis should be 
designed so that all important inputs can be easily changed. Review the file 
AAPEX in Appendix C to see how all the inputs in that model have been placed 
into a Data Section so that they can be changed without having to redo formulas 
each time. This is an excellent design for what-if analysis. 
 
 
MOUSE SHORTCUT 
 
When you are working in Excel, pressing the right mouse button displays a list of 
shortcut commands. Many of the commands used in this lesson are found on the 
list. These commands will change as you move the mouse over different areas 
and objects in the worksheet. 
 
 
FINAL COMMENT 
 
In this lesson you were exposed to numerous commands that enable you to 
expand and modify worksheets to better suit your needs. The Fast Track financial 
plan is now in a very functional and presentable state. 
 
Now that you are done with Lesson 3, close this file without saving any of the 
changes that have been made to it during the what-if analysis. You want to keep 
the original financial plan numbers intact. To do this, select the Exit or Close 
command (File menu) and then select No when you are asked to save changes 
in Plan3. 
 
Lesson 4 will introduce you to several features of Excel that you may find helpful 
as you begin designing your own spreadsheet models in the future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1The answers to the questions are $7,366, $27,320, and $11,119 respectively. 

 
42 
Lesson 4 
TOP TEN LIST 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
In this lesson, you will learn to: 
 
• 
Establish and change global settings 
• 
Use special date formats 
• 
Automatically fill ranges with sequential values 
• 
Establish standard column widths 
• 
Use “Accounting” underlines  
• 
Protect files and cells from alteration 
• 
Name cells and ranges to clarify formulas 
• 
Freeze columns and rows on the screen 
• 
Use multiple sheets 
• 
Add artwork to worksheets 
 
 
BEFORE BEGINNING 
 
This lesson consists of ten important skill areas for power users of Excel. They 
are not in any particular order. While you are encouraged to work through the 
entire lesson, each section is independent and may be completed without regard 
to any other section. Save any of the work you want as Plan4. 
 
You should have the workbook Plan3 available on your file diskette, hard drive, 
or network. To begin this lesson, the Excel program should be started and a 
blank worksheet should be on your screen (use the File New command if 
necessary). Do not open the Plan3 workbook yet. 
 
 
1. GLOBAL SETTINGS 
 
Global settings are commands that affect the entire workbook. Five important 
global settings are mentioned in this lesson. 
 
Setting a Global Numeric Format 
 
Click Style (Format menu). The dialog box that pops up shows all of the styles 
used throughout the workbook. There are occasions where you may wish to 
change these styles. For example, suppose you wanted all numeric entries on 
the worksheet to be entered in the Currency style (dollars and cents). To 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
43 
demonstrate this, click the word Number and then click the Modify button. Next, 
on the Number tab select Currency style, set it for 2 decimal places, and click 
OK twice. Now, all numbers entered subsequently on the worksheet will be in 
dollars and cents. Go ahead and experiment with this now. 
 
Before moving on to the next section, reset the Number format to General.  
 
Setting a Global Font 
 
This option allows you to alter your font style and size of all entries throughout 
the worksheet. Use the same process as setting a global numeric format. Choose 
Style (Format menu) and click the Font tab. Experiment with this if you wish. 
Before moving on to the next section, reset the font and size to Arial 10. 
 
If you want to make the global font change permanent, not only for this worksheet 
but for all future worksheets, select Options (Tools menu), and on the General 
tab choose your new standard font. 
 
Eliminating Display of Zero Values 
 
Sometimes spreadsheet models contain cells with lots of formulas that have a 
zero value because of the current data entered in other cells. Rather than have a 
model print columns of zeros, you can suppress the display of zeros. To do this, 
select Options (Tools menu), and on the View tab deselect the Zero values 
box. Try it out if you wish. 
 
Tools Options Edit Cell Selector Movement 
 
Normally, when you enter data in a cell and press the ENTER key, the cell 
selector moves down to the next row. Many people find this irritating because 
they want to continue working in that same cell (to format it, to perform what-if 
analysis, etc.) without having to go back to it each time they press ENTER. They 
do not want the cell selector to move down automatically. Automatic cell selector 
movement can be eliminated by selecting Options (Tools menu), and on the 
Edit tab deselect the Move Selection after Enter box.  
 
Activating the HOME Key 
 
Moving the active cell to cell A1 is a common occurrence. In Excel, the normal 
shortcut to do this is to use the CTRL+HOME keys in combination. All other 
spreadsheet programs allow you simply to press the HOME key. To choose this 
option in Excel, select Options (Tools menu), and on the Transition tab click the 
Transition Navigation Keys box. Checking this box also activates the Tab keys. 
 
 
2. ENTERING DATES 
 
Many worksheets use calendar dates as a part of labels, and some use them as 
values (e.g., to calculate the number of days from today until Halloween, etc.). 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
44 
Entering a date as a label is easy if you begin with a letter or an apostrophe. 
Excel is also smart enough to recognize certain entries as dates by the way you 
type them in. For practice, enter 10-31-03 in cell A1. Type July 4, 2003 in cell B1. 
You will notice that Excel puts these dates into its own format.  
 
There are three advantages to entering a recognizable date. One is that there are 
many formatting options available for dates. Move the cell selector to cell A1 and 
select Cells (Format menu). Click the Number tab and notice the various date 
formats it uses. Try them out. 
 
A second advantage is that you can do some mathematical operations with the 
dates. How many days are there from the Fourth of July to Halloween? To find 
out, enter the formula =A1-B1 in cell C1. You have to change the number format 
of cell C1 before you can see the answer (select Cells [Format menu] and click 
on the General category). 
 
 
 
The third advantage is discussed in the next section. 
 
There are several functions specifically designed to assist in the development of 
models where dates (or time) are an important element. Some of the more 
important ones are discussed in Appendix A. 
 
 
3. AUTOFILL (THE FILL HANDLE) 
 
You were introduced to the fill handle in Lesson 3. It can be used to copy 
formulas and to fill ranges with sequential values. The standard increment is 1. 
For example, you began with the value $4,400 in cell C5. When you used the fill 
handle, it put $4,401, $4,402, and $4,403 in cells D5, E5, and F5, respectively. It 
also works with dates; again, the standard increment is 1 (day).  
 
If you enter two values or dates at the beginning of a range, Excel is programmed 
to recognize the increment between them and to complete the remaining entries 
in the range automatically. 
 
For example, type the values 2 and 5 in cells C1 and C2, respectively and then 
use the mouse to select the range C1 to C2. Next, position the mouse over the 
small black box located in the lower right corner of cell C2 (called the fill handle), 
until the pointer becomes a black cross shape. Drag the fill handle down to cell 
C5 and then release the mouse button. Instantly, the cells fill up the range with a 
beginning value of 2 and an increment of 3. 
 
 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
45 
For another example, enter 10/31/03 in cell A1 and 11/30/03 in cell A2. Next, 
select the range A1 to A2 and drag the fill handle down to cell A5. The range fills 
with all the month-end dates out to 2/29/04. This example also demonstrates the 
importance of using a recognizable date format because if these dates were 
initially entered in an unfamiliar form, Excel would not know what to do. Proper 
date formats were mentioned in the “Entering Dates” section above. 
 
 
 
 
4. UNIFORM COLUMN WIDTHS 
 
Occasionally you may develop a new worksheet where, because of all your 
experimentation, every column is a different width. If you want to standardize the 
width of columns containing similar data, you can grab the column borders and 
try to visually even out the column widths. You may find it difficult to get uniform 
column widths by sight alone. Where you want more precise column width 
settings, use the Column command (Format menu), and select Width. This tells 
you the width of the column where the active cell is, and it allows you to reset it. 
The standard width of a cell is generally 8.43 when the font is Arial size 10. Try it 
out! 
 
 
5. ACCOUNTING UNDERLINES 
 
There are three types of underlining that are in common use: regular underlines, 
accounting underlines, and bottom borders. An example of the appearance of 
each is shown below. 
 
 
 
 
 
The regular underline extends only under the data in each cell. The accounting 
underline extends almost all the way across each cell. This type of gapped 
underline is frequently used in financial reports because it visually breaks up data 
into distinct columns. The bottom border is a solid line drawn all the way across 
the bottom of the cells. 
 
There are restrictions on where the accounting underlines can be used. In cells 
that contain values, they can only be used if the cells are in the Accounting 
number format. 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
46 
 
To demonstrate, enter the word May in cell D8 and center it in the cell. Next, 
enter 10,000 in cell D10. Then follow these steps: 
 
1. 
With the cell selector in cell D8, click the Underline button. This puts a 
regular underline under the word. 
 
 
 
 
2. 
With the cell selector in cell D8, select Cells (Format menu) click the Font 
tab. In the Underline text box, select Single Accounting, and then click OK. 
This puts an accounting underline across the cell. 
 
 
 
3. 
With the cell selector in cell D10, click the Underline button. This puts a 
regular underline under the number. 
 
 
 
4. 
With the cell selector in cell D10, select Cells (Format menu) and click the 
Font tab. In the Underline text box, select Single Accounting, and then 
click OK. Surprise! What you see is a regular underline, not an accounting 
one. This is because D10 is a value cell and it has not yet been put into the 
Accounting number format. 
 
 
 
5. 
With the cell selector in cell D10, select Cells (Format menu) and click the 
Number tab. In the Category text box, select Accounting, and then click 
OK. Now you will see the accounting underline in that cell. 
 
 
Bottom line: Accounting underlines can be used for text and for values expressed 
in the Accounting number format. Prior planning about this will help! 
 
 
6. CELL AND WORKSHEET PROTECTION 
 
Open the workbook Plan3 now if it is not already on your screen. Your financial 
plan worksheet is currently unprotected, meaning that the contents of any cell 
can be changed. You may, however, protect your worksheet or certain portions of 
it from change, accidental or otherwise. This is accomplished with the Tools 
Protection and the Format Cells Protection commands. 
 
Lets work through an example to see how these commands are used. You could 
protect the entire financial plan worksheet, but this would prevent you from 
performing what-if analysis or from changing any other aspect of the model. So, 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
47 
the first step before protecting a file is to identify which cells you want to leave 
unlocked. On your model, the only cell you have changed over and over is cell 
B6. All the other cells contain text, formulas, and values that could be protected. 
 
To identify cell B6 as a cell you want to leave unlocked, move to cell B6, select 
the Cells command (Format menu), and click the Protection tab. Deselect the 
“Locked” check box and click OK. Next, select the Protection command (Tools 
menu). Choose the Protect Sheet option and then click OK (you could enter a 
password if you want). Your worksheet is now protected. The only cell that can 
be changed is B6. Try to enter something in some other cell. If you have done 
this properly, you should be able to enter data in cell B6. 
 
Before moving on to the next section, the model must be unprotected. Select the 
Protection command (Tools menu), and choose the Unprotect Sheet option. 
 
The current protection settings for a workbook are saved when the file is saved. If 
you wish to save this file, use the Save As command (File menu), and name the 
file Plan46. 
 
 
7. CREATING NAMES FOR CELLS AND RANGES 
 
Open the workbook Plan3 now if it is not already on the screen. As mentioned in 
Lesson 1, it is possible to give a cell or range of cells a descriptive name so that 
you can use the name to indicate the cell or range rather than having to enter the 
cell addresses. Names are saved when the workbook is saved. 
 
Name Conventions 
 
There are several name conventions of which you should be aware. For 
example, the first character in a name must be a letter or an underscore. Names 
may not contain any spaces or punctuation other than periods or underscores. 
Excel does not distinguish between uppercase and lowercase letters in names. 
Additionally, names should not look like cell addresses (i.e., B12), function 
names, key names, or macro command keywords. 
 
Name Demonstration 
 
To demonstrate this command, move the cell pointer to cell B6 and then click in 
the Name box to highlight the “B6” cell reference. 
 
 
 
1. 
Type the name FEES and then press ENTER. 
 
 
 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
48 
 
2. 
Move the cell pointer to cell B13 and click the Name box. 
 
 
 
3. 
Type the name EXPENSES and then press ENTER. 
 
 
 
Now, any time you wish to do something to either of these cells, you can indicate 
the cells by entering FEES or EXPENSES instead of the cell addresses. 
 
Additionally, naming these two cells makes the formula in cell B15 easier to 
understand. To demonstrate this, move to cell B15 and enter =FEES-
EXPENSES. Now even a casual user of this financial plan would understand that 
the value in cell B15 is derived by subtracting total expenses from consulting 
fees. This method of documenting and clarifying formulas is particularly helpful 
with long and complex models. 
 
Names can be used with single cells or with a range of cells. Names are 
automatically updated for insertions, deletions, and moves. 
 
The F5 Key and the Name Box Drop-Down Arrow 
 
Another benefit to using names is that they make it easier to move around the 
worksheet using either the Name box drop-down arrow or the F5 (GOTO) key. 
Pressing the F5 key allows you to move the cell pointer to a specific location on 
the worksheet by specifying a name as the destination. 
 
Clicking the Name box drop-down arrow is an even quicker way of moving the 
cell pointer to a specific location on the worksheet. To demonstrate, click the 
Name box drop-down arrow to display a list of the two range names you just 
created. Now click FEES and watch the cell pointer jump to cell B6. 
 
Range names can be deleted by selecting Name (Insert menu) Define Delete. 
Range names are saved when the workbook is saved. If you wish to save this 
file, use the Save As command (File menu), and name the file Plan47. 
 
 
8. KEEPING CERTAIN COLUMNS AND ROWS ALWAYS ON THE SCREEN 
 
Open the file Plan3 now if it is not already on the screen. In Excel, the Windows 
Freeze Panes command allows you to freeze a row or column (or both) in place 
so that it always stays on the screen no matter where the cell pointer is. As you 
can imagine, this command is very handy with a large worksheet since you can 
always keep certain column or row headings on the screen. 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
49 
 
To demonstrate this command, move the cell pointer to cell B6, select the Freeze 
Panes command (Window menu). This freezes column A and rows 1-5 on the 
screen. To confirm this, move the cell pointer to column M or further and note 
that column A is still displayed on the screen. 
 
 
 
 
Move back to cell B6 and then down to row 25 or further and notice that rows 1-5 
are still displayed on the screen. 
 
These are examples of what both a column freeze and a row freeze looks like. If 
you wanted either a column freeze or a row freeze but not both, you would click 
the row header or column header before using the Freeze Panes command 
(Window menu).  
 
If you wish to save this workbook, use the Save As command (File menu), and 
name the file Plan48. 
 
Before you go on to the next section, be sure to eliminate the frozen titles that 
you have. To do this, select the Unfreeze Panes command (Window menu). 
 
 
9. WORKING WITH SHEETS 
 
Open the file Plan3 now if it is not already on the screen. Workbooks may consist 
of several worksheets. This section will demonstrate some simple mechanics of 
using multiple sheets. The worksheet tabs at the bottom of the worksheet window 
allow you to move quickly between different worksheets in a workbook. To 
demonstrate, click the tab for Sheet2. Now click the tab for Sheet3. Thats all 
there is to it. 
 
 
 
 
 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
50 
Adding, Moving, and Deleting Sheets 
 
Additional worksheets can be added. With Sheet3 still selected, click Worksheet 
(Insert menu) and a new Sheet4 is inserted between Sheet2 and Sheet3. 
 
 
 
 
Use the mouse button to grab the tab for Sheet3 and move it between Sheet2 
and Sheet4. Now all sheets are in numerical order.  
 
 
 
Sheets can be deleted using the Delete Sheet command (Edit menu). Select 
Sheet4 and delete it now. 
 
Naming Sheets 
 
Just like range names and file names, worksheets can be given more descriptive 
names. To demonstrate, double-click the Sheet1 tab, type Fast Track, and press 
ENTER. Use the same process to name Sheet2 Adventure Travel and Sheet3 
Combined. 
 
 
 
 
Copy and Paste 
 
Suppose you want to make a projection for Consulting fees for Adventure Travel 
similar to the one you made for Fast Track. Just as you used Copy and Paste on 
one worksheet, you can also use it between sheets in a workbook. To 
demonstrate, go to the Fast Track sheet, select the range A1 to F6, click the 
Copy button, click the Adventure Travel sheet tab, and with the cell pointer in 
cell A1, click the Paste button. The column width for column A does not carry 
over, but everything else should. Make the following four changes to this 
worksheet: (1) widen column A, (2) change cell B2 to Adventure Travel, (3) 
change cell A6 to Commissions, and (4) change cell B6 to $8,800. Easy! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copy 
Paste 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
51 
 
 
 
If you ever want to copy an entire worksheet, click the top left corner box of the 
worksheet (between column A and row 1). This action selects the entire 
worksheet. Then click the Copy button, select another sheet, and click the Paste 
button. 
 
 
Multiple Sheet Formulas 
 
Suppose you now want to prepare a combined report for fees and commissions 
in the 1st Quarter. Click the Combined sheet tab and enter Consolidated Total 
in cell A1. Next, move to cell C1, type = (equal sign), click the Fast Track tab, 
click cell B6, type + (plus sign), click the Adventure Travel tab, click cell B6, and 
press ENTER. The combined total ($18,800) now appears in cell C1. Not very 
elegant, but you get the idea. 
 
 
 
 
Youve barely scratched the surface on using multiple sheets, but you certainly 
have enough information now to develop some sophisticated consolidated 
reports. See the spreadsheet model called SUMMARY in Appendix C for a 
simple example. 
 
If you wish to save this workbook, use the Save As command (File menu), and 
name the file Plan49. 
 
 
10. ARTWORK 
 
Open the file Plan3 now if it is not already on the screen. It is possible to add 
lines, arrows, geometric shapes, freehand drawings, fancy text, clip art, and other 
objects to a worksheet. You can add a gazillion colors and patterns as well. 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
52 
Charts and graphs can also be added, but thats covered in the next lesson. 
 
 
 
 
The three quickest places to go for artwork are covered in this section. 
 
Format Cells Patterns 
 
Select your cells and go for color and patterns. Use the Border, Font, and 
Alignment options as well. 
 
View Toolbars Drawing 
 
This activates the Drawing toolbar. Lots of shapes, shadows, and word art are 
available with the Drawing toolbar (Excel 2000 version shown below). The 
Drawing toolbar can also be activated with the Drawing button. 
 
 
 
 
Insert Picture (or Insert Objects) 
 
These commands allow you to insert clip art, pictures, scans, sound, and video. 
 
Experiment! 
 
Feel free to experiment as much as you wish. If you want, see if you can recreate 
the artwork above. The star and checkmark come from Insert Picture ClipArt in 
Excel 2000. The color in lines 6, 13, and 15 and the pattern in the title box come 
from Format Cells Patterns. The drop shadow behind the title box comes from 
Drawing 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
53 
the Shadow button on the Drawing toolbar. Zowie comes from the WordArt button 
on the Drawing toolbar.  
 
As you experiment, you will probably make many mistakes. Rest assured that 
objects can be deleted, moved, or resized easily after they are initially drawn. 
And remember that Undo button! 
 
When you are done, print and save your work if you wish. Use the Save As 
command (File menu) to save your file as Plan10. 
 

 
54 
Lesson 5 
CHARTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
In this lesson, you will learn to: 
 
• 
Create charts based on data in the worksheet 
• 
Save a chart 
• 
Perform what-if analysis with a chart 
• 
Select, move, size, copy, and delete a chart 
• 
Print a chart 
• 
Change the current chart type 
• 
Edit and enhance a chart 
• 
Use Chart Sheets 
 
 
BEFORE BEGINNING 
 
In this lesson you are going to create some charts. To begin, Excel should be 
started and the file Plan3 (created in Lesson 3) should be open on your screen. 
 
 
ABOUT CHARTS IN EXCEL 
 
A chart is basically a graphical representation of the data that you have in your 
worksheet. Charts are a very important means of communicating information 
because they allow you to visually examine trends and relationships that exist in 
the data.  
 
Most charts in Excel have the following basic elements: title, y-axis, y-axis title,  
x-axis, x-axis title, plot, and legend. In Excel, the y-axis is called the Value axis 
and the x-axis is called the Category axis. These items are depicted in Illustration 
5.1. 
 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
55 
 
 
 
        Illustration 5.1  
Basic Chart Elements 
 
 
Excel makes it very easy for you to create charts on your screen and to print 
them on a printer. In most cases, charts can be created with a drag and a couple 
clicks of the mouse. Elements of a chart can be easily modified by the creator. 
 
 
CREATING CHARTS IN EXCEL 
 
To demonstrate the creation of a chart, select the range A5 to E6, click the Chart 
Wizard button, and then click the Finish button. Bingo! A chart is immediately 
drawn. It cant get much easier than that! See Illustration 5.2. 
 
 
Illustration 5.2 
Chart: Quick and Simple 
Chart 
Wizard 
 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
56 
You can easily change the chart type from a column graph to another style (line, 
pie, 3D bar, etc.). A couple clicks or drags lets you resize the chart, move it, copy 
it, and delete it. You can edit the chart, change the fonts, add color, and other 
visual effects. It is all pretty simple and straightforward. In fact you could probably 
end this lesson right now and use what youve just learned (with a little 
experimenting) to create many attractive charts on your own. 
 
But why experiment on your own when you can take a short, guided tour? Thats 
what this lesson is all about. To begin, press the DELETE key to delete the chart 
you just created. If that doesnt work, close the file Plan3 (without saving it) and 
then reopen it. 
 
In the chart you just drew, only one data series was plotted: Consulting fees. 
When you select a range of data to chart, Excel treats each row or column of 
data in the range as separate data series. Each data series represents a set of 
values that will be plotted on the chart. Now lets create a new, fancier chart for 
Fast Track Inc., plotting more than one data series. 
 
To demonstrate charting multiple data series, use the mouse to select the range 
A5 to E6. Next hold down the CTRL key and use the mouse to select a second 
range A9 to E12. Then click the Chart Wizard button. The Chart Wizard guides 
you through four steps. 
 
Step 1 (Chart Type) allows you to select the chart type. Go ahead and 
experiment with different chart types. To view the results of each selection, click 
the button that says “Press and hold to view sample.” 
 
The remaining illustrations in this section use the Column chart (upper left corner 
sub-type). To make sure your charts look like those in this book, select this chart 
type and sub-type (see Illustration 5.3) before going to Step 2. Then click Next to 
go to Step 2. 
 
 
 
Illustration 5.3 
Chart Wizard Step 1 
 
 
Chart 
Wizard 
 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
57 
Step 2 (Source Data) allows you to select the data ranges to be plotted and to 
select which categories are to be used on the x-axis. Notice that the chart shown 
on the Data Range tab has the income and expense categories shown on the x-
axis (Category axis) and the four quarters are shown in the legend. 
 
To demonstrate the difference between plotting by columns and plotting by rows, 
select the Row option now (see Illustration 5.4). Notice the graph is redrawn so 
that the four quarters are on the x-axis (Category axis) and the income and 
expenses are shown in the legend. Lets use this new orientation for your chart. 
 
 
 
Illustration 5.4 
Chart Wizard Step 2 
 
When you construct charts, you should be aware of the logic Excel uses. If the 
range you select to chart has more rows than columns, Excel automatically plots 
the data series by columns. This is what happened above. If this is not what you 
had in mind, you can switch the orientation around later, as you just did here. 
 
Click Next to go on to Step 3.  
 
Step 3 (Chart Options) allows you to customize the appearance of your chart. For 
Chart title, enter Fast Track Inc. (see Illustration 5.5). If you want to put titles on 
the x-axis (Category axis) or y-axis (Value axis), you can do that here. Brief 
descriptions of the other tabs are as follows: 
 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
58 
 
Axes: Custom options for the x- and y-axes 
 
Gridlines: Drawing guidelines vertically or horizontally on your chart 
 
Legend: Placement of the legend 
 
Data Labels: Data values displayed on the chart itself 
 
Data Table: Data arrangement serving as basis for chart 
 
 
 
 
Illustration 5.5 
Chart Wizard Step 3 
 
 
Click Next to go on to Step 4. 
 
Step 4 (Location) allows you to place the chart on the worksheet (As object in) or 
on a separate sheet (As new sheet). The second option (As new sheet) will be 
demonstrated later. For now, select the option to keep As object in (see 
Illustration 5.6) and click Finish.  
 
 
 
 
Illustration 5.6 
Chart Wizard Step 4 
 
When you are done, your chart should appear as in Illustration 5.7 below. Do not 
be concerned if your y-axis scale is shown in smaller increments. 
 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
59 
 
 
Illustration 5.7 
Chart Wizard Completed 
 
 
SAVING A CHART 
 
Now that you have created your chart, you should save it. To save a chart, you 
simply have to save the file that contains the chart. Do this now. Select the Save 
As command (File menu), enter the file name Plan5 in the file name text box, 
and then select OK. Your chart will now be saved with the rest of the worksheet 
data. 
 
 
WHAT-IF ANALYSIS WITH CHARTS 
 
In Excel, charts are dynamic. This means that when you change data in the 
worksheet, you can immediately see the graphical impact of the change by 
looking at the chart. The ability to see the effect of changes immediately in the 
chart can be extremely helpful when performing what-if analysis. 
 
To demonstrate the dynamic link between the worksheet and the chart, you will 
need to enter a new value in cell B6. If the chart is blocking that cell, click on an 
open space on the chart and drag it out slightly to the right. Examine the chart 
and then enter 5000 in cell B6. Examine the chart again and note how the chart 
has been redrawn to reflect the new value for 1st Qtr consulting fees. Feel free to 
experiment with other values in cell B6. Reset it to $10,000 when done. 
 
 
 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
60 
 
 
WORKING WITH CHARTS AS A WHOLE 
 
Charts can be altered or modified after they are created. You can think of a chart 
as very fancy artwork (covered in Lesson 4). In fact, after you create a chart, you 
can work with the chart the same way you do with other drawn objects. Charts 
may be altered using the Chart menu, the Format and Insert menus, the Chart 
toolbar, or they can be directly edited by pointing at objects within the chart itself 
and clicking once or twice. A brief summary of some important tasks is presented 
below. 
 
Selecting a Chart 
 
A chart is selected by clicking once in an open area of the chart. When a chart is 
selected, it has a series of solid black squares positioned around the outside of 
the chart. These solid black squares are known as handles. If your chart is 
currently not selected, click it once now to select it. When a chart is selected, the 
Chart command replaces the Data command in the main menu. 
 
 
 
 
Chart Toolbar 
 
When a chart is selected, the Chart toolbar becomes available. If it is not on your 
screen now, select Toolbars (View menu), and click the Chart option. If you still 
do not see it on your screen, chances are it is hidden behind some other toolbar. 
Turn the other toolbars off until you find the Chart toolbar. See Illustration 5.8. 
The Chart toolbar offers a few, limited options for modifying the chart. More 
options are available on the Format menu, Insert menu, and Chart menu. These 
menu options will be discussed later. 
 
 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
61 
I
 
Illustration 5.8 
Chart in New Location 
 
Moving a Chart 
 
To move a chart, select the chart, position the mouse pointer in any open area 
within the chart (but not on one of the handles), then press the left mouse button 
to grab the chart, drag it to a new location, and release the mouse button. Move 
the chart now so that the upper left corner of the chart is in cell A20. 
 
Sizing a Chart 
 
To resize a chart, select the chart, position the mouse pointer on one of the chart 
handles so that it changes to a doubled-headed arrow, press the left mouse 
button to grab the chart border, drag it to the desired size, and then release the 
mouse button. Resize the chart now so that the lower right corner is in cell G32. 
 
After you are done, your chart should appear as shown in Illustration 5.8.  
 
Copying or Cutting a Chart 
 
Do not do this; just read. To copy a chart, select the chart, click the Copy button 
or the Cut button, position the cell pointer in the location where you want the 
copy of the chart to be placed, and then click the Paste button. You may want 
copies of a chart to show the same data using different chart types, and so 
forth. Charts can also be pasted to other applications such as word processing 
programs or presentation programs.  
 
Deleting a Chart 
 
Do not do this; just read. To delete a chart, select the chart and then press the 
DELETE key. You did this at the beginning of the lesson with the first chart you 
drew. 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
62 
PRINTING CHARTS 
 
Printing charts in Excel is easy to do. You can print the chart by itself or print it 
together with the worksheet as they appear on your screen.  
 
To print a chart by itself, simply select the chart and then execute the File Print 
command as usual. Excel will then print the chart filling an entire page. Lets print 
your chart now. Click in an open area on your chart to select it, select the Print 
command (File menu), and then select OK. As with all printing, the Page Setup 
command (File menu) can be used to modify layout, margins, headers, footers, 
etc. 
 
You can print the worksheet and the chart together as they appear on your 
screen. First, deselect the chart by clicking anywhere on the worksheet itself. 
Then execute the File Print command as usual. Try this now. 
 
 
CHART TYPES 
 
One of the most obvious ways to change a chart is with the many different chart 
types that are available. The default chart type in Excel is a two-dimensional 
column chart. Lets examine other chart types. Begin by selecting the chart. The 
Chart toolbar appears, but as mentioned earlier, the chart types available on the 
toolbar are limited. 
 
To look at the full range of chart types available, select Chart Type (Chart 
menu). Recall that the Chart command appears in the main menu in place of the 
Data command only after the chart has been selected. You are presented with a 
gallery of choices and descriptions. As you click on various chart types, you can 
press a button to view what the chart will look like with the current data. Try out a 
few. When you are done, click OK or Cancel. 
 
 
CLARIFICATION ON TWO POPULAR CHART TYPES 
 
1. 
Pie charts display only the first data series (consulting fees in this case). 
Also, individual slices of a pie can be moved out for visual effect. 
 
2. 
The XY chart is commonly called a scattergraph. The XY chart requires that 
the x-axis be values, not labels, otherwise it ends up functioning as a plain 
old line graph. An example of this would be to plot advertising expense on 
the x-axis and consulting fees on the y-axis. This would allow you to see 
what impact advertising had on consulting fees. See Illustration 5.9. 
 
 
 
 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
63 
 
 
Illustration 5.9 
XY Chart 
 
 
EDITING CHARTS 
 
There are many other features available to alter charts and objects within charts, 
such as titles, legend, and data series. You can add or change colors, patterns, 
fonts, gridlines, data labels, artwork, and so forth. 
 
As a simple demonstration of this, select the chart. Then click the title Fast Track, 
Inc., once. You can see by the handles placed around the title that it has been 
selected. 
 
 
 
 
 
Select the Format command and choose the Selected Chart Title option. Three 
tabs become available for enhancing the title: Patterns, Font, and Alignment. 
Click on the Patterns tab. This tab is divided into two sections: Border and Area. 
Border can be used to place a border around the title. Click the Shadow box. 
 
Area can be used to color or fill the area around the title. To demonstrate this 
option, click the Fill Effects button and pick a pattern on the Textures tab. Click 
OK twice. An example of how your chart might appear is shown in Illustration 
5.10. 
 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
64 
 
Illustration 5.10 
Chart with Fancy Title 
 
 
This is a very simple example of how your chart can be visually enhanced. What 
you did to the title can also be done to the chart as a whole and to other chart 
objects. With the extensive options available in Excel, the possibilities are 
practically limitless. Go ahead and experiment if you wish. You can also use the 
Drawing toolbar (see Lesson 4) to add geometric shapes, fancy text, and 
shadows to your chart. Remember the Undo command if you create something 
you do not like! 
 
A Warning 
 
When creating a chart, always keep in mind that its purpose is to visually 
communicate information to the user. If the viewer has to struggle to figure out 
what the chart is illustrating because it is too cluttered, you are defeating the 
benefit of using a chart. 
 
 
SAVE YOUR WORK 
 
Since you have made changes to your chart, save your file again under the name 
Plan5. Click the Save button. 
 
 
CHART SHEETS 
 
So far, your chart has been located as an object in the worksheet. It floats above 
the worksheet and can be moved around to different spots. Charts can also be 
placed on separate sheets called Chart Sheets. To demonstrate this now, lets 
move your chart into its own special sheet. 
 
Select the chart. Then choose the Location command (Chart menu) and pick 
the As new sheet option. Click OK. The chart is now on a sheet by itself called 
Chart1. Click the Sheet1 tab and notice that only the worksheet itself is there. 
Save 
 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
65 
See Illustration 5.11. 
 
 
 
Illustration 5.11 
Chart on Chart Sheet 
 
CHART DATA TABLES 
 
When you have data in several locations on a worksheet that you wish to plot in a 
single chart, you may select several ranges at once using the mouse and the 
CTRL key. However, if the data is too disconnected, the Chart Wizard may have 
difficulty constructing the chart you want. You may find it easier in these cases to 
use a separate section of the worksheet to accumulate all the data in one place. 
If data is placed in a tabular format (neat columns and rows), the Chart Wizard 
will have little difficulty constructing the chart you want. 
 
 
FINAL COMMENT 
 
This lesson covered how to create, work with, save, enhance, and print charts. 
Charts are a very effective means of presenting data, so you are strongly 
encouraged to continue working with them. Keep in mind that establishing a 
purpose for your chart is just as important as learning the mechanics of how to 
create and enhance a chart. 

 
66 
SECTION II: Excel 2007 
 
Lesson 1 
BASIC USER SKILLS 
 
 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
In this lesson, you will learn to: 
 
• 
Start the Microsoft® Excel program 
• 
Move the active cell around the worksheet 
• 
Enter text and numbers 
• 
Modify and delete entries 
•  
Change column widths 
•  
Use toolbar buttons 
• 
Save worksheets for later recall 
• 
Perform what-if analysis  
• 
Print files 
• 
Exit the Microsoft® Excel program 
 
 
COMPUTER SPREADSHEETS 
 
Imagine a large sheet of accounting paper with many columns and rows. In the 
business world, this is often referred to as a worksheet or spreadsheet. Paper 
spreadsheets are commonly used to gather large amounts of financial data and 
to accumulate the results using a pencil and a calculator. 
 
Computer spreadsheets are similar to paper spreadsheets in structure and 
format. One big difference with computer spreadsheets is that the columns and 
rows appear on a computer screen rather than on paper. Another difference is 
that arithmetic calculations (totals, averages, etc.) can be performed 
automatically by the computer. In fact, the real benefit to using a computer 
spreadsheet comes when you start taking advantage of the programs ability to 
automatically perform calculations using different sets of numbers (called what-if 
analysis) and to create charts (graphs) based on data contained in the 
worksheet. A computer spreadsheet program such as Microsoft® Excel lends 
itself perfectly to just about any application that requires the analysis and 
manipulation of numbers. 
 
Go to the www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith website to see some simple 
and useful Excel applications. 
 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
67 
BEFORE BEGINNING 
 
1. 
Necessity of Saving Your Work. During the lessons in this tutorial, you will 
be asked occasionally to save your work for use in a later lesson. Files 
should be saved on your hard drive, removable flash drive, or network. 
 
2.  ESC (Escape) Key. As you work through this tutorial, you will be asked to 
enter commands using the mouse or various keys on the keyboard. 
Occasionally, you may make a mistake by clicking the wrong spot or 
pressing the wrong key. When this occurs, you can use the ESC (Escape) 
key to escape from the incorrect entry. Pressing the ESC key once or twice 
will eliminate the error. This will allow you to start over with the proper entry. 
 
3.  Getting Help. Excel uses the function key marked F1 as a help key. The 
same help system is available by clicking the Help icon in the upper-right 
corner of the screen. 
 
STARTING MICROSOFT® EXCEL 
 
To start Excel, simply double-click the Microsoft® Excel icon. You will see the 
Excel opening logo for a few seconds followed by a screen containing a blank 
worksheet window. If necessary, maximize the worksheet screen so that the work 
area is as large as possible. Illustration 1.1 identifies some important elements of 
the screen that are unique to Excel. Please take a minute to note the names of 
the various parts of the Excel screen. Many of these names will be referred to 
later in the tutorial.  
    Illustration 1.1 
    Worksheet Terminology 
Excel 
 
Excel 
Help 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
68 
 
HOW EXCEL WORKS 
 
Excel is frequently used to prepare a numerical report or analysis.  In the 
simplest case, numbers and text are entered into the cells on a worksheet and 
the results are printed out.  An additional capability of Excel is that it can perform 
mathematical calculations using the numbers that have been entered on a 
worksheet.  It can add the values in two cells together and place the sum in a 
third cell.  It can subtract, multiply, or divide cell values.  With a column of 
numbers Excel can easily compute the total, find the average value, the 
maximum value, the minimum value, and other statistical information.  This is just 
a small sampling of the hundreds of mathematical operations that Excel can do.  
Many of these operations are programmed into Excel (called functions), but most 
users create their own formulas to analyze or summarize the numbers in their 
own reports.  Another positive feature of Excel is that files can be used over and 
over again with different numbers: monthly reports, invoices, and so forth.  Files 
that can be used repeatedly with different data are frequently referred to as 
templates. 
 
 
TABS and the RIBBON 
 
Excel has many features that assist the user in developing a functional report 
(copy, paste, insert new columns, etc.) and other features that enhance the 
reports visual impact (bold, underlines, color, charts, etc.).  Virtually all of these 
features are activated by buttons on the Ribbon (Cut, Copy, Font Color, 
AutoSum, etc.)   
 
There are eight tabs (usually) across the top of the Ribbon labeled Home, Insert, 
Page Layout, etc.  The Home tab is currently active.  Click the Insert tab now.  
Notice how a whole new set of Ribbon buttons appears.  Click the Home tab 
again. 
 
Additional tabs will appear when you are working with certain objects in the 
worksheet.  They are called Contextual tabs.  Examples include Chart Tools, 
Table Tools, and Picture Tools. 
 
The Ribbon buttons are arranged into groups (Clipboard, Font, Alignment, etc.) to 
assist the user in finding the correct command buttons quickly.  In some of the 
groups, there is a small diagonal arrow in the lower right corner by the group 
name called a dialog box launcher.  Clicking this provides additional options for 
formatting cells. 
 
To find out what each Ribbon button does, place the mouse pointer over the 
button.  A short description of the function of that button appears in a small box 
below the mouse pointer.  Take a moment right now to check the function of 
some buttons, but dont click on any just yet. 
 
There is a lot of redundancy built in to the command structure for Excel.  Many 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
69 
tasks can be accomplished in more than one way.  This tutorial may show you 
one way to do something and you may find other ways of doing the same thing. 
 
 
ALT KEY 
 
Excel 2007 offers a keyboard approach to selecting Ribbon buttons.  To 
demonstrate, press and release the ALT key now.  Excel displays hot keys for 
each of the eight tabs.  Press P now to select Page Layout.  Next press T and E 
to select Theme Effects.  Press ENTER to select the default setting (Office).  If 
you know your keyboard well, using these hot keys can greatly speed up 
executing tasks. 
 
 
OFFICE BUTTON 
 
Clicking this button offers a pull-down menu to Open, Save, Print, and Close files, 
among other options.  Also, the most recent documents used by Excel are listed.  
This is very similar to the File menu in older versions of Excel.  Check it out. 
 
 
QUICK ACCESS TOOLBAR 
 
Initially this toolbar contains buttons you can use to save your file, undo edits, 
and redo edits.  The toolbar can be easily customized to add any Ribbon or 
Office button commands that you wish to have “quick access” to.  (To customize, 
click the drop-down button to the right of the Quick Access toolbar.  Its a 
horizontal bar over a down-pointing triangle.)  After you complete this tutorial you 
may want to consider adding the Print Preview, Quick Print, and Print buttons to 
the toolbar to speed the printing process.  One advantage to putting buttons on 
the Quick Access toolbar is that they are always visible no matter which tab you 
are on. 
 
 
THE WORKSHEET 
 
Excel uses a grid of columns and rows to frame a work area that is known as the 
worksheet. The top border of the worksheet window contains a row of sequential 
letters (A, B, C, etc.). These are the column headers. The left border of the 
worksheet window contains a column of sequential numbers (1, 2, 3, etc.). These 
are the row headers. The intersection of a column and row is known as a cell. 
Currently the worksheet is completely empty except for an outlined rectangular 
box in cell A1. This box is known as the active cell. The active cell indicates 
where text or numbers may be entered on the worksheet. You will also notice 
that the position of this cell is indicated in the Name box just above the 
worksheet. NOTE: Illustration 1.1 may appear slightly different from your screen 
because Excel automatically adjusts the worksheet to the size of your screen.  To 
some extent you can alter the size of the worksheet window by grabbing the 
outside edges of the frame and dragging them in or out.  You also can drag the 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
70 
Zoom Slider on the bottom right side of the worksheet window to enlarge or 
reduce the size of the cells. 
 
 
DIFFERENTIATING BETWEEN WORKBOOKS AND WORKSHEETS 
 
Excel files are called workbooks. Each workbook can contain several pages 
which are referred to as worksheets. Currently on your screen is a workbook 
named Book1, and it contains three empty worksheets. Notice the workbook 
name in the Title bar at the top of the screen and the Sheet tabs at the bottom of 
the worksheet. Both workbooks and worksheets can be given more descriptive 
names, but for now the default names will be used. 
 
 
MOVING AROUND THE WORKSHEET 
There are several ways to move around the worksheet using either the mouse or 
the keyboard. Both approaches are demonstrated below. 
Using the Mouse 
You can use the mouse to move the active cell around the worksheet simply by 
aiming the mouse pointer at the cell you want to move to and then clicking the left 
mouse button. To demonstrate this, click cell B1 (if you miss, aim and try again). 
After doing this, the active cell should shift to a position under the B column 
(notice the cell address in the Name box changes from A1 to B1). You can use 
this method to move the active cell to any location on the worksheet. 
 
The actual worksheet is bigger than what is shown on the screen. To 
demonstrate this, click the right scroll arrow once and notice that column A is 
no longer visible and that a new column has been added on the right side of the 
worksheet. 
 
Now for one of the surprises of this program. Repeatedly click the right scroll 
arrow and note that new columns appear in alphabetic sequence (you can speed 
up the scrolling by holding down the mouse button). Stop when you get to column 
BD. You have moved out 56 columns. The far right column is XFD. Thats 16,384 
columns! 
 
The worksheet also has more rows than are shown on the screen. Repeatedly 
click the down scroll arrow to move down the worksheet. Notice the row 
numbers increase each time you click the down scroll arrow (again, hold down 
the mouse button to speed up the scrolling). Stop when you get to row 100. It 
would take a long time for you to find the bottom of the worksheet since it is 
1,048,576 rows deep. 
 
As you can see, the worksheet is very large. There are billions of cells available 
for use on each worksheet. It is limited only by the memory of your computer. 
Right scroll 
 arrow 
 
Down scroll  
arrow 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
71 
What you see on the screen in the worksheet window is only a small portion of 
the entire workbook. 
 
 
As with other Windows programs, you can use the scroll bar to move quickly 
around the worksheet. Dragging the scroll boxes horizontally or vertically over the 
scroll bars or clicking the scroll arrows are some common ways of moving 
around. Feel free to experiment with these now. Position the active cell back in 
cell A1 when you are done. 
Using the Keyboard 
You can also use the arrow keys on the keyboard to move the active cell around 
the worksheet. The arrow keys are located on the right side of your keyboard. 
 
Pressing any of the arrow keys will move the active cell in the direction of the 
arrow. This is different than clicking the scroll arrows with the mouse. When you 
click the scroll arrows with the mouse, the active cell remains stationary and the 
worksheet moves. When you use the arrow keys on the keyboard, the active cell 
itself moves. 
 
To demonstrate using arrow keys, press the right arrow () key once. This 
shifts the active cell over to column B. Now press the right arrow () key 
repeatedly and notice that as new columns come on the screen, the active cell 
remains visible. 
 
There are also four common ways to move the active cell quickly around the 
worksheet using the keyboard. These methods are particularly helpful for moving 
the active cell long distances. 
 
1. 
The first way is to simply hold down one of the arrow keys on the keyboard. 
Holding down an arrow key moves the active cell quickly in the direction of 
the arrow. Try it with the down arrow ( ) key. 
 
2. 
A second way is to use the keys marked PG UP (Page Up) and PG DN 
(Page Down) on the keyboard. These move the active cell up and down one 
page at a time, respectively. Try these keys out if you wish. 
 
3. 
The third way to move long distances quickly is to use the END key in 
conjunction with the arrow keys. No matter where the active cell is now, 
press the END key once and then press the down arrow () key. What 
happens? As you can see, the END key/arrow key combination moves the 
active cell to the end of the column or row that the active cell is on. The 
active cell will stop if it bumps into a cell that isnt empty. Practice using the 
END key. See if you can get the active cell positioned in the lower-right 
corner of the worksheet. 
 
4. 
The fourth way is to hold down the CTRL key and then press the HOME 
key. Try this CTRL+HOME key combination now and watch what happens. 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
72 
This moves the active cell back to cell A1. This is a rather limited, but very 
helpful, key combination. The HOME key by itself will take you back to 
Column A of the active row. 
 
 
DATA ENTRY 
 
You are now ready to learn how to enter data on the worksheet. All data entered 
on a worksheet is classified as either text or values. You must be in the Ready 
mode to enter data on the worksheet. Check the mode indicator on the left-hand 
corner of the Status bar. If it does not say Ready, press the ESC key (repeatedly 
if necessary). 
 
Text 
 
Text is cell input that is either letters or words. In some cases, numbers can  
be entered as text. Excel does different things with values (i.e., mathematical 
operations, special number formats, etc.) than with text so it is important that it 
knows which cells contain text and which are values. By default, text is aligned to 
the left side of a cell. As you will see later, the alignment of text can be changed 
so that it is right-aligned or centered. 
 
Values 
 
Values are cell inputs that are either numbers, user-created formulas, or built-in 
formulas (called functions). By default, values are aligned to the right side of a 
cell, but this too can be changed. 
 
 
ENTERING TEXT ON THE WORKSHEET 
 
There are many conventions that relate to entering text and numbers that you 
need to be aware of. Since the easiest way to introduce you to these is with a 
demonstration, lets begin entering some data on the worksheet. You will create a 
simple financial plan for a consulting firm for the first quarter of the year. 
 
To begin with, you will enter the label Consulting fees in cell A2. To do this, move 
the active cell to cell A2 (use arrow keys or the mouse) and type the letter C. If 
you make any typing errors, press the ESC key and start over. As soon as you 
type the letter C, the word Enter appears in the mode indicator on the Status bar. 
 
 
 
 
Now finish entering your label by typing the letters onsulting fees. You will see 
the words “Consulting fees” appear in the cells and in the Formula bar. 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
73 
 
 
 
 
Storing Input in a Cell 
 
Input is not actually stored in the cell until you (1) press the ENTER key, or (2) 
press one of the arrow keys, or (3) click the Enter box in the Formula bar, or (4) 
click some other cell. Pressing ENTER will store the input in the cell and move 
the active cell down one row. Pressing one of the arrow keys serves the dual 
purpose of storing input in a cell and moving the active cell in the direction of the 
arrow. This is particularly helpful when entering a large amount of data in a row 
or column. Clicking the Enter box stores the input in the active cell without 
moving it. Clicking the Cancel box serves the same purpose as pressing the ESC 
key. Use any of these four methods now to store the label Consulting fees in cell 
A2. 
 
 
Throughout the rest of this tutorial all instructions for entering input onto the 
worksheet will be condensed. You will simply be instructed to enter input into a 
cell. How you choose to store the entry will be left up to you (using any of the four 
methods just described). 
 
Continue setting up the financial plan categories by entering Expenses in cell 
A4, Salaries in cell A5, Commissions in cell A6, Social security taxes in cell 
A7, Rent in cell A8, Total expenses in cell A9, and Net income in cell A11. If 
you make any typing errors, press ENTER and leave them for now. You will be 
shown how to correct them later. 
 
 
 
 
 
Enter 
Cancel 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
74 
Entering Long Labels 
Notice that several labels extend over into column B. The extra characters arent 
actually entered in column B, they are just displayed there. Now move the active 
cell to cell B9 and enter the word micro. From the result, you can see that long 
entries in a cell will not be completely displayed if the adjacent cell contains input. 
 
 
 
 
Correcting Typing Errors Before Storing 
If you make a typing error before you press ENTER you can use either the ESC 
key or the BACKSPACE key to change your entry. Pressing the ESC key will 
completely cancel the current entry and return you to the Ready mode so you can 
start over. Pressing the BACKSPACE key will delete the current entry one 
character at a time (working right to left), allowing you to correct your entry 
without having to start over from scratch. 
Correcting Typing Errors After Storing 
There are many ways to correct errors that you catch after you store the input in 
the cell. Two easy methods will be described here. The first method is to simply 
type over the incorrect entry with a new entry. To demonstrate this, you will 
change the label in cell A7 from Social security taxes to Payroll taxes. To do this, 
simply move to cell A7 and enter Payroll taxes. 
 
 
 
 
The second way to correct errors is to directly edit the contents of a cell. Move 
the active cell to cell B9. Lets change the word “micro” to “macro.” To activate 
the Edit mode, press the F2 key—or double-click the cell—or move the mouse 
over the word “micro” in the Formula bar and click once. The mode indicator 
changes from Ready to Edit. Next, use the left arrow ( ) key or the mouse to 
move the insertion bar to the space between the letters i and c. The position of 
the insertion bar is important because pressing the DELETE key erases letters to 
the right and pressing the BACKSPACE key erases letters to the left. Since you 
want to change micro to macro, press BACKSPACE now to erase the letter i, 
type the letter a, and press ENTER. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
75 
Erasing Cell Contents Completely 
 
Sometimes correcting errors can mean erasing cell contents completely. The 
DELETE key can be used for this. Move to cell B9 and press the DELETE key. 
Goodbye macro! 
 
 
 
 
TYPEFACE STYLES (FONTS) 
 
The name of the font currently being used by the worksheet is Calibri and the 
size of the type is 11 points. These are shown in the font and font size boxes.  
 
To demonstrate how to change fonts within individual cells, move to cell A2. Then 
click the Font drop-down arrow. Up pops a menu of other font choices. Slowly 
scroll down the list of fonts to get a “live preview” of what each font looks like in 
cell A2. The type size can also be changed by clicking the Font size drop-down 
box and selecting another size. Again, watch the live preview. The row height will 
automatically change to accommodate larger type sizes. Go ahead and 
experiment. 
 
When you are done experimenting, set cells A2, A4, and A11 to the Calibri font  
with a point size of 14. Your screen should look exactly as shown below before 
proceeding! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Font style box 
 
Font 
size box 
 
Font  
size box 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
76 
 
CHANGING COLUMN WIDTH AND ROW HEIGHT 
 
The titles Expenses, Commissions, Payroll taxes, and Total expenses all spill 
over into column B. Column widths can be changed to accommodate long words 
or numbers. Lets widen column A so that the expense titles are completely 
contained within it. To do this, move the mouse pointer to the line between 
column headers for columns A and B at the top of the worksheet. When 
positioned exactly on the line, the mouse pointer becomes a thick cross with 
arrowheads at both ends of the horizontal bar. When this symbol appears, press 
the mouse button to grab the right border of column A, drag the column border to 
the right about an inch, and then release the mouse button. Column A is now 
widened and the expense titles no longer overlap into column B. 
 
Another way column widths can be changed is by clicking the Format button in 
the Cells group. Do that now, then select Column Width. The standard column 
width is 8.43 when the font is Calibri size 11. Enter 22 and click OK. 
 
There is also a way to size columns automatically. Move the mouse pointer again 
to the line at the top of the worksheet between column headers A and B. When 
the mouse pointer becomes a thick cross with arrowheads again, double-click the 
mouse. This technique automatically makes column A just wide enough to 
include the widest label in that column. See the illustration on the next page. 
 
These same techniques can be used to change the height of any row. 
  
 
 
 
 
ENTERING NUMBERS ON THE WORKSHEET 
 
Now lets give a little substance to your financial plan by adding some numbers. 
 
 
Format 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
77 
 
Entering Numbers  
 
Whenever you need to enter a number on a worksheet, simply enter it using 
either the numerical keypad on the far right side of your keyboard (NUM LOCK 
on) or the number keys across the top of your keyboard. 
 
You do not need to include commas or dollar signs as you type in the value, but 
Excel will accept them. Also, if you enter a decimal point, that will be shown as 
well. You can enter negative numbers either by enclosing them in parentheses or 
by preceding the number with a minus sign. You can enter percentages either by 
typing in the number followed by a % (percent sign) or simply by typing in the 
percentage as a decimal. 
 
Number Formats 
 
Number formats are the presentation styles for values entered into cells. For 
example, the value 1234 is shown below expressed in several common format 
categories. 
 
 
 
All of these formats can be shown with decimals, too (e.g., 1234.567 or 
$1,234.56). Notice also that some of the values are not aligned exactly below 
each other. Methods to correct this alignment problem are discussed in Lesson 2. 
 
You can designate the number format for cells using the buttons on the Ribbon in 
the Number group. In some cases you can also assign number formats to cells 
automatically by the way you enter values for the first time. To demonstrate this, 
enter the following values in the indicated cells (be sure to use dollar signs and 
commas where shown): 
 
 
cell C2: $10,000 
(use dollar sign and comma) 
 
cell C5: $4,400 
(use dollar sign and comma) 
 
cell C6: 600 
(no dollar sign or comma) 
 
cell C7: 500 
(no dollar sign or comma) 
 
cell C8: 1,350 
(use comma) 
 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
78 
 
 
 
Now experiment in cell C8 by entering 1350, $1,350, and $1,350.00. Once a 
number style is established for a cell, all subsequent entries in that cell will show 
up in the established format until you formally change it. Changing formats will be 
demonstrated in Lesson 2. 
 
 
Entering Numbers as Text 
 
Numbers are usually entered as values, but they can also be mixed with letters 
and entered as text. Common reasons for doing this might be to enter inventory 
part numbers, addresses, or calendar dates. When numbers and letters are 
mixed in an entry, Excel is generally smart enough to recognize that entry as text. 
For example, enter 1st Qtr in cell C1. 
 
If you wish to treat an entry that contains only numbers as text, you can precede 
the number with an apostrophe (). The apostrophe itself does not show up in the 
cell. 
 
 
SAVE YOUR WORK 
 
You should get in the habit of saving your work at regular intervals to prevent 
losing it due to a power failure and other unforeseen mishaps. Click the Office 
Button and select Save As on the pull-down menu.  Among the Save As options 
presented, if you select Excel Workbook the file will be saved with all Excel 2007 
features intact and will be given an .xls extension to the file name.  If you ever 
plan to use a file while running older versions of Excel, you should save it as 
an Excel 97-2003 Workbook file.  These files are saved with an .xls extension  
to the file name and if you later open the file with Excel 2007, the words 
“Compatibility Mode” appear next to the file name in the Title bar.  Choose  
either Excel Workbook or Excel 97-2003 Workbook now.  In the Save 
As dialog box, enter the proper drive and directory, type the name 
Office 
Button 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
79 
Plan1 in the File name text box and click Save.  It should be noted that the cell 
pointer will be saved in its current location and the current tab in use (Home, 
Insert, etc.) will also be saved. 
 
IMPROVING APPEARANCES 
 
Now lets use some of the Ribbon buttons to enhance our preliminary financial 
plan. 
 
 
1. 
Move to cell C1, then click the Bold button. Instantly the title 1st Qtr is 
changed to bold print.  
 
 
2. 
In cell C1 again, click the Center button. Now the title 1st Qtr is centered in 
the cell. 
 
 
 
3. 
In cell C1 again, click the Borders button drop-down arrow. On the pull-
down menu, click on Thick Bottom Border. A line is now drawn across the 
bottom of cell C1. 
 
 
 
4. 
Move to cell C8, then click the Underline button. The number 1,350 is now 
underlined. Notice that Underline is different than Borders. Underline places 
a line directly under the characters within a cell. Borders underlines the 
entire cell. 
 
 
 
5. 
Ugh! That underline doesnt look great. If total expenses turns out to be a 
large number, the underline will look really short. Click the Undo button. You 
can also turn off the underline by clicking the Underline button again. 
 
6. 
In cell C8, click the Borders button drop-down arrow. Select Bottom Border 
(top option on the list). This puts a thin bottom border in cell C8. Repeat this 
as well in cell C9. 
 
 
 
7. 
Move to cell C11 and again click the Borders drop-down arrow. This time 
select the Bottom Double Border. A double line is now drawn across the 
bottom of cell C11. 
 
 
 
 
 
8. 
Lets italicize the expense titles (range A5 to A8). Two methods will 
be used to demonstrate selecting this range. First, move to cell A5. 
Then, hold down the SHIFT key, and press the down arrow () key 
three times to expand the range to cell A8. The range A5 to A8 is 
now selected, and cells A6, A7, and A8 should be darkened. (The 
first cell in a range is always outlined while all other cells in the 
Bold 
Center 
Borders 
 
Underline 
Undo 
Borders 
Borders 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
80 
range are darkened.) If you were to click the Italic button now 
(dont do it), all four expense titles would be changed to italic. 
Deselect the range now by clicking any where on the worksheet. 
 
 
Now lets use the mouse to select the same range. Aim the mouse pointer at 
cell A5, depress the mouse button, drag the mouse pointer down to cell A8, 
and then release the mouse button. If you have any problems, try again. 
After the range has been properly selected, click the Italic button. The four 
expense titles are now changed to italic print. 
 
9. 
Move to cell A9, then click the Align Text Right button. This moves the 
label Total expenses to the right side of cell A9. 
 
 
 
FUNCTIONS AND FORMULAS 
 
Two values are needed to finish the financial plan: Total expenses and Net 
income. 
 
Functions 
 
Move to cell C9, then click the AutoSum button in the Editing group on the 
Ribbon and press ENTER. Instantly the column of numbers is totaled using a 
function called SUM (more on this and other functions in Lesson 2). Since the top 
number in this column is in the Currency format, Excel places the sum in the 
same format. 
 
Formulas 
 
Now you are ready to write a formula containing cell references that will be used 
to compute net income. Please note that all formulas must be preceded with an = 
(equal) sign. Formulas will be covered in more detail in Lesson 2. 
Since net income is revenue minus total expenses, the formula you are going to 
write will tell Excel to take the value in cell C2 (revenue), subtract the value in cell 
C9 (total expenses), and put the result in cell C11. This is easy to do. Move to 
cell C11, type the formula =C2-C9 (you may use either capital or lowercase 
letters when entering formulas), and press ENTER. Excel will instantly perform 
the calculation and the result ($3,150) should appear in cell C11. Click on cell 
C11 and note that the formula =C2-C9 appears in the Formula bar. 
 
As you entered the formula, each time you typed the letter c up popped a list box 
of items all beginning with the letter c.  These are the built-in functions for Excel 
and we will ignore them until Lesson 2. 
 
If you had forgotten to type the = (equal) sign when entering the formula, Excel 
would think that you were entering text and C2-C9 would appear in cell C11 
instead of the value $3,150. 
 
Your financial plan should appear as on the following page. 
Italic 
Align Right 
AutoSum 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
81 
 
 
 
 
Note that dollar signs ($) are used only at the top and the bottom and for items 
being subtotaled. This is the standard professional format for financial 
statements. 
 
 
SAVE YOUR WORKBOOK AGAIN 
 
Since you have made some changes to your file since you last saved it, your new 
version should be saved. On the Quick Access toolbar, click the Save button (or 
on the Office button pull-down menu, click Save). 
  
 
PRINTING A WORKSHEET 
 
You are now finished with your first spreadsheet model. It looks pretty nice! Lets 
get a printout of it. Click the Office button and select Print.  Next, select Print 
again and click OK. A copy of your financial plan should now print from your 
printer.  Notice the printout does not show the gridlines of the worksheet nor the 
column and row headers (A, B, C, 1, 2, 3, etc.). 
 
A printed spreadsheet page will contain nine normal-sized columns and will 
extend down about 50 rows before going to a second page (if those rows 
contain any data). Because printing a spreadsheet file is not the same as printing 
a word processing document, there are some print options and controls of which 
you should be aware. 
 
Before demonstrating some additional print options, click in cell K1 and enter 
your name.  It is always a good idea to preview an Excel document before you 
print it.  Click on the Office button, select Print, and then select Print Preview.  
A Preview window appears and you can see what your worksheet looks like 
before you print it.  On the screen you see your financial planning model.  Click 
Save 
Office 
Button 
Print 
Preview 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
82 
the Next Page button and you will see page 2 of the printout which contains your 
name.  Close the preview by selecting the Close Print Preview button. 
 
Your current view of the spreadsheet is called Normal.  Click the Page Layout 
button in the Layout Selector at the bottom of the screen (right side).  This is a 
more detailed view of the individual pages. 
 
Next select the Page Break Preview button in the Layout Selector at the bottom 
of the screen (right side).  Then click OK if you get a welcome screen.  The blue 
borders (solid and dashed) indicate what will be printed on each page.  These 
blue borders are page breaks and can be moved with a mouse to print exactly 
what you want on each page.  As an experiment, use the mouse to grab the 
bottom blue line and move it up just under the row for Total expenses.  Next 
grab the dashed blue line and move it to the right so that it includes your name 
in cell K1.  
 
 
 
Then click the Office button and select Print.  Next, select Print again and click 
OK.  A copy of your financial plan including your name should now print from  
your printer. Notice that Excel has reduced the font size to fit everything on one 
page.  Before moving on, select the Normal button in the Layout Selector.  This 
will return your screen to a normal view of the worksheet except that that the 
page breaks now show up as dashed lines.  By the way, the views available in 
the Layout Selector can also be accessed with Ribbon buttons on the View tab. 
 
 
 
 
If you wish, you can also print just a portion of the worksheet without adjusting 
the page breaks.  For example, lets assume you want to print only the expenses 
shown in your model.  On your worksheet, select the range A4 to C9, click the 
Office button, and then click Print.  Click Print again and under the Print What 
area of the Print dialog box, click Selection and then click OK.  Your printout will 
Close 
Print 
Preview 
Page 
Layout 
Page 
Break 
Preview 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
83 
show only the area you selected. 
 
 
 
Some other commonly used print options should be mentioned.  You can try 
these later on your own.   On the Insert tab, there is a button for Header & 
Footer.  These are print items that appear at the top and bottom of every printed 
page (report titles, page numbers, etc.).   
 
On the Page Layout tab, there are several useful options when printing.  Margins 
lets you increase or reduce the size of the margin on a printed page.  
Orientation offers the option of printing sideways on a page to accommodate a 
wide spreadsheet model.  This is called Landscape orientation.  The normal 
orientation is called Portrait.  Breaks lets you manually insert or remove page 
breaks.  In the Scale to Fit group, you can scale the font size for printing to 
whatever you want.  You can also print a large worksheet on a single page by 
setting Width to 1 and Height to 1.  Clicking the Print option under Gridlines will 
print the column and row lines when the worksheet is printed.  This is particularly 
helpful when trying to read a wide printout.  Clicking the Print option for 
Headings will print the column letters and row numbers when the worksheet is 
printed.  This can be useful when discussing a printout with a group of people 
(“On row 18, notice how …”). 
 
All the options mentioned in the previous two paragraphs are 
also available by clicking the dialog box launcher on the right 
side of the Page Setup group in the Page Layout tab.  Click it 
now to see the options, then click OK or Cancel to close it. 
 
 
WHAT-IF ANALYSIS 
 
One of the most important features of spreadsheet programs is their ability to 
quickly recalculate values when new data are entered. This is often referred to as 
what-if analysis—“What if the value were this? What if the value were that?” 
Although our financial plan model is still very simple, this recalculation ability can 
be easily demonstrated. Suppose rent expense is $1,500 instead of $1,350. 
Enter 1500 in cell C8 now. Instantly, total expenses are changed to $7,000 and 
net income changes to $3,000! Enter 11000 in cell C2 (Consulting fees) now. 
Bingo! Net income changes to $4,000. Experiment with other values if you wish. 
You will find that the total expenses and net income are recomputed each time. 
Think of the possibilities! 
 

Lesson 1 – Basic User Skills 
84 
 
FINISHING THE LESSON 
 
To continue on directly to Lesson 2, select Close from the Office button menu. If 
you are going to do Lesson 2 at a later time, select Exit Excel from the Office 
button menu. When you are asked if you want to “Save changes,” choose No 
since you do not want your “what-if” numbers, experimental page breaks, and 
name in cell K1 saved. You want to keep the original financial plan numbers 
intact.  
 
 
FINAL COMMENT 
 
Give yourself a pat on the back. This first lesson has covered a lot of territory. 
You should feel confident enough at this point to construct some simple but 
useful spreadsheet models. You will find the remaining lessons in this tutorial are 
shorter, but no less important.  
 

 
85 
Lesson 2 
MATH:  FORMULAS, FORMATS, AND FUNCTIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
In this lesson, you will learn to: 
 
• 
Use Excel to perform arithmetic calculations 
• 
Design Excel formulas 
• 
Distinguish between number formats 
• 
Use Excel functions 
• 
Display formulas and cell contents 
 
 
BEFORE BEGINNING 
 
In this lesson you are going to expand the financial plan that you created in 
Lesson 1 and saved as a workbook named Plan1. To begin this lesson, the Excel 
program should be started and a blank worksheet should be on your screen (if 
necessary, select New on the Office menu, and then click Create). The Home tab 
should be selected. Do not open the Plan1 workbook yet. 
 
 
THE IMPORTANCE OF FORMULAS IN EXCEL 
 
The ability to enter formulas on worksheets is one of the most important features 
of Excel. It is what makes spreadsheet programs so flexible and powerful, and so 
appropriate for performing repeated numerical analysis, sometimes called what-if 
analysis. This form of analysis was introduced in Lesson 1. 
 
When you enter a formula in a cell, Excel automatically computes the answer 
and immediately displays it in the cell. The formula itself will be displayed in 
the 
Formula 
bar. 
The 
worksheet 
models 
shown 
at 
the 
www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith website use many formulas. 
 
Writing formulas in Excel is usually very easy, but you can make your formulas 
as complicated as your needs demand. Formulas can include any combination of 
the following: numbers, mathematical operators, cell references, functions, and 
range names. All of these except range names will be covered in this lesson. 
Range names will be covered in Lesson 4. 
 
 
 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
86 
MATH 
 
The simplest type of formula that you can create in Excel is one that contains 
only numbers and mathematical operators. The basic mathematical operations 
that Excel can perform are addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and 
exponentiation. Table 2.1 indicates the keyboard keys for each mathematical 
operation. You will find all of the operator keys on the keyboard, some in more 
than one place. 
 
Try each of the examples listed in Table 2.1 by entering them on the blank 
worksheet on your monitor. Be sure to include the = sign at the beginning of each 
entry. After you press ENTER for each example, notice that the keys you typed 
appear in the Formula bar and that the answer appears in the cell you used for 
entry. 
 
Table 2.1  Mathematical Operations 
 
Symbol 
Description 
Example 
Explanation  
Answer 
+ Plus Sign 
Addition 
=123+456 
Adds 123 and 456 
579 
- Minus Sign 
Subtraction 
=123-81 
Subtracts 81 from 123 
42 
* Asterisk 
Multiplication 
=123*1.2 
Multiplies 123 by 1.2 
147.6 
/ 
Slash 
Division 
=123/7 
Divides 123 by 7 
17.57143 
^ Caret 
Exponentiation =123^2 
Squares 123 
15129 
 
Order of Precedence 
 
All of the examples in Table 2.1 use only one mathematical operator at a time to 
perform a single operation. You can also combine the operator keys to perform 
several mathematical operations at once. For example, enter =4+6/2-1 in cell A6 
(the result is 6). 
 
If you are going to use more than one operator in a formula, you should be aware 
of the sequence that Excel will use to perform computations. This is called the 
order of precedence, and for Excel, it is as follows: 
 
First: 
Exponentiation 
Second: Multiplication and Division 
Third: 
Addition and Subtraction 
 
Just like high school algebra! Within each level of precedence, the calculations 
are performed from left to right. In the formula =4+6/2-1, the first operation 
performed is 6 divided by 2 (result is 3). Next, starting from the left, 4 is added to 
3 (result is 7), and then 1 is subtracted from 7 (result is 6). 
 
 
 
 
 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
87 
Use of Parentheses 
 
If you wish to perform the computations in some other sequence, what can you 
do? Rearranging the mathematical operators is not always the answer. However, 
you can control the sequence of computations by using parentheses. There are 
several things that you need to know about the use of parentheses in Excel. 
These are listed below. Try each example on your worksheet. 
 
1. 
Excel will always perform calculations inside a set of parentheses before 
doing any other arithmetic operations. Suppose in the example above that 
you want to add 4 and 6 before dividing by 2. Using parentheses, the 
formula would look as follows: =(4+6)/2-1 (result is 4). 
 
2. 
It is also possible to have several sets of parentheses in a single formula, 
such as = 2*(9+7)/(4-2). Excel will perform the operations inside both pairs 
of parentheses first (left set first), then do the multiplication, and lastly do the 
division (result is 16). 
 
3. 
Parentheses may also be nested as shown in this example: =90/((9+6)*3). 
Excel will perform the operations in the innermost set of parentheses first 
and will then work outward to the next set. In this example, the program will 
add 9 and 6, multiply the result by 3, and then divide that answer into 90 
(result is 2). 
 
4. 
There must always be an equal number of left and right parentheses in a 
formula. The formula =(128/4*(3+81) is incorrect because there are two left 
parentheses and only a single right parenthesis. When you enter this 
formula, Excel will respond with an error message and a possible correction. 
In our example, just click No, then OK, and then press ESC. 
 
 
FORMULAS 
 
Open Plan1 
 
Now lets expand and improve the simple financial plan you created in Lesson 1. 
To do this you must close the current workbook that you have been entering 
formulas into and open the Plan1 workbook. Follow the steps listed below: 
 
1. 
Select Close (Office button menu) and select No when asked “Save 
changes in Book1?” 
 
2. 
Select Open (Office button menu) and select Plan1 from the drive where 
you saved it in Lesson 1. It should appear as shown in Illustration 2.1. 
 
 
 
 
 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
88 
 
 
Illustration 2.1 
Plan1 
 
Expanding the Financial Planning Model 
 
In Lesson 1, you played what-if with your model by entering in different values for 
consulting fees and for the various expenses. You probably noted that when you 
changed only consulting fees it changed net income, but it did not change total 
expenses. This is because none of the expenses are currently linked in any way 
to the value of consulting fees. 
 
 
Suppose that for our little company, commissions should be based on consulting 
fees (6% of revenue, hence $600), and payroll taxes should be paid on both 
salaries and commissions (10% of the combined total, hence $500). As you play 
what-if with the consulting fees, these expenses should also change. You can 
enter formulas to do just that. 
 
 
Formula Entry Techniques 
 
Formulas can be entered from the keyboard as you did in Lesson 1 when you 
typed in the formula for net income. Excel also provides an alternate way to enter 
formulas. Instead of typing in the cell addresses like you did in Lesson 1, Excel 
allows you to simply point to the cells you want to enter. You can use either the 
mouse or the arrow keys on the keyboard to do the pointing. You will now use 
both approaches to enter appropriate formulas for commissions and for payroll 
taxes. 
 
First, you will use the mouse to enter a formula to compute commissions 
expense. Use the following steps to enter the formula =C2*0.06 in cell C6: 
 
 
 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
89 
 
1.  Click on cell C6. 
 
 
2.  Type = (equal sign). 
 
 
3.  Click cell C2. 
 
 
4.  Type * (asterisk). 
 
 
5.  Type .06. 
 
 
6. Click the Confirm box in the Formula bar or press ENTER. 
 
The formula =C2*0.06 shows up in the Formula bar, and the answer ($600.00) 
appears in cell C6.  
 
Lets use the arrow keys now to enter a formula to automatically compute payroll 
taxes. Payroll taxes are computed by multiplying the sum of salaries and 
commissions by 10%. Use the following steps to enter the formula =(C5+C6)*0.1 
in cell C7: 
 
 
1. Move to cell C7. 
 
 
2. Type = (equal sign). 
 
 
3. Type ( (left parenthesis). 
 
 
4. Use the arrow keys to move to cell C5. 
 
 
5. Type + (plus sign). 
 
 
6. Use the arrow keys to move to cell C6. 
 
 
7. Type ) (right parenthesis). 
 
 
8. Type * (asterisk). 
 
 
9. Type .1 or 10%. 
 
 
10. Press ENTER. 
 
The formula =(C5+C6)*0.1 shows up in the Formula bar, and the answer (500) 
appears in cell C7. 
 
This pointing technique with the mouse or the arrow keys can be used any time 
you use a cell address in a command sequence, formula, or function. Most 
people make extensive use of pointing. However, you should use whichever 
approach you feel most comfortable with (typing cell addresses in, pointing with 
the mouse, or pointing with the arrow keys). 
 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
90 
NUMBER FORMATS 
 
There are some problems, both visible and hidden, with the number formats in 
cells C6, C7, and C8. To reveal the hidden problem, enter $10,001 in cell C2. 
See Illustration 2.2. 
 
 
 
Illustration 2.2     Plan1 with Inconsistent Alignment, Format, and Decimal Places 
 
 
The problems in the model are: cell C6 was switched to the Currency format (see 
page 81) by Excel when you entered the formula; cell C6 has two decimal places; 
C7 shows three decimal places. The values in C7 and C8 do not line up directly 
under the values in C5 and C6. 
 
All of this makes for a very sloppy, unprofessional presentation. Normal financial 
statements show dollar signs at the top of columns and at the bottom for 
subtotals and totals. Numbers in columns should all have the same decimal 
place. These objectives can be met by using proper number formats. Click on 
cell C2.  To see all the available number formats, click on the dialog box 
launcher for the Number group to get the Format Cells dialog box. 
 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
91 
 
 
Category: all number formats possible.  Note that the Currency format is currently 
selected. 
General:  no specific number format 
Number:  can specify decimal points, use commas, change negative  
 
 
    number presentation 
Currency:  same as Number format plus places a currency symbol ($)  
 
      directly in front of number 
Accounting:  same as Currency except places the currency symbol to left  
 
         side of cell 
 
Date:  various date presentation formats 
 
Time:  various time presentation formats 
Percentage:  numbers expressed as percentages (e.g., .43 becomes  
 
 
         43%) 
 
Fraction:  decimals expressed as fractions (e.g., .375 becomes 3/8) 
 
Scientific:  displays values in scientific notation (e.g., 5.46E+04) 
 
Text:  treats numbers as text 
 
Special:  zip codes, phone numbers, social security numbers, etc. 
 
Custom:  specialized formats 
Sample:  what the active cell looks like in the format selected. 
Decimal places:  sets the number of decimal places to be shown.  Note 0 (zero) 
is currently selected since we have entered values as whole dollars (i.e., 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
92 
no cents). 
Symbol:  sets the currency symbol.  The symbol for the U. S. dollar is currently 
selected (by default). Symbols for other currencies around the world could 
be shown. 
Negative numbers:  allows you to select the presentation of negative numbers.  
In the Currency and Accounting formats, Excel assumes you wish to 
show negative numbers with parentheses. As a result of this, all numbers, 
positive and negative, are aligned one space in from the right to leave 
room for the right parenthesis if it is needed.  Notice in Illustration 2.2 that 
the numbers in cells C2, C5, C6, C9, and C11 all have one empty space 
to the right.  The numbers in cells C7 and C8 are aligned to the far right 
side of their cells because they are not in the Currency or Accounting 
format. 
 
To see some of the formats yourself, click on some of the Category names and 
look at the result in the Sample box.  Click Cancel when done. 
 
There are additional buttons in the Number group that can be used to format 
numbers.  With cell C2 currently selected, note that the Number Format button 
displays the word Currency (cell C2s format).  Click the drop-down arrow on the 
Number Format button and several preset formats are presented.  Note that the 
Number, Currency, and Accounting formats all show two decimals, which is not 
helpful to us when we want to show whole dollars (no cents).  Press Esc to 
cancel the menu. 
 
Also in the Number group, the Accounting Number Format button places cells in 
the Accounting format with a $ and two decimal places. The Percent Style button 
places cells in the Percentage format. The Comma Style button places cells in 
the Accounting format with no $, but with two decimal places. 
 
Lets use the Comma Style button to uniformly format cells C6 to C8. To 
accomplish this with your model, use the following steps: 
 
1. 
Select the range C6 to C8. 
 
2. 
Click the Comma Style button. 
 
3. 
Click the Decrease Decimal button twice. 
 
4. 
Click cell C2. 
 
See Illustration 2.3. Your model is now looking very professional! 
Accounting 
Number Format 
Percent 
 Style 
CoComma  
Style 
Decrease 
Decimal 
Number 
Format 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
93 
 
 
 
Illustration 2.3 
Plan1 with Uniform Alignment, Format, and Decimal Places 
 
 
SAVE YOUR WORK 
 
Change the value in cell C2 to $10,000. Before proceeding, save your new and 
improved financial plan as Plan2. To do this, select the Save As command 
(Office button menu), click on Excel Workbook or Excel 97-2003 workbook, 
choose the proper drive and directory, type the name Plan2 in the File name text 
box, and click Save. See Illustration 2.4. 
 
 
 
 
Illustration 2.4 
Plan2 
 
Please note that throughout the rest of Lesson 2, you should not save your file 
again. In the remaining sections of this lesson you will be making some 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
94 
experimental changes to your financial plan that are for demonstration purposes 
only. These changes are not intended to become a permanent part of the Plan2 
file. 
 
 
PRINT YOUR FILE 
 
This is a good time to print out your model so that you can have a permanent 
record of your work so far. Review instructions for printing in Lesson 1. On the 
Office button menu, select the Print Option and click the Quick Print button. You 
can use the Quick Print button any time you do not need to change any of the 
normal print settings. 
 
 
WHAT-IF ANALYSIS AGAIN 
 
Lets do a little more what-if analysis. Move to cell C2 and try the values 11000, 
25000, and 5000. Notice now that commissions, payroll taxes, total expenses, 
and net income all change with the different values entered in cell C2, and the 
number formats stay consistent. 
 
 
Numerical Input Quirks 
 
In spite of proper number formats, certain entries in cell C2 will cause strange 
results. Enter 10,000.52 in cell C2. Notice that the net income answer appears to 
be off by $1. This error is an occasional, annoying occurrence in Excel. It is 
caused because number formats change the appearance of the values in cells, 
but not the actual values. For example, the actual value in cell C2 is 10,000.52, 
but because of the number format chosen for this cell (Currency with no 
decimals) Excel rounds off the appearance of the value to the closest whole 
number. This rounding process is perfectly proper, but it does cause occasional 
problems, as in this case. 
 
 
Actual Value 
Appearance 
Consulting fees 
10,000.52000 
$10,001 
 
Salaries 
4,400.00000 
$4,400 
Commissions 
600.03120 
600 
Payroll taxes 
500.00312 
500 
Rent 
1,350.00000 
 1,350 
Total expenses 
6,850.03432 
$6,850 
 
Net income 
3,150.48568 
$3,150 
 
The appearance of a $1 discrepancy on a financial statement isnt much, but it 
can cast doubt on other parts of your model in an uninformed reader. If you are 
interested in correcting this “minor” problem, you may use the ROUND function 
Quick 
Print 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
95 
described in Appendix A. 
 
To demonstrate another input quirk, enter the word HELLO in cell C2. The 
reason that #VALUE! appears in several cells is because Excel does not know 
how to interpret text in a formula. Many error messages in Excel begin with a “#.”  
 
Enter =123/0 in cell C2. Dividing a value by zero results in #DIV/0! on your 
worksheet. Be aware that this error will ripple through your formulas. Thus, any 
formula that refers to a cell that contains #DIV/0! will also show #DIV/0!. 
 
Enter =C11 in cell C2. When entering formulas in Excel, you must make sure not 
to enter a formula in a cell that refers to itself either directly or indirectly. This is 
known as a circular reference. In this case the formula in cell C11 uses 
information from C2, and now the formula in cell C2 refers to cell C11. Excel 
warns the user when a circular reference occurs. Click Cancel.  
 
Enter 10,000 in cell C2 and 1234567 in cell C5. Two things happen: (1) column C 
automatically widens to accommodate the long number, and (2) ######## now 
appears in cell C11. When the value of a formula is too large to show up in a cell, 
this is how Excel responds. If you widen column C a bit, the value in cell C11 will 
show up. 
 
Now reenter 4400 in cell C5. Unfortunately, one of the consequences of entering 
a large number is that column C is now wider than all the other columns. To reset 
the column to its original width, use the mouse to grab the bar between the C 
and D column headers and move the column border to the left.  Stop when you 
get to 8.43 (the standard column width). 
 
 
 
 
USING FUNCTIONS  
 
Besides using the five operator keys (+, -, *, /, and ^), there are more complex 
mathematical functions that Excel can perform. They are called functions, and 
they consist of built-in formulas to perform a long list of different tasks 
automatically. A partial list of functions includes SUM (to sum the values in a 
range of cells), SQRT (to find the square root), AVERAGE (to compute the 
average value in a range of cells), MAX (to find the maximum value in a range of 
cells), IF (to enter one value if something is true and another if not), VLOOKUP 
(to look up values in a table), and NPV (to compute net present value). These 
and other functions are discussed in detail in Appendix A of this manual. 
 
Function Basics 
 
Most functions require you to enter additional information in parentheses that will 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
96 
allow the function to perform its task. Functions can be entered using either 
capital or lowercase letters. Any cell addresses used in a function may be 
entered by typing them in or by pointing to them. 
 
Examine the formula entered in cell C9 now. The formula entered in that cell is 
=SUM(C5:C8). This is the SUM function. C5 is the first cell to be included in the 
total, and C8 is the last. This function was entered when you used the AutoSum 
toolbar back in Lesson 1. 
 
You also could have entered this function by typing in all the characters you now 
see in cell C9. To demonstrate, move to cell B13, type =SUM(C5:C8) and press 
ENTER. The total $6,850 should now appear in the cell.  
 
You also could have entered the formula =C5+C6+C7+C8. Try it in cell B14. This 
method is fine for adding a short series of cells, but using the SUM function is 
certainly quicker for longer ranges. 
 
You can use the pointing technique to enter all cell references used in functions. 
To demonstrate the pointing technique using arrow keys, move to cell B15, type 
=SUM( and use the arrow keys to move to cell C5. Type the : (colon) key to lock 
in the beginning point of the range and press the down arrow () key three times 
to move to cell C8. Finally, type “)” (right parenthesis) and press ENTER. 
 
To demonstrate the pointing technique using the mouse, move the cell pointer to 
cell B16, type =SUM( and select the range to be summed by dragging the mouse 
pointer over the range C5 to C8. Type “)” (right parenthesis) and then click the 
Confirm box. 
 
For the absent-minded, Excel will automatically add the final right parenthesis if 
you forget to type it in. 
 
 
Function Help 
 
There are three ready sources of information on all the functions available in 
Excel.  To demonstrate, click the Help button on the far right side of the Ribbon.  
Next select the Function reference option and choose one of the Subcategories.  
Youll be presented with a list of functions that you can explore further with help 
information.  Close the Help information box when done. 
 
Secondly, the same sort of information is available by clicking the Insert Function 
button.  This button is found on the Formula bar. 
 
Lastly, click the Formulas tab and youll be presented with a Function Library on 
the Ribbon. 
 
 
 
 
Excel 
Help 
Insert 
Function 

Lesson 2 – Math: Formulas, Formats, and Functions 
97 
 
A HIDDEN TRICK 
 
There is a quick way to display on the screen all formulas, functions, and other 
cell contents. Press the CTRL key and then press the Tilde (~) key—its right 
above the Tab key. Bingo! All cell contents are displayed. To return to a normal 
display, press this key combination again. This display can also be activated by 
clicking the Show Formulas button in the Formula Auditing group on the 
Formulas tab. 
 
 
FINAL COMMENT 
 
In this lesson, you learned how to construct formulas using numbers, 
mathematical operators, cell references, and functions. You were also warned 
about some typical input quirks. Believe it or not, you are now equipped to 
construct some relatively complicated spreadsheet models. Very few of the 
models in Appendix C have formulas that are more complicated than what you 
have seen in this lesson. So get those creative juices flowing! 
 
Since you are not going to save any of the changes that you made in the last two 
sections of Lesson 2, feel free to experiment with new formulas and functions. 
When you are done, close this file without saving any of the changes that have 
been made to it. To do this, select the Exit or Close command (Office button 
menu) and then select No when you are asked to save changes in Plan2. 
Show 
Formulas 

 
98 
Lesson 3 
EXPANDING AND ENHANCING YOUR MODEL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
In this lesson, you will learn to: 
 
• 
Copy data 
• 
Move data 
• 
Insert new columns and rows 
• 
Delete existing columns and rows 
 
 
BEFORE BEGINNING 
 
In this lesson you are going to take the financial plan that you improved in Lesson 
2 and expand it further. To begin this lesson, the Excel program should be 
started and the workbook Plan2 should be opened on your screen. See 
Illustration 3.1. 
 
 
 
Illustration 3.1 
 
Plan2 
 
 
EXPANDING THE FINANCIAL PLANNING MODEL 
 
Lets expand the financial plan developed in Lesson 2 to include three more 
quarters and a year total. A single column will be used for each quarter and then 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
99 
a final column for the total. Remember, if you make errors as you make the 
changes to the model, you can use the Undo button on the Quick Access toolbar 
to undo your last entry. The DELETE key may also come in handy. 
 
You need to enter data for each of the other three quarters. Since you learned 
about entering text, numbers, and formulas in Lessons 1 and 2, filling in the 
remaining quarters and computing the year totals would be easy for you. On a 
worksheet much larger than Plan2, it would be very time-consuming to enter all 
of this data one cell at a time. Luckily, with computer spreadsheet programs such 
as Excel, it is very easy to copy data, text, and formulas. This saves time by 
reducing the need to perform repetitive entry tasks. 
 
 
COPYING DATA 
 
There are several ways that you can copy data in Excel. Two methods will be 
demonstrated below and a third method will be discussed: 
 
1. 
Using the Fill Handle 
2. 
Using the Copy and Paste buttons or commands 
3. 
Using the mouse and CTRL key to drag and copy 
 
Using the Fill Handle 
 
Select cell C1. Position the mouse pointer over the small black box, called a fill 
handle, in the lower-right corner of the cell. The pointer becomes a black cross 
shape. 
 
 
 
 
Next, drag the fill handle over to cell F1 and then release the mouse button. The 
headings are automatically filled in for the remaining quarters. 
 
 
 
 
The fill handle has been programmed to recognize numeric and date sequences. 
In this case, it recognized 1st and was able to complete the sequence. If the fill 
handle does not recognize a sequence, youll just have to type it in yourself! More 
about the fill handle in Lesson 4. 
 
The fill handle can also be used to copy formulas. To demonstrate this, assume 
that consulting fees will increase by 5% per quarter. In other words, you want 
consulting fees to be 5% greater each quarter than in the preceding quarter. To 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
100 
compute 2nd Quarter consulting fees, you want to tell Excel to multiply 1st 
Quarter consulting fees (cell C2) by 1.05 and place the result in cell D2. To do 
this, enter =C2*1.05 now in cell D2. 
The value $10,500.00 shows in cell C2.  Correct this now by using the Decrease 
Decimal button to eliminate the two decimal points. When multiplying by a 
number with two decimals, Excel will automatically add two decimals to the 
answer. The same is true for one decimal, three decimals, etc. Isnt Excel 
wonderful! Reset  the width of column D to 8.43 
Next, this 5% increase should be computed for both of the remaining quarters. 
These values will be entered using the fill handle. Select cell D2, grab the fill 
handle in that cell, drag it over to cell F2, and release the mouse button. Instantly 
cells E2 and F2 display a value for consulting fees that is 5% higher than the 
value for each previous quarter.  
 
 
 
 
Relative Cell Addresses  
Notice the sequence of values for consulting fees. Each quarter is a 5% increase 
over the previous quarter. The formula in cell D2 is =C2*1.05. Move to cell E2 
and check the formula in that cell. You will see that the formula is =D2*1.05. 
Move to F2 and note that the formula is =E2*1.05. 
 
 
 
 
Obviously, the formula in cell D2 was not copied exactly. As it moved from cell to 
cell, the formula was modified to follow the same pattern as in the original 
formula. In this case, the original formula in cell D2 uses a value from the cell to 
its immediate left (C2). Therefore, the value in cell E2 will use a value from the 
cell to its immediate left (D2), and the value in cell F2 will use a value from the 
cell to its immediate left (E2). When copying formulas unless otherwise specified, 
Excel assumes that all cell addresses are relative and are to be modified from 
cell to cell. 
Absolute Cell Addresses 
But what if you want to copy a formula and leave the cell addresses unaltered? 
Excel allows you to make cell addresses “absolute” so they will not be modified 
as they are copied from cell to cell. This is done by adding $ (dollar signs) to any 
Decrease 
Decimal 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
101 
cell address used in a formula. To compare the effects of absolute versus relative 
copying of formulas, examine Table 3.1. 
 
Table 3.1  Effects of Absolute vs. Relative Cell Addresses 
 
 
C2 Is Absolute 
C2 Is Relative 
 
Formula 
Value 
Formula 
Value 
Original Formula 
D2: $C$2*1.05 
10500 
D2: C2*1.05 
10500 
Copy 
E2: $C$2*1.05 
10500 
E2: D2*1.05 
11025 
Copy 
F2: $C$2*1.05 
10500 
F2: E2*1.05 
11576 
 
Mixed Addresses 
 
On some occasions you may not want the whole cell address to be absolute, just 
the column part or the row part. This is called a mixed address. In these cases, 
type a single $ in front of the part of the cell address that you want to be absolute 
(e.g., $C2 or C$2). 
 
F4 Key (A Hidden Trick) 
 
There is a quick way to add dollar signs to cell addresses, even those already 
entered into formulas. When typing in, editing, or pointing to a cell address, 
pressing the F4 key repeatedly places $ in front of various parts of the cell 
address automatically. 
 
The Fill Handle Again 
 
You can copy several cells at once. To demonstrate this, lets copy all of the 
remaining 1st Quarter values and formulas to the other quarters. Select the range 
C5 to C11, drag the fill handle over to column F, and release the mouse button. 
See Illustration 3.2. 
 
 
Illustration 3.2 
Copying with the Fill Handle 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
102 
Everything looks okay, but examine rows 5 and 8 closely. Notice that the fill 
handle increased these expenses $1 each quarter. The fill handle is programmed 
to increase all numbers by 1 unless it sees some other pattern. This is not the 
result you wanted. A better way to handle this copying is with the normal Copy 
and Paste commands. Click the Undo button to get out of this mess. 
Copy and Paste Buttons 
The Copy and Paste buttons are found on the Ribbon in the Clipboard group of 
the Home Tab. They are also found on the shortcut menu activated by clicking 
the right button of the mouse. Those buttons will be used in this section. 
Lets begin again the process of copying the first quarter values and formulas to 
the remaining three quarters. 
1. 
Select the range C5 to C11. Use the mouse or the SHIFT+ARROW key 
combination to do this. 
2. 
Click the Copy button on the Ribbon or on the shortcut menu. This places a 
copy of the values, formulas, and formats of the selected range into a part of 
your computers memory called the clipboard. 
 
 
3. 
Select the range D5 to F5 as the destination. Note that only the top row in a 
range needs to be selected. 
4. 
Click the Paste button. This command copies whatever is in the clipboard to 
those cells. Note that borders and formats are copied along with the values 
and formulas.  
 
 
5. 
Click cell A1 and then examine the formulas in columns D, E, and F. Note 
how they have been updated as you go from column to column. Illustration 
3.3 shows how your screen will appear when you select cells C5 to C11 to 
copy. 
Illustration 3.3 
Copy and Paste Quarterly Expenses 
Undo 
Copy 
Paste 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
103 
It also should be noted that the dashed outline around the copied range indicates 
that the clipboard still contains a copy of the contents of those cells. The Paste 
command can be used over and over again to paste this data elsewhere on the 
worksheet. The dashed outline will disappear if you press ESC or enter data in 
other cells. 
If you ever want to copy an entire column or row, click the column header (a 
letter) or row header (a number) before clicking the Copy button. 
 
It is now time to fill in the Total column. First, move to cell G1 and enter the word 
Total. Notice Excel automatically picks up the formatting (bold, centered) from 
the adjacent cell (F1). Then give it a Thick Bottom border. Then move to cell G2, 
and review the function section of Lesson 2. Use any method you wish to enter 
=SUM(C2:F2) in that cell (quickest way: click the AutoSum button and press 
ENTER). 
 
Finally, use any method you wish (the Copy and Paste commands or the toolbar 
buttons) to copy the formula in cell G2 and paste it to the range G5 to G9 and 
then paste it again to cell G11. The results are shown in Illustration 3.4. 
 
 
 
Illustration 3.4 
Filling in the Total Column 
 
 
Copying Data with the Mouse and the CTRL key 
 
A third approach to copying data involves using the mouse and the CTRL key. 
When you position the mouse pointer on the border of a selected cell or range, 
the mouse pointer becomes an arrow. You then hold down the CTRL key and 
drag the cell or range to a new location. Wherever you release the mouse button, 
a copy is made. This feature is very handy, but you are limited because copying 
can take place only to a single destination. For example, you can copy from cell 
D2 to cell E2 or to cell F2, but not to both cells at once. 
 
Borders 
Copy 
Paste 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
104 
CLEANING UP THE FINANCIAL PLAN 
 
Lets clean up the financial plan so all labels and values are presented in a 
uniform fashion. 
 
1. 
Select the range G6 to G8. Click the Comma button and then click the 
Decrease Decimals button twice to get rid of the decimals. 
 
2. 
Move to cell G8, click the Borders button, and select Bottom Border. 
Repeat this with cell G9. 
 
 
3. 
Move to cell G11, click the Borders button, and select Bottom Double 
Border.  
 
See Illustration 3.5. 
 
 
 
Illustration 3.5 
Total Column Cleaned Up 
 
 
Subtraction Error? 
 
Notice that there appears to be a subtraction error in cell G11. Why does cell 
G11 display $15,497 when in fact $43,101 minus $27,605 equals $15,496? Did 
the program make a mistake? The answer is no. This is the same type of error 
discussed in Lesson 2 where formatting a cell may result in some rounding 
differences when it comes to screen presentation of values. This “error” can be 
eliminated with the ROUND function. See Appendix A. 
 
 
SAVE YOUR MODEL 
 
Excel saves the active cells current position when a file is saved. It is a good 
habit to move the active cell back to cell A1 before saving so that you always 
Comma Decrease 
   Style 
Decimal 
Borders 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
105 
know exactly where you are when you open the file again. Move to cell A1 now. 
 
Since you have made many changes to your model, please use the Save As 
command (Office button menu) now to save your updated financial plan using 
the file name Plan3. 
 
 
MOVING DATA 
 
In addition to being able to copy data, Excel also allows you to move data. 
Moving data is different than copying data. Copying data involves making a copy 
of the original data and then placing the copy at another location on the 
worksheet. Moving data involves picking up the original data and then placing it 
somewhere else on the worksheet. 
 
There are several ways that you can move data. Two ways will be discussed 
here: (1) using the mouse to drag and drop and (2) using the Cut and Paste 
buttons. 
 
Moving Data with the Mouse (Drag and Drop) 
 
To demonstrate the first type of move, suppose that you want to move some of 
the quarterly headings and consulting fee projections (range A1 to G2) to a 
section of the worksheet below the quarterly net income figures (range A13 to 
G14). Use the following steps to do this: 
 
1. 
Select the range A1 to G2. 
 
2. 
Position the mouse pointer on the bottom border of this range so the mouse 
pointer changes to an arrow. 
 
 
 
 
3. 
Press and hold down the left mouse button. 
 
4. 
Drag the outline to the range A13 to G14 and then release the left mouse 
button. In a flash the move is completed. 
 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
106 
 
 
 
It is important to note that all formulas affected by a move are automatically 
updated by Excel. For instance, the formula in cell D11 now reads =D14-D9, 
whereas it used to read =D2-D9. 
 
Lets undo this move now. Click the Undo button on the toolbar. 
 
Moving Data with Cut and Paste 
 
The Cut and Paste buttons can be used to move cells to new locations. The 
process is straightforward. You first select a cell or range of cells to be moved. 
Then you click the Cut button on the Ribbon or on the shortcut menu (right-click 
the mouse). Finally, select the range where the data is to be moved and click the 
Paste button. As before, all formulas will be automatically updated. This method 
will not be demonstrated. 
 
 
DELETING AND INSERTING COLUMNS, ROWS, AND SHEETS 
 
Delete Button 
 
Clicking the Delete button (Cells group on the Home tab) deletes the active cell 
and moves all cells under it up one row.  This is a rarely used feature in Excel.  
Far more common is the need to delete whole rows, columns, and sheets.  
These options are available by clicking the drop-down arrow on the Delete 
button. 
 
To demonstrate this command, lets delete column B from the worksheet. This is 
an ideal column to delete because there are no entries in it. Move the active cell 
to any cell in column B (the row doesnt matter), click the drop-down arrow on the 
Undo 
Cut 
Paste 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
107 
Delete button, and select Delete Sheet Columns. Your computer screen will 
look like Illustration 3.6 after you have deleted column B. 
 
 
 
Illustration 3.6 
Old Column B Is Deleted 
 
Instantly, the column is deleted and the remaining columns containing the 
quarterly financial plan data all shift one column to the left. Before the deletion, 
the 1st Qtr figures were in column C, but now they are in column B. All formulas 
affected by the deletion are automatically updated by the program. For instance, 
the formula for 2nd Qtr Net income has been changed from =D2-D9 to =C2-C9 (a 
difference of one column). 
 
Once a column or row is deleted, an easy way to restore it is to click the Undo 
button, but this only works if no additional commands have been entered since 
the deletion. Otherwise, click the drop-down arrow next to the Undo button and 
select the command labeled Delete. 
 
Insert Command 
 
Suppose you wish to insert a title at the top of the financial plan. Right now there 
is no place at the top of the worksheet to do this. Lets solve this problem by 
inserting four new rows at the top of the worksheet. To do this, move to any cell 
in row 1 (the column does not matter) and select a range that extends from row 1 
to row 4 (A1 to A4, for example, as shown in Illustration 3.7). Now click the drop-
down arrow on the Inset button, select Insert Sheet Rows, and instantly four 
new rows are inserted at the top of the financial plan. 
 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
108 
 
 
Illustration 3.7  
Inserting Four New Rows 
 
Again, all formulas affected by an insertion are automatically updated by the 
program. For instance, the 2nd Qtr Net income figure used to be calculated by 
the formula =C2-C9, but now the formula has been updated to read =C6-C13 (a 
difference of four rows). 
 
Now enter Fast Track Inc. in cell B2 and Financial Plan in cell B3. To enlarge 
the font size for these titles, select the range B2 to B3, click the Font size drop-
down box, and then select 14. Next, click the Bold and Italic buttons on the 
Ribbon. Finally, select the range B2 to E2 (note: this is E2, not E3) and click the 
Merge and Center button in the Alignment group. This centers Fast Track Inc. 
across these columns of your worksheet. The Merge and Center command only 
works on one row at a time. 
 
Now, repeat this step to center the entry in cell B3 to E3 across columns. 
 
Finally, lets add a border around the company name and statement title. Select 
the range B2 to E3, click the Borders drop-down arrow on the Ribbon, and click 
the Thick Box border shown midway down the list. A solid border now outlines 
the title. See Illustration 3.8. Plan3 is done! 
 
Font 
Bold 
Size
Italic 
Merge 
and 
Center 
Borders 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
109 
 
 
Illustration 3.8 
 Plan3 Is Done! 
 
 
 
SAVE AND PRINT YOUR WORK 
 
Once again it is time to save your financial plan. Move to cell A1 and click the 
Save button on the Quick Access toolbar to save Plan3 again. Then, select Print 
from the Office button menu and print out your financial plan. 
 
 
 
WHAT-IF ANALYSIS 
 
You were introduced to what-if analysis in Lessons 1 and 2, but this expanded 
model provides a basis for more meaningful exposure to this topic. Notice that 
total net income for the year is $15,497. What would it be if 1st Qtr consulting 
fees were $11,000 instead of $10,000? Try it and see. Enter 11000 in cell B6. 
Notice that the model recalculates and total net income for the year is now 
$19,522. 
 
This model will answer all sorts of what-if questions: What is net income for the 
4th Qtr if 1st Qtr consulting fees are $12,538? What are total expenses for the 
year if 1st Qtr consulting fees are $9,000? Try these out and check your answer 
below. 
 
Now try this backward what-if question: What do 1st Qtr consulting fees need to 
be in order to have net income for the year equal at least $20,000? Answer this 
Save 
Print 

Lesson 3 – Expanding and Enhancing Your Model 
110 
by trying different values in cell B6 until you get net income for the year to equal 
at least $20,000. Check your answer at the end of the lesson.1 
 
Although this financial plan allows you to answer numerous what-if questions, 
only 1st Qtr consulting fees (cell B6) can be easily changed. It would require 
many steps to change the quarterly growth rate to 7%, the payroll tax rate to 
15%, or rent to $1,500. Models that you use to perform what-if analysis should be 
designed so that all important inputs can be easily changed. Review the file 
AAPEX on the www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith Website to see how all 
the inputs in that model have been placed into a Data Section so that they can be 
changed without having to redo formulas each time. This is an excellent design 
for what-if analysis. 
 
 
FINAL COMMENT 
 
In this lesson you were exposed to numerous commands that enable you to 
expand and modify worksheets to better suit your needs. The Fast Track financial 
plan is now in a very functional and presentable state. 
 
Now that you are done with Lesson 3, close this file without saving any of the 
changes that have been made to it during the what-if analysis. You want to keep 
the original financial plan numbers intact. To do this, select the Exit Excel or 
Close command from the Office button menu and then select No when you are 
asked to save changes in Plan3. 
 
Lesson 4 will introduce you to several features of Excel that you may find helpful 
as you begin designing your own spreadsheet models in the future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1The answers to the questions are $7,366, $27,320, and $11,119 respectively. 

 
111 
Lesson 4 
TOP TEN LIST 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
In this lesson, you will learn to: 
 
• 
Establish and change global settings 
• 
Use special date formats 
• 
Automatically fill ranges with sequential values 
• 
Establish standard column widths 
• 
Use “Accounting” underlines  
• 
Protect files and cells from alteration 
• 
Name cells and ranges to clarify formulas 
• 
Freeze columns and rows on the screen 
• 
Use multiple sheets 
• 
Add artwork to worksheets 
 
 
BEFORE BEGINNING 
 
This lesson consists of ten important skill areas for power users of Excel. They 
are not in any particular order. While you are encouraged to work through the 
entire lesson, each section is independent and may be completed without regard 
to any other section. Save any of the work you want as Plan4. 
 
To begin this lesson, the Excel program should be started and a blank worksheet 
should be on your screen (use the New command from the Office button menu if 
necessary). Do not open the Plan3 workbook yet. 
 
 
1. GLOBAL EXCEL OPTIONS 
 
Global settings are commands that affect the entire workbook. Five important 
global settings are mentioned in this lesson. 
 
Setting a Global Font 
 
The default font is Calibri size 11.  Suppose instead you want the entire 
worksheet to be in a different font or size.  To demonstrate one way of 
accomplishing this, first click the Select All button (box in the upper-left corner of 
the worksheet).  This selects the entire worksheet.  Then change the Font 
box from Calibri to Australian Sunrise and the Font Size box from 11 to 
Select All 
Button 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
112 
14.  Now all letters and numbers entered on the worksheet will be in the new font.  
Go ahead and experiment with this now.  This font will be saved when the file is 
saved. 
 
Before moving on, reset the font to Calibri size 11. 
 
Dont try this now, but if you want to make the global font change permanent for 
all future workbooks, select Excel Options from the Office button menu and 
choose the Popular subcategory.  Where it says “Use this font” and “Font size,” 
change the selections as you wish and click OK. 
 
Setting a Global Numeric Format 
 
The default numeric format is General.  Suppose instead you want all numeric 
entries on the worksheet to be entered in the Currency style (dollars and cents).  
To demonstrate one way of accomplishing this, first click the Select All button 
(box in the upper-left corner of the worksheet).  This selects the entire worksheet.  
Then change the Number Format box from General to Currency.  Now all 
numbers entered on the worksheet will be in dollars and cents.  Go ahead and 
experiment with this now.  This format will be saved when the file is saved. 
 
Before moving on, reset the number format to General. 
 
Besides the General format, one alternate format called Fixed Decimal can be 
made permanent for all new workbooks.  This format would be helpful when you 
are going to be entering lots of values that use the same number of decimals.  To 
turn this feature on, select Excel Options from the Office button menu and 
choose the Advanced subcategory.  Click the box for “Automatically insert a 
decimal point,” set the decimal level desired, and then click OK.  You are 
welcome to experiment making some numeric entries now to see how this works. 
 
Afterwards, uncheck that box and click OK before moving on. 
 
Harnessing the Enter Key 
 
Normally, when you enter data in a cell and press the ENTER key, the cell 
selector moves down to the next row. Many people find this irritating because 
they want to continue working in that same cell (to format it, to perform what-if 
analysis, etc.) without having to go back to it each time they press ENTER. They 
do not want the cell selector to move down automatically. Automatic cell selector 
movement can be eliminated by selecting Excel Options from the Office button 
menu and then selecting the Advanced tab.  Under Editing options at the top, 
uncheck the box labeled After pressing Enter, move selection. 
 
Eliminating Display of Zero Values 
 
Sometimes spreadsheet models contain cells with lots of formulas that have zero 
value because of the current data entered in other cells. Rather than have a 
model print columns of zeros, you can suppress the display of zeros. To do this, 
Select All 
Button 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
113 
select Excel Options from the Office button menu and select the Advanced 
tab.  Scroll down halfway down and under the Display options for this 
worksheet heading, uncheck the box labeled Show a zero in cells that have 
zero value. Try it out if you wish. 
 
More Useful Home and Tab Keys 
 
Moving the active cell to cell A1 is a common occurrence. In Excel, the normal 
shortcut to do this is to use the CTRL+HOME keys in combination. All other 
spreadsheet programs allow you to simply press the HOME key. To choose this 
option in Excel, select Excel Options from the Office button menu and select 
the Advanced tab.  Scroll to the bottom and under the Lotus Compatibility 
heading, check the box labeled Transition navigation keys.  Checking this box 
also activates the Tab keys to move left and right a full page at a time (the 
horizontal equivalent to the Pg Up and Pg Dn keys). 
 
 
2. ENTERING DATES 
 
Many worksheets use calendar dates as a part of labels, and some use them as 
values (e.g., to calculate the number of days from today until Halloween, etc.). 
 
Excel is smart enough to recognize certain entries as dates by the way you type 
them in. For practice, enter 10-31-08 in cell A1. Type July 4, 2008 in cell B1. You 
will notice that Excel puts these dates into its own format.  
 
There are three advantages of entering a recognizable date. One is that there are 
many formatting options available for dates. Move the cell selector to cell A1 and 
click the dialog box launcher in the Number group. Notice the various date 
formats available in the Type box. Try them out. 
 
A second advantage is that you can do some mathematical operations with the 
dates. How many days are there from the Fourth of July to Halloween? To find 
out, enter the formula =A1-B1 in cell C1. You may have to change the number 
format of cell C1 General before you can see the answer. 
 
 
 
 
The third advantage is discussed in the next section. 
 
There are several functions specifically designed to assist in the development of 
models where dates (or time) are an important element. Some of the more 
important ones are discussed in Appendix A. 
 
 
 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
114 
3. AUTOFILL (THE FILL HANDLE) 
 
You were introduced to the fill handle in Lesson 3 (see page xx). It can be used 
to copy formulas and to fill ranges with sequential values. The standard 
increment is 1. For example, you began with the value $4,400 in cell C5. When 
you used the fill handle, it put $4,401, $4,402, and $4,403 in cells D5, E5, and 
F5, respectively. It also works with dates; again, the standard increment is 1 
(day).  
 
If you enter two values or dates at the beginning of a range, Excel is programmed 
to recognize the increment between them and to complete the remaining entries 
in the range automatically. 
 
For example, type the values 2 and 5 in cells C1 and C2, respectively and then 
use the mouse to select the range C1 to C2. Next, position the mouse over the 
small black box located in the lower right corner of cell C2 (called the fill handle), 
until the pointer becomes a black cross shape. Drag the fill handle down to cell 
C5 and then release the mouse button. Instantly, the cells fill up the range with a 
beginning value of 2 and an increment of 3. 
 
For another example, enter 10/31/08 in cell A1 and 11/30/08 in cell A2. Next, 
select the range A1 to A2 and drag the fill handle down to cell A5. The range fills 
with all the month-end dates out to 2/28/09. This example also demonstrates the 
importance of using a recognizable date format because if these dates were 
initially entered in an unfamiliar form, Excel would not know what to do. Proper 
date formats were mentioned in the “Entering Dates” section above. 
 
 
 
 
 
4. UNIFORM COLUMN WIDTHS 
 
Occasionally you may develop a new worksheet where, because of all your 
experimentation, every column is a different width. If you want to standardize the 
width of columns containing similar data, you can grab the column borders and 
try to visually even out the column widths. You may find that this is time-
consuming at best.  A quicker way to get uniform column widths is to drag the 
mouse across all columns to be standardized, then click the Format button (Cells 
group), select Column Width, enter the desired size, and click OK. The standard 
width of a cell is generally 8.43 when the font is Calibri size 11. Try it out! 
 
 
Format 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
115 
5. ACCOUNTING UNDERLINES 
 
There are three types of underlining that are in common use: regular underlines, 
accounting underlines, and bottom borders. An example of the appearance of 
each is shown below. 
 
 
 
The regular underline extends only under the data in each cell. The accounting 
underline extends almost all the way across each cell. This type of gapped 
underline is frequently used in financial reports because it visually breaks up 
headings into distinct columns. The bottom border is a solid line drawn all the 
way across the bottom of the cells. 
 
There are restrictions on where the accounting underlines can be used. In cells 
that contain values, they can only be used if the cells are in the Accounting 
number format. 
 
To demonstrate, enter the word May in cell D8 and center it in the cell. Next, 
enter 10,000 in cell D10. Then follow these steps: 
 
1. 
With the cell selector in cell D8, click the Underline button. This puts a 
regular underline under the word. 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
With the cell selector in cell D8, click the dialog box launcher in the Font 
group. In the Underline text box, select Single Accounting, and then click 
OK. This puts an accounting underline across the cell. 
 
 
 
3. 
With the cell selector in cell D10, click the Underline button. This puts a 
regular underline under the number. 
 
 
 
4. 
With the cell selector in cell D10, click the dialog box launcher in the Font 
group. In the Underline text box, select Single Accounting, and then click 
OK. Surprise! What you see is a regular underline, not an accounting one. 
This is because D10 is a value cell and it has not yet been put into the 
Accounting format (it is in the Number format). 
 
 
 
 
Underline 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
116 
5. 
With the cell selector in cell D10, click the dialog box launcher in the 
Number group. In the Category text box, select Accounting, and then click 
OK. Now you will see the accounting underline in that cell. 
 
 
Bottom line: Accounting underlines can be used for text and for values expressed 
in the Accounting number format. Prior planning about this will help! 
 
 
6. CELL AND WORKSHEET PROTECTION 
 
Open the workbook Plan3 now. Your financial plan worksheet is currently 
unprotected, meaning that the contents of any cell can be changed. You may, 
however, protect your worksheet or certain portions of it from change, accidental 
or otherwise. This is accomplished using options on the Home and Review tabs. 
 
Lets work through an example to see how these commands are used. You could 
protect the entire financial plan worksheet, but this would prevent you from 
performing what-if analysis or from changing any other aspect of the model. So, 
the first step before protecting a file is to identify which cells you want to leave 
unlocked. On your model, the only cell you have changed over and over is cell 
B6. All the other cells contain text, formulas, and values that could be protected. 
 
To identify cell B6 as a cell you want to leave unlocked, 
(1) 
Move to cell B6 and make sure youre on the Home tab. 
(2) 
Click the Format button (Cells group). 
(3) 
Select Format cells (the last option). 
(4) 
Click the Protection tab. 
(5) 
Uncheck the “Locked” check box. 
(6) 
Click OK. 
 
The next step is to protect the worksheet. 
(1) 
Again, click the Format button (Cells group). 
(2) 
Select Protect Sheet. 
(3) 
Click OK.  You could enter a password if you want.  (As an option, 
there are buttons on the Review tab to Protect Sheet and Protect 
Workbook.) 
 
Your worksheet is now protected. The only cell that can be changed is B6. Try to 
enter something in some other cell. If you have done this properly, you should be 
able to enter data only in cell B6. 
 
Before moving on to the next section, the model must be unprotected. Click the 
Format button (Cells group), and choose the Unprotect Sheet option. 
 
The current protection settings for a workbook are saved when the file is saved. If 
you wish to save this file, use the Save As command (Office button menu), and 
name the file Plan46. 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
117 
7. CREATING NAMES FOR CELLS AND RANGES 
 
Open the workbook Plan3 now if it is not already on the screen. As mentioned in 
Lesson 1, it is possible to give a cell or range of cells a descriptive name so that 
you can use the name to indicate the cell or range rather than having to enter the 
cell addresses. Names are saved when the workbook is saved. 
 
Name Conventions 
 
There are several name conventions of which you should be aware. For 
example, the first character in a name must be a letter, an underscore, or a 
backslash (\). Names may not contain any spaces or punctuation other than 
periods or underscores. Excel does not distinguish between uppercase and 
lowercase letters in names. Additionally, names should not look like cell 
addresses (e.g., B12), function names, key names, or macro command 
keywords. 
 
Name Demonstration 
 
To demonstrate this feature, move the cell pointer to cell B6 and then click in the 
Name box to highlight the “B6” cell reference. 
 
 
 
1. 
Type the name FEES and then press ENTER. 
 
 
 
2. 
Move the cell pointer to cell B13 and click the Name box. 
 
 
 
3. 
Type the name EXPENSES and then press ENTER. 
 
 
Now, any time you wish to do something to either of these cells, you can indicate 
the cells by entering FEES or EXPENSES instead of the cell addresses. 
 
Additionally, naming these two cells makes the formula in cell B15 easier to 
understand. To demonstrate this, move to cell B15 and enter =FEES-
EXPENSES. Now even a casual user of this financial plan would understand that 
the value in cell B15 is derived by subtracting total expenses from consulting 
fees. This method of documenting and clarifying formulas is particularly helpful 
with long and complex models. 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
118 
 
Names can be used with single cells or with a range of cells. Names are 
automatically updated for insertions, deletions, and moves. 
 
The F5 Key and the Name Box Drop-Down Arrow 
 
Another benefit to using names is that they make it easier to move around the 
worksheet using either the Name box drop-down arrow or the F5 (GOTO) key. 
Pressing the F5 key allows you to move the cell pointer to a specific location on 
the worksheet by specifying a name as the destination. 
 
Clicking the Name box drop-down arrow is an even quicker way of moving the 
cell pointer to a specific location on the worksheet. To demonstrate, click the 
Name box drop-down arrow to display a list of the two range names you just 
created. Now click FEES and watch the cell pointer jump to cell B6. 
 
Range names can be deleted by selecting the Name Manager button in the 
Defined Names group on the Formulas tab. Select the name you wish to remove 
and click Delete. Range names are saved when the workbook is saved. If you 
wish to save this file, use the Save As command (Office button menu), and 
name the file Plan47. 
 
 
8. KEEPING CERTAIN COLUMNS AND ROWS ALWAYS ON THE SCREEN 
 
Open the file Plan3 now if it is not already on the screen. In Excel, the Freeze 
Panes button allows you to freeze a row or column (or both) in place so that it 
always stays on the screen no matter where the cell pointer is. As you can 
imagine, this command is very handy with a large worksheet since you can 
always keep certain column or row headings on the screen. 
 
To demonstrate this feature, move the cell pointer to cell B6, click the Freeze 
Panes button from the Window  group on the View tab and then select the 
Freeze Panes option. This freezes column A and rows 1-5 on the screen. To 
confirm this, move the cell pointer to a column just off the right side of the current 
screen and note that column A is still displayed on the screen. 
 
 
 
 
Freeze 
Panes 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
119 
Move back to cell B6 and then down to row 25 or further and notice that rows 1-5 
are still displayed on the screen. 
 
These are examples of what both a column freeze and a row freeze looks like. If 
you wanted either a column freeze or a row freeze but not both, you would click 
the row header or column header before using the Freeze Panes command.  
 
If you wish to save this workbook, use the Save As command (Office button 
menu), and name the file Plan48. 
 
Before you go on to the next section, be sure to eliminate the frozen titles that 
you have. To do this, click the Freeze Panes button and then select the 
Unfreeze Panes command. 
 
 
9. WORKING WITH SHEETS 
 
Open the file Plan3 now if it is not already on the screen. Workbooks may consist 
of several worksheets. This section will demonstrate some simple mechanics of 
using multiple sheets. The worksheet tabs at the bottom of the worksheet window 
allow you to move quickly between different worksheets in a workbook. To 
demonstrate, click the tab for Sheet2. Now click the tab for Sheet3. Finally, click 
the tab for Sheet1. Thats all there is to it. 
 
 
 
 
Adding Sheets 
 
Additional worksheets can be added. Click the Insert Worksheet button to the 
right side of the Sheet3 tab and a new Sheet4 is added.  This button 
automatically adds a new sheet at the end of the worksheet tabs.  Try it now. 
 
Its also possible to insert a worksheet between two worksheets.  To 
demonstrate, click the Sheet2 tab, click the drop-down arrow of the Insert 
button (Cells group), and select Insert Sheet.  A new Sheet5 is added in front of 
Sheet2. 
 
 
 
Moving Sheets 
 
Use the mouse to grab the tab for Sheet5 and move it after Sheet4. Now all 
sheets are in numerical order.  
 
 
 
Insert 
Worksheet 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
120 
 
Deleting Sheets 
 
Sheets can be deleted. Click on the tab for Sheet4, then click on the drop-down 
arrow on the Delete button (Cells group), and select Delete Sheet.  Use this 
process to also delete Sheet5. 
 
Naming Sheets 
 
Just like range names and file names, worksheets can be given more descriptive 
names. To demonstrate, double-click the Sheet1 tab, type Fast Track, and press 
ENTER. Use the same process to name Sheet2 Adventure Travel and Sheet3 
Combined. 
 
 
 
 
Copy and Paste 
 
Suppose you want to make a projection for consulting fees for Adventure Travel 
similar to the one you made for Fast Track. Just as you used Copy and Paste on 
one worksheet, you can also use it between sheets in a workbook. To 
demonstrate, go to the Fast Track sheet, select the range A1 to F6, click the 
Copy button, click the Adventure Travel sheet tab, and with the cell pointer in 
cell A1, click the Paste button. The column width for column A does not carry 
over, but everything else should. Make the following three changes to this 
worksheet: (1) widen column A, (2) change cell B2 to Adventure Travel, and (3) 
change cell B6 to $8,800. Easy! 
 
 
 
 
If you ever want to copy an entire worksheet, click the Select All button in the top-
left corner box of the worksheet (between column A and row 1). This action 
selects the entire worksheet. Then click the Copy button, select another sheet, 
and click the Paste button. 
 
 
 
Copy 
Paste 
Select All 
Button 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
121 
 
 
Multiple-Sheet Formulas 
 
Suppose you now want to prepare a combined report for consulting fees in the 
1st Quarter. Click the Combined sheet tab and enter Consolidated Total in cell 
A1. Next, move to cell C1, type = (equal sign), click the Fast Track tab, click cell 
B6, type + (plus sign), click the Adventure Travel tab, click cell B6, and press 
ENTER. The combined total ($18,800) now appears in cell C1. Not very elegant, 
but you get the idea. 
 
 
 
Youve barely scratched the surface on using multiple sheets, but you certainly 
have enough information now to develop some sophisticated consolidated 
reports. 
See 
the 
spreadsheet 
model 
called 
SUMMARY 
on 
the 
www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith website for a simple example. 
 
By the way, sheet commands for inserting, deleting, renaming, copying, etc., can 
also be accessed by right clicking on the tab of the sheet you wish to alter. 
 
If you wish to save this workbook, use the Save As command (Office button 
menu), and name the file Plan49. 
 
10. ARTWORK AND COLOR 
 
Open the file Plan3 now if it is not already on the screen. It is possible to add 
lines, arrows, geometric shapes, freehand drawings, fancy text, clip art, and other 
objects to a worksheet. You can add a gazillion colors and patterns as well. 
Charts and graphs can also be added, but thats covered in the next lesson. 
 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
122 
 
 
 
The quickest places to go for artwork and color are covered briefly in this section.  
As you experiment with these options, dont worry about making mistakes.  You 
dont have to save anything you do.  If things get too messy, you can simply 
close and reopen the file.  And have that Undo button ready (Quick Access 
toolbar)! 
 
1. Home tab.  Select a cell or range of cells and then click the Ribbon button 
a. 
Font group: Fill Color – applies background color to any range you 
select 
b. 
Font group: Font Color – applies color for text or values in any 
range you select 
c. 
Styles group: Conditional Formatting – applies different formats to 
different cells depending on certain conditions (e.g., largest ten 
numbers are shown in red; check out Data Bars and Color Scales 
too!) 
d. 
Styles group: Format as Table – converts range to a table; 
activates the Table Tools contextual tab that allows you to format 
the table, apply color scheme, etc. 
e. 
Styles group: Cell Styles – applies color and various cell designs 
to the range you select 
 
2. Insert tab.  Click on a Ribbon button and then on an object to be inserted.  
It will be inserted near the active cell on the worksheet (or Excel will have 
you click and drag to position the object).  After insertion the object will have 
handles (tiny empty circles or squares) on it or around it.  (If not, click on the 
object once.)  All inserted items can be moved, resized, or deleted easily. 
• 
Move: Use the mouse to drag the object to a new location. 
• 
Resize: Use the mouse to grab one of the handles and move it in the 

Lesson 4 – Top Ten List 
123 
direction needed for resizing.  Repeat with other handles. 
• 
Delete: Press the delete key on the keyboard.  Poof! 
 
a. 
Illustrations group: Picture – before clicking the Picture button, 
position the active cell to the right side or below worksheet cells 
containing data so that the inserted photo does not cover the data 
area; photos will probably have to be downsized; activates the 
Picture Tools contextual tab that offers many formatting options 
b. 
Illustrations group: Clip Art – after clicking the Clip Art button, a 
Clip Art task pane is displayed;  Search for – enter description 
(boat, flower, checkmark, etc.); Search in – check the everywhere 
option; click Go and then click on the one you want from the 
gallery presented; activates the Picture Tools contextual tab 
c. 
Illustration group: Shapes – inserts geometric shapes and 
designs; click and drag 
d. 
Illustration group: SmartArt – inserts special graphic groups like 
organization charts, matrices, pyramids 
 
 
e. 
Text group: Text Box – used to insert text anywhere on a 
worksheet, chart, photo, or other object; click and drag to needed 
size, then enter text inside the box 
f. 
Text group: WordArt – inserts fancy text inside a text box 
g. 
Text group: Object – inserts drawings, video, sound 
h. 
Text group: Symbol – inserts symbols (@, ©, ) or special 
characters (§, ¶, ™) in a cell by itself or in a line of text 
 
3. Page Layout tab. 
a. 
Themes group – changes the overall color scheme of the 
document 
b. 
Page Setup group: Background – applies a selected photo as 
wallpaper background to the whole document 
 
When you are done with this section, save your work if you wish.  Use the Save 
As command (Office button menu) to save your file as Plan410.  Otherwise 
Close the file without saving it. 

 
124 
Lesson 5 
CHARTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
In this lesson, you will learn to: 
 
• 
Create charts based on data in the worksheet 
• 
Save a chart 
• 
Perform what-if analysis with a chart 
• 
Select, move, size, copy, and delete a chart 
• 
Print a chart 
• 
Change the current chart type 
• 
Edit and enhance a chart 
• 
Use Chart Sheets 
 
 
BEFORE BEGINNING 
 
In this lesson you are going to create some charts. To begin, Excel should be 
started and the file Plan3 (created in Lesson 3) should be open on your screen. 
 
 
ABOUT CHARTS IN EXCEL 
 
A chart is basically a graphical representation of the data that you have in your 
worksheet. Charts are a very important means of communicating information 
because they allow you to visually examine trends and relationships that exist in 
the data.  
 
Most charts in Excel have the following basic elements: title, Y-axis, Y-axis title,  
X-axis, X-axis title, plot, and legend. In Excel, the Y-axis is called the Value axis 
and the x-axis is called the Category axis. These items are depicted in Illustration 
5.1. 
 
Excel makes it very easy for you to create charts on your screen and to print 
them on a printer. In most cases, charts can be created with a drag and a couple 
clicks of the mouse. Elements of a chart can be easily modified by the creator. 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
125 
 
 
 
     Illustration 5.1 
   Basic Chart Elements 
 
CREATING CHARTS 
 
To demonstrate the creation of a chart, lets plot Fast Tracks consulting 
revenues over the year: 
 
1. 
Use the mouse to select the range A5 to E6.  Note: Do not include cell F6. 
 
2. 
Click the Insert tab. 
 
3. 
Click the Column button. 
 
4. 
Select the first option under the 2-D Column heading (Clustered Column). 
 
Illustration 5.2  
Chart: Quick and Simple 
Column 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
126 
The chart shown in Illustration 5.2 is immediately drawn over or next to the 
worksheet data.  Note that three new Ribbon tabs called Design, Layout, and 
Format are added at the end of the Ribbon.  They are Chart Tools and only 
appear on the Ribbon when working with a chart.  These are called contextual 
tabs and different ones appear when working on different types of objects in 
Excel. 
 
Click on cell A1.  Since you have moved off the chart now, the Chart Tools 
contextual tab disappears and the Ribbon reverts to the Home tab.  Click again 
on an open area of the chart to select it (this puts a thick light blue frame around 
it) and the Chart Tools tabs appear again.  A chart can be altered only when it 
has been selected. 
 
Creating a chart is as easy as selecting a range of cells to be plotted and 
following the steps outlined above.  Note that the range selected included labels 
at the top of each column (row 5) and a label at the beginning of the row of data 
(column A).  Excel uses cells it recognizes as labels to create titles for the 
horizontal axis (X-axis) and for the legend.  Excel may also suggest a title for the 
chart itself.  The vertical axis (Y-axis) in this case does not need a title since it is 
already obvious that it represents dollars of consulting revenues.  Including the 
labels in the range to be plotted is not required (these titles could be added later) 
but it speeds up the creation process.  Titles are an important component of 
creating meaningful charts. 
 
 
MOVING A CHART 
 
With the chart currently selected, you can move a chart by dragging it to a new 
location.  Try it out.  You can also move around elements within the chart (titles, 
legends, etc.) in the same way. 
 
 
RESIZING A CHART 
 
To resize a chart (make it bigger, smaller, wider, and so forth), use the mouse to 
grab the selection handles of the chart (tiny groups of dots on the chart border) 
and drag to the desired size and shape.  Check it out.  Some chart elements can 
also be resized in the same manner.  Remember you can always use the Undo 
button to get yourself out of a mess. 
 
 
COPYING A CHART 
 
With the current chart selected, click the Copy button on the Ribbon.  Move the 
mouse to cell B17 and click the Paste button. A copy of the chart is now 
displayed there.  You may want copies of a chart to show different data with the 
same chart style or to display the same data using different chart types. 
 
 
Copy 
Paste 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
127 
DELETING A CHART 
 
To demonstrate deleting a chart, well delete the chart copy now.  With the copy 
of the chart currently selected, press the DELETE key on the keyboard.  Pretty 
simple!  While youre at it, DELETE the original chart too. 
 
 
CHART TOOLS – DESIGN TAB 
 
Lets begin exploring the chart tools.  Well start with the Design tab.  First, follow 
the steps below to create a chart that plots Fast Tracks revenue and expenses 
for the four quarters of the year. 
 
1. 
Use the mouse to select the range A5 to E12. 
 
2. 
Click the Insert tab. 
 
3. 
Click the Column button. 
 
4. 
Select the first option under the 2-D Column heading (Clustered Column). 
 
 
Illustration 5.3 
Fast Track Revenues and Expenses: First Try 
 
Click on the Design tab if it is not already active. 
 
The first group on the left side of the Ribbon is called Type.  One major concern 
in drawing meaningful charts is the type of chart to be used.  Click the Change 
Chart Type button to see all the types available. 
 
 
Change 
Chart 
Type 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
128 
By far the most common chart types are column, bar, line, pie, and scatter 
diagram.  Column and bar charts are generally used to compare items at the 
same point in time.  Line charts are good for showing changes over a time 
period.  Pie charts are used to show the relative proportion of elements that make 
up the whole.  In Excel, pie charts display only the first data series (consulting 
fees in this case).  Individual slices of a pie can be moved out for visual effect. 
 
A scatter diagram is called an XY chart in Excel.  The XY chart requires that the 
X-axis be values, not labels; otherwise it ends up functioning as a plain old line 
graph.  An example of this would be to plot advertising expense on the X-axis 
and consulting fees on the Y-axis.  This would allow you to see the impact of 
advertising on generating consulting fees.  See illustration 5.4.  It is also possible 
to have Excel draw a trendline (also called a regression line) through the data 
points. 
 
 
 
Illustration 5.4 
XY Chart 
 
 
Go ahead and experiment with some different chart types now.  When done, 
reset the chart to 2-D Column. 
 
The Save As Template button saves the chart format for use in future charts.  We 
will not use that button here. 
 
The Data Group on the Ribbon provides two buttons that are very helpful in the 
initial phases of creating a chart.  One decision to be made is whether the data 
are plotted in a way that is meaningful to you (or other readers).  Notice on the 
current chart that the revenue and expense categories are on the X-axis and the 
four quarters are shown in the legend.  For a different orientation to plotting the 
same data, click the Switch Row/Column button on the Ribbon.  Notice now that 
the four quarters are on the X-axis and the revenue and expenses are shown in 
Switch 
Row/Column 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
129 
the legend.  With our data, this second orientation seems more meaningful for 
comparative analysis, so lets keep it. 
 
 
 
Illustration 5.5 
Fast Track Revenues and Expenses: Better View 
 
When you construct charts you should be aware of the logic Excel uses (If you do 
not see the words Chart Title at the top of the chart, go back and select Layout 1 
first). If the range you select to chart has more rows than columns, Excel 
automatically plots the data series by columns.  This is what happened above.  If 
this is not what you had in mind, you can switch the orientation around later, just 
as you did here. 
 
Notice that the range selected for the chart (A5 to E12) includes two rows that we 
do not want to be on the chart (rows 7 and 8 do not contain any data).  We really 
want to chart A5 to E6 and A9 to E12.  These are two nonadjacent ranges.  To 
get rid of the unwanted rows, click the Select Data button.  In the Select Data 
Source dialog box, select <blank series> and then click the Remove button.  
Next select Expenses and then click Remove again.  Finally, click OK. 
 
NOTE:  Nonadjacent ranges can be selected for charting at least two other ways.  
One, you could select A5 to E6, then hold down the CTRL key and select A9 to 
E12, and follow steps 2-4 above.  Two, when you have data in several locations 
on a worksheet that you wish to plot in a single chart, you may find it easiest to 
set up a separate table on the worksheet and accumulate all the data in one 
place.  This is sometimes referred to as a Chart Table. 
 
Excel offers many styles and formats for 2-D column charts.  The 
Chart Layouts group has 11 different layout buttons for 2-D column 
charts (Layout 1, 2, 3, …, 11). Click on the More button (lower-right 
side of group) to see all 11.  Try some out.  When done experimenting,  
Select  
Data 
Chart  
Layouts  
group 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
130 
leave the chart in Layout 1. 
 
Before moving on, enter a chart title by clicking in the title area of the chart to 
select it and replacing the words Chart Title with Fast Track Inc.  Then click on 
an open area of the chart. 
 
The Chart Styles group offers 48 different styles of 2-D column charts– many 
very impressive.  
 
 
 
Click on the More button and try some.  While youre experimenting, check out 
Style 42.  Stunning!    When you are done, leave the chart in Style 2. 
 
Click the Move Chart button in the Location group.  As you see, you have the 
option to move the chart onto a sheet all by itself rather than have it be on the 
worksheet where it is now.  Lets leave the charts location alone for now.  Click 
Cancel. 
 
Click on cell A1 of the worksheet.  Your chart should now appear as in 
Illustration 5.6. 
 
 
Illustration 5.6 
Fast Track Revenues and Expenses: Done 
 
 
SAVING A CHART 
 
Now that you have created your chart, you should save it.  To save a chart you 
simply have to save the file that contains the chart.  Do this now.  Select the 
Move 
Chart 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
131 
Save As command (Office button) and enter the file name Plan5.  Your chart will 
now be saved with the rest of the worksheet. 
 
 
PRINTING A CHART 
 
You can print a chart by itself or print it together with the worksheet as they 
appear on the screen. 
 
To print the chart by itself, click on an open area of the chart to select it and 
choose the Print command (Office button).  Next select the Print option and 
click OK or just click the Quick Print option. 
 
To print the chart and the worksheet together, deselect the chart by clicking 
anywhere on the worksheet itself.  Then execute the normal Print command 
sequence (Office button) to print a worksheet.  Caution: if your chart is off to the 
side of the worksheet, you may want to use Landscape orientation (Orientation 
button on the Page Layout tab) to get both the chart and the worksheet on one 
page.  When in doubt, use the Print Preview command (Office button, Print 
command) before printing. 
 
Try out both of these approaches now. 
 
CHART TOOLS - LAYOUT TAB 
 
If your chart is not currently selected, click on an open area of the chart.  
Click the Layout tab.  Starting at the left side of the Ribbon, click the Chart 
Area drop-down arrow in the Current Selection group.  This menu allows you to 
customize individual elements of the chart.  Select Chart Title then click the 
Format Selection button. Click Picture or texture fill and in the Texture drop-
down menu pick White Marble.  Click Close.  This gives the chart title a marble 
background. 
 
With the Insert Group you may insert pictures, shapes, and text boxes into the 
charts.  See Lesson 4 for instructions. 
 
In the Labels Group you can add, remove, or position text items on the chart.  
Well try a couple.  Click the Legend button and select Show Legend at 
Bottom.  This moves the legend to the bottom of the chart.  Next click the Data 
Labels button and select Outside End.  Ugh, this doesnt look very good on our 
chart, so click the Undo button (Quick Access toolbar).  Finally, click the Data 
Table button and select Show Data Table.  This shows all the series values in a 
table underneath the chart area.  If the chart is too cramped to accommodate the 
data table, use the Selection Handles to enlarge the chart. 
 
In the Axes group, we wont change the format of the axes but lets alter the 
gridlines.  Click the Gridlines button, pick Primary Horizontal Gridlines, and 
select Major & Minor Gridlines.  This puts more horizontal gridlines on the 
chart. 
Format 
Selection 
Legend 
Data 
Labels 
Data 
Table 
Gridlines 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
132 
 
In the Background group, click on the Plot Area button and select the More 
option.  Choose Gradient fill, and under Preset colors select Calm Water from 
the options offered.  Click Close.  This gives a blue-green-lavender color 
background to the plot area. 
 
In the Analysis group, click the Trendline button, select Linear trendline, and 
click OK to accept Consulting fees as the series to base the trendline on. 
 
 
CHART TOOLS – FORMAT TAB 
 
Click on the chart if it is not selected.  Click the Format tab.  The Shape Styles 
group provides 42 preset styles to jazz up your chart.  Click on the More button to 
see them all.  Then move the mouse across the options and watch the chart to 
see how the various shape styles impact it (Live Preview).  After experimenting, 
leave the chart in Subtle Effect – Accent 6.  Chart elements themselves can 
also be dressed up using the Shape Styles group options. 
 
The WordArt Styles is for choosing visually attractive textual styles.  To 
demonstrate, select the chart title and then watch the Live Preview as you move 
the mouse over some of the 30 preset word styles.  When done, leave the title in 
Fill – White Drop Shadow. 
 
The Arrange group offers buttons for dealing with multiple charts or objects.  The 
Size group lets you set the size of your chart.  It is a more precise method of 
resizing than simply dragging the selection handles with a mouse. 
 
Your chart should appear as in Illustration 5.7.  Click in cell A1.  Use Save As 
(Office button) to save the file now as Plan5U. 
 
Plot 
Area 
Trendline 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
133 
 
 
Illustration 5.7 
One Ugly Chart 
 
You have created one ugly chart.  Always keep in mind that the purpose of a 
chart is to visually communicate information to the user.  If the viewer has to 
struggle to figure out what the chart is illustrating because it is too cluttered or 
garish, you are defeating the benefit of using a chart.  Probably eliminating the 
Data Table, eliminating the trendline, and coordinating the colors of the chart title, 
plot area, and background would help immensely.  Maybe something like 
Illustration 5.8 would be better. 
 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
134 
 
 
Illustration 5.8 
One Pretty Chart 
 
 
WHAT-IF ANALYSIS WITH CHARTS 
 
In Excel, charts are dynamic.  This means that when you change data in the 
worksheet, you can immediately see the graphical impact of the change by 
looking at the chart.  The ability to see the effect of changes immediately in the 
chart can be extremely helpful when performing what-if analysis. 
 
To demonstrate the dynamic link between the worksheet and the chart, you will 
enter new values in cell B6.  If the chart is blocking the view of that cell, click on 
an open space on the chart to select it and use the mouse to drag it to the right 
so that column C is exposed.  Examine the chart and then enter 5000 in cell B6.  
Examine the chart again and note how the chart has been redrawn to reflect the  
new value for 1st Qtr consulting fees.  Feel free to experiment with other values 
in cell B6.  Reset it to 10000 when done. 
 
 
INSTANT CHARTS 
 
You can save a step or two in creating charts with the F11 key.  To demonstrate, 
click on cell C5 and then press the F11 key.  Instantly a 2-D clustered column 
chart is drawn on a separate chart sheet (Chart1). 
 

Lesson 5 - Charts 
135 
 
 
Illustration 5.9 
Instant Chart 
 
Excel groups all adjacent cells (or cells selected by you) into a range to be 
plotted.  If you had clicked in cell C10 and then pressed the F11 key, a chart 
showing all the expenses (A9 to F12) would have been created.  You can 
customize this chart in the same way as described in previous sections of this 
lesson.  And you can move it to the worksheet using the Move Chart button on 
the Design tab. 
 
If you want to save this chart, save the file now.  Otherwise, close the file without 
saving it. 
 
 
FINAL COMMENT 
 
This lesson covered how to create, work with, save, enhance, and print charts.  
Charts are a very effective means of presenting data, so you are strongly 
encouraged to continue working with them.  Keep in mind that establishing a 
purpose for your chart is as important as learning the mechanics of how to create 
and enhance a chart. 

 
136 
Appendix A 
FUNCTIONS FOR BUSINESS 
 
 
 
 
 
Functions are used to perform special calculations in cells. There are over 200 functions 
available in Excel, but only the commonly used ones are discussed in this appendix. 
 
Review the section called “Using Functions” in Lesson 2 to refresh your memory on how 
functions work. That lesson covers entering functions and using the function Help 
system. 
 
Functions may be linked with standard arithmetic operations and can also be combined 
with one another. All of the following are legitimate Excel formulas: 
 
 
=D15/VLOOKUP(C12,E4:F9,1) 
 
=SUM(B12:H12)+17 
 
=A17*IF(B1= 0,2,B9) 
 
=IF(H16>12,0,MAX(H2:H9)) 
 
As a reminder, any time a cell address is used in one of these functions, it can be 
entered by typing it in or by pointing to it either with the mouse or with the keyboard. 
Ranges are entered with the beginning and ending cell addresses separated by a colon 
(e.g., E4:F91). 
 
The following functions are covered in this appendix: 
 
 
Date: 
 
 
NOW 
gives todays date and time 
 
 
TODAY 
gives todays date 
 
 
Finance: 
 
 
FV 
future value of an ordinary annuity 
 
 
PV 
present value of ordinary annuity 
 
 
PMT 
periodic loan payment to amortize loan 
 
 
NPER 
number of periods for annuity or amount to reach future 
value  
 
 
RATE 
interest rate for amount to reach future value 
 
 
 
 
Capital Budgeting: 
 
 
IRR 
internal rate of return 
 
 
MIRR 
IRR with modified reinvestment rate 
 
 
NPV 
net present value 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Functions for Business 
137 
 
Statistical: 
 
 
SUM 
sum of values in range 
 
 
AVERAGE 
average value in range 
 
 
COUNT 
number of entries 
 
 
MAX 
maximum value in range 
 
 
MIN 
minimum value in range 
 
 
MEDIAN 
median value in range 
 
 
STDEVP 
standard deviation 
 
 
VARP 
variance 
 
 
FORECAST 
predicts next value in series 
 
 
INTERCEPT 
computes y-intercept of regression line 
 
 
SLOPE 
computes slope of regression line 
 
  
Mathematical: 
 
 
ABS 
absolute value 
 
 
SQRT 
square root 
 
 
RAND 
random value 
 
 
INT 
integer portion of value 
 
 
ROUND 
round the value 
 
 
Logical: 
 
 
IF 
if true, enter one value; if false, enter another 
 
 
VLOOKUP 
look up value in vertical table 
 
 
HLOOKUP 
look up value in horizontal table 
 
 
Depreciation: 
 
 
SLN 
straight-line 
 
 
SYD 
sum-of-the-years digits 
 
 
DDB 
double-declining balance 
 
 
 
Descriptions of each of the above functions are given in alphabetical order on the 
following pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Functions for Business 
 
138 
ABS(number) 
 
This function calculates the absolute value of number. Example: =ABS(C11) will return 
23.7 if the value in cell C11 is either 23.7 or -23.7. 
 
AVERAGE(list) 
 
This function computes the average value of a specified range or list of cells separated 
by commas. Examples: =AVERAGE(H12:H20) or =AVERAGE(F4, H4, J4:P4). Also see 
the file named CLASS on the www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith website. 
 
COUNT(list) 
 
This function will count the number of nonblank cells in a list of cells separated by 
commas or in specified ranges. Example: =COUNT(A7,A10,A11:A20). Also see the file 
named CLASS on the www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith website. 
 
DDB(cost,salvage,life,period,factor) 
 
This function computes depreciation for an asset using the double-declining balance 
method. Cost is the cost of the asset, salvage is its estimated salvage value, life is its 
estimated useful life, and period is the time period for which depreciation is to be 
computed. For example, =DDB(10000,2000,8,2) would compute depreciation for the 
second year on an asset that cost $10,000, has an expected useful life of 8 years, and 
salvage value of $2,000 (answer is $1,875). Entering a value for factor is optional and is 
only used when changing the depreciation rate. 
 
FORECAST (x,known_ys,known_xs) 
 
This function predicts the next value in a series (e.g., next months sales based on sales 
for the last four months) based on a linear trend of existing values. For example, enter 
the following table on a worksheet: 
 
 
A1: Month 
B1: 1 
C1: 2 
D1: 3 
E1: 4 
F1: 5 
 
A2: Sales 
B2: 277 
C2: 307 
D2: 290 
E2: 321 
 
In cell F2 enter the following formula: =FORECAST(F1,B2:E2,B1:E1). The result (327.5) 
is a linear prediction of sales for month 5. Also, see the TREND function to predict 
several future values. 
 
FV(rate,nper,pmt,pv,type) 
 
This function computes the future value of an ordinary annuity. Pmt is the amount of 
each periodic payment and is assumed to occur at the end of the period. Rate is the 
interest rate per payment, and nper represents the number of payments made. For 
example, if at the end of each year you put $100 into a savings account earning 5% 
interest, how much would the account be worth at the end of the fifth year? The formula 
=FV(.05,5,-100) provides the answer ($552.56). 
 
Entering values for pv and type are optional. If you enter the value 1 for type, Excel 
will treat the payments as occurring at the beginning of each period. To continue the 

Appendix A – Functions for Business 
139 
previous example, this modified formula would be: 
 
 
=FV(0.5,5,-100,,1) 
  
HLOOKUP 
 
See VLOOKUP. 
 
IF(logical_test,value_if_true,value_if_false) 
 
This function allows the program to choose one of two inputs to enter in a cell. If the 
specified condition is true, input x will be put in the cell. If the condition is false, input y 
will be entered. An example of how this function can be used is as follows: 
 
 
C2: =IF(A8=2,7,9) 
 
This formula states that if the value in cell A8 is equal to 2, enter a 7 in cell C2; if the 
value in cell A8 is not equal to 2, enter a 9 in cell C2. 
 
The conditions that may be used are as follows: 
 
 
= 
equal to 
 
> 
greater than 
 
< 
less than 
 
<= 
less than or equal to 
 
>= 
greater than or equal to 
 
<> 
not equal to 
 
AND 
logical AND 
 
OR 
logical OR 
 
NOT 
logical NOT 
 
Here are some acceptable examples: 
 
 
B12: =IF(B11>10,B11,B10/D5) 
 
D23: =IF(A3<A2,D8,“overdrawn”) 
 
D71: =IF(G12>=0,0,SUM(C20:C58)) 
 
F22: =IF(A1=0,B7,IF(A1=1,B8,B9)) 
 
P17: =IF(OR(B7=B8,C15>500),“Credit OK”,“Credit Not OK”) 
 
E1: =IF(NOT(A2=2),55,66) 
 
Also 
see 
files 
named 
CHECKREG, 
CHURCH, 
and 
PROPERTY 
on 
the 
www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith website. 
 
INT(number) 
 
This function returns the integer portion of a number. Example: =INT(27.3) will return the 
value 27. 
 
INTERCEPT(known_ys,known_xs) 
 
See SLOPE. 

Appendix A – Functions for Business 
 
140 
IRR(values,guess) 
 
This function will approximate the internal rate of return for a series of cash flows (repre-
sented by values in a range of cells). To start the process, you must enter an initial 
guess (from 0.00 to 1.0) either as a number or as a cell address. 
 
Suppose you wish to evaluate an investment that will cost $200,000 today and will 
generate $60,000 per year at the end of the first two years and $75,000 per year at the 
end of the next two years. The projected cash flows are entered in cells B17 through B21 
as follows: -$200,000; $60,000; $60,000; $75,000; and $75,000. You want the IRR to be 
entered in cell C6. Your initial guess is 10%. The formula is as follows: 
 
 
C6: =IRR(B17:B21,.1) 
 
The internal rate of return for this investment will show up in cell C6 as 13%. For another 
example, see the file named PROPERTY on the www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/ 
smith website. 
 
MAX(list) 
 
This function returns the maximum value found in specified ranges or a list of cells 
separated by commas. Example: =MAX(B8:B28). Also see the file named CLASS on the 
www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith website. 
 
MEDIAN(list) 
 
This function returns the median value found in specified ranges or a list of cells 
separated by commas. Example: =MEDIAN(P1:P32). 
 
MIN(list) 
 
This function returns the minimum value found in specified ranges or a list of cells 
separated by commas. Example: =MIN(C1:C8,C12:C20). Also see the file named 
CLASS on the www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith website. 
 
MIRR(values,finance_rate,reinvestment_rate) 
 
This function computes the modified internal rate of return on a range of cash flows. This 
formula is used when the reinvestment rate is different from the financing rate. Also see 
IRR. 
 
NOW( ) 
This function calculates the date and time currently showing on your computers clock. It 
is a very useful means of date- or time-stamping worksheets. Excel recalculates the 
value of NOW each time you recalculate your work and it will show this value when the 
file is printed. For examples, see the files named BUPLAN and INVOICE on the 
www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith website.  
 
 

Appendix A – Functions for Business 
141 
NPER(rate,pmt,pv,fv,type) 
This function computes the number of compounding periods it would take for an 
investment (pv) plus periodic payments (pmt) to grow to a future value (fv) if the amounts 
were invested at a specific interest rate (rate) per period. For example, if $10,000 is 
invested today at 11% interest compounded annually and $1,000 is added at the end of 
each year, how many years would it take to grow to $15,000? The formula =NPER(.11,-
1000,-10000,15000) provides the answer (2.23 years). Notice that amounts invested are 
entered as negative numbers. 
 
If no periodic payments are involved and you want to find how long it will take $10,000 to 
grow to $15,000 at 11% interest, the formula =NPER(.11,0,-10000,15000) provides the 
answer (3.89 years). 
 
If there is no beginning investment, and you want to find how long it will take $1,000 
annual amounts invested at 11% to grow to $15,000, the formula =NPER(.11,-
1000,0,15000) provides the answer (9.34 years). 
 
If you enter a value of 1 for Type, Excel will treat the payments (pmt) as occurring at the 
beginning of the year instead of at the end. 
 
NPV(rate,range) 
This function will automatically compute the net present value of annual future cash 
flows (represented by values in a range of cells) discounted at a specific interest rate 
(interest). The interest rate may be expressed as a number or as a cell address. 
 
Suppose that an investments projected future cash inflows at the end of each of the next 
three years (say, $1,000, $1,800, $2,500) are entered in cells D38, E38, and F38. You 
wish to compute the present value of these future cash flows using a discount rate of 
11%. The result is to be put in cell H14. This will be accomplished by the following 
formula: 
 
 
H14: =NPV(.11,D38:F38)  
 
The answer is $4,189.80. 
 
If the discount rate is found in cell B2, one of the following formulas will work: 
 
 
H14: =NPV(B2,D38:F38) or 
 
H14: =NPV(B2/100,D38:F38) if B2 is an integer 
 
If a cash outlay is necessary at the beginning of the first year to acquire this investment, 
the cash outlay (found in cell G12) must be subtracted from the formula as follows: 
 
 
H14: =NPV(B2,D38:F38)-G12 
 
The initial cash outlay must be handled separately like this any time it occurs at the 
beginning of the year. This is because NPV treats all payments as occurring at the end 
of the year. 
 

Appendix A – Functions for Business 
 
142 
PMT(rate,nper,pv,fv,type) 
This function will compute the periodic payment amount needed to pay back a loan. Pv 
is the amount borrowed in dollars, rate is the interest rate per payment, and nper is the 
number of payments to be made. For example, =PMT(.11,10,-100000) would compute 
the annual payment needed to retire a $100,000 loan at 11% interest over ten years 
(answer is $16,980.14). If the payments were to be made monthly, the formula should be 
written as =PMT(.11/12,120,-100000) (answer is $1,377.50). 
 
Fv and type are optional. With type omitted or set to 0, payments are assumed to be 
made at the end of each period. If payments are made at the beginning of each period, 
set type to 1 (answer would be $15,297.43). For other examples, see the files named 
AMORTIZE and PROPERTY on the www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith website. 
 
PV(rate,nper,pmt,fv,type) 
This function computes the present value of an ordinary annuity. Pmt is the amount of 
each periodic payment, rate is the interest rate per payment, and nper is the number of 
payments made. For example, =PV(.08,7,-100) would compute the present value of 
$100 payments to be made at the end of each of the next seven years discounted at an 
annual rate of 8% (answer is $520.64). 
 
Fv and type are optional. If the payments are being made at the beginning of each 
period, set type to 1 (answer is $562.29). The formula for this would be  
 
 
=PV(.08,7,-100,,1). 
 
RAND( ) 
This function generates a random value between 0 and 1. Example: =RAND()*5 will 
generate a random number between 0 and 5. The random value changes each time the 
worksheet performs a new calculation. 
 
RATE(nper,pmt,pv,fv,type,guess) 
This function computes the interest rate per period required to make a present 
investment (pv) plus periodic payments (pmt) grow to a future value (fv) in a specific 
number of periods (nper). For example, if $10,000 was invested today with no future 
periodic payments, what annual interest is required to have it grow to $15,000 in eight 
years? The formula =RATE(8,0,-10000,15000) provides the answer (5.2%). 
 
Type and guess are optional. Set type to 1 if the periodic payments are made at the 
beginning of the period rather than at the end. 
 
ROUND(number,num_digits) 
 
This function will round a value to a specified number of decimals. This is particularly 
useful when a cell formula involves either multiplication with a decimal or any kind of 
division. For example, if cell D2 contains the formula =ROUND(C2*27.389,2), the 
computer will round the product of C2*27.389 to two decimal places and enter it in cell 
D2. =ROUND(C2*27.389,0) will round the product to zero decimal places (an integer). 
 

Appendix A – Functions for Business 
143 
ROUND is different from the Decrease Decimal button (or Increase Decimal button) 
because ROUND eliminates all values to the right of the decimal places specified. The 
Decrease and Increase Decimal buttons change the appearance of the values on the 
screen but do not alter the values in the cells themselves. Using the ROUND function 
would have eliminated the problems encountered in several tutorial lessons where a 
column of numbers did not appear to add up correctly because of rounding errors. For 
example, in Plan3 if all formulas in rows 6, 10, and 11 had used ROUND specifying 0 
decimals (e.g., cell B10: =ROUND(C6*.06,0), none of the “subtraction” errors would have 
occurred. Other functions can be used in conjunction with ROUND. For example, 
=ROUND(PMT(D4,D5,-D6)2) rounds a payment calculation to the nearest penny. For 
additional examples see the files named AMORTIZE, CHECKREG, COSTJOB, and 
INVOICE on the www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith website. 
 
SLN(cost,salvage,life) 
 
This function computes depreciation for an asset using the straight-line method. Cost is 
the cost of the asset, salvage is its estimated salvage value, and life is its estimated 
useful life. For example, =SLN(10000,2000,8) would compute depreciation for an asset 
that cost $10,000, has an expected useful life of 8 years, and salvage value of $2,000 
(answer is $1,000). 
 
SLOPE(known_ys,known_xs) 
INTERCEPT(known_ys,known_xs) 
 
These functions are used in linear regression analysis. SLOPE computes the slope for a 
range of data points that could be plotted on an XY chart (scatter graph). INTERCEPT 
computes the Y-intercept. For example, suppose you want to develop a cost prediction 
formula for your monthly manufacturing costs. Some costs are fixed and some vary with 
your production levels. Enter the following production data for the last three months onto 
a worksheet: 
 
 
C10: 
Manufacturing 
D10: 
Units 
 
C11: 
Costs 
D11: 
Produced 
 
C12: 
$9000 
D12: 
100 
 
C13: 
$28000 
D13: 
550 
 
C14: 
$25000 
D14: 
375 
 
=INTERCEPT(D12:D14,C12:C14) gives you a Y-intercept of $5,755. This represents the 
fixed costs each month. =SLOPE(D12:D14,C12:C14) computes a slope of $43.64. This 
is the variable cost per unit produced. 
 
SQRT(number) 
 
This function calculates the square root of number. Example: =SQRT(G55) will compute 
the square root of the value found in cell G55. 
 
STDEVP(list) 
 
This function calculates the standard deviation of values in specified ranges or a list of 
cells separated by commas. Example: =STDEVP(F26:F35). 
 

Appendix A – Functions for Business 
 
144 
SUM(list) 
 
This function adds the values found in specified ranges or a list of cells separated by 
commas. Examples: =SUM(A1:A22) or =SUM(A21,A24,A27:A50). See Appendix C for 
several examples of using this function on the www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith 
website. 
 
SYD(cost,salvage,life,per) 
 
This function computes depreciation for an asset using the sum-of-the-years digits 
method. Cost is the cost of the asset, salvage is its estimated salvage value, life is its 
estimated useful life, and period is the time period for which depreciation is to be 
computed. For example, =SYD(10000,2000,8,2) would compute depreciation for the 
second year on an asset that cost $10,000, has an expected useful life of 8 years, and 
salvage value of $2,000 (answer is $1,555). 
 
TODAY( ) 
 
This function shows the current date on your computer. This is exactly like NOW except 
that it only calculates the date, not the time, too. 
 
VARP(list) 
 
This function calculates the variance of values in specified ranges or a list of cells 
separated by commas. Example: =VARP(G18:G42,G44). 
 
VLOOKUP(lookup_value,table_array,col_index_num) and 
HLOOKUP(lookup_value,table_array,row_index_num) 
 
These functions allow you to look up a value in a table. They are similar in concept to the 
IF function, but they allow the program to pick an answer from a whole table of values. 
VLOOKUP stands for a vertical table (values entered up and down), and HLOOKUP 
stands for a horizontal table (values entered side by side). 
 
For an example of how the VLOOKUP function works, suppose you are setting up an 
Excel model to use in tax planning for your clients. As a part of the tax planning program, 
you want a clients tax bracket to be automatically computed based on his/her taxable 
income. You obtain the following (hypothetical) information from the Internal Revenue 
Service: 
 
 
Taxable Income 
 
Over 
But Not Over 
 Tax Bracket 
 
 
$ 
0 
$ 8,000 
10% 
 
8,000 
32,000 
15 
 
32,000 
77,000 
25 
 
77,000 
161,000 
28 
 
161,000 
350,000 
33 
 
350,000 
— 
35 
 
 

Appendix A – Functions for Business 
145 
You can incorporate this tax table into your tax planning model by constructing the 
following table: 
 
 
E40: INCOME 
F40: 
BRACKET 
 
E41: 0 
F41: 
10% 
 
E42: 8000 
F42: 
15% 
 
E43: 32000 
F43: 
25% 
 
E44: 77000 
F44: 
28% 
 
E45: 161000 
F45: 
33% 
 
E46: 350000 
F46: 
35% 
 
Now assume that the clients taxable income will be computed by your tax model and will 
be entered in cell G10. You wish to have the clients tax bracket automatically 
determined by the program and shown in cell G11. The following formula would be used: 
 
 
G11: =VLOOKUP(G10,E41:F46,2) 
 
The VLOOKUP function searches the leftmost column of the table for the value closest 
to, but not larger than, the value in cell G10. The program then moves across the row to 
the column number specified and returns the value of that cell as the answer in cell G11. 
 
As an example, suppose the taxable income value found in cell G10 is $50,000. In 
evaluating cell G11, the program would jump to cell E41 and begin looking for the value 
closest to, but not greater than, 50000. The cell containing a value closest to, but not 
greater than, 50000 is cell E43 (it contains 32000). The program then picks up the 
corresponding value in column 2 (25%) and enters it in cell G11. 
 
The range of cells entered in the middle of the VLOOKUP formula begins with the top of 
the leftmost column and ends with the bottom of the last data column. Lookup tables can 
have many data columns. 
 
For additional examples, see the files named CLASS and TAXCOMP on the 
www.thomsonedu.com/accounting/smith website. 
 
Note the following three things about the VLOOKUP and HLOOKUP functions: 
 
1. 
If the value being searched for is less than the lowest number in the table, the 
program will indicate this by returning #NA. In our example, this is what would 
happen if the value of G10 were less than zero. 
 
2. 
The table must always be constructed in ascending order. 
 
3. 
The table may be constructed in rows instead of columns. If rows are used, the 
HLOOKUP function is utilized. The top row is searched (left to right) and the rows 
below it contain the values that will be returned. 
 

 
 
146 
Appendix B 
DATA COMMANDS 
 
 
 
 
 
Data commands are useful for manipulating data on a worksheet that is organized in 
tables or lists.  This appendix demonstrates three of the more common database 
activities: creating a database, sorting records, and filtering records. 
 
 
 
 
CREATE 
 
To begin, start Excel and enter the titles shown above in Row 1.  You will need to widen 
the columns to fit the names in.  Then enter information for Eva Smith, the first record.  
Center the account number in cell A2 and be sure to include the dollar sign in cell D2. 
 
Excel 2007 users.  Excel 2007 does not have a particular command option on its Ribbon 
that was very commonly used in the past for data entry.  To add this option to your Excel 
2007 Quick Access toolbar: 
 
 Click the down-arrow next to the Quick Access toolbar 
 
 Select More Commands 
Under Choose commands from, click the drop-down arrow and select 
Commands Not in the Ribbon 
 
 Click on Form, then Add, and then OK. 
 If your institution does not permit adding items to the Quick Access toolbar, 
enter the remaining customers just as you normally enter data on a worksheet.  
Then save the file with all six customers as Customer List and begin the Sort 
section of this appendix. 
 
All users.  Click the Data tab and select Form. Excel 2007 users simply click the Form 
button in your Quick Access toolbar. A data entry form now appears on the screen.  
 

Appendix B – Data Commands 
 
147 
 
 
 
Click New and enter the information for Aidan Wilson.  Use the Tab key to move from 
one field to the next.  After entering Aidans data, press Enter.  You can see in the 
database that Aidans record has been added.  Because you entered Evas information 
first, Excel knows what format to use in each field. 
 
Enter the remaining four customers now.  When you have entered all six customers, 
close the data entry Form and save the worksheet as a file named Customer List. 
 
You do not have to use a Form to enter data in a database.  You can enter data just the 
way you do a normal worksheet, cell by cell. 
 
SORT 
 
A very common data task is to sort records in alphabetic or numeric sequence.  A quick 
way sort is to use the Sort Ascending or Sort Descending buttons. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
                         Sort Ascending 
 
            Sort Descending 
 
In Excel 2007, these buttons are found on the Data tab. 
 

Appendix B – Data Commands 
 
148 
Suppose you want the Balance Due column sorted from high to low.  You want the 
people who owe the most shown at the top.  Click on any cell in column D  
within the list and then click on the Sort Descending button. 
 
 
 
Lets now sort the file by last name.  Alphabetic sorting works this way:  Ascending 
arranges records from A to Z; Descending sorts from Z to A.  Click somewhere in 
column C within the list and then click the Sort Ascending button. 
 
 
 
Mission accomplished except check out the Smiths.  The first names are not in 
alphabetic sequence (Taylor should come after Eva).  The Smiths are simply listed in the 
order they appear within the database.  It is generally understood that names should be 
sorted first by last name but then secondarily by first name.  Think telephone book. 
 
In Excel 2007, click the Sort button on the Data tab.  Then click Add Level.  In the Then 
by area select First Name and click OK. 
 
In other versions of Excel, click the Data tab and select Sort.  In the Sort by area, Last 
Name and Ascending should be selected.  In the Then by area, select First Name and 
Ascending.  Click OK 
 
This will put Taylor after Eva. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix B – Data Commands 
 
149 
FILTER 
 
Sometimes you may want to view a record or group of records that meets a certain 
criteria.  This is what filters are for.  For example you may want to view all Smith records 
or all records for customers owing $50 or more. 
 
First lets look at only the Smith records.  In versions of Excel other than 2007, select the 
Data tab, click on Filter, and select AutoFilter.  This action places drop-down arrows 
next to each field name. 
 
In Excel 2007, select the Data tab and click the Filter button on the Ribbon. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Filter 
 
All versions of Excel: 
• Click the drop-down arrow next to Last Name.  The drop-down menu offers 
many choices (including another way to do sorting).  Select Smith and the 
database now shows only customers with the last name of Smith. In Excel 2007 
deselect all others first. 
• If you now wanted only Calebs record, click the drop-down arrow next to First 
Name and select Caleb. Again in Excel 2007 deselect all others first. 
• Before moving on, restore the database to show all six customers by clicking 
the First Name and Last Name drop-down menus and selecting All.   
 
To demonstrate showing all records of customers over owing $50 or more, do the 
following: 
• Click the drop-down arrow for Balance Due and select Custom. In Excel 2007 
select Number Filters. 
• Click the drop-down arrow immediately under the words Balance Due and 
select is greater than or equal to. In Excel 2007 there is no drop-down arrow. 
 
• In the box to the immediate right enter 50 and click OK. 
 
 
Filter 
(Excel 
2007) 

Appendix B – Data Commands 
 
150 
 
Before closing, click the Data command, select Filter, and click on AutoFilter to 
deselect it.  In Excel 2007, select Sort & Filter on the Home tab under the Editing group 
and click on Filter. 

 
 
151
Appendix C 
PIVOT TABLES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A pivot table is a special type of summary technique.  It is used on worksheet 
data that are organized into tables or lists.  In Excel, pivot tables are very flexible 
and capable of repeated rearrangements of the worksheet data.  This appendix is 
a very short introduction to them. 
 
To begin, start Excel and enter the following data into a worksheet as shown 
below and save it as Sales List.  To speed up data entry, you may want to use 
the Data Form approach described in Appendix B. 
 
 
 
Sales List 
 
Excel 2007 instructions.  Move to cell A1.  Click the Insert tab and select the 
Pivot Table command button.  In the Create Pivot Table dialog box, click OK to 

Appendix C – Pivot Tables 
 
152 
accept the Table/Range as $A$1:$E$21 and the pivot table being put on a new 
worksheet. 
 
Excel now adds a new worksheet containing a blank grid for a new table and a 
Pivot Table Field List task pane. 
 
Excel 2003 and earlier instructions.  Move to cell A1.  Click the Data tab and 
select the Pivot Table and PivotChart Report option.  Up pops the Pivot Table 
and PivotChart Wizard. 
 
• Step 1 of 3 – click Next 
 
• Step 2 of 3 – click Next to accept the range as $A$1:$E$21 
 
• Step 3 of 3 – click Finish to accept the pivot table on a new worksheet 
 
Excel now adds a new worksheet containing a Pivot Table toolbar, a Pivot Table 
Field List, and four rectangular areas outlined in blue. The Pivot Table toolbar is 
not in Excel 2007. If necessary, use the mouse to move the Pivot Table toolbar (if 
applicable) and the Pivot Table Field List to a spot off the outlined rectangular 
areas.  
 
 
 
 
Blank grid and Pivot Table Field List (created using Excel 2007) 
 
All versions of Excel.  The instructions that follow are for all versions of Excel.  
There will be occasional references to Excel 2007 differences. 
 
To construct the table you are going to drag items from the Field List to various 
parts of the empty pivot table.  In Excel 2007, you can drag field list items to the 
drop zones at the bottom of the Field List task pane.  
 

Appendix C – Pivot Tables 
 
153 
Now lets go pivoting!  Suppose you want to find out which products are being 
sold by which sales people.  Move the mouse to the Pivot Table Field List and: 
1.  Drag the field name Product to the box that says “Drop Row Fields 
Here” and drop it in. In Excel 2007, drag Product to Row Label drop 
zone. 
2.  Drag the field name Salesperson to the box that says “Drop Column 
Fields Here” and drop it in.  In Excel 2007, drag Salesperson to the 
Column Label drop zone. 
3.  Drag the field name Quantity sold to the box that says “Drop Data 
Items Here” and drop it in.  Only data fields that contain values may be 
entered in this section of the Pivot Table.  In Excel 2007, drag Quantity 
sold to Values drop zone. 
4.  Drag the field name Location to the box that says “Drop Page Fields 
Here” and drop it in.  In Excel 2007, drag Location to Report Filter drop 
zone. 
 
Now presented on the page is just what you asked for: which products are being 
sold by which sales people.  Save this file as Sales List C2. 
 
 
 
 

Appendix C – Pivot Tables 
 
154 
Click on cell A15.  Notice the Field List disappears.  Click again somewhere on 
the pivot table and the Field List reappears.  Just so you know. 
 
Additional information is available in this report.  Click the drop-down button 
next to the word Location in cell B1.  This is a filter button.  Next, click the word 
Phone and then OK.  The pivot table now shows only phone sales.  Bill drops off 
the list because he apparently did not make any phone sales. 
 
Click the filter button next to the word Product.  Click the box next to Amp to 
deselect it.  The pivot table now shows sales of all products except Amps.  Haley 
drops off the list because she sells only Amps. 
 
You could keep going by filtering sales people, selecting store sales instead of 
phone, and so forth.  You can experiment on your own.  When done, click the 
Undo button a few times to get the pivot table back the way it was originally or 
simply close this file without saving and re-open Sales List C2. 
 
Suppose you want a report on each sales person.  In Excel 2003 and earlier 
versions, go to cell A1, use the mouse to grab the word Location and move it 
back to the Field List.  Next, grab the word Salesperson in cell B3 and move it to 
cell A1.  In Excel 2007, go to the report Filter drop zone and drag Location back 
up to the field list.  Next, go to the Column Labels drop zone and drag 
Salesperson over to the Report Filter drop zone. 
 
The pivot table now shows product sales for all sales people.  Click the filter 
button in cell B1 and select Haley.  The pivot table now shows what Haley sold.  
Apparently she is the Amp specialist! 
 
If you want to know the split between Haleys phone sales and store sales, drag 
the word Location from the Field List to cell B4. In Excel 2007, drag Location to 
 
 
 
And on and on and on….. 
 
There are many additional options with pivot tables (formats, styles, charts, etc.).  
But you can already do a lot with just what youve learned in this appendix! 

