
Thank you for downloading this
AMACOM eBook.
Sign up for our newsletter, AMACOM BookAlert, and 
receive special offers, access to free samples, and  
info on the latest new releases from AMACOM, 
the book publishing division of 
American Management Association.
To sign up, visit our website: www.amacombooks.org
To learn more about the American Management 
Association visit: www.amanet.org
The copyright information for this title may be found at the end of this eBook file.

excuse me

excuse me
THE SURVIVAL GUIDE TO  
MODERN BUSINESS ETIQUETTE
Rosanne J. Thomas
AMERICAN MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
New York  •  Atlanta  •  Brussels   •  Chicago  •  Mexico City  •  San Francisco 
Shanghai  •  Tokyo  •  Toronto  •  Washington, DC

FOR JEAN

contents
Introduction  	
xi
chapter 1 
Respect: Practicing the Platinum Rule	
1
Real Respect  	
3
Respect for Experience  	
9
Respect for Diversity	
13
chapter 2
Social Skills: Putting Your Best Foot Forward	
25
Social Skills  	
26
The Hiring Process  	
28
The Interview Experience  	
33
The Generational Challenge  	
42
chapter 3
Professional Presence: Getting It Right	
47
The Right Brand  	
48
The Right Attitude  	
53
The Right Appearance  	
56
The Right Way to Travel  	
61

contents
[  viii  ]
chapter 4
Business Behavior: Combining Proven Strategies  
with 21st Century Expectations	
69
The Glass Door  	
70
Everyday Manners  	
74
Business Meetings  	
77
The Team  	
80
The Cubicle Farm  	
82
The Open Office  	
83
The New Schedules  	
86
The Benefits Buffet  	
90
The New Realities  	
92
chapter 5
Business Communication: Making the Connection	
95
Nonverbal Cues  	
98
The Eyes Have It  	
102
The Good Conversationalist  	
104
The Power of Speech  	
108
The Good Listener  	
114
chapter 6
Electronic Communication: Smart Rules for	
  
Smart Devices 	
119
Telephone Skills  	
121
Telephone Options  	
128
Email  	
131
Hardware  	
135
The Message  	
137
chapter 7
Twitter, Etc.: Acing Social Media	
143
Your Digital Footprint  	
145
The Cyber Citizen  	
150

contents
[  ix  ]
The Social Network  	
155
Social Sites  	
156
chapter 8
Business Dining: Observing the Formalities	
167
The Business of Hospitality  	
169
Hosts and Guests  	
174
The Mechanics of a Meal  	
178
Dining Decorum  	
184
chapter 9
The Social Side of Business: Knowing the Basics  
for Every Situation	
191
Entertaining Clients  	
192
Wine  	
199
Tipping  	
207
Activities and Events  	
207
Colleagues  	
210
chapter 10
New Frontiers: Future-Proofing Your Career	
215
The Future Workplace  	
217
Gen Zs  	
223
Constant Connectivity  	
225
Digital Detox  	
227
The Eternal Truths  	
230
Conclusion	
235
Acknowledgments  	
239
Notes  	
241
Index  	
255
About the Author  	
269
Free Sample from The Power of Presence  	
270
About AMACOM  	
287

xi
introduction

introduction
[  xii  ]
G
rowing up, I cannot recall ever hearing my parents mention 
etiquette. A fussy word that conjures up a certain level of 
affectation, it was likely not the first one that came to mind for 
my parents who were otherwise involved in the care, feeding, 
and general management of six children. Yet respectful 
behavior—the actual manifestation of good etiquette—was 
indeed mentioned and modeled by my parents continually, and 
expected of us every day. Of course, being considerate of our 
siblings was not our first inclination. As kids vying for attention 
or the last piece of pie, sharing and waiting our turns were not 
second nature to us. But we did our best because we knew such 
behaviors were nonnegotiable. 
In our family, manners lessons came in many forms. Our 
naval officer dad would often remind us to “take all you want, 
but eat all you take” (military-ese for not being greedy or 
wasteful) and not to “short-stop” (when passing food, not to help 
yourself first, especially if it is the last serving). Our high-school 
teacher mom let us know that the correct response when she 
called our names was “Yes?” not “What??” She reminded us 
that “please” and “thank you” were not to be omitted and that 
arguing was a nonstarter. 
One of my fondest childhood memories was of our mom and 
dad bravely piling us into our big station wagon on Friday nights 
and taking us to a local Italian restaurant for dinner. A huge 
treat for us, we were fully cognizant that any future excursions 
depended entirely upon how well we behaved. Since no one 
child dared jeopardize this for the rest, we rose to the occasion 
every time. And we learned how to twirl spaghetti in the 
process! We also learned—to our amazement—that this whole 
concept of showing good manners had an upside. Good things 
and ice cream came to those who were polite. 

introduction
[  xiii  ]
This trip down memory lane may evoke similar reminiscences 
from those who also came of age sometime in the 20th century. 
We remember when parents were shown respect simply because 
they were parents. We recall how family dinner was sacred: 
Everyone showed up on time, hands cleaned, and ready to 
participate in a family discussion. At these meals, children 
learned how to hold their forks and knives, how to speak when 
it was their turn, and how to listen when it was someone else’s 
turn. Telephone calls were never taken. When outside the home, 
people dressed up for school, church, and travel; showed respect 
for authority; and with most audiences, generally kept their 
language profanity-free. 
Much of what constituted respectful behavior a generation 
or two ago seems positively quaint by today’s standards, with 
little relevance in the 21st century. Back then, parents were 
parents, and friends were friends, and never the twain did 
meet. Today, many parents are their children’s best friends, 
and vice versa. Then, showing respect for authority figures 
such as adults, teachers, and employers was simply done. 
Today, the very idea of authority is questioned. Then, sit-down 
meals were a nightly ritual. Today, coordinating schedules and 
dietary preferences to make such an event happen seems like 
far too much work. 
In other ways, though, civility in the 21st century looks very 
much like it did before, even if its tenets are now applied in 
different ways. Today, we hear about the importance of authen-
ticity and transparency. Back then, it was known as telling the 
truth. Today, teamwork is the mantra. Back then, you couldn’t 
win a game of touch football without it. Today, organizations are 
embracing conversation cultures, as though conversing with 
colleagues is a new workplace invention. Last century, there 

introduction
[  xiv  ]
were expectations of appropriate attire and behavior on the job. 
Today, there still are, even if they are defined in new ways.
Of course, much has changed—dramatically. In the 20th century, 
questions about how to refer to a gay colleague’s spouse, whether 
it was okay to text the boss at home over the weekend, or how to 
handle a checkered online past did not come up because the 
situations did not yet exist. 
Add to this the generational challenge, as millennials—
considered digital natives because they grew up with digital 
technology—try to work side by side with digital immigrants: 
traditionalists, baby boomers, and Gen Xers. These generations 
speak different languages, hold different values, and have 
different goals. Some say that because of the sheer number of 
millennials and their presumed influence, a new playbook for 
workplace behavior should be designed predominantly with this 
group in mind. But millennials are still outnumbered by the 
previous generations combined, and the previous generations 
are still mostly in charge. Gen Z is also coming up fast. Soon, 
there will be five generations needing to figure out how to work 
together. 
In a workplace rife with opportunity for misunderstanding, 
people often do the wrong thing, at great expense to relation- 
ships and reputations. Workplace incivility—unintentional or 
sometimes deliberate—is rampant. Nine out of 10 employees say 
they have experienced or witnessed incivility on the job. And it’s 
costly. “Job stress, much of which stems from workplace incivility, 
costs U.S. corporations $300 billion a year.”1 
How do employee populations come together with such 

introduction
[  xv  ]
disparate ways of looking at the work environment today? How 
are best behavioral practices identified to mitigate misunder- 
standings and ensure everyone feels understood and heard within 
a corporate culture? How do individuals and organizations 
burnish personal and company brands to position themselves 
most competitively in a fiercely competitive global arena? It’s a 
tall order, but it can be done. It requires adoption of a new playbook 
for workplace behavior that respects the individual, which in turn 
paves the way for the greatest mutual success.
Excuse Me takes on this challenge. Incorporating dozens of 
real-life scenarios, hundreds of practical tips, valuable advice 
from those on the front line, and resources for additional 
information, Excuse Me explores what it takes to survive—and 
thrive—in today’s demanding global workplace. It takes a look at 
the root of workplace disrespect, from corporate cultures and 
the behaviors they allow to the uncertainty in interacting with 
coworkers of different genders, races, sexual orientations, 
cultures, physical abilities, and backgrounds. 
A respectful workplace is a more pleasant workplace, and 
there are very real bottom-line advantages that accrue to 
organizations that uphold them. Eric Imparato, a principal at 
the accounting firm Wolf & Co., said, “In a commodity market- 
place, it’s easy to translate skills into shareholder value. People 
are differentiated by how they behave and can charge greater 
rates as a result.”
As readers go through these pages and consider the in- 
numerable ways they are evaluated in the workplace, they may 
find themselves thinking, “Uh-oh, I should have been doing 
that” or “Whoa, I definitely should not have been doing that!” 
Have readers made missteps? If they are anything like me, they 
have—and will again. This is understandable. There is a great 

deal of new information to absorb and realities to accept. These, 
combined with everyday work and life stresses, create an ideal 
environment for interpersonal missteps. 
The very good news is that the practice of on-the-job etiquette 
does not require anyone to be perfect. It only requires a good 
faith effort to know and do the right thing, and when one errs, 
to employ the all-powerful apology to right the ship. We will 
need others to excuse us as we get up to speed with new business 
expectations and the needs of the various workplace populations, 
just as we will excuse those who are trying their level best to do 
the same. We will not dwell on past transgressions—ours’ or 
others’—but instead simply identify opportunity areas for 
growth and change and make continuous improvements toward 
our objectives.  
My goal for readers is that they develop confidence in them- 
selves and in their interactions with others and feel empowered 
to bring their best, most authentic selves to the workplace each 
and every day. Excuse Me makes it everyone’s responsibility to 
treat everyone else with respect and civility. Because when 
employees feel respected and valued, individuals and organiza- 
tions win. 

excuse me

1
chapter 1 
respect 
Practicing the Platinum Rule
“I’ve learned that people will forget what you’ve said, people 
will forget what you did, but people will never forget how you 
made them feel.” 
—MAYA ANGELOU
S
he hasn’t been even one week on the job at Push Hard 
Marketing and 23-year-old Abby knows she made a huge 
mistake. There had been warning signs. Her new employer’s 
rating on Glassdoor was a mere 2.9 out of 5. The interviewer’s 
vagueness about the team, the manager, and even why this 
sought-after position was available all raised red flags. But the 
website’s job description dovetailed perfectly with her interests 
and education, and the company billed itself as collaborative and 
inclusive, all major advantages in Abby’s book. And besides, she 
needed a job. 
Her reception is chilly. One week in, virtually no one has 
spoken with her. Her questions illicit one-word answers or 
shrugged shoulders. There is a supposed “welcome to the team” 

excuse me
[  2  ]
meeting about to begin, but the manager is late. The team 
members wait. Some glance furtively in Abby’s direction. One 
has his eyes glued to his iPhone. Another grouses that he’s got 
better things to do. Then Abby overhears a complaint about 
having to break in another new hire.
The manager finally arrives and launches immediately into the 
team’s dismal quarterly results, telling them they have three 
months to turn things around or they’ll all be looking for new jobs. 
And, “Oh, by the way, make sure you get your new team member 
up to speed.” The manager gets a call and leaves. The team 
unleashes a diatribe about their clueless boss before the meeting 
deteriorates into a cacophony of complaints and interruptions. 
While they completely ignore Abby, she decides, then and 
there, that she will start her new job search today. 
We are all familiar with the ancient and venerable Golden 
Rule, which impels us to treat others as we would wish to be 
treated. While noble, in today’s world and workplace of diverse 
ages, cultures, sexual orientations, experiences, preferences, 
goals, and lifestyles, the Golden Rule falls short. Its basic 
premise is that there is only one frame of reference—one’s own—
for determining how another would like to be treated. A newer 
rule, the Platinum Rule, goes one big step farther by requiring 
truly respectful people to treat others as they would wish to be 
treated. Dr. Milton J. Bennett, founding director and CEO of the 
nonprofit Intercultural Development Research Institute, 
introduced the term in his 1979 article, Overcoming the Golden 
Rule: Sympathy and Empathy. Dr. Bennett says the Golden Rule 
is based on an assumption of similarity between individuals 
while the Platinum Rule assumes there are differences.1
By most accounts, the workplace has a way to go toward the 
widespread adoption of the Platinum Rule—or the Golden Rule, 

RESPECT 
[  3  ]
for that matter. Whether accidental or deliberate, the lack of 
respect in the workplace is a pervasive, serious, and costly 
problem. Inroads are being made as organizations expand 
inclusion strategies, but there is still a great deal of work to do. 
Real Respect
Jane, an administrator at well-respected Bay Farm Hospital, 
had been looking forward to this year’s healthcare conference. 
Many of her colleagues will be there, and she’ll have a chance to 
network with peers from the world’s leading hospitals. The 
luncheon is an open-seating buffet, and Jane sees Phil, who she 
knows casually from her hospital, at a table with a free spot. She 
asks if she can join him and the four other men at the table. Phil 
nods, quickly introduces Jane, and then continues to regale the 
group with the very “blue” sexist joke he is telling. 
As Phil reaches the end of his joke, he inserts Jane’s name in 
the punch line. Phil, laughing loud and proud of how clever he 
is, at first does not realize no one is laughing with him. When he 
finally notices the embarrassed looks on the other men’s faces 
and the horror on Jane’s face, he tries in vain to salvage the 
situation. With a forced laugh, he announces to the table, “Way 
to ruin a punchline, Jane!” 
The foundation of civility is respect, which is the outward 
expression of esteem or deference. This is the foundational 
requirement and, without that, no other behaviors ring true. 
Respect extends to peoples’ privacy, physical space, property, 
viewpoints, philosophies, religion, gender, ethnicity, physical 
abilities, background, age, beliefs, and personality. Respect and 
disrespect can be shown by language, gestures, and actions. 

excuse me
[  4  ]
Respect is what employees say they want most from their 
employers and coworkers: respect for their experience, 
education, intelligence, skill, creativity, hard work, dedication, 
and the results they produce. Yet respect is what employees say 
they get least. 
Employees, management, and organizations at large are 
characterized by the behaviors they exhibit and allow. 
Disrespectful behavior runs the gamut from neglecting basic 
civilities and   outright rudeness to discrimination and bullying. 
Throughout managements’ ranks, disrespect manifests itself 
with favoritism, subtle pressure, condoning damaging behavior 
or speech, neglecting to follow up on complaints of harassment 
or bullying, and criticizing or firing employees who voice 
concerns. Organizations that engage in illegal or unethical 
activities, such as deceptive business practices, embezzlement, 
and predatory pricing, and the cultures such activities create, 
also contribute to this problem.
It’s not enough to say an organization values respect and 
civility. The boss who preaches the importance of respectful 
listening without practicing it is better off saying nothing at all. 
Dr. Todd Whitaker and Dr. Steve Gruenert, professors of 
educational leadership at Indiana State University and authors 
of the book School Culture Rewired, say, “The culture of any 
organization is shaped by the worst behavior the leader is 
willing to tolerate.”2 It stands to reason that a culture would also 
be shaped by the best behavior a leader is willing to model. 
An incredible 80 percent of employees believe they get no 
respect at work, and a whopping 95 percent report they have 
experienced or witnessed disrespect in the workplace,3 
according to Christine Pearson and Christine Porath, authors of 
the book The Cost of Bad Behavior. Mike Miles, head of social 

RESPECT 
[  5  ]
strategy for online retailer SmartSign, said in his article “Work- 
place Bullying Costs Companies Billions, Wrecks Victims’ 
Health” that the price tag to the U.S. economy for all of this bad 
behavior is an estimated “360 billion annually due to turnover 
and decreased work productivity.”4
Disrespect also comes in subtle forms through microaggres-
sion. Dr. Derald Wing Sue, Ph.D., professor of counseling 
psychology at Columbia University, defines microaggressions as 
“the everyday verbal, nonverbal, and environmental slights, 
snubs, or insults, whether intentional or unintentional, which 
communicate hostile, derogatory, or negative messages to 
target persons based solely upon their marginalized group 
membership.”5 Reflecting unconscious bias, a microaggression 
can be a “compliment” to an African American colleague on 
how articulate he is or a remark to a female executive on how 
impressively she balances work and family responsibilities.
Workplace disrespect affects employees’ morale, engagement, 
productivity, and health. It also negatively affects coworkers 
who witness it, causing them stress and job insecurity. It 
becomes contagious, creating a greater likelihood of rudeness 
throughout the employee population. Disrespected employees 
are more likely to leave jobs, increasing their companies’ 
severance and benefits pay, recruiting, hiring, and training 
costs, and potentially, legal fees. As Dr. Robert J. Cuomo, Ph.D., 
dean and professor of business at Dean College, said, “People 
don’t leave jobs. People leave people.” Disrespect ruins 
companies’ reputations, loses customers, and eats up managers’ 
valuable time.
The benefits to companies that establish genuinely respectful 
cultures are enormous, including everything from greater 
productivity and increased bottom lines to happy shareholders. 

excuse me
[  6  ]
The enhanced reputation of a respectful organization means it is 
able to hire and retain the best and brightest, resulting in a distinct 
competitive advantage. Teamwork, trust, and creative problem 
solving are also fostered, and employees realize greater job 
satisfaction, self-respect, and even enhanced earning potential.
Employers must enforce a zero-tolerance policy in order to 
realize the benefits of a respectful culture. The law now protects 
victims of the most egregious forms of disrespectful behavior, 
but how much better it would be not to need to rely upon the law 
for enforcement. Management can educate employees on the 
company’s Code of Respect and invest in civility training to 
make sure all employees understand the policy. 
Employers need to look closely at their hiring practices. 
Carefully watching for behavioral clues during the interview 
process and not hiring candidates with red flags is easier, faster, 
and less costly than dealing with them after they are hired. The 
candidate who casts blame on a former employer, exhibits 
disrespectful body language, or comes across as arrogant during 
the interview can be expected to display the same or worse 
behavior once hired. Employers can hire for “attitude over 
experience” as the Four Seasons does, or heed the call of Howard 
Schultz, CEO of Starbucks, for civility and values-based 
leadership. They can emulate the practices of Fortune’s “100 
Best Companies to Work For” and view corporate culture as 
their greatest tool. 
Employees, on the other hand, need to know bosses mean 
what they say. Management should encourage the reporting of 
disrespectful behavior without fear of consequences. This can 
be achieved through anonymous 360-degree reviews or by 
identifying an HR representative or independent workplace 
consultant to whom employees can make confidential reports. 

RESPECT 
[  7  ]
And if disrespect is reported, management must confront it 
specifically and immediately and take appropriate action.
Companies can reward good behavior with positive 
reinforcement. At Zappos, employees who show exemplary 
behavior can earn “Zollars” (Zappos dollars) and peer-to-peer 
“Wow” awards from their coworkers. Anything from holding 
a door open, to smiling, volunteering, or cleaning a common area 
might qualify someone for a $50 reward. Regularly scheduled 
employee recognition luncheons, holiday parties, and summer 
outings that bring together various employee populations can do 
wonders to build trust. Bosses can also publicly recognize and 
value employees for their ideas and accomplishments and 
reward initiative and creativity.
Most important, bosses must consistently model the behavior 
they want to see in their employees. Smart bosses recognize that 
treating employees with respect is critical to attracting and 
retaining workers. They also realize that what happens at work 
does not stay at work. Sites like glassdoor.com, which has a 
database of more than 8 million company reviews, enable job 
seekers to evaluate rankings of companies’ cultures and values 
before deciding whether or not to join their ranks. At such sites, 
salary and benefits reports, CEO rankings, interview questions, 
and insights into what it’s really like to work at a company are 
all at a job seeker’s fingertips. 
Employees also need to do their part, beginning with 
becoming aware of any unconscious biases they may harbor. 
Recently, I had a personal experience with the concept of 
unconscious bias. While walking home through the Boston 
Common from the gym early one morning, I heard a voice say, 
“Hey, lady, you don’t have to be afraid.” Lost in thought, it took 
me a second to realize the person was talking to me. I stopped 

excuse me
[  8  ]
and walked toward two African American men sitting on a 
bench. I said I was not afraid and asked them why I would be. 
One man said, “When you saw us, you walked to the other side 
of the sidewalk.” I assured him I did not; he assured me I did. 
What ensued was a remarkable 15-minute conversation about 
the concept of unconscious bias. We exchanged names and 
parted as new friends, promising to pick up our conversation if 
our paths crossed again. In continuing to think about what 
happened, I know for sure I was unaware of any bias. But did I 
cross to the other side of the walkway? I simply do not know. 
This question, and its lesson, have stayed with me. 
Employees can embrace everyone’s uniqueness and extend 
simple common courtesies such as listening attentively and 
valuing others’ opinions. While not always easy, they can also 
challenge disrespect when they experience or witness it. When 
you witness what you think is disrespectful or exclusionary 
behavior, it is important to assess the situation to make sure you 
are reading it correctly. Once you are certain, it’s time to take 
action. Depending on the seriousness of the situation, you could 
try to diffuse it with humor by saying something like, “Don’t 
hold back. Tell us how you really feel!” Such an approach might 
get an interaction back on a respectful track. If this does not 
work, you’ll need to be more direct. You could say, “Something 
seems to be bothering you. What is it?” 
To improve a relationship, you could say, “I want us to work 
well together. How can we do that?” If someone interrupts you, 
you could say, “Hold on . . . I’d like to make my point.” If someone 
displays aggressive body language, you could say, “You look 
upset. What’s wrong?” If someone uses inappropriate language, 
you could say, “Can we rein in this discussion? We’re at work.” 
If someone is spreading gossip, you could say, “I was surprised 

RESPECT 
[  9  ]
to hear you said (something) about me. Is that true?” And if 
someone is blatantly rude, you could say, “You may not realize 
how negative that sounds.” Sometimes none of these work, in 
which case it’s time to get management or HR involved.
Once the personal and institutional groundwork for showing 
respect has been laid, we are ready to consider what respect 
means to the various populations of today’s workplace. 
Respect for Experience
Bill takes a deep breath and braces himself for today’s weekly 
staff meeting. Sixty-five years old, Bill is a workplace survivor. 
He has lasted 42 years with the same large bank and has had 
nine different bosses and seven different jobs in four different 
locations. He has assiduously played the political game, always 
keeping his head down. Bill has risen through the ranks to 
management and enjoys a comfortable salary. 
Bill knows the workplace has changed dramatically and has 
tried, as much as possible, to keep up. Despite his best efforts, he 
still cannot seem to connect with his much younger staff. At last 
week’s meeting, Bill rolled out a new marketing plan that Josh, 
the new hire, immediately questioned before offering a “much 
better idea.” Drew asked for feedback on a project but seemed 
put off by Bill’s constructive suggestions. Colin, three months on 
the job, asked Bill, again, when he would be promoted. Gina said 
she hadn’t prepared a report for the meeting because she doesn’t 
listen to voicemail or read email, and in the future, would Bill 
please text her. 
Bill has tried very hard to stay current. He’s taken Salesforce 
and database management training and mastered Excel. He’s up 

excuse me
[  10  ]
to speed on social media and active on LinkedIn. He knows he 
has a lot of experience to share, but somehow his staff treats him 
like a “has been,” as though he should just retire. But with a 
couple of kids still in college, that is not an option for Bill. So he 
squares his shoulders and enters the meeting room. He will 
continue to try and relate to his staff as well as he can—he has to. 
Millennials are the fastest growing, most sought-after 
demographic in the workplace. By 2020, there will be 86 million 
millennials in the workplace, representing 40 percent of the 
total working population.6 Should a new business etiquette 
playbook be designed exclusively with them in mind?
The simple answer is no. Millennials, born roughly between 
1981 and 2000, are still outnumbered by traditionalists, baby 
boomers, and Generation Xers combined. And these folks are 
still largely in charge. According to statisticbrain.com, the 
median age of an S&P 500 CEO is 55.7 Warren Buffet and J. 
Willard Marriott, Jr., are in their 80s and 90s, with countless 
lesser known CEOs in their 70s and 60s. The U.S. retirement age 
is also going up. A 2014 Gallup survey reports that the average 
age at which non-retired Americans expect to retire is 66,8 the 
highest age Gallup has found since first asking the question in 
1991. What’s needed is a new playbook for respect that ack- 
nowledges the perspectives and values of all ages, not the least 
of whom are those still making the hiring decisions and signing 
the paychecks. 
The current four generations in the workplace come from 
distinctly different social, political, and business times in 
history. Their perspectives evolved as they were exposed to 
people, places, and ideas, but were still largely informed by the 
prevailing social mores of their formative years. The great 
disruptor, digital technology, has only widened the gap. While 

RESPECT 
[  11  ]
opinions differ on their precise characteristics and birth years, 
the following represents generally held views of the generations. 
Traditionalists 
Born before 1946, traditionalists joined a work world where 
women were primarily in support roles and social behavior 
was the template for business behavior. Men traditionally 
showed respect to women by doffing their hats, holding doors 
open, pulling out chairs, paying bills, and refraining from vulgar 
speech. The flip side of the coin was a kind of Mad Men 
approach to women, job and wage discrimination, and bias 
along lines of race, religion, class, age, marital status, and 
sexual orientation. Traditionalists are respectful of seniority 
and rank and are loyal, disciplined, and self-sacrificing. Tech- 
nology for this cohort consisted of a radio, a rotary telephone, 
and a television. 
Baby Boomers
Born between 1946 and 1964, baby boomers came of age between 
the mid 60s and the early 80s. They witnessed or participated in 
the civil rights movement. The Equal Opportunity Act of 1972 
was enacted when the first of the boomers were in their 20s. By 
1986, when the last of the boomers had entered the workplace, 
more than half of college graduates were women taking their 
places beside men in traditionally male-dominated fields such as 
law, medicine, and business. Acceptable behavior on the job was 
changing dramatically. It was no longer considered appropriate 
to focus on gender rather than ability. Boomers, while less 
respectful of rank, still believe in corporate hierarchy and strive 

excuse me
[  12  ]
to climb the corporate ladder. Touch-tone telephones were one 
of the technological innovations of their time.
Generation X
Born between 1965 and 1980, Generation X entered the 
workplace in the mid 80s. The Civil Rights Act (1991) and the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (1990) were both enacted while 
they were in their 20s. Astronauts Sally Ride, a woman, and 
Guion Bluford, an African American man, broke ground by 
going to space during this time. Members of Gen X were the first 
to have two parents work outside of the home in great numbers. 
They also saw many of those parents lose their jobs. As a result, 
this generation does not have the same respect for job titles or 
rank, nor do they believe in job security. Known for being 
distrustful, self-reliant, and tech-savvy, Gen Xers are protective 
of family time and value work-life balance. They were the first 
to experience mobile technology. 
Generation Y/Millennials
Born between 1981 and 2000, Gen Y/millennials do not remember 
a time before mobile devices. Entrepreneurial and tech-savvy, 
they have fostered relationships with people all over the world 
through social media. Laws enacted as this generation grew up 
and came of age included the Family and Medical Leave Act in 
1993, same-sex marriage in Massachusetts in 2004, and the Lilly 
Ledbetter Fair Pay Act in 2009. Millennials value diversity and 
social responsibility and are known for being especially close to 
their parents. They’d like to make more money, but seem less 
concerned about that than about making a difference. 

RESPECT 
[  13  ]
Respecting Age Difference
The need and desire for respect, appreciation, and acceptance 
cut across generational divides. By taking the time to learn 
about other generations, we can begin to embrace rather than 
judge or discount others’ experiences and points of view and 
realize the vast personal and professional benefits that accrue to 
us in doing so. Younger generations can also keep in mind that if 
they’re lucky, one day they will be part of the older generation 
and that karma—good or bad—may await them!
Respect for Diversity
Ginny didn’t sleep well last night. New to her job as an event 
planner, she is due to meet with her boss today and needs to steel 
herself to discuss the evaluations from last week’s annual 
clients’ conference in New York. 
Ginny knew from the initial tepid response that attendance 
would be low. But she had not anticipated so many complaints 
from those who did attend about everything—the food, the 
venue, the transportation, the speakers—virtually the entire 
conference had been panned. She realizes in hindsight that if 
she had put a little more thought and research into the 
conference, she would have saved herself a lot of trouble.
She had been pleased to find a great rate, within her budget, 
at a fabulous hotel for the last week in March, but she completely 
failed to anticipate that Passover and Easter, coinciding this 
year, would affect turnout. She thought she’d covered her bases 
with food by offering two menu selections: a vegetarian and beef 
option. It had not occurred to her to request that vegan and 

excuse me
[  14  ]
kosher meals also be available. She had made sure that the 
entrance to the venue was accessible but did not think to see if 
there were some low cocktail tables or if the coach she’d hired 
was  accessible for people with disabilities. She thought the 
speakers she had invited represented an interesting mix of 
experience, but it had not occurred to her that they were all 
middle-aged white men. 
Ginny prepared for the likelihood that the meeting with her 
boss would be as much of a disaster as the conference had been. 
Now she was wondering if this first meeting would be her last. 
Today’s workplace has many faces, and those faces have 
changed considerably since the oldest of the workforce first 
entered. Approximately 70 years ago, non-Hispanic white men 
made up about 80 percent of the workforce. Today, the workplace 
is approximately 66 percent non-Hispanic white, 16.4 percent 
Hispanic, 11.7 percent African American, and 5.8 percent Asian.9 
Census data tells us that by 2050, there will be no racial or 
ethnic majority in the U.S.10 In general, most respectful 
behaviors are appropriate for all employees, but some groups 
require different or additional considerations. 
Diversity refers to race and ethnicity, but also to gender, 
sexual orientation, persons with disabilities, and former 
military. Women make up 46.8 percent11  of the workforce 
today. In 1950, it was just 29.6 percent. Gay and transgender 
workers represent another 6.28 percent of the workforce, 
persons with disabilities, 5.5 percent, and former military, 
9 percent.12 Employers have embraced diversity, not only 
because it is the law, but also because a diverse workplace is a 
productive, adaptive, competitive, and innovative one. But 
there are challenges. 

RESPECT 
[  15  ]
Gender Respect 
Make no mistake; sexism is still alive and well. An older male 
employee of an insurance claims office tells a young female 
colleague that he’d love to have a “front-end collision” with her. 
A recent college graduate who works for a high-end clothing 
retailer is given some “friendly advice” by her boss: If she wants 
to get promoted, she will have to lay off the cookies. Management 
doesn’t promote “fat girls.” A top producer at a tech company 
rebuffs advances from her male boss and is then passed over for 
promotion, because she is not a “team player.” A young male 
employee has an impressive physique. His female boss responds 
by squeezing his bicep. The older male coworker is expected, yet 
again, to pick up the check at lunch. 
Men and women in the workplace represent close to a 50-50 
split, and mutual respect is imperative. Yet sexual harassment 
and sexist behavior, illegal and unacceptable as they are, still 
exist. While men are considered the main culprits, women may 
also be guilty of sexist behavior toward men or even toward other 
women. Language, presumptions, or behavior that relegates 
particular responsibilities or excludes, demeans, or offends based 
on gender is considered sexist, no matter who the perpetrator is. 
It is critical that employees present a united front against 
sexist behavior in the following ways: Eliminate the use of sexist 
labels such as men are “assertive” and women are “aggressive.” 
Reject sexist expectations such as women make coffee, arrange 
celebrations, and take office collections, while men change 
water coolers, lead meetings, and open doors. Don’t exclude 
based upon gender by inviting only women to join book clubs, 
take cooking classes, or get pedicures, or by inviting only men to 

excuse me
[  16  ]
join golf outings, have after-hour drinks, or play cards. Don’t use 
sexist language, tell sexist jokes, or make sexist presumptions. 
And finally, scrupulously avoid offering unwelcome comple- 
ments, unwanted advances, and making any inappropriate 
gestures, gazes, stances, or touching. In a nutshell, treat all 
coworkers respectfully, professionally, and the same, regardless 
of gender. 
Cultural Diversity  
You notice, at a departmental meeting, that your Japanese 
colleague does not look you in the eye. At a business lunch, your 
German client frowns when you address him by his first name. 
At the company Christmas party, your Indian guest seems not 
to appreciate the leather picture frame you give him. The new 
proposal you send to your Argentinian business partner garners 
no immediate response, and when you meet, it seems to take 
him forever to get down to business. And now your Middle 
Eastern prospect fails to show up at an important meeting. What 
is happening here?
As businesses become part of the global arena at an 
increasing rate, it is vital that we understand how cultures 
differ and how respect is shown for those whose backgrounds 
are unlike our own. Everything, including history, language, 
religion, value systems, communication style, formality of 
interactions, business practices, greetings, humor, and 
attitudes toward hospitality, time, money, minorities, women, 
and age could be startlingly different. Successful professionals 
accept and embrace these differences, rather than challenge 
them, paving the way for mutually respectful and successful 
relationships. 

RESPECT 
[  17  ]
In showing respect across cultures, we want to remember we 
are dealing with individuals first and cultures second. It is a 
mistake to assume that “Asians think this” and “Latin Americans 
do that.” It is important to learn as much as possible about other 
cultures, but this information is to be used to help us understand 
individuals, not to define them.
Begin by researching colleagues’ or business partners’ 
cultures of origin, and by asking questions and showing genuine 
interest in the answers provided. In conversation, listen 
patiently and speak slowly, at a normal decibel level. Avoid using 
nonverbal communication such as the “thumbs up” sign, which 
is considered offensive in the Middle East, or the “A-okay” sign, 
which is an obscene gesture in Brazil. 
In verbal communication, avoid sarcasm, humor, and words 
that could be easily misunderstood. Stay away from potentially 
controversial topics, such as politics, religion, and human rights. 
Above all, avoid showing judgment or disapproval or comparing 
cultures in any negative ways. 
The LGBT Community
In 2014, Apple CEO Tim Cook came out as gay, “forever changing 
the game for equality in corporate culture,” according to Sara 
Kate Ellis, president and CEO of GLADD.13 Indeed, the Lesbian, 
Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) community is coming 
out in the workplace as never before and in the process, 
contributing to the continued shattering of the “glass closet.” 
Building relationships with and avoiding inadvertent offense 
to the LGBT community requires that employees educate 
themselves. Steve Petrow, Washington Post columnist and 
author of The Essential Book of Gay Manners and Etiquette, says 

excuse me
[  18  ]
the questions he receives for his column “Civilities” “reflect 
both the confusion of the social landscape and the hurt and 
anger caused by bullying and discrimination.”14 But he says 
respect and kindness go a very long way. 
To show respect for your LGBT colleagues and business 
partners, educate yourself by learning the correct 
terminology. Refer to members of the LGBT community in 
the ways they wish to be referred and if unsure, ask. There 
are now 56 ways in which Facebook users can identify, 
including “gender questioning,” “intersex,” “androgynous,” 
and “neither.” Facebook spokesman Will Hodges said, “While 
to many, this change may not mean much, for those it affects, 
it means a great deal.”15
Refer to married colleagues appropriately. In the past, 
married same-sex couples were often referred to as partners or 
spouses. With the 2014 changes in the Defense of Marriage Act, 
husband and wife are now the legal and appropriate terms, and 
are used unless a couple indicates that they prefer otherwise. 
And if a colleague has a boyfriend, girlfriend, or fiancé(e), use 
that term, not friend or roommate. 
If an LGBT colleague is celebrating an engagement, marriage, 
promotion, or new baby, home, or job, offer congratulations and 
join in the celebration. Do not ask an LGBT colleague personal 
questions, offer religious advice, suggest counseling, tell 
offensive jokes, use inappropriate language, or—need it be said—
whisper, gossip, stare, make fun of, or exclude. 
It is critically important to keep an LGBT coworker’s 
confidence, especially if he or she has not come out to all. Finally, 
be an ally. In her article “How to React When Someone Comes 
Out: Dos and Don’ts for Straight Allies,” Miranda Perry of Care 

RESPECT 
[  19  ]
2, a social network website for activists, says, “If you’re straight, 
you can be an ally by creating a safe space for them to come out. 
You’ll help combat homophobia and transphobia, and support 
the LGBT people in your life—even those you may not know 
about yet.”16
People with Disabilities
Well-intentioned individuals sometimes make mistakes that 
range from the comical to the offensive when interacting with 
colleagues with disabilities. According to United Cerebral Palsy, 
“the rules of etiquette and good manners for dealing with people 
with disabilities are generally the same as the rules for good 
etiquette in society.”17 It cautions that everyone is different, 
however, and that its published guidelines hold true for most 
individuals most of the time.
United Cerebral Palsy recommends that one speak directly to 
a person with a disability, not a caregiver, and shake hands if 
possible (using left hands is fine). If someone is unable to shake 
hands, another physical greeting such as a tap on the arm or 
shoulder is appropriate. Adults are always to be treated as adults. 
The National Center on Workforce Disability advises using 
“person first language” such as person with a disability instead 
of disabled or handicapped. It advises respecting all assistive 
devices and animals, such as canes, wheelchairs, crutches, and 
service dogs, and using a normal speaking tone and style. 
When speaking with someone who is visually impaired, 
identify yourself and others with you. When speaking with a 
person who is deaf, look directly at the person, and then speak 
clearly, slowly, and expressively. When speaking with someone 

excuse me
[  20  ]
using a wheelchair, place yourself at eye level. There is a wealth 
of additional information available that will ensure interactions 
with people with specific disabilities are helpful, positive, and 
professional. 
Most importantly, display the right attitude. Never pity or 
assume someone is unhappy with his life, or exhibit fear or 
apprehension. Do not presume someone’s disability has affected 
his intelligence, comprehension, memory, job effectiveness, 
sense of humor, or interests. And finally, relax! Do not be embar- 
rassed to use common expressions that seem to relate to 
someone’s disability such as “See you later” or “I’ve got to run.” 
People with disabilities use similar phrases all of the time. 
According to the Center for American Progress, approximately 
38 million Americans have severe disabilities. Workers with 
disabilities are nearly twice as likely to be unemployed as their 
nondisabled counterparts.18 Employers can take advantage of 
the underutilized talents and vast potential contributions of this 
population by creating an accepting, understanding, and in- 
clusive culture.
Veterans
Adjusting to a new life is challenging under any circumstances 
and is especially so for a veteran who may be dealing with 
physical, emotional, financial, and family issues in addition to 
the pressures of a new job. There are a number of things 
coworkers can do to make this transition easier. They can 
welcome a new colleague by inviting him to coffee, lunch, or 
after-hours events. They can ask how his transition is going and 
express interest in his military work experience. They can (and 

RESPECT 
[  21  ]
must) avoid asking prying questions (“Do you have service- 
related physical or emotional issues?”) or judgmental questions 
(“How could you have left your family for so long?”).
The Brain Drain 
Traditionalists and baby boomers are retiring, cutting back, or 
moving on to new careers. And unless organizations figure out 
a way to harvest and transfer their institutional knowledge and 
relationships, they are going with them. “Brain drain” is an 
enormous risk to the bottom line and another important reason 
employers need to ensure respectful communication among 
generations while there is still time. 
The first year all baby boomers were at least 50 years old was 
2014. Eighty million strong, they possess the greatest amount of 
institutional knowledge and represent the largest pool of 
mentors in the workplace today. Granted, many boomers do not 
expect to retire until their late 60s, and some have no plans to 
ever retire. But employers cannot rely on boomers staying on as 
a way to protect their intellectual capital. Many are leaving for 
better opportunities, beginning new careers, and starting new 
businesses. And they are taking their lifelong professional ex- 
periences with them. 
Employers and coworkers who want to capture this know- 
ledge need to act fast. John A. Challenger, CEO of Challenger, 
Gray & Christmas, Inc., the outplacement and career 
transitioning firm, said, “With the leading edge of the Baby 
Boomer generation reaching age 68 in 2014, it is critical that 
companies understand their exposure to brain drain related 
to retirement.”19 There are now roughly two times as many 

excuse me
[  22  ]
boomers in the workplace as there are Gen Xers. When the 
retirement floodgates open, there is a legitimate concern that 
there will not be enough qualified mid-level workers ready to 
take their places. Those who are ready will be in great demand, 
and able to command larger salaries as a result.  
Employers should communicate with their over-50 employees 
to evaluate their skills, knowledge, contacts, and retirement 
plans in order to gauge and limit their company’s exposure to 
brain drain. They can offer creative solutions to those who do 
not necessarily want to retire but would like less demanding 
jobs or schedules. Sabbaticals, flexible time, shared responsi- 
bilities, and fewer hours—the work-life integration benefits so 
important to millennials—may be enough to entice these in- 
dividuals to stay on. They can create a mentoring program to 
ensure the succession of vital institutional knowledge and 
relationships to the next generations. They can also “hire for 
age” by replacing retiring baby boomers with employees of 
similar backgrounds and levels of experience. 
Savvy younger employees can also avail themselves of the 
treasure troves of information sitting next to them by asking 
questions and truly listening to answers. Not only are 
experienced coworkers a font of company information, they 
have career-spanning relationships with people to whom they 
might just be willing to make introductions. While gathering 
information, younger workers want to remember to show 
patience and express gratitude for the time, advice, and perspec- 
tive their senior colleagues are willing to offer them. They can 
also offer advice in a reciprocal mentoring mode.

RESPECT 
[  23  ]
REMEMBER
A
A A culture of respect comes first. Liberal and consistent 
application of the Platinum Rule makes this possible.
A
A Life experiences inform attitudes and behaviors. We must 
challenge our own mindsets and make room for others’ 
backgrounds and beliefs. 
A
A Diversity is to be embraced. Its value to individuals and 
organizations is incalculable.

25
chapter 2 
social skills 
Putting Your Best Foot Forward
“I will prepare and someday my chance will come.”
—ABR AHAM LINCOLN
M
ary, head of Human Resources, has been interviewing 
candidates all month for a good position at Stellar Insurance 
Company but still hasn’t found the right person. Her boss has 
run out of patience. “We need an underwriting assistant now!” 
he tells her. “Choose the best candidate and get ’em in here first 
thing Monday morning.” 
Mary reviews the candidates. There was the college grad 
who asked Mary what the company did exactly. There was the 
woman who said if she could not bring her cat to work, there was 
no point in continuing the conversation. Then there was the 
young man who brought his mother into the interview room for 
“another set of ears.” Mary also recalled the middle-aged man 
who arrived, unapologetically, 20 minutes late. He told Mary he 

excuse me
[  26  ]
was completely overqualified but needed a job, so he’d take it. 
And then there was Chloe.  
Chloe had the right skill set, but her appearance was alarming. 
A snake tattoo coiled up her arm to her neck, in homage, she 
said, to her pet snake Rumplesnakeskin. She had multiple 
piercings in her ears and wore a tank top sans bra and flip flops 
with glittery blue nail polish on her toes. But Chloe was the best 
of the lot. So Mary offered her the job on one condition: that she 
come to work appropriately dressed for a conservative insurance 
company. 
First thing Monday morning, Mary gets a call from her boss. 
“May I see you in my office—now?” he asks, with unmistakable 
anger in his voice. Mary rushes to his office and sees Chloe 
sitting demurely outside his door, dressed in what Mary 
surmises is her version of conservative: a hot pink suit with a 
plunging neckline and micro-mini skirt, six-inch stiletto heels, 
heavy gold chains and bracelets, extreme makeup, and of course, 
Rumplesnakeskin in plain sight. 
The interview process has undergone dramatic changes in 
the last 20 years. Today, every candidate is expected to be tech 
savvy, to have a strong social media presence and an unassailable 
“digital footprint,” and of course, to have the education and 
experience to do the job. These attributes are essential, but what 
employers value most are well-honed interpersonal skills.  
Social Skills
Fresh out of Bates College, one of the most highly regarded 
liberal arts schools in New England, 23-year-old psychology 
major Tully knew how fortunate he was to be offered a personal 

SOCIAL SKILLS 
[  27  ]
recommendation for a job at a top software company. This got 
him in the door. The rest was up to him. 
On the day of the interview, Tully groomed himself impec- 
cably from head to toe and dressed in what he called his best 
“techie attire”: a plaid shirt, pressed khakis, and brown loafers. 
Tully spent the next six hours in meetings with a HR rep, a team 
leader, and team members, all of whom would offer input on his 
candidacy. He was told he would hear from them that afternoon. 
Tully went home feeling hopeful and waited. Two hours later, 
he got the call—and the job.
How did he do it? Tully had done his research, boning up on 
the company’s culture and the position he sought. He found 
common areas of interest with his interviewers, talking about 
his recent travels to Thailand and Greece, his fascination with 
nature photography, and his love of running. Tully attributed 
his success to his ability to successfully establish rapport. His 
interviewers warmed to him because he himself is a genuinely 
warm person. 
Just how important are social skills? Tom Malone of MIT’s 
Center for Collective Intelligence says, “It is becoming 
increasingly important to think about business and organizations 
not just in terms of how efficient or how productive they are, but 
also how intelligent they are.”1 When Mr. Malone conducted 
research, he found that just having “a bunch of smart people in 
a group” does not necessarily make for a smart group. What does 
make a group smart is the average social perceptiveness of the 
group members. 
Employers agree. In its article “15 Traits of the Ideal Employee,” 
Forbes states, “The most intelligent companies hire on future 
success and heavily weigh personality when determining the 
most apt employees.”2 Of course, most employers do look for 

excuse me
[  28  ]
technical skills as well, but depending upon the job, not having 
them is not necessarily a deal breaker. Even in a workplace that 
demands the ability to master tech tools, many employers are 
hiring for attitude and training for skill. They have found that you 
can teach technology but it is far more difficult, if not impossible, 
to instill in individuals the critical qualities of patience, kindness, 
and empathy.
Many hiring managers say that they know within a minute or 
two whether or not they will hire someone. Immediate red flags 
are candidates who are late, inappropriately dressed, do not 
make eye contact, or leave their cell phones on and out. Once a 
conversation is underway, a candidate who knows nothing about 
the company’s culture, is too focused on himself, or disparages 
a previous employer is disqualified as well. 
In her Business Insider article, “The All-Time Worst Interview 
Mistakes Job Candidates Have Made,” Vivian Giang writes of 
the applicant who warned the interviewer that she had probably 
taken too much Valium that day, the one who asked for a hug 
before the interview began, and the one who pretended he was 
getting a call from the interviewer’s competitor. The applicant 
who asked for the phone number of the company’s receptionist 
because he really liked her also made the list.3
The Hiring Process
It’s been 30 years since Bob, a business service consultant, has 
looked for a job. Bob has worked at the same telecommunications 
company for his entire career, and he knows the job search and 
interview processes have changed dramatically in those 30 
years. Now that his office has moved out of state, he is about to 

SOCIAL SKILLS 
[  29  ]
find out just how much. The first thing he does is call the local 
competitor, where he wanders through a maze of telephone 
options. He finally reaches a live human voice in HR and is 
promptly told that they do not field employment inquiries. All 
information about available jobs and application instructions 
would be on their website. 
It was on the website that he sees what he is up against. Bob 
would first be asked to register, complete a detailed online 
application, and attach a current résumé with references. Next, 
he would need to take a two-hour three-part pre-assessment 
test to determine his technical ability, behavioral profile, and 
problem-solving acumen. If he met all of the requirements, he 
would then be contacted for a telephone-screening interview. 
If all went well and he was selected for an in-person interview, 
he would first meet with a hiring manager. Any subsequent 
interviews would involve meetings with company representa- 
tives at various levels, as well as presentations and role-playing 
exercises. If he were to be offered a job, he would then submit to 
an extensive background check. 
Bob sighs. He knew he had his work cut out for him in getting 
a job, but he didn’t know how much of a job it would be just to 
get through the interview process. 
Job seekers who have been out of the market for any length of 
time are in for a big surprise. The scenario of “mail in your 
résumé and wait by the phone” has long since been replaced by 
technology. Indeed, Luddites, those opposed to technology, 
need not apply. Even though the majority of jobs are still found 
through networking and internal opportunities, not online, one 
still needs at least a baseline of tech ability to apply. Companies 
typically require an online application to even begin the process 
and candidates’ social media will likely be vetted. 

excuse me
[  30  ]
Social media is a double-edged sword for job candidates. 
They must have a social media presence, especially on LinkedIn, 
but anything discovered and deemed inappropriate can be held 
against them. This can be a big problem for digital natives, 
as online sharing is just what they do. John Challenger of 
Challenger, Gray & Christmas, offers some hope to those who 
have ever made a misstep online. “There is more understanding 
of these communications tools, as well as the realization that if 
you eliminate every candidate with problematic Facebook or 
Twitter posts, you would quickly run out of candidates,”4 he 
says. But counting on a stranger to generously overlook an online 
misstep is a risky strategy, especially if there is a lot of com- 
petition for the job.
Employers go deep in their research. They begin with Google, 
going back several pages to see what is in a person’s background. 
Then they move on to Facebook to get a sense of the candidate’s 
personality and attitude. They look at pictures but also read posts 
to understand the tone with which the person interacts with 
friends. Does she come across as positive, encouraging, even 
funny, or is there a drumbeat of negativity? The person’s grammar 
and spelling are noted and judged. The employer begins to form 
an overall impression of a candidate—her intelligence, judgment, 
and character—all before they even meet.
A check of Twitter comes next. Here, recruiters first want to 
see if candidates are on the platform, and if they are, exactly 
what they are doing. Are they tweeting and re-tweeting relevant 
information? Are they sharing interesting articles and helpful 
links? Are they following thought and industry leaders? Are 
they promoting professional affiliations and memberships? Or 
are they recounting the mundane details of their daily lives? 
Answers to these questions help recruiters gauge a candidate’s 

SOCIAL SKILLS 
[  31  ]
level of seriousness and provide additional character clues. 
From there, recruiters move on to LinkedIn to view candidates’ 
executive summaries, references, and industry memberships. 
Finally, they check YouTube.
What else are companies doing to identify and vet candidates? 
More and more, they are relying upon big data, a term that refers 
to the vast amount of information now available from a multi- 
tude of seemingly disparate sources. Gill Press, a contributor to 
Fortune/Tech, says big data is “a new attitude by businesses, 
non-profits, government agencies, and individuals that 
combining data from multiple sources could lead to better 
decisions.”5 “Big data is fast becoming a vital component of the 
modern Human Resources toolkit and the advantages go far 
beyond the ability to identify the brightest and best talent,”6 
reports Orlaith Finnegan of Digimind Insights, a social 
intelligence blog. Companies are now retaining firms like Entelo 
and Talent Bin to help them in the recruiting process. These, and 
other organizations, not only analyze prospective candidates’ 
activity on social media platforms, but also on other sites specific 
to their fields. 
Employers may also be factoring in Klout Scores, a ranking of 
1–100 by which online social influence is measured using social 
media analytics. Klout scores are determined by the amount of 
engagement people generate from their use of social media based 
upon the amount of content they share. In his article entitled 
“Does Your Klout Score Matter?” James A. Martin quotes Ron 
Culp, instructor and professional director of the Public Relations 
and Advertising (MA) Program at DePaul University College of 
Communication. Mr. Culp says, “Klout matters big time to hiring 
managers, often serving as a tie breaker in hiring decisions 
involving two equally solid candidates.”7 Not everyone agrees 

excuse me
[  32  ]
about how important Klout scores are to hiring managers, but 
candidates must be prepared for the fact that their scores could 
matter.
PREPARATION
A
A Conduct a social media audit. Review everything that you 
and others have posted, going back years. Take down posts 
that reflect poorly on you, and ask others to do the same. 
Remove photos of drinking, drug use, offensive activities 
or gestures, or inappropriate clothing. Remove posts that 
include profanity, intolerant views, or unethical behavior, 
and those of a political, religious, or very personal nature. 
A
A Be judicious with future posts. Refrain from putting 
anything online that could hurt your job prospects in the 
future. 
A
A Block or remove friends and connections, if necessary. 
Do not allow others’ posts to possibly reflect negatively 
upon you.
LinkedIn is considered the primary platform for professional 
networking, but savvy job seekers do not overlook Facebook. 
With some 1.71 billion monthly users at this writing and at 
roughly four times the size of LinkedIn, Facebook has become a 
major job search tool. Using Facebook to your best advantage 
means first completing the section on work and education. Next, 
organize your connections to create lists of professionals with 
whom you want to share work-search updates. Use search bars 
to find out who among your connections work at certain 
companies, and stay active by posting relevant articles, liking 
connections’ posts, and liking target companies’ pages.  

SOCIAL SKILLS 
[  33  ]
On LinkedIn, make sure you have completed your profile and 
are a member of relevant industry groups. Post thoughtfully at 
appropriate intervals. To help recruiters find you, use keywords 
in your profile and branding statement. Avail yourself of the 
numerous online tools and sites available for job seekers.  
The Interview Experience
When Ginger congratulated Scott, one of her LinkedIn 
connections, on his new job, she had no idea how important this 
relationship would become. A few months later, after a company 
downsizing, the 55-year-old HR executive became unemployed 
herself. She was now in the job market and needed the network 
she had nurtured to help her. Scott, the LinkedIn connection she 
had congratulated, now had a job lead for her! Three months 
and 13 in-person interviews later, Ginger got great news. She 
would once again be employed as an HR executive!
Ginger accomplished this by paying careful attention to 
detail. She did in-depth company research, videotaped herself 
in practice interviews, and prepared an extensive list of 
thoughtful questions. She dressed for the conservative culture 
in which she hoped to work, wearing tailored suits and dresses, 
understated jewelry and makeup, hosiery, and appropriate 
shoes. She carried her résumé in a black leather portfolio and 
made sure she had two elegant working pens. When introducing 
herself and shaking hands, she made sure her name badge was 
placed on her right, in the direct line of vision of the person she 
was meeting. In the interview room, Ginger waited to be offered 
a seat, asked if she could take notes, maintained eye contact, 
asked salient questions, mirrored her interviewer’s tone of voice 

excuse me
[  34  ]
and facial expressions, and was respectful of any time 
constraints. She sent a personal thank-you email after every 
meeting or conversation. 
After the interview process was completed, Ginger followed 
up at weekly intervals. She did not ask about compensation, 
vacation time, or benefits until after the job was offered. It all 
paid off to ensure her final success.
Debbie Monosson, president of Boston Financial and Equity, 
a capital equipment leasing company, describes her interview 
process. She starts by placing ads on LinkedIn and in college 
career centers. She then contacts interested candidates by 
email, asking them to respond with short paragraphs about 
why they want the position. The professionalism of their 
responses determines whether they are invited in for in-person 
interviews. The candidate who wrote back asking if she would 
remind him of what the position was did not get an invitation 
to interview. There are deal breakers during the interview, as 
well. The candidate who showed up wearing chinos and a 
T-shirt was not offered a job, nor was the one who put his cell 
phone on the table. “It vibrated. To his credit, he did not 
answer the phone,” Ms. Monosson said. But just having it out, 
and the interruption it caused, cost him the job offer. When an 
interview goes really well, however, she says she often offers a 
job on the spot.
Today’s interview process often starts with an online 
application. A telephone screening call may come next, 
followed by a Skype interview and anywhere from one to a 
dozen or more one-on-one and/or team interviews. Depending 
upon the position, interviews may include behavior-based 
questions to see how candidates handled specific challenges, 
and questions about their decision-making and problem-solving 

SOCIAL SKILLS 
[  35  ]
processes. They may also be asked about their communication 
and management styles and their goals for the future. They will 
certainly be asked what they know about the company and the 
position, why they want to work there, and what they will 
contribute. They will be asked about their employment and 
educational backgrounds, their salary expectations, and what 
questions they have for the interviewer. A request for a pre- 
sentation or completion of an assignment may also be part of the 
process.
Even after a job offer is made and accepted, a candidate 
cannot relax just yet. She may be subjected to a complete back- 
ground check including credit reports, criminal records, 
bankruptcies, military service, worker’s compensation claims, 
and some medical records. Employers may check education, 
certifications, licenses, salary history, job history, and driving 
records. Drug testing may also be part of the process, and 
references from former employers may be requested.
Résumés and Cover Letters
Well-written résumés and cover letters are still necessary even 
when online applications are required. Regardless of the 
position, a résumé needs to be organized, concise, and easy to 
read, with perfect spelling and grammar. It also needs to be 
attention grabbing and compelling enough to get more than a 
cursory glance. A typical hiring manager sifts through dozens 
of résumés at a time and may spend just seconds looking at any 
one résumé. 
There are many serviceable boilerplate résumé and cover 
letter examples from which to choose, but it is important to 
avoid writing anything that looks formulaic or that could be 

excuse me
[  36  ]
used for a variety of positions. You will also want to research 
firms and fine-tune your résumé and cover letter so that your 
experience and skills align with what the employer seeks. 
It is useful to note that hiring managers are increasingly 
using technology to help them sift through their databases of 
résumés. Incorporate keywords from their job ads into your 
résumé to increase the odds of having yours read. You may 
decide that a career coach and a professionally written résumé 
are excellent investments of time and money. 
The Job Search 
Although the majority of jobs seekers today still find jobs 
through networking and internal opportunities, many are going 
online in their searches. To keep private information out of the 
wrong hands, avoid posting a résumé on a job board, and send it 
directly to the hiring manager. You can also use job-site privacy 
settings and a temporary phone number or address for the 
duration of your job search.
Searching for a job is a full-time job, which can be problematic 
for someone already employed. But a well thought out approach 
will help you stay organized. 
A
A Networks. Include every contact you have ever made 
personally, professionally, and through social media. 
A
A Internet and social media. Create a blog through free 
blogging services, such as Google’s blogger.com. Use of a 
résumé distribution service may also be helpful.
A
A Job boards. Use advanced search options available on all 
major sites, including monster.com, careerbuilder.com, 
indeed.com, and simplyhired.com. 

SOCIAL SKILLS 
[  37  ]
A
A Goals. Establish job search goals and keep detailed notes. 
Use a spreadsheet for keeping track of applications made, 
persons contacted, dates interviewed, correspondence 
sent, follow-up dates, and additional companies and 
individuals to contact. 
Telephone Interviews
Being contacted for a telephone interview indicates that you 
have made it through the preliminary screening process. Usually 
conducted by an HR representative, it is used to determine 
whether or not an in-person interview with a hiring manager is 
in order. During a telephone interview, which usually lasts about 
30 minutes, your demeanor, confidence, and verbal commun- 
ication style are noted and evaluated. The interviewer’s task is 
to ascertain enough basic information to make a decision about 
whether to recommend you for an in-person interview. It is 
critically important that you consider this conversation the most 
important one in the process. All subsequent interviews depend 
on its success.  
When preparing for a telephone interview, select an environ- 
ment that is conducive to a business conversation. This means 
controlling potential distractions, such as noisy electronic 
devices, and ensuring family members, roommates, and dogs 
are out of the room. Additionally, plan to hold the conversation 
in a private place and never while walking or driving. If possible, 
use a landline instead of a mobile phone. A dropped call or 
tenuous connection will impact the flow of the conversation and 
potentially affect your confidence and concentration.
Do your homework and prepare good questions about the job 
and how you can help the organization. Allow the interviewer 

excuse me
[  38  ]
to lead the conversation. Be prepared to talk through your 
résumé in detail. Answer all questions truthfully, even if they 
are about potentially tricky topics such as gaps in employment 
or job change frequency. Do not ask about salary, vacation, or 
start date at this point.
Your tone of voice will account for 70 percent of the message 
you convey on the telephone. Be energetic and humorous, if 
appropriate, and smile! The interviewer will not see your smile, 
but it will come through. Take time to answer questions 
thoughtfully, but do not worry if you do not have time to say 
everything you would like. If all goes well, you will soon have 
that opportunity at an in-person interview.
At the conclusion of the call, thank the interviewer for her 
time. If you are interested in pursuing this opportunity, 
follow-up with an email relating your qualifications to the job 
requirements and expressing your continued interest in the 
position.
Skype Interviews
The Skype interview, or one conducted via Voice over Internet 
Protocol (VoIP), has many similarities to the telephone 
interview. But of course, on Skype, they can see you! This will 
require extra preparation to be sure you are appropriately 
groomed and attired and that the physical space in which you 
are sitting is appropriate as well. Sit in front of a neutral 
background with no distracting photos or decorations behind 
you. Maintain eye contact with the interviewer by looking at the 
camera, and not at yourself on the screen. Sit up straight, keep 
gestures to a minimum, and keep your hands away from your 
face and hair. Nods of understanding and smiling as appropriate 

SOCIAL SKILLS 
[  39  ]
are great, but try not to frown or show displeasure. Practice a 
Skype interview beforehand with a friend. You want no glitches 
on the big day! 
In-Person Interviews
At an in-person interview, you are evaluated by a whole new set 
of criteria. Your interviewer is trying to get a sense of you as a 
whole person, not just a list of academic achievements and skill 
sets. He immediately notices your attire and grooming, whether 
you are late, even by a minute (or too early), how you introduce 
yourself and shake hands, the degree of respect in your tone, 
your eye contact and facial expressions, and your standing and 
seated posture.
Once the conversation is underway, your attitude, enthusiasm, 
engagement, and level of preparedness are now all on display. 
You are judged on how well you listen, the questions you ask, 
and whether your focus is upon your needs rather than upon 
how you can add value within the organization. No two 
interviewers are alike in their styles or in the kinds of questions 
they ask, but all know a respectful, prepared, and confident 
candidate when they meet one. You can show your preparedness 
by researching beforehand on glassdoor.com to learn about a 
specific company’s interview process, or by visiting readyprepin-
terview.com for the interview questions most often asked for 
this job.
Candidates should be prepared for unusual questions. 
Ostensibly used to determine how quickly and creatively 
candidates think on their feet and how well they deal with 
stress, the practice of purposely asking difficult or unanswerable 
questions is questionable in my opinion. But if candidates are 

excuse me
[  40  ]
faced with such questions, the best they can do is deflect the 
questions with humor and keep calm! Some real-life examples 
from glassdoor.com: 
A
A “Using a scale of 1–10, rate yourself on how weird you 
are.” —Capital One
A
A “How many bricks are there in Shanghai? Consider only 
residential buildings.” —Deloitte Consulting
A
A “You are in charge of 20 people. Organize them to 
find out how many bicycles were sold in your area last 
year.” —Schlumberger
A
A “What’s your fastball?” —Ernst & Young8
If, after the interview, you would still like to be considered for the 
position, send an email that day to thank the interviewer and to 
reiterate your interest and the strength of your candidacy. Follow 
up no more than once weekly or as directed by the interviewer. 
Perhaps the most difficult, but most critical, aspect of the 
interview process is exhibiting patience. Enthusiasm and interest 
work in your favor; a sense that you are desperate does not. 
After all of your hard work, you’ve gotten the job. Congrat- 
ulations! What are you going to do first? Share your great news 
with everyone who helped you. Whether they provided advice, 
introductions, encouragement, or assistance, let them know 
how grateful you are and that you would welcome the chance to 
be of help to them in some way in the future.
At this point, it is also considered good form, and good 
strategy, to let other prospective employers know you have 
accepted a job offer. Thank them for their interest, and tell them 
how much you enjoyed meeting them and how impressed you 
were with their organizations. This will allow them to keep 

SOCIAL SKILLS 
[  41  ]
their lists of viable applicants current and distinguish you as a 
considerate job candidate. 
There is a chance you will receive job offers you choose not to 
accept. Handle such situations with the same gratitude, grace, 
and tact. You need not get too specific, such as saying you did not 
like someone you had met or that you thought the company was 
subpar. If pressed, just say the fit wasn’t quite right for you. And 
always keep your eyes on the future. In her 2015 article in Busi-
ness Insider, Jacquelyn Smith says, “The business world, your 
industry and market are all small. Your hiring manager can 
likely reappear in your career. So put your best foot forward, 
especially when you refuse a position.”9
There is always the remote possibility that despite your very 
best efforts, you did not win the position. Clearly, this is a difficult 
situation, especially if you were one of the finalists. But, believe it 
or not, the way in which you handle this “rejection” may actually 
end up working in your favor. First, try to see all the good that 
came of this process. You met new people, got to hone your 
interview skills, and learned more about the requirements for the 
position. And to get as far as you did, you obviously impressed a 
lot of people. Now it’s time to cement their good impressions. 
Start by thanking everyone who interviewed you. Let them 
know that you would still be very interested in joining the 
organization should another opportunity arise. Ask for feedback 
about why they selected another candidate and how you could 
possibly improve your technical or interview skills. Candid 
feedback is not always easy to get, but a recruiter may be willing 
to do this. Ask if you can stay in touch from time to time, and 
assuming the answer is yes, do so by forwarding relevant articles, 
offering congratulations for good news, and recommending 
candidates who you think could help them. 

excuse me
[  42  ]
All of this may come back to help you sooner than you think. 
If you came in second place, and the job is either not accepted or 
does not work out for the first-place candidate, you will be the 
first person they call. Interviewers will be far more likely to 
recommend a gracious candidate to their networks than one 
who seemed to sulk, or worse, badmouthed a prospective 
employer because she did not get the job. Remember, your brand 
is always on display. How you handle disappointment tells 
others a great deal about your character, professionalism, 
resilience, and maturity.
The Generational Challenge  
The interview seems to be going really well for recent grad 
Alex. He thinks he may be offered the job, as the hiring 
manager is now describing the next steps. With a big smile, the 
interviewer asks Alex if he has any questions. “Just one,” says 
Alex. “What’s your lead time for drug testing?” That’s when the 
smile froze.
Most job search challenges are faced equally by candidates of 
all ages. But there are some generation-specific challenges with 
which candidates might need to contend, challenges often 
fueled by stereotypes. For example, millennials may have to 
combat the notion that they all feel “entitled,” and baby boomers 
that they are all “over the hill.” Here is some advice on what the 
generations can do to challenge any preconceived notions or 
age-related speed bumps they may encounter. 

SOCIAL SKILLS 
[  43  ]
Digital Natives
Millennials, you are not in charge—yet. But you soon will be. And 
as long as you alone create the code, don’t you own the market- 
place? Perhaps . . . if tech skills were all one needed to succeed. But 
this is not now nor will it ever be the case. Even if it were the case, 
millennials would not have a corner on technical expertise for 
much longer. Generation Z is coming up fast. The oldest of this 
cohort of true digital natives are now around 20 years of age. As 
they begin to enter the workplace, technical skills will no longer 
be the exclusive domain of millennials, and social skills will once 
again become the distinguishing commodity.
Fairly or unfairly, Gen Y has been painted as a socially clueless 
cohort. In his article for Monster.com, “How to Help Millennials 
Fill the Soft Skills Gap,” John Rossheim wrote, “Gen Y 
employees, raised to believe that hard skills matter most, often 
fall short on soft skills.” He adds, “The soft skill gaps most likely 
to trip up millennials include written and oral communications, 
social skills and the ability to engage and motivate, business 
etiquette, and professionalism.”10 In her article “Just Look Me in 
the Eye Already,” Sue Shellenbarger of the Wall Street Journal 
puts an even finer point on the challenges this group faces. “Eye 
contact, so vital an element of respect among preceding 
generations, seems conspicuously missing from millennials.”11
As a millennial job candidate, you can overcome these 
preconceptions by realizing that interviewers are on the lookout 
for such stereotypical behavior. They’ve also done additional 
homework. They know that technology is part of your DNA. 
They know of the social conscience you embody as a group, the 
flexible work-life balance you seek, the feedback you crave, the 
aspirations you have for fast and continuous development and 

excuse me
[  44  ]
advancement, the casual work environment you prefer, and yes, 
your interest in food, food, and more food! All of these are things 
you do not need to tell them. Your fellow Gen Ys will ask about 
job perks, gym memberships, office decor allowances, bringing 
their dogs to work, and using company equipment for their new 
start-ups. Those are their issues. Just be sure they are not yours.
Why shouldn’t candidates announce their clear wishes from 
the get-go? Because employers who are seriously interested in 
them will not only be willing to share the many benefits their 
companies offer, they will be shouting these benefits from the 
rooftops. Applicants of all ages need to guard against thinking 
that they are more important to their prospective employers 
than the employers are to them. It is only after a job offer is 
made that a candidate is in any position of strength. 
The good news for millennials is that they do not have to do 
much to tip the employment scales in their favor. If their 
education and experience match their prospective employers’ 
needs, brushing up on such social skills such as small talk, eye 
contact, handshakes, and turning devices off may be all that’s 
required to get the jobs. 
Digital Immigrants
Older job applicants face their share of challenges in the 
interview process as well, starting with who interviews them. 
Anyone in the job market who is not a millennial is almost 
certainly going to be interviewed by one at some point during 
the process. This means trying to impress a potential boss some 
20 or 30 years one’s junior.  
Applicants interviewing with millennials will want to keep in 
mind the defining characteristics of this generation. Applicants 

SOCIAL SKILLS 
[  45  ]
should speak to what millennials value most: work-life 
integration, teamwork, and continuous learning. They should 
offer positive feedback to interviewers on their questions and 
insights and keep focus squarely on the present and future, not 
on the past. 
Albert Einstein once said, “Learning is not a product of 
schooling but the lifelong attempt to acquire it.” Older applicants 
know they need to stay current with technology, but wonder 
how they can when it moves at the speed of light. The answer 
is through education, in whatever form they can find it. 
Community college and online courses, YouTube videos, paid 
seminars, free classes, and reverse mentoring with younger 
colleagues, children, grandchildren, and neighbors can all 
provide excellent low-cost or no-cost sources of up-to-the-minute 
information. Older workers should not be afraid to ask for help. 
They have so much of value to offer in return—college referral 
letters, key introductions, and free room and board among them! 
Despite proof to the contrary, older workers suffer from 
misconceptions about their energy, stamina, productivity, and 
adaptability. To keep age from being your defining characteristic, 
Carmine P. Gibaldi, Professor of Organizational Behavior and 
Management at St. John’s University and Harvard University, 
advises working late one or two nights each week, letting co- 
workers know you exercise, keeping current with your clothing, 
and staying positive. He also recommends not talking about how 
things used to be done, not advertising your lack of tech savvy, 
and not complaining about your bad back!12 Older candidates 
and employees also want to make sure that 21st century tech- 
speak and skills are part of their repertoires. 

excuse me
[  46  ]
REMEMBER 
A
A Master the use of technology for job searches and interviews.
A
A Learn the interview requirements of a particular job or 
field.
A
A Develop and nurture networks.
A
A Stay organized and follow up meticulously. 

47
chapter 3 
professional presence 
Getting It Right
“Your manners are always under examination, and by 
committees little suspected, awarding or denying you very 
high prizes when you least think of it.” 
—R ALPH WALDO EMERSON
Gen Xer Joe doesn’t know when his alarm clock buzzes for the 
second time how much his job will be on the line later that 
morning. Now, with his heart pounding wildly, he is in full panic 
mode. Joe’s new district manager is visiting this morning and 
will be addressing rumors about a possible company downsizing. 
Joe knows he had better get to the office before the DM does.
Joe grabs the pile of clothes lying on the floor, the same ones 
he had worn the day before, and after a quick sniff test, wildly 
pulls them on. He brushes his teeth and drags a comb through 
his hair before he is out the door. 
Joe has a lot of time to make up and his foot is heavy on the 
gas. Weaving in and out of traffic, he gets pulled over. Politely 
accepting his speeding ticket, Joe is now desperate to get to 

excuse me
[  48  ]
work. At the company parking lot, he barely misses the car 
stopped at the front entrance. He blares his horn as a passenger 
leaves the car and slowly walks to the entrance. Joe finally parks 
and rushes into the building. He dashes up the stairs into the 
meeting room disheveled, breathless, dripping in sweat, and two 
minutes late. 
His boss and coworkers stare at him in disbelief. And then, 
the man at the far end of the conference table stands, and Joe 
and the district manager lock eyes in mutual recognition. Here 
is the passenger of the car stopped at the entrance, the very 
same car at which Joe had blared his horn. And he looks very 
unhappy. Joe sinks into the nearest seat, head bowed, and 
prepares for the worst. 
If you’ve ever wondered if you have a personal brand, wonder 
no more. You do. We all do. Where we live, what we drive, with 
whom we associate, what we wear, how we communicate both 
in person and virtually, our work habits, and our leisure 
activities combine to create an indelible image and powerful 
message. Who we are and what we value, in essence, define our 
personal brands. Your personal brand precedes you and stays 
long after you have left. Says Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon, 
“Your brand is what people say about you when you are not in 
the room.” 
The Right Brand
It has been almost a month to the day since Karen, a 33-year-old 
CPA at a major accounting firm, has taken her “voluntary” 
Professional Presence training. Indisputably brilliant at her job, 
Karen has rapidly worked her way up from staff auditor to tax 

PROFESSIONAL PRESENCE 
[  49  ]
manager and is on track to become one of the firm’s youngest 
partners. That is, if she is able to convince the senior partners 
that she can project the image they have so carefully developed 
for their firm. 
Karen knows she can be a little rough around the edges. 
Impatient and demanding, she is a perfectionist. After all, time 
is money—her clients’ and the firm’s—and she’s not going to 
waste any of it. Still, her salty language, severe attire, and 
unsmiling face intimidate the junior staff and even put off some 
of the partners, as well. But this is who she is, Karen thinks, an 
accountant, not a cruise director. Besides, a “lipstick” approach 
to changing her image will never work. 
Karen had no choice but to take the training if she wanted to 
become partner—which she desperately did. But she was 
skeptical when the consultant said that little tweaks could 
actually make big differences. If Karen was willing to make a 
few changes, she said, she might be pleasantly surprised at how 
powerful the effects could be. They would meet again in a month 
to assess her progress. 
Karen figured she had nothing to lose. She made an appoint- 
ment with a personal shopper and a hair salon to update her 
wardrobe and hairstyle. She visited a cosmetics counter and was 
astonished at what a difference a little well-applied makeup 
made. At work, Karen began greeting colleagues as they passed 
by and was surprised when her greetings were invariably 
returned. Rather than her usual all-business approach, she 
engaged her staff in light conversations about their weekend 
plans and outside interests, and truly listened to their responses. 
She even invited some coworkers to coffee—something she’d 
never done in the past—and began to forge some new relation- 
ships. She was amazed at how receptive people were. But the 

excuse me
[  50  ]
biggest shock for Karen was that she had begun to receive 
compliments about her appearance and attitude—that was a 
first! 
Karen’s confidence was sky-high, and she had to acknowledge 
her new approach wasn’t hurting her team’s productivity at all—
in fact, it actually seemed to be helping it. Karen looked forward 
to her follow-up meeting with the consultant, eager to share her 
successes and to ask for additional tips. All of a sudden, her 
partnership dream seemed very much within her grasp. 
The concept of brands is not new. First introduced in 1937 by 
Napoleon Hill in his book Think and Grow Rich,1 personal 
branding was again brought to the fore in 1981 by Al Ries and 
Jack Trout in their book Positioning: The Battle for Your Mind.2 
It was later popularized by management guru Tom Peters in his 
1997 article in Fast Company, “A Brand Called You.”3
Professional image and reputation have always been 
important. But there is a new sense of urgency in having a 
positive brand, due to the proliferation of social media. In the 
past, the implications of a person’s brand, whether good or 
bad, were largely contained. Only specific family, work, and 
community audiences were privy to them. Today, the possible 
ramifications of a negative brand are enormous because 
everything is out there for the whole world to see.
Occasionally, personal branding suffers from a negative 
connotation. When less than truthful self-promotion reveals 
itself, a letdown inevitably occurs. Conversely, while openness 
is to be valued where matters of character are concerned, 
sharing too much information can work against you. Today’s 
workplace mantra is “transparency and authenticity,” but the 
fact is, true civility requires good judgment and a measure of 
nondisclosure. 

PROFESSIONAL PRESENCE 
[  51  ]
It is easier than ever to inflict permanent damage to our 
brands. We would be wise to heed the advice of Guru Sai Baba, 
who said, “Before you speak, ask yourself: is it kind, is it necessary, 
is it true, does it improve on the silence?” If what we are about to 
say does not meet these criteria, it may be better left unsaid.
Dan Schawbel, author of Personal Branding Book, says 
personal branding is “The process by which individuals 
differentiate themselves and stand out from a crowd by 
identifying their unique value proposition, whether professional 
or personal, and then leveraging it across platforms with a 
consistent message to achieve a specific goal.”4 The benefits of 
having a strong personal brand, he says, include the ability to 
demand a premium price, a higher salary, and enhanced 
visibility within professional communities. 
One’s in-person persona and online activities combine to create 
a brand—a brand that can easily be compromised. Online, a brand 
can be undermined by one’s failure to include a professional 
photograph, poor judgment with posts, relentless self-promoting, 
and over-sharing. In person, it can be marred by behaviors at 
work, on public transportation, in restaurants, on elevators, 
while waiting in line, and while walking on the sidewalk or into 
buildings—virtually anyplace one is seen or heard.
Perceptions of people are also fueled by stereotypes. If one 
wishes to overcome the preconceived notions that millennials 
are flighty narcissists and baby boomers are cranky has-beens, 
one will need to build an authentic, compelling personal brand 
that flies in the face of these stereotypes. To accomplish this, 
deliberation is key, and it begins with self-reflection. Brian 
Lawrence, a career development specialist at Saint Louis 
University, says that a personal brand is first and foremost per-
sonal. “Your brand should not be a character you create but 

excuse me
[  52  ]
instead should be a representation of what employers can expect 
when you are hired.”5 Once you determine who you are and 
what you want to convey, you can align all aspects of your 
personal and professional personas and begin to clearly and 
consistently communicate your brand.
Sometimes rebranding is in order. One of the most famous 
comeback stories is that of Steve Jobs. He founded Apple in 
1976, got kicked out of the company in 1985, and 12 years later 
was rehired. Henry Blodget, cofounder and former CEO of the 
business website businessinsider.com, wrote, “During his 
time in the wilderness—the 12 years he spent away from the 
company that became his life’s work—Steve learned the skills 
and discipline that he needed to lead Apple’s resurrection. 
Steven wasn’t born with these skills, he developed them.”6 Bill 
Gates and Richard Branson, among others, also faced signi- 
ficant setbacks in their careers. What is encouraging is that no 
matter how great the challenge or how long it takes, rebranding 
is not only possible, it may land one in a far better position than 
before. 
The newly hired are at an advantage because they are in the 
process of making their first impressions. They can turn these 
good impressions into good brands. Tenured employees, on the 
other hand, or those who have made less than positive first 
impressions, may need to do some rebranding. This involves 
first convincing themselves, and then others, that they are not 
only capable of making successful changes, but also would 
thrive in doing so.  

PROFESSIONAL PRESENCE 
[  53  ]
SUCCESSFUL REBRANDING
A
A Take seriously all feedback received. Make personal 
improvements with an eye toward the future.
A
A Determine how current skills align with future job require-
ments. Learn necessary skills for a new job before pursuing 
it. Find mentors to lend support and give advice.
A
A Realize rebranding takes time. Be persistent and confident. 
Eventually, others will change their minds about you and 
your capabilities. 
The Right Attitude
Helen approaches Tom, the new manager of the regional office. 
“Do you have a minute?” she asks. Eager to assist, Tom invites 
her in to his office. With a worried look on her face, Helen, one 
of the company’s sales assistants, begins. “I am hesitant to say 
this, but as the new manager, you have a right to know. And I 
really just want to help.” Helen now has Tom’s full attention. 
“Unfortunately, we have some big problems on our team.” In 
a voice full of concern, Helen reports that Tina’s difficult home 
life is affecting her attendance, Brett’s drinking problem makes 
him late most days, Jeff’s money woes are making him miserable 
to be around, and Susan’s poor performance is because she can’t 
get along with her clients. “Rich’s behavior is the most 
problematic, though,” Helen says with great drama. “Now that 
his marriage is on the rocks, he’s beginning to hit on all the 
young female interns.”  
After she finishes describing virtually every person on the 
team in an unflattering, personal way, Helen sighs heavily, a 

excuse me
[  54  ]
barely perceptible look of smugness on her face. Tom thinks for 
a moment and says, “You’re right, Helen, we do have a problem. 
It’s your attitude. What are you going to do about that?” 
The importance of a positive attitude cannot be overstated. 
In his article, “The One Thing That Determines How 
Successful You Can Be,” author Jim Rohn says attitude 
“determines the level of our potential, produces the intensity 
of our activity, and predicts the quality of the result we 
receive.”7 Charles Swindoll, pastor and author, says attitude is 
a greater determinant of future success than one’s background, 
education, financial means, position, or reputation with others. 
He says attitude is more important than the past, the future, 
and even the facts.8
Still, bad attitudes on the job run rampant, and those who 
have them run the gamut. From the complainer, the victim, and 
the martyr to the self-proclaimed overworked, under-paid, and 
under-appreciated, these individuals share and often over-share 
their feelings, about, well, everything. Nothing is off the table: 
relationships, politics, ill-health, weather, traffic, long lines, 
discourteous commuters, bosses, coworkers, work conditions, 
job loads, paychecks, deadlines—the list is endless. On the job, 
bad attitudes are evidenced by tardiness, rudeness, gossip, poor 
work habits, inappropriate attire, and negative tones. They are 
also demonstrated through disrespectful nonverbal communi- 
cation such as slouching, eye rolling, glaring, smirking, and the 
use of electronic devices. 
There are myriad reasons people exhibit bad attitudes, 
including to get attention, avoid responsibility, achieve common 
ground, and gain validation. Fear, insecurity, jealousy, and bad 
habits are also factors that lead to negative attitudes. And 

PROFESSIONAL PRESENCE 
[  55  ]
blameless colleagues, unsuspecting customers, and innocent 
business partners all take the hit.
Of course, there are issues of legitimate concern that can 
affect attitudes, including serious health, family, and money 
matters. And there are generation-specific concerns as well. 
Digital natives in particular are worried. While the current 
national unemployment rate of 5 percent means many are 
landing jobs, they still carry an average of $37,000 in school 
loan debt alone.9 According to the Census Bureau, some 30 
percent of young adults aged 18–34 are living with their 
parents,10 creating a challenging “full nest” situation for parents 
and their adult children. At an age where thoughts traditionally 
turn to establishing relationships, buying homes, and starting 
families, such considerations are on the back burner for many 
millennials. This lack of money and independence contribute 
to a high degree of stress for many in this cohort. Digital 
immigrants also have a lot on their minds as retirement security, 
health and healthcare, employment security, children’s edu- 
cations, and the needs of aging parents weigh heavily. 
Regardless of the challenge, it is still our responsibility to 
choose the right attitudes, because the alternative is just too costly. 
Negative attitudes have deleterious effects on physical and 
emotional health. They drain energy, weaken immune systems, 
contribute to depression, lengthen illness recovery times, and 
shorten life. Negative attitudes at work decrease productivity, 
lower morale, overshadow accomplishments, damage relation- 
ships, and jeopardize business, jobs, and promotions. Bad attitudes 
permeate corporate cultures from top to bottom.
Positive attitudes, on the other hand, provide enormous 
benefits. They engender respect, encourage the perceptions of 

excuse me
[  56  ]
confidence, strength, and leadership ability, facilitate optimum 
job productivity and satisfaction, and promote strong profes- 
sional relationships. 
You can become a member of the “positive attitude club” with 
a few simple steps. First, do a gut check by acknowledging your 
feelings and recognizing how you are broadcasting them. Ask 
yourself whether an issue will matter tomorrow, next month, or 
five years from now. If the answer is no, let it go. Improve the 
situation if you can, but be prepared to move on in a healthy way 
when there’s nothing more you can do.
With coworkers, demonstrate your good attitude by treating 
everyone with respect and kindness. Use positive language, 
banishing words like problem and impossible from your lexicon. 
Offer compliments, encouragement, congratulations, and 
apologies as warranted. Show optimism and appreciation. Go 
above and beyond, without expectation of recognition. In 
addition to doing your part in creating a positive work 
environment, all of these efforts can reap you great personal and 
professional rewards. 
Now that you’ve put on the right attitude for work, it’s time to 
put on the right clothes!
The Right Appearance
After a career that spanned nearly five decades, Walter, a 
74-year-old financial advisor at one of the country’s largest 
wealth management companies, was about to retire. But before 
he did, this very successful man needed to devise a succession 
plan for his longstanding clients, many of whom were high 
net-worth individuals in their 60s, 70s, and above. They trusted 

PROFESSIONAL PRESENCE 
[  57  ]
him completely, and Walter knew the importance of this last 
business decision for his clients—and for his legacy. He was not 
going to let them down. 
Walter had a dozen or more skilled advisors in the office to 
whom he could pass his clients, and all of the advisors were 
technically proficient and would do a fine job. But in the end, he 
chose 35-year-old Patrick. Walter’s final decision was influenced 
not only by Patrick’s overall professionalism, but very much by 
the way Patrick dressed. His clients still respected formal 
business attire, including shined shoes, pressed suits, and 
“neckties,” as they called them. Walter was confident that his 
clients would feel very comfortable being transferred to Patrick 
and that the company had an excellent chance of retaining their 
business for years to come. A career’s worth of valuable contacts 
and business went to Patrick, because he “dressed the part.”
Attire is a big part of one’s personal brand. Attire tells the 
world what one thinks about oneself and others. It conveys 
competence and judgment, or the lack thereof. It inspires 
confidence or elicits concern. It enhances credibility or creates 
confusion. It matters. Attire is the first thing others notice at an 
interview and on the job. It can be a deciding factor between the 
person who gets the job, the client, or the promotion and the 
person who does not. Dressing professionally is not about the 
latest styles or comfort. It is about reflecting and supporting a 
specific workplace culture and industry standards by meeting 
expectations, not defying them. 
It is often argued that attire, as mere “packaging,” is not 
important. It’s what’s inside that counts. But in order to entice 
others to be interested in what’s inside, they must be intrigued—
or at least not put off—by what’s outside. The importance of 
packaging was reinforced for me daily during my 11 years 

excuse me
[  58  ]
working in the business sales division of Tiffany & Co. Known 
for its trademark “little blue box,” the venerable jeweler has 
never lost sight of the power of its packaging and goes to great 
lengths to defend infringement upon its brand. On occasions 
when I was asked if I could supply a Tiffany box, I would always 
say yes, as long as it contained paid-for Tiffany merchandise. I 
understood the assumptions made about this packaging. The 
mere sight of a Tiffany blue box held a promise, if not a guarantee, 
that whatever was inside was of unsurpassed beauty and quality. 
Attire, or one’s packaging, has similar power.
Digital immigrants remember well when there was no 
question about what to wear to work: for men, it was a suit and 
tie, and for women, it was a dress (or skirt and blouse) and 
hosiery. Today, these standards have been relaxed dramatically, 
even in the most staid environments. Whether this is a good 
thing is under debate. In his Financial Times article, “Sorry, JP 
Morgan, Smart Guys Still Wear Suits,” Robert Armstrong took 
issue with the announcement by the world’s leading bank urging 
its employees to adopt business casual attire. Among Mr. 
Armstrong’s arguments against this standard of attire was “Put 
a suit on, hotshot, it’s other people’s money.”11
In deciding what to wear, the culture of the organization is 
always the major determining factor. There is no “one size fits 
all.” Even within a corporate culture, there may be different or 
relaxed standards depending upon the physical location of an 
office or what a person does for an organization. Expectations 
for attire at corporate headquarters where executives and 
important clients roam may be different from dress standards 
in field offices; warmer climates may dictate lighter fabrics 
and fewer items of clothing; regional standards of dress in a 

PROFESSIONAL PRESENCE 
[  59  ]
conservative Northeast work environment may be different 
from a laid-back West Coast concern.  
We dress to meet expectations—not to cause confusion or 
concern. A uniformed police officer, firefighter, or nurse 
reassures us that a professional is on the scene. A hard-hatted 
construction worker or white-coated scientist suggests someone 
who respects and is prepared for the job. A suited and buttoned- 
down accountant or banker instills confidence in us that good 
care will be taken with our money. In an operating room, you 
hope the surgeon is wearing scrubs; in a court of law, you hope 
the judge is wearing black robes.
What you wear depends on what you do and where you do it. 
If you work in a conservative field such as law or financial 
services, conservative attire is the way to go. If you’re in a creative 
field, such as marketing or advertising, dressing in an avant-
garde style is in order. Hoodies are often the uniform of the day 
in the high-tech field, and the fashion industry requires the 
latest runway styles.
It is incumbent upon job candidates and employees to find out 
what is expected of them and to dress accordingly. Job applicants 
can get the information they need by conducting online research 
for industry-specific attire, asking for advice from someone who 
works for an organization, or calling and inquiring about a 
company’s dress code. One applicant did a “stakeout” by sitting 
in his car in a parking lot for a first-hand view of what employees 
were wearing. Employees will ensure they dress appropriately 
by adhering to the company’s dress code or simply by observing 
how higher-ups in the organization dress. 
In your research, you will come across a head-spinning array 
of categories of business dress. They will include business formal, 

excuse me
[  60  ]
business professional, traditional business, general business, 
and interview attire. You will also see business casual and its 
possible subdivisions of campus casual, active casual, sporty 
casual, smart casual, rugged casual, and small business casual. 
Then there is formal and semi-formal attire for special gala 
events. Knowing exactly what the categories mean is problematic 
because the interpretations vary so widely across organizations 
and industries. Do your best reconnaissance, and prepare for 
any error to be on the side of formality. Fortunately, the following 
business attire rules span industries.
BUSINESS ATTIRE RULES
A
A Cleanliness. Keep everything clean, including body, hair, 
clothing, nails, breath, and teeth. Keep a toothbrush and 
breath mints on hand for unexpected meetings.
A
A Grooming. Style hair in an acceptable fashion for your 
work environment. Avoid extreme colors and cuts unless 
that defines your company culture. Keep facial hair neat 
and trimmed. Wet hair is unprofessional, ear and nose hair 
are unsightly. With perfume, less is more. 
A
A Quality. Fabric, stitching, pattern, color, buttonholes, and 
linings all give clues about the quality of a garment. Make 
sure they are top-notch. 
A
A Cost. Employ the “cost per wearing method” before buying 
anything. A seemingly expensive item could cost just 
dollars per wearing.
A
A Fit and condition. Clothes need to fit well and be in good 
repair. Do not wear ripped, stained, frayed, or threadbare 
items or those that have missing buttons or holes.  

PROFESSIONAL PRESENCE 
[  61  ]
A
A Taste. Avoid plunging necklines, garish colors, clanging 
bracelets, visible underwear, facial bolts, and conspicuous 
tattoos unless, of course, such styles define your workplace. 
More than a few hiring managers have reported their dismay 
when the well-dressed millennials they hired bore no 
resemblance to those who came to work. It was as though they 
thought that once they landed the jobs, any additional sartorial 
efforts were unnecessary.    
Older workers have their dress challenges, too. Some see no 
need to change styles that have served them well for 30, 40, or 
even 50 years. Others cling to the hope that the practical and 
conservative dress that comprises their wardrobes will once 
again be the standard. But attire, like everything, evolves with 
the times, and it’s important to evolve with it.
The Right Way to Travel
“ON YOUR LEFT!” comes the loud shout. Today, for what must 
have been the hundredth time, Liz is practically run over on her 
walk to work by a passing bicyclist. Or at least it feels that way. 
Liz appreciates the positive impact more bicycles and fewer 
cars have on collective well-being and the environment. What 
she doesn’t appreciate are the heart palpitations caused by a 
cyclist shouting in her ear as he speeds by with just inches to 
spare at 30 miles an hour. Startled, angry, and practically 
knocked off her feet—again—Liz begins to shout back at the 
cyclist, but he is long gone. “How can people be so inconsiderate?” 
Liz says out loud.

excuse me
[  62  ]
Liz’s route to work is via Boston’s Charles River, a beautiful 
and very popular location surrounded by trees and flat paved 
paths that go for more than 20 miles. In the course of a given 
day, thousands of runners, walkers, cyclists, bladers, moms with 
strollers, and dog lovers with their dogs all share the river’s 
paths. But an unfortunate chasm has developed between cyclists 
and pedestrians, as each vociferously and indignantly laments 
the other faction’s lack of consideration. And if she is honest 
with herself, Liz knows each side has valid complaints.  
So Liz makes a decision. While she can’t change everyone’s 
attitude and behavior, she can change hers. When the next cyclist 
comes riding toward her, Liz gives her ample room to pass and 
smiles. To her amazement, the cyclist smiles back and thanks her. 
She tries this several more times and finds that almost everyone 
returns her smile, and some even say hello. Liz decides that 
showing a little courtesy toward those she encounters on her 
commute may just encourage others to do the same. No matter, it 
will make her commute more pleasant, and that’s a start.
How do we annoy one another en route to work? Whether on 
foot or horseback (yes, a few folks do commute that way), in 
automobiles, or on buses, boats, mopeds, skateboards, planes, or 
trains, commuters are driven to daily distraction by their fellow 
travelers. Presuming that none of us set out to get others’ blood 
boiling and are merely oblivious, the issue of traveling to and 
from work needs attention from a number of perspectives. 
Employees begin to broadcast their brands the moment they 
leave home. Are they rushing down the sidewalk with ties 
undone and hair wet, bumping into slower moving pedestrians 
as they try to catch trains or buses? Do they push to get onto 
public transportation and vie for scarce open seats, giving scant, 
if any, thought to others? Are they impatient behind the wheel, 

PROFESSIONAL PRESENCE 
[  63  ]
weaving in and out of lanes, crudely gesturing at the slightest 
provocation and blaring horns with abandon? These behaviors 
do not go unnoticed.
Travel can be stressful, especially during rush hours. 
Meetings with clients, bosses, or coworkers, project deadlines, 
or relieving team members may all be dependent on our 
timeliness. Trying to deal with uncontrollable factors such as 
weather, traffic accidents, and breakdowns by giving vent to our 
frustrations may give us breakdowns of our own.
There are approximately 128.3 million commuters in the U.S., 
76 percent of whom travel to and from work in their own cars. 
Another 12 percent carpool, and approximately 8 percent 
combined take the bus, walk, bicycle, or ride the subway. The rest 
use alternate means (horseback?). Where we live determines how 
we get to work. In cities, up to 15 percent of workers travel by foot 
and up to 5 percent by bicycle.12
To protect your brand and ensure safety all around, the 
following guidelines are offered for the various transportation 
modes.
WHEN IN AN AUTOMOBILE:
A
A Personal auto:
Use good judgment and observe the rules of the road. 
Speeding, following too closely, flashing headlights, using 
the breakdown lane to bypass traffic, or zigzagging between 
lanes will win you no friends and may get you pulled over.  
DO NOT text or use social media while driving. The 
National Highway Transportation Safety Administration 
reports that in 2014, more than 3,000 people were killed in 

excuse me
[  64  ]
distracted driving-related car crashes, and 431,000 were 
injured. The average time eyes are off the road while texting 
is five seconds, which, if traveling at 55 MPH, is like 
covering the entire length of a football field blindfolded.13
Resist the urge to text even at stoplights. Invariably, the 
light will turn green, which you will know by the horns 
blaring behind you. You may make the light, but others 
will not, and this may come back to haunt you at the next 
intersection.
A
A Carpool:
Establish costs and payment guidelines up front. If 
everyone takes turns driving, split all costs evenly. If one 
person does the driving, consider a mileage approach 
factoring in costs for fuel, maintenance, parking, and tolls. 
The IRS offers mileage rates, which it updates on a yearly 
basis.
Keep on hand a list of co-riders’ cell, work, home, and 
emergency phone numbers. 
Be ready when your ride arrives. Requiring others to wait 
is inconsiderate. Doing so habitually may get you kicked 
out of the carpool.
Respect the culture of the carpool. If food and drink are 
allowed and conversation welcome, participate as you like. 
If instead, quiet is desired, observe that.
Be meticulous about personal hygiene. Apply fragrance 
sparingly, if at all. Be neat, and take newspapers and trash 
with you.

PROFESSIONAL PRESENCE 
[  65  ]
Decide upon seating based upon practical considerations, 
such as the needs and the sizes of the passengers or drop- 
off order.
Stick like glue to the no-stopping policy. If anyone is ever 
to get to his destination, personal errands cannot be 
allowed. 
Be reliable. If you are the driver and are sick or delayed, 
give your passengers as much notice as possible. Allow for 
unexpected traffic, construction, accidents, long lights, 
tollbooth backups, and weather delays.  
A
A Taxi and transportation services:
Be respectful of the driver and of the automobile, and be 
aware that any bad behavior on your part may become part 
of a file on you. Uber and Lyft rate their customers and 
share this knowledge with fellow drivers who may elect 
not to pick you up in the future. (Want to know your 
rating? A feature on the Uber app lets you find out. Or just 
ask the driver!)
Engage the driver in conversation if you are so inclined, 
but only if he seems receptive to it. A driver’s first priority 
is to get you safely to your destination, which may require 
his full attention to the road and directions.
Do not eat, drink, or engage in personal grooming while in 
the vehicle.
Keep calm if traffic or weather delays your ride, and, of 
course, do not blame the driver. He or she is equally, if not 
more, frustrated than you are.

excuse me
[  66  ]
WHEN ON A TRAIN OR BUS:
A
A Attend to personal grooming tasks before you board. This 
means no hair brushing, shaving (yes, it’s done), nail filing 
or clipping, tooth picking, or applying makeup. 
A
A Do not travel if you are sick. But if you decide you absolutely 
must, cover coughs and sneezes, and stand or sit as far 
away from others as possible. 
A
A Allow passengers to get off a bus or train before you get on. 
Board quickly, being careful of others’ toes, shins, elbows, 
and belongings. If you bump into someone, apologize. 
A
A Do not eat or drink when commuting, especially on short 
commutes. 
A
A Respect fellow travelers. Occupy no more room than that to 
which one person is entitled. Do not allow briefcases, luggage, 
or umbrellas to occupy needed sitting or standing room.
A
A Keep your voice down and music to yourself. Loud phone 
calls, conversations, and music distract and disturb fellow 
passengers who may be trying to work, rest, or think.
WHEN ON A PLANE:
A
A Comply with boarding instructions and then move to your 
seat as quickly as possible. Do not obstruct others as you 
stow your luggage. Move out of the aisle so others can pass.
A
A Remember, this is a public mode of transportation and 
other travelers’ comfort, convenience, and safety are as 
important as yours. Take up the space, including storage 
and foot room, for which you paid and no more. 
A
A Recline your seat, if you desire, but look back first and ask 
politely if you may do so. Yes, you are within your rights to 

PROFESSIONAL PRESENCE 
[  67  ]
recline, but considering the person behind you who may be 
eating or working is just courteous. Do not ever employ a 
device that prevents others from reclining. Not only is that 
presumptuous, it is against airline rules. There are simple 
solutions to get more legroom: pay for it or fly with airlines 
that offer more space.
A
A Follow the instructions of the crew for seatbelt and 
electronic device use. Do not argue or cause a disruption. 
Airlines have zero tolerance for such behavior, and you 
may be required to deplane. 
A
A Do not presume your seatmates want to engage in 
conversation. Read their nonverbal cues, and respect 
signals that they wish to work, read, or rest.
A
A Accept delays as part of travel. Everyone is in the same 
situation. Arguing with gate personnel makes you look like 
an inexperienced and unsophisticated traveler. 
WHEN ON A BICYCLE:
A
A Obey all traffic signals and rules of the road. 
A
A Make sure you and the bicycle are properly equipped.
A
A Use hand signals to alert others of your intentions.
A
A Give notice before passing and a wide berth when doing so. 
Try not to startle pedestrians or other riders as you pass by 
them.
WHEN ON FOOT:
A
A Watch where you’re going. Observe traffic signals and 
never try to beat a light, especially when there is oncoming 
traffic. Do not assume drivers see you. 

excuse me
[  68  ]
A
A Step aside to use your electronic device. Texting and taking 
photos, especially with selfie sticks, are to be avoided in 
the middle of a sidewalk. They can slow you down, cause 
you to abruptly stop or collide with someone or something, 
or even cause you to walk into traffic. Using earbuds that 
restrict hearing is equally dangerous. 
A
A Keep to the right on the sidewalk, and try to keep a brisk 
pace so others do not continually need to pass you. Be 
considerate of those who are slower, the elderly, persons 
with disabilities, and those pushing strollers or with arms 
full of groceries.  
A
A Do not walk two-, three-, or even four-abreast or have im- 
promptu mid-sidewalk meetings. Others may be forced 
into traffic to get around you. 
Getting the ingredients right to achieve the highest level of 
professional presence enables employees to present their best 
versions of themselves in the workplace. 
REMEMBER
A
A Develop and display an all-star personal brand.
A
A Embrace a stellar attitude.
A
A Attire yourself appropriately for your corporate culture.
A
A Realize that small behaviors make big impressions.

69
chapter 4 
business behavior 
Combining Proven Strategies  
with 21st Century Expectations
“It takes 20 years to build a reputation and five minutes to 
ruin it.”
—WARREN BUFFETT
K
ate has spent months cultivating a business relationship with 
a very successful, soon-to-be retiring executive. She has 
outlined the ambitious plan she proposes for his retirement 
account, suggesting the prospect of very healthy growth and a 
comfortable yearly income. Kate, a 38-year-old wealth 
management advisor, knows that for Robert, a conservative 
gentleman, it is important that he work with a firm that shares 
his values. Kate also knows there is a lot of competition for his 
business. But they seem to have developed a nice, respectful 
rapport, and she thinks he may be ready to commit. Kate’s 
fingers are crossed. This next call could close the deal.
The call goes well, and as it winds down Kate asks Robert 
when they can meet to share more information and sign formal 

excuse me
[  70  ]
papers. At that very moment, her colleague in the next cubicle, 
who is arguing on the phone with his ex-wife, shouts out a 
stream of obscenities that can be heard throughout the entire 
office. Kate freezes. Her client goes silent. Then he clears his 
throat and says, “Thank you, I think I have all the information I 
need. I will let you know if I plan to move forward. Good-bye.” 
Here you are with your newly burnished brand, your finely 
adjusted attitude, and your perfectly appropriate attire. You’ve 
even managed to travel to work with life and limb intact. You are 
someone about to start a new job and will allow nothing to derail 
what promises to be your banner first day! There’s just one more 
thing to consider. The culture of the organization you have just 
joined is one that can only be fully appreciated from the inside. 
You’ve done your due diligence and know as much as any 
outsider could possibly know about this organization. So it’s a bit 
of a shock to discover how different things are on the other side 
of the glass door.   
The Glass Door
Jake, 23 years old and eight months on the job, only wishes he 
had known when he started what he knows now. His job as a 
representative at a call center had been described as simple and 
pressure-free: He would answer callers’ questions about 
products, and if they expressed interest in buying, he would 
transfer them to the sales department to handle the sales. The 
first couple of months were fun as Jake learned about the 
products and bonded with the other new hires. But once he was 
on the phone full-time, this “no-pressure” job turned into any- 
thing but. 

BUSINESS BEHAVIOR 
[  71  ]
Jake was quickly informed that too many of the calls he was 
sending through to the sales department were unqualified 
prospects, wasting the sales representatives’ time. He also 
learned that the number and length of his calls were measured, 
his conversations were monitored, his emails were counted, and 
his time on social media was logged. And all of these statistics 
would factor into his job evaluation, affecting any potential pay 
raise or promotion.
During the interview process, Jake had been delighted to 
hear about the company’s unlimited vacation policy, flexible 
schedules, and flat organizational structure that gave employees 
unfettered access to the higher-ups. “How great was that nap 
room!” he said to himself at the time. But Jake soon realized that 
no one actually used any of these highly touted benefits, as 
though there was some unwritten rule against it. And although 
they had access to the executives’ calendars to schedule 
meetings with them, no one ever did. Instead, there was not-so- 
subtle pressure to stay late, forgo vacation time, and keep one’s 
ideas and concerns to oneself. Jake knew he was in the real 
world now. He just hadn’t anticipated what reality would look 
like or how fast it would be upon him. 
A surprise awaiting digital natives in particular is that the 
flat organizational structure they envisioned is not so flat after 
all. Designed to eliminate unnecessary layers of management 
and foster collaboration, decision-making, and creativity, the 
flat structure is particularly attractive to millennials eager to 
share their ideas. It’s not just young start-up companies with 
little hierarchical structure to dismantle or e-commerce 
companies like Zappos that have embraced flatness. Staid 
manufacturing companies like General Motors are also dipping 
their toes in the flat waters. According to Tim Kastelle in 

excuse me
[  72  ]
Harvard Business Review, “There is a growing body of evidence 
that shows organizations with flat structures outperform those 
with more traditional hierarchies in most situations.”1
If there is agreement that flatter is better in theory, there is 
less agreement on whether it works in practice and whether 
organizations are actually as flat as they claim to be. Google 
itself dabbled in this approach back in 2002 when it decided to 
do away with the management level in its engineering 
operations, but within months, management was back. Going 
forward, there will likely be degrees of flatness determined on 
a company-by-company basis. To be on the safe side, new 
employees will want to find out what kind of structures their 
organizations have and make no assumptions. 
Penni Connor, a vice president at the Fortune 500 energy 
company Eversource, says, “Eversource is deliberately trying to 
create a workplace that encourages entrepreneurial thinking.” 
She also says there is a time and place for sharing. “In a rush to 
get their questions answered, there is no hesitancy (among 
millennials) to take their questions right to a higher-up who 
could answer it, but is not necessarily the best person to answer 
it.” She adds, “They need to ask themselves how to navigate the 
hierarchy better.” 
Older workers used to a hierarchical structure can also make 
missteps. If their new culture is one that not only encourages 
but also expects employees to speak up, holding back will do 
them no service. Become keenly attuned to expectations within 
your organization, and proceed with caution. Your CEO may 
welcome weekend texts from employees, and if so, text away. 
But you’ll want to make sure of that before you interrupt his golf 
game, a dinner party, or a nap. 

BUSINESS BEHAVIOR 
[  73  ]
What awaits you on your first day is a plethora of people, all 
eager to pass and share judgment about you, the new kid. You’re 
a curiosity to all, a threat to some, and more work for others. Your 
attitude, energy level, attire, style, demeanor, confidence, 
judgment, grace, and overall professionalism will say volumes 
about you, even before you’ve had a chance to say “good morning.” 
Your level of comfort and skill in making polite conversation will 
add to what becomes a practically indelible first impression—the 
only first impression you’ll get to make. The success of your first 
day may have an unalterable impact on the success of all of your 
future days. It is wise to execute it thoughtfully.
THE FIRST DAY 
A
A Arrive early. Be well rested, well dressed, and raring to go. 
Shake hands and introduce yourself to colleagues, and try 
to remember their names.
A
A Thank everyone. Thank the person who announces your 
arrival, escorts you to your desk, arranges for your security 
badge, sets up your technology, walks you through stacks 
of paperwork, directs you to the break room and restroom, 
invites you to lunch, and offers you information. Your 
gratitude will be remembered.
A
A Look and listen. Pay attention to the general office vibe. 
When do people arrive? How quickly do they get to work? 
How do they interact with one another? When do they leave? 
What is the noise level? Respect the culture and follow suit.
A
A Take notes. Record important information  on your phone 
or a notepad. Having new codes, names, numbers, and 
emails at your fingertips will help you assimilate quickly. 

excuse me
[  74  ]
Everyday Manners
Brimming with confidence, Connie had aced her telephone and 
Skype interviews for a fabulous new job  as a sales manager with 
a leading consumer products company. She has one more hurdle 
today, the in-person interview, after which Connie believes the 
job will be hers! 
An experienced 34-year-old sales professional, Connie is 
confident but is taking no chances. She leaves three hours early 
for a drive that would usually take two hours, getting to the 
company parking lot with plenty of time to spare. Connie had 
decided she would do her hair and makeup when she arrived, to 
look as fresh as possible.
She drives around to the quiet far side of the building, out of 
sight of parked cars or incoming traffic, and picks a sunny spot 
for good light. She brought her portable curling iron and begins 
curling and spraying her hair. Perfect, she thinks! In the bright 
light, she notices and tweezes a few stray hairs on her eyebrows. 
She adjusts her bra straps and her blouse and after a quick 
underarm “sniff test,” applies a little more antiperspirant. “Just 
to be safe,” she thinks. She brushes and flosses her teeth, looking 
in the car mirror to make sure there are no leftover poppy seeds 
from this morning’s breakfast bagel. She swishes around some 
mouthwash then spits it into her cold coffee. She puts on her 
lipstick, rubbing with her little finger a bit that had gotten onto 
her tooth. Finally, she pours the mouthwash and remaining 
coffee on the ground. Finished.
With a satisfied smile, Connie drives to the building’s 
entrance, parks, and enters. It takes a while for the hiring 
manager to arrive and escort her to his office. He seems to 

BUSINESS BEHAVIOR 
[  75  ]
avoid making eye contact with her. Is he shy? As they make 
their way down the long corridor, Connie struggles to make 
small talk, to no avail, and begins to experience a growing 
sense of dread.
 As the door to his office opens, Connie sees the view im- 
mediately outside his window. It is exactly where she was 
parked just minutes ago, performing her beauty and personal 
grooming rituals in the brightest, whitest sunlight. 
Each day, people who have a great deal of influence over our 
current and future careers have their eyes peeled and their 
antennae up. The good news is we have a great deal of control 
over how others perceive us. It’s just a matter of making the 
right decisions.
PAY ATTENTION TO OTHERS
A
A Do you look back as you walk into a building to see who 
might be coming in behind you, or do you absentmindedly 
let doors shut on coworkers?
A
A Do you cheerfully greet security personnel by name or 
treat them as if they were invisible? 
A
A Do you look up when walking in corridors, or are you glued 
to your device, oblivious to the passersby? 
A
A Do you check to see who might also be trying to catch the 
elevator, or do you hit “close” the minute you are aboard? 
A
A Do you keep right on stairs or position yourself squarely in 
the middle, impeding others trying to get by?
A
A Do you talk loudly on the way to your desk or keep the 
decibel level down out of respect for colleagues who are 
working? 

excuse me
[  76  ]
The number of ways in which colleagues can potentially offend 
or irritate others before buckling down to work each day pales 
only in comparison to the opportunities they have to do so 
once the workday begins. These unintentional behaviors may 
seem trivial, but when regularly subjected to them, they 
become a monumental nuisance. Resentment builds, relation- 
ships suffer, and brands are bruised, all for want of a little 
common courtesy.
What annoys people at work? The list is very, very long. It 
includes not allowing others to get off of elevators before getting 
on, constant tardiness, leaving dirty cups and dishes in the 
lunchroom, wafting food aromas, personal grooming at desks 
(nail-clipping, flossing, hair-brushing, etc.), poor personal 
hygiene, incessant and loud personal calls, gum-chewing, loud 
talking, humming, whistling, singing, noise-emitting electronic 
devices, conducting conference calls and speakerphone con- 
versations in open spaces, never contributing to collections for 
gifts, coming back late from breaks, not reimbursing coworkers 
for miscellaneous expenses, never making coffee or lunch 
runs, always asking for but never having stamps (or tissues, 
gum, mints, etc.), eavesdropping, noisy jewelry, heavy walking, 
foot-tapping, finger-drumming, knuckle-cracking, throat- 
clearing, nose-blowing, pen-clicking, and sniffling.
The list goes on.
Staring, failing to observe personal space boundaries, lurking 
outside someone’s cubicle or office door, interrupting others’ 
work instead of calling or emailing ahead, reading coworkers’ 
computer screens, emptying but never refilling candy jars, 
incessantly talking about new babies (or relationships, homes, 
cars, etc.), being overly dramatic, being lazy, boasting, yelling, 

BUSINESS BEHAVIOR 
[  77  ]
arguing, swearing, fist-banging, door-slamming, leaving break 
rooms (or restrooms or meeting rooms) dirty, taking up too 
much parking lot space, stealing food, leaving coffee pots (or 
water jugs or copy paper trays) empty, slurping coffee, eating 
noisily, pranking, dressing inappropriately, not thanking others 
for holding doors, laughing or commenting out loud at text 
messages or emails, not asking permission before borrowing 
others’ property, not returning borrowed items, emitting bodily 
sounds and odors, decorating office spaces unprofessionally, and 
currying favor with bosses.
The advice regarding these behaviors is simple: don’t. As 
Henry Ford, Sr., said, “Paying attention to the little things that 
most men neglect makes a few men rich.”           
Business Meetings
Did you ever wonder just how much time people spend in 
meetings? According to a study by the Australian software 
company Atlassian, most employees attend 62 meetings a month 
of which 50 percent are considered time wasted. During an 
average 31 hours per month in meetings, 91 percent of employees 
daydream, 73 percent do other work, 47 percent complain, and 
39 percent sleep. The cost of unnecessary meetings in the U.S. 
per year: an eye-popping $37 billion in salary.2 
Regardless, executives overwhelmingly agree that face- 
to-face meetings are still the best way to persuade, lead, engage, 
and make decisions. Rather than do away with meetings entirely, 
simple strategies can be employed to make yours as productive 
as possible. 

excuse me
[  78  ]
MAKE SURE YOU ARE NOT THE ORGANIZER WHO:
A
A Fails to have a valid reason for the meeting, invite the right 
people, or send an agenda
A
A Neglects to reserve a meeting room, test AV, or order 
materials and refreshments
A
A Forgets to send pre-meeting assignments or reading or to 
advise attendees what will be expected of them
A
A Schedules ill-timed meetings such as early Monday 
morning or late Friday afternoon
A
A Fails to intervene when attendees show disrespect through 
words or behaviors
The biggest complaint about meetings by far is that they were 
not necessary to begin with. These complaints are valid if the 
information could have been communicated in other, better 
ways, if key stakeholders were not available, if there was not 
enough time to prepare, or if nothing would have been gained in 
holding the meetings.
FLAWLESS MEETINGS 
A
A Invite only those who can contribute to and/or benefit from 
attending. These include both stakeholders and opponents. 
Send agendas and assignments/reading in advance. You 
need not invite higher-ups, but inform them of meetings 
and let them know they are welcome to attend. 
A
A Prepare tent cards. This is especially important when 
attendees do not know one another, and it’s a nice touch 
even when they do. At formal meetings, decide on seating 
and arrange tent cards accordingly. Make introductions, 

BUSINESS BEHAVIOR 
[  79  ]
invite attendees to help themselves to refreshments, and 
let them know where the restrooms are located. 
A
A Consider timing of meetings. Early mornings when people 
are fresh are great if high participation is required. Mid- 
and late-morning meetings are good as long as they do 
not run into lunch. Lunch meetings can work well, as long 
as attendees are fed! Mid-afternoon meetings require 
energetic presenters, activities, or engaging topics to keep 
people awake. Late afternoon meetings are fine if they do 
not conflict with departures.
A
A Set meeting expectations up front. These include how and 
when attendees will be asked to contribute, when breaks 
can be expected, and whether using devices is permitted. 
Electronic device use at meetings can be a big problem 
because others often feel disrespected or ignored. A client 
told me that the person using a device is saying, “You are not 
worthy of my time.” The culture of the group may allow it, 
but unless everyone is on his or her device, it is wise to stay 
off of yours.
A
A Thank people for their attendance. Discuss next steps, and 
then confirm them in an email.
Adhering to these guidelines will stand you in good stead. If, 
in addition to these, you start on time, stick to the agenda, and 
end on time, you will be inducted into the meeting organizer 
hall of fame!
Attending a Meeting
As a meeting attendee, you also have responsibilities. What you 
do before, during, and after a meeting will be critical to its success. 

excuse me
[  80  ]
Occasionally, you will be invited to a meeting and wonder why. It 
may have been a courtesy invitation or, possibly, an invitation sent 
by mistake. If you are ever unsure about why you were invited, it 
is perfectly permissible to ask the organizer. In some cases, you 
will have the opportunity to gracefully bow out. 
A
A Arrive early and prepared. Introduce yourself to other 
attendees and take advantage of this golden opportunity 
to “work the room.” Be sure to comply with instructions 
given by the meeting chair about seating, breaks, partici- 
pation, and electronic device use.
A
A Respect others’ opinions. Do not interrupt, argue, or hold 
side conversations. 
A
A Display attentive body language. Do not slouch, cross your 
arms, roll your eyes, look out the window, frown, shake 
your head, yawn, doze off, or doodle. 
A
A Stay in your seat. If you think there is a chance an emer- 
gency might arise, such as a call about a sick child or 
expectant wife, ask the meeting chair beforehand if it 
would be all right for you to keep your phone on for this 
reason only. But even then, keep it out of view and silent. 
A
A Take notes on a laptop or tablet if allowed. But do not get 
caught doing anything extracurricular. 
The Team 
Today’s workplace is all about teams, and it’s easy to see why. 
Put together a group of people with diverse backgrounds, 
experiences, perspectives, and talents, and a more creative 
solution to a problem or situation is sure to follow. The benefits 

BUSINESS BEHAVIOR 
[  81  ]
that accrue to organizations and employees from effective 
team interactions include greater productivity, better human 
resource utilization, increased learning, improved morale, and 
greater efficiency. The bottom line is that when people work 
together in a positive fashion toward a common goal, anything 
is possible.
But it’s not always easy. Egos get in the way. And if they do, 
conflicts arise, resentments build, power struggles develop, 
alliances form, and feelings get hurt. The result is wasted time, 
energy, and resources. If teams do work effectively, it is because 
members have taken personal responsibility to do their 
respective parts. 
TEAM MEMBERS
A
A Polish their attitudes. The nature of a team is to bring 
together divergent views and experiences to achieve the 
best possible result. Disagreements are welcomed but 
disagreeable behaviors are not. Effective team members 
show respect, humility, a willingness to learn, and an 
acceptance of the wisdom of the collective. They keep 
calm even when others do not and keep the focus on the 
issue at hand. 
A
A Hone listening skills. Good team members encourage 
others to share their expertise through active, attentive, 
and respectful listening. They never argue or interrupt, 
but instead allow others to express themselves as they 
choose, presuming it is respectful of other attendees. 
A
A Exhibit exemplary verbal and nonverbal communication 
skills. Good team members are respectful in their tones, 
words, and body language. They always take the high road.

excuse me
[  82  ]
A
A Execute their responsibilities. Good team members are 
responsible, responsive, thorough, and timely. They never 
pass the buck or lose sight of the team’s goal. 
The Cubicle Farm
Patrice cringes. Here comes Dottie, and she looks like she wants 
to talk. Again. Patrice likes Dottie, but she comes into Patrice’s 
cubicle three or four times a day to talk about whatever is on her 
mind. The topic could be anything—her brilliant new grandson’s 
most recent milestones, the latest company gossip, a recap of last 
night’s TV shows, or the weekend weather forecast—no thought 
goes unshared. 
The problem is, every visit breaks Patrice’s concentration. She 
has tried every subtle means she can think of to discourage 
Dottie, from keeping her eyes on her computer screen when she 
approaches to piling her office chair with books and binders so 
there is no place for her to sit. Sometimes she offers Dottie only 
a brief smile or a one-word acknowledgment to her greetings, 
and she has even said, “Sorry, I was concentrating. What did you 
say?” But none of these have worked. 
So Patrice decides it’s time to be direct. She gently tells Dottie 
that to keep on task, she needs to keep their visits to break times. 
Not the least bit offended, Dottie says, “I only stopped by because 
I thought you really liked my visits. You should have just told 
me. Really!” Problem solved. 
Today’s workplace looks nothing like what digital immigrants 
remember when they joined the workforce pre-1990. Then, it 
was primarily comprised of offices, with sizes and locations 
determined by hierarchy and rank. Executives occupied large, 

BUSINESS BEHAVIOR 
[  83  ]
beautifully appointed, carpeted corner offices with magnificent 
top-floor views. Everyone else worked on floors below in spaces 
and square feet determined by their positions and tasks. There 
was little collaboration between the ranks. If a worker was 
unlucky enough to be “called on the carpet” for a conversation 
with an executive, it was not a good thing. Open-plan spaces did 
exist, but were reserved for entry-level employees or those who 
performed specific functions such as clerical staff. 
The office has changed dramatically, largely because of 
technology. Employees now also work from their homes, cars, 
hotel rooms, or local coffee shops. Business is conducted on a 
treadmill, a train, or a plane. Today, 9 to 5 is 24-7. The corner 
office, if it exists, has walls made of glass. But offices are hard 
to come by because collaboration is king, and the open-plan 
layout is its castle. 
The Open Office
Creativity. Productivity. Agility. These are the promises of the 
new workplace. Designed to encourage communication and 
improve effectiveness, in open-plan offices, employee work side 
by side at desks, in chairs, or at long tables. They stand, they sit, 
they wander. According to the International Management 
Facility Association, a full 70 percent of U.S. employees currently 
work in such an environment.3 
In concept, the design makes sense. But in reality, it has its 
challenges. Studies show that the majority of employees are not 
happy about open-plan offices, citing lack of privacy as their 
greatest concern. A study by the global design firm Gensler 
reveals that open-plan offices actually lower productivity and 

excuse me
[  84  ]
focus and significantly increase sick days.4 Tenured workers in 
particular may have a hard time adjusting to the concept, 
especially if it means giving up the cherished privacy and status 
they equate with private offices. But technology  giants such as 
Google, Facebook, and Twitter are all on board, and such 
traditionally conservative industries as insurance and financial 
services are increasingly adopting the concept. Love it or loathe 
it, open-plan is the new standard.
The form and function of the entire office is evolving. 
Companies are going to great lengths to design spaces in which 
ideas can be captured from chance encounters. Among them are 
wider staircases that allow for side-by-side conversation, booths 
in lobbies and lunchrooms for spontaneous brainstorming, bar- 
stools in cafes for tête-à-tête communication, free transportation 
shuttles for sharing ideas with seatmates, and on-site laundry 
facilities for impromptu discourse over the dry cycle. 
Employees may not agree on the merits of today’s workplace 
evolution, but they can perhaps mutually agree on best behaviors 
for working within them. 
Cubicle Life
If you still happen to work in a cubicle, you will notice its size is 
shrinking and its walls are lower. Cubicle dwellers face 
challenges in getting work done without interrupting, or being 
interrupted by, neighbors just inches away. 
 POLITE POINTS 
A
A Keep volume low. This applies to conversations, music, and 
electronic devices. Use earphones, mute devices, and 

BUSINESS BEHAVIOR 
[  85  ]
conduct speakerphone conversations and meetings in 
spaces designed for these purposes. 
A
A Don’t eat at your desk. Pungent foods, such as Indian or 
Mexican food, or reheated fish, are not welcomed aromas 
for many. If you do eat at your desk, dispose of food wrap- 
pers in appropriate receptacles. 
A
A Be aware of all olfactory issues. Fragrance, worn gym 
clothing, and bare feet can be unpleasant smelling to those 
nearby.
A
A Keep décor tasteful. Tasteful photos, appropriate objet 
d’art, quality desk accessories, and small plants are fine. 
Do not display items that could be considered offensive or 
controversial. If you wouldn’t say it, don’t display it!
A
A Respect coworkers’ privacy. Do not enter cubicles unless 
invited, read others’ computer screens, touch others’ 
belongings, help yourself to coworkers’ candy or snacks, 
purposely listen in on conversations, or comment on any- 
thing overheard.
Common Areas
Using common amenities and areas requires a great deal of 
trust and honesty among coworkers. Incredibly, employee theft 
in general and theft of coworkers’ food in particular are 
extremely common occurrences. According to a 2015 report by 
statisticbrain.com, employee theft amounts to $50 billion per 
year, and 75 percent of employees admit to having stolen at work 
at least once.5 Inc. magazine says 43 percent of employees report 
they have had food stolen from them.6 A good rule of thumb to 
employ: Unless you brought it, bought it, or someone expressly 
invited you to it, do not help yourself to anything. This also 

excuse me
[  86  ]
applies to food left in common areas after lunches and meetings. 
While it may seem to be there for the taking, there could be 
plans for the food, and you may be advised of this while helping 
yourself to it. 
If you decide to take advantage of  any of the common areas 
available to you for collaboration or privacy, resist any temptation 
to take up residence in them. We all want and need privacy from 
time to time, but common areas are meant to serve as temporary 
oases, not permanent solutions to privacy quests. 
The New Schedules
“This is not working,” a frustrated Grace says under her breath. 
A 43-year-old career advisor at Jefferson Junior College, Grace 
recently returned to her job after a five-year hiatus following 
the birth of her daughter. She was happy when a new job-sharing 
arrangement with her colleague, Jim, a long-time employee, 
presented itself. Jim had been on the verge of retiring but 
decided a part-time paycheck would be perfect as he got his 
gardening business off the ground. Grace thought it would work 
well for her, too, because she would be able to drop off and pick 
up her young daughter from school three days a week. 
 It’s only been a few weeks, but the arrangement is beginning 
to fray. Increasingly, Grace feels like she is doing much more 
than her share and that Jim’s communication is woefully 
lacking. Just yesterday, a recruiting visit they were supposed to 
arrange for a key local employer fell through because Jim did 
not let Grace know that the recruiter was expecting to hear from 
her. It’s like Jim’s mind is elsewhere, probably on his new 
gardening business, Grace thinks.

BUSINESS BEHAVIOR 
[  87  ]
Grace cannot do this entire job by herself. She has spoken 
with Jim, who promised to do better. But nothing has improved. 
Grace hates the thought of going to their boss, but cannot think 
of another alternative. 
Telecommuting, flextime, part-time, and job-sharing have 
changed how often and during what hours employees come to 
the office, and even if they come at all. Driven by millennials, 
this flexible approach to work is what this cohort wants and 
expects. Older workers like it, too. Depending upon what you do, 
it is likely your organization does or soon will offer some kind of 
flexible work arrangement. 
Telecommuting 
The popularity of telecommuting among employees and 
employers alike has gained huge traction. Advocates of tele- 
commuting, generally defined as an employment arrangement 
where employees work at least half of the time at home, point to 
increased productivity, improved job satisfaction, and saved 
time and money. Employers benefit by reduced employee 
attrition as well as substantial savings on costs associated with 
providing office space. 
Telecommuting is not for everyone. Some employers simply 
do not trust workers to be self-directed and motivated enough 
to get their work done at home. Some managers feel threatened 
by the arrangement, wondering if their positions are redundant. 
And some employees who have tried it reported experiencing 
loneliness and difficulty in setting clear boundaries between 
their professional and personal lives. 
To achieve the best results, telecommuters should organize 
their workdays with the same dedication and professionalism 

excuse me
[  88  ]
they would if their bosses were sitting right next to them. Yes, a 
home-office worker does have the opportunity to throw in the 
occasional load of laundry during the day, but generally looks at 
this workday as he would any other: as the opportunity to 
produce an excellent work effort in exchange for a paycheck. 
MAKING TELECOMMUTING WORK
A
A Create an office space. Start at a designated time, take 
regularly scheduled breaks, and at the end of the day, 
close the office door. A business associate of mine says to 
get herself in the right frame of mind each day, she dresses 
professionally, leaves the house to get coffee, and returns 
promptly at 8:00 A.M. to start her day. Make sure friends 
know your working hours and that, unless it is important, 
you are not to be disturbed. 
A
A Dress the part every day. Even if you don’t see anyone 
face-to-face, attire still matters. A study from the Kellogg 
School of Management found that the symbolic meaning 
clothing holds for people might affect their productivity.7 
Besides, you never know when you might get called to a 
Skype meeting.
A
A Communicate, communicate, and communicate! You need 
never be out of the loop if you keep yourself firmly in it. 
Use technology to stay on top of others’ minds. And do not 
forget the telephone. The sound of a human voice has its 
own immeasurable magic. 
A
A Arrange face-to-face meetings with your team and boss. 
Attend company events and after-hours celebrations. It 
lets others know you are still very much involved.

BUSINESS BEHAVIOR 
[  89  ]
On-site part-time and flextime employees will incorporate similar 
strategies around their schedules, particularly if they do not 
overlap with their bosses’ and colleagues’ schedules. Punctuality 
and reliability are key for part-time and flextime workers. 
Sharing an Office 
When telecommuters eventually come to the office, they need 
somewhere to sit! Enter “hoteling” and “hot-desking.” The terms 
are often used interchangeably, but there is a distinction between 
the two. Hoteling is reservation-based unassigned office seating, 
while hot-desking is reservationless unassigned seating. Both are 
designed to provide dedicated, supported office space for those 
who only need it occasionally. In addition to adhering to the 
guidelines for open-plan spaces, a considerate hoteler or hot- 
desker observes these rules.
GUIDELINES
A
A Reserve only needed time and space. Cancel reservations 
you no longer need or can’t use. Tying up space unneces- 
sarily may impact your ability to secure future reservations.
A
A Introduce yourself. Smile and offer a friendly greeting to 
those sitting nearby, but take care not to interrupt them if 
they are obviously busy or concentrating on work.
A
A Keep the space clean. Sanitize all surfaces and equipment 
with disinfectant wipes upon arriving and departing. Take 
trash with you when you vacate.
A
A Leave the space as you found it. Store personal items in 
desk drawers while using the space, and make sure to take 

excuse me
[  90  ]
them with you when you leave. Do not rearrange or remove 
furnishings. 
Sharing a Job
The concept of job-sharing is increasingly the answer for 
parents wanting more time with their children, millennials 
interested in volunteering, older workers looking to design their 
“portfolio lives,” and employees seeking less stress and more 
work-life integration. Employers benefit, too, from improved 
employee engagement and retention, increased accountability 
and productivity, and the combined intelligence, experience, 
and perspective of two employees.
Employers can help ensure the success of job-sharing by 
pairing employees with complementary skills and temperaments, 
setting clear expectations, and supporting efforts through 
ongoing feedback and coaching. Job-sharing partners will 
explicitly define their roles, agree upon reporting methods and 
frequency, communicate consistently, hold themselves and one 
another accountable, learn to respectfully disagree and reach 
consensus, present a unified front, and share both the 
responsibility for, and success of, their efforts. 
The Benefits Buffet 
Forty-one year-old Lori was a billing department representative 
at a large hospital. For 12 years, she had juggled the responsi- 
bilities of two children and a Monday through Friday 9 to 5 job, 
an hour away from home. After work, she’d go grocery 
shopping and hurry home to make dinner, hoping to spend at 

BUSINESS BEHAVIOR 
[  91  ]
least a little time with her young daughters before it was time 
for bed. 
It bothered Lori tremendously that her job made it 
impossible for her to attend any of her girls’ school plays or 
soccer games, even though they never complained. (Well, 
maybe they complained a little.) But the billing department 
needed staffing during normal work hours, and Lori needed 
her job. And so when it was announced that the billing office 
hours were being expanded to 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M. and that 
employees could now self-schedule their hours, Lori was 
elated. Lori did not know who was more excited—her nine- 
year-old daughter or herself! Today, for the first time that did 
not involve her taking personal or vacation time, Lori was 
going to see her little girl play soccer. The cookies made, Lori 
would be there on the sidelines, cheering away and smiling 
from ear to ear. 
Are you a parent concerned about new baby expenses? 
Facebook has you covered with $4,000 in “Baby Cash.” Worried 
about how to feed that new baby while traveling for work? 
Zillow will pay for moms to ship their breastmilk home. Travel 
bug biting? Airbnb will give you a $2,000 travel stipend to any 
of its lodgings worldwide. Eager to finally finish (or start) your 
novel? Deloitte will pay you for four weeks off, for any reason at 
all, and another three to six  months at partial pay for volunteer 
work or a career-enhancing opportunity. 
 Employers know perks matter. According to a Glassdoor 
survey, “nearly three in five (57 percent) people report benefits and 
perks being among their top considerations before accepting a job, 
while four in five people say they would prefer new perks over a 
pay raise.”8 The same report indicates that while perks may get key 
talent in the door, they will not necessarily keep them there. Once 

excuse me
[  92  ]
on board, a company’s culture, values, senior leadership, and 
career opportunities are the things that get the best to stay. 
Subsidized transportation, company paid meals, dry cleaning 
services, and closing early on Fridays in the summer are now 
almost ubiquitous. Depending on the industry and company, 
today’s work-life smorgasbord might include concierge services, 
web-monitored day care, adoption subsidies, family leave, 
prayer rooms, tax preparation assistance, paid volunteer time, 
free subscriptions, pet sitting, massages, on-site doctor’s visits, 
nap pods, organic food, wine bars, home cleaning services, 
marital counseling, vacation money, help for aging parents and 
grandparents, in-home dinner delivery, international assign- 
ments, and paid sabbaticals. 
Perks are defining the workplace. In the New York Times 
article “Housecleaning, Then Dinner? Silicon Perks Come 
Home,” Matt Ritchel says, “That shifting mind-set—the idea that 
life and work must be blended rather than separated—is 
increasingly common.” The article quotes Google spokesman 
Jordan Newman saying, “What you’ve seen is benefits moving 
away from free food into thinking more holistically about 
individuals and their health.”9
Amenities cannot make up for bad corporate cultures and, if 
they are seen as ways to buy employees off, can even backfire. 
But if the culture is healthy, and everyone is happy, perks can 
provide a win-win situation.
The New Realities
The 21st century workplace can be disconcerting, even as 
employers try to make the lives of their employees ever more 

BUSINESS BEHAVIOR 
[  93  ]
comfortable. Recognition of new workplace realities is every- 
one’s responsibility. This starts with accepting the fact that we 
are under digital and visual surveillance many of our waking 
moments and virtually all of our working moments. Our com- 
mutes are chronicled by tollbooths, stoplights, and highway 
cameras that take our pictures while recording tolls paid, lights 
run, and speeds travelled. Mobile phones track our movements. 
Office parking lots, garages, entrances, and elevators are 
watched. Walks through security and to desks are logged. And 
once at our desks, Internet use, email communication, and 
telephone calls are monitored.
In the Financial Times, Adam Jones writes, “The Spies in the 
cellar are now sidling up to your desk.” He says, “Offices, in 
particular, are becoming havens for monitoring equipment with 
varying levels of intrusiveness.”10 Among them, he writes, are 
sensors in name badges that monitor how people move around 
the office, who they talk to, and even their tone of voice. 
Workplace occupancy sensors indicate how often desks and 
meeting places are used. 
Organizations defend these and other measures as ways to 
identify problem workers, maximize resources, and save costs. 
While few would object to the green benefits of smart rooms 
turning off lights when unoccupied, we find it disconcerting to 
realize that these rooms also know exactly when and for how 
long we are in them. Those seemingly unnoticed late arrivals, 
long lunches, and early weekend departures are perhaps not so 
unnoticed after all. 
Perhaps this is not a problem in laid-back cultures, but it 
could be in more formal ones. Debating whether such monitoring 
is legal (it is), whether the information it provides to employers 
is useful (it is), whether the atmosphere it promotes feels like 

excuse me
[  94  ]
“Big Brother is watching you” (it does), and whether employees 
like it (they do not) are all nonstarters. As with all elements of 
corporate culture, our options are these: Accept them, reject 
them and join new ones, or start our own. The surveilled work- 
place will become more and more the norm. 
Success in today’s professional arena requires more than a job 
well done. Surviving and thriving requires that you accept the 
realities of the new workplace and manage them as well as 
possible.
REMEMBER 
A
A Everything is different on the other side of “the glass door.” 
Your agility in adjusting to a new corporate culture will 
determine your chances for success and happiness within it.
A
A Know that everyday manners matter more than anything 
else. Good manners define your character and brand. Pay 
careful attention to the little things. They are huge.  
A
A Evolve with and embrace new workspaces. Or start your 
own.
A
A Respect your colleagues’ work arrangements, hours, and 
time zones. Consider these before scheduling meetings or 
otherwise attempting to engage with them.
A
A Know that workplace realities mean that our brands are 
always on display. Always!

95
chapter 5
business communication 
Making the Connection
“Speak clearly, if you speak at all; carve every word before you 
let it fall.”
—OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, SR .
T
oday is the day. After a long process of winnowing can- 
didates for an associate’s position at a leading real estate 
law firm, Rebecca has narrowed it down to two: Paul and 
Frederick. On paper, there is no comparison. Frederick was on 
the law review at one of the country’s top-tier law schools, 
graduating at the head of his class. The latest in a long line of 
very successful lawyers in his family, his social connections 
and avid interest in golf and sailing make him a natural to rub 
elbows with just the kind of clients the firm is looking to 
attract. Frederick dresses impeccably from head to toe. And he 
is confident—maybe too confident—Rebecca thinks, as she 
remembered how he jumped in to finish her sentences and 
dropped names with abandon. 

excuse me
[  96  ]
Paul had also graduated first in his class, but from a 
second-tier school. His LSATs would have gotten him into a top 
school, but he needed to attend part-time so he could work to 
support himself and his young family. This let the elite schools 
out. Paul did not have Frederick’s social connections, expensive 
hobbies, or bespoke wardrobe. What he did have, Rebecca 
thought, was a respectful nature, a quiet self-assuredness, and a 
genuine warmth. When Rebecca spoke, Paul listened intently. 
He asked excellent questions, deftly responded to her comments, 
added relevant information, and smiled and laughed when 
appropriate. He made Rebecca feel like his primary interest was 
how he could help the firm, not how lucky the firm would be to 
hire him. Considering the many obstacles Paul had overcome to 
get to the finalist stage and the kind, respectful way in which he 
communicated with her, Rebecca was sure his intelligence, 
tenacity, and authenticity would serve the firm and its clients 
very well. Her decision was made. 
Well-honed communication skills are necessary at every 
stage of one’s career, but are even more critical as one ascends—
or tries to ascend—the corporate ladder. One need look no 
further than to Doug McMillan to support this point. At 49 
years old, he is the youngest Walmart CEO since Sam Walton 
and is by all accounts a brilliant communicator. Named to 
Decker Communications’ “The Top Ten Best (and Worst) 
Communicators of 2015,”1 he is described as a warm, humble, 
approachable man who communicates care for his employees. 
Walmart board member Kevin Systrom, cofounder and CEO of 
Instagram, agrees. In Fortune’s 2015 article entitled “The Man 
Who’s Reinventing Walmart,”2 Brian O’Keefe describes Mr. 
McMillan as the most intensely friendly person he has ever met. 
He says that “his focus is on you, like there is no other thing 

BUSINESS COMMUNICATION 
[  97  ]
going on in his mind when he talks to you. He’s not distracted, 
he’s 100 percent focused on you.” 
Walmart’s CEO seems to have taken the advice of its founder 
to heart. So important was good communication to Sam Walton 
that he devoted 2 of his “10 Rules for Building a Business”3 to it. 
Mr. Walton advised:
Rule 4. Communicate everything you can to your 
partners. The more they know, the more they’ll 
understand. The more they understand, the more 
they’ll care. Once they care, there is no stopping  
them. 
Rule 7. Listen to everyone in your company. And 
figure out ways to get them talking. To push 
responsibility down within your organization, and to 
force good ideas to bubble up within it, you must listen 
to what your associates are trying to tell you.
Communication can make or break business relationships, 
careers, and even companies. Effective communication provides 
you with opportunities to expand networks, raise profiles, 
showcase skills, and engender confidence. Despite all these 
benefits, developing good communication skills is still an 
intimidating prospect for many. 
Conversation, especially spontaneous, unscripted small talk, 
is particularly problematic. Millennials would rather do 
anything than engage in simple conversation, finding it 
superficial, boring, pointless, and altogether too much work. 
Chatting, unless it’s via electronic devices, is just not their thing. 
Truth be told, older generations are not too crazy about small 

excuse me
[  98  ]
talk either. But it’s very important, because substantive 
conversations, crucial to professional success, emerge from 
small talk. 
Opportunities for conversation are everywhere, and the 
professionally savvy take advantage of as many as possible as 
often as possible. The chances to promote one’s personal brand 
through conversation are endless: on public transportation, 
while waiting in line for coffee, walking down a hallway, or 
riding an elevator, and at business meetings, lunches, dinners, 
events, parties, or conferences. 
Nonverbal Cues
Liam needs advice from his boss. The 33-year-old biotech 
engineer is not sure how to proceed with the new project he’s 
been assigned. He approaches his boss’s office and peering 
through the window, sees him hunched over his computer 
screen in deep concentration, frowning intently. The thought 
quickly flits through Liam’s mind that his boss is probably 
working on the quarterly reports due later today. He quickly 
brushes that thought aside and says to himself, “This will just 
take a second.” 
When Liam tentatively knocks, his boss looks up with an 
impatient “this had better be important” expression on his 
face—an expression lost on Liam. He clears his throat and asks 
his question. His boss, incredulous as well as annoyed, shakes 
his head and says, “You interrupted me for that?”
The ability to read and send nonverbal cues is critical in the 
professional arena. In face-to-face interactions, studies tell us 
that approximately 60 percent of communication is nonverbal, 

BUSINESS COMMUNICATION 
[  99  ]
30 percent is tone of voice, and only 10 percent is the words we 
say. Nonverbal communication governs how we think about 
ourselves, according to Amy Cuddy, social psychologist and 
associate professor at Harvard Business School. In her TED 
talk, “Your Body Language Shapes Who You Are,” she says, 
“Our bodies change our minds, our minds change our behaviors, 
our behaviors change our outcomes.”4
Ms. Cuddy says to convey high power—and conceivably 
change our minds in the process—we should lean in, stand with 
our heads high, our arms open, our legs uncrossed, and our 
hands on our hips or clasped behind our necks. Conversely, we 
would avoid the appearance of low power by refraining from 
looking down, having our hands in our pockets, crossing our 
arms and legs, or slouching. Ms. Cuddy recommends that we not 
only “fake it ’til we make it” with our nonverbal communication, 
but fake it until we actually become as strong and confident as 
our body language conveys. There is not complete agreement 
that nonverbal communication changes minds, but there is 
virtually universal agreement that nonverbal communication 
affects the perceptions others have of us.
Nonverbal communication can be obvious or subtle. Body 
language experts Patryk and Kasia Welowski say people convey 
unconscious emotions through “micro expressions” and that 
true feelings can be transmitted in as little as half a second.5 
Through nonverbal cues, we express feelings, disseminate 
information, reinforce messages, provide feedback, and exert 
control. We encode the information we send and decode the 
information sent back to us through body language.
In the U.S., it is generally agreed that hands clasped behind 
the back show confidence, clenched fists show firmness of 
resolve, a hand on the heart indicates a desire to be believed, and 

excuse me
[  100  ]
finger-pointing conveys aggressiveness or arrogance. Rubbing 
ones hands together equals anticipation, steepling fingers shows 
confidence, and hands in pockets indicates mistrust or reluctance. 
Hands folded in front indicate vulnerability, arms across the chest 
shows the person feels threatened, and talking with palms open 
suggests honesty. Smiles, laughter, and frequent eye contact signal 
friendliness and courteousness, head nodding shows empathy, 
and eye contact transmits credibility. 
Note that nonverbal communication has different meanings 
around the world. Among the Japanese, smiles may indicate 
embarrassment, confusion, or discomfort. The A-okay sign means 
a variety of things in different countries—virtually none of them 
good. Unless we make a point to understand the meanings of 
nonverbal communication in other cultures, it is better to refrain 
from gesturing among international colleagues and clients. 
Striking up a pleasant conversation is easier and less 
threatening if we first learn how to read others’ nonverbal cues. 
It enables us to know when to approach others, when to keep 
talking and when to let others talk, how others are responding 
emotionally to what we’re saying, and when to end conversations. 
If we see that someone is otherwise engaged in conversation, 
concentrating on a task, reading, eating, or praying, it’s clearly 
not a good time to begin a conversation. However, if they smile, 
make eye contact, stand, nod their heads, look interested, or 
speak, they are conveying that they are open to an exchange.
READ THE CUES
A
A If someone doesn’t want to talk, she will look away, frown, 
sigh, cross her arms, offer a quick furtive smile, keep her 
eyes on her device, or put up a physical barrier. 

BUSINESS COMMUNICATION 
[  101  ]
A
A If someone is bored, he will look around the room, check 
his phone, fidget, slouch, stand at an angle, avoid eye 
contact, sigh, roll his eyes, or have a vacant look. 
A
A If someone is angry, she will narrow her eyes, lower her 
chin, purse her lips, raise a corner of her mouth, place her 
hands on her hips, glare, or point or wag a finger.
How close we stand to others is another means of nonverbal 
communication that is culture-specific. Americans feel most 
comfortable sitting or standing at an arm’s length, but this 
distance would be considered too far apart among Middle 
Easterners and South Americans and too close among the 
Japanese. According to the life skills website, skillsyouneed.
com, Westerners recognize four categories of distance: intimate, 
personal, social, and public.6 When you violate those norms, 
knowingly or not, you make others feel uncomfortable.
KNOW THE DISTANCES
A
A Intimate distance ranges from touching to about 1.5 feet. 
This distance is reserved for close personal relationships, 
where eye contact and other nonverbal cues are not neces- 
sarily critical. This distance is too close for professional 
interactions as most will feel their space is being violated.
A
A Personal distance is somewhere between 1.5 feet and 3.8 
feet. This distance is good for shaking hands or conversing 
with a friend or colleague. Depending upon the relationship, 
people may start at a lesser distance and move farther apart 
after introductions have been made. They may also move 
closer as the conversation progresses. This distance allows 
for observation of important nonverbal cues. 

excuse me
[  102  ]
A
A Social or professional distance is anywhere from 3.8 to 11 
feet. In this setting, the situation determines the distance at 
which to position yourself. If working on a project, you 
would be at the closer end of the range. If presenting at a 
meeting, the farther end is more appropriate. 
A
A Public distance of 11 to 14 feet is used mainly by public 
speakers. At this distance, the subtlety of facial expressions 
is lost, which is why many public speakers rely upon 
expansive gestures to underscore their messages.
In conversation, note how far others stand from you. If you 
lessen or increase the space they will unconsciously move until 
their comfort level is restored. If you aren’t sure how close to 
stand to someone, keep to the closer end of the social/professional 
distance range.
The Eyes Have It
Margot, new to the IT team, has outstanding credentials but her 
six-month performance review was mixed. There were no 
complaints about her work, but there were many about how she 
interacts with her team members. Margot, her team claims, is 
unapproachable, prickly, and dismissive. Teammates are afraid 
to interrupt her when she is on the phone or computer, and she 
is always on one or the other. This is a problem because they need 
to work together as a team.  
So Margot is called into a meeting with Josephine, the HR 
manager, to discuss the matter. Josephine plans to ask Margot 
to assess her relationship with the team, thinking that if she 
recognizes her disconnect with her colleagues, the issue could 

BUSINESS COMMUNICATION 
[  103  ]
be more easily rectified. Margot arrives, plops down in a chair, 
keeps her eyes glued to her phone, and says, “Okay, what’s this 
all about?” Josephine tells her about the concerns voiced by her 
colleagues. She asks Margot if she can think of any areas in 
which she could improve her communication. Without taking 
her eyes off of her phone, Margot says, “That’s ridiculous. I treat 
everyone respectfully. I don’t know what they’re talking about.” 
Josephine realizes this is going to be a much harder problem 
to solve than she had hoped.
When it looks like we are not listening, relationships may be 
at risk. We always need to decide what is more important at a 
given moment: connecting with the person in front of us or 
connecting with others virtually. When we make eye contact 
with others, we not only show respect and attention, we connect, 
build trust, and bond. Doctors, attorneys, and coaches use it to 
comfort, persuade, influence, encourage, and control. Without 
eye contact, they could not effectively do their jobs.  
The extent and implications of eye contact vary from culture 
to culture. Among Asians, subordinates do not initiate direct eye 
contact with superiors, as it could be construed as disrespectful. 
In African and Latin American cultures, looking someone in the 
eye may be interpreted as aggressive or confrontational. In the 
Arab world, men engage in a high degree of eye contact, but 
consider it inappropriate between men and women. Britons 
engage in less eye contact than Americans, and Southern 
Europeans, more. When interacting with international business 
partners, it is important to remember these differences to avoid 
giving or taking unintended offence. 
Eye contact does not come easily for everyone. Some find it 
threatening and others just find it uncomfortable. But in the U.S. 
and many other cultures, making eye contact is critical. 

excuse me
[  104  ]
EYE CONTACT
A
A Keep eyes up. Do not look at other parts of the body. Gazes 
should be reflective of professional, not personal or 
intimate, relationships.
A
A Make direct eye contact. Hold someone’s eyes for about 
five to seven seconds in conversation, look away for a few 
seconds, and then look back. He will know you are engaged 
without feeling under a microscope. If direct eye contact 
feels intimidating, look at the bridge of someone’s nose or 
lower forehead.  
A
A Aim for eye contact 50 percent of the time. It can be more 
when listening and less when speaking. Too much eye 
contact comes across as aggressive and too little, timid.
A
A Practice, practice, practice! Start with comfortable 
relationships, gradually moving on to acquaintances, 
passersby, cashiers, and wait staff. TV newscasters and 
even pets provide great opportunities to become more 
comfortable in making eye contact. 
The Good Conversationalist  
Darrell, a musician, was thrilled when he was asked to play for 
the President at a White House event. When he was informed he 
was welcome to bring a guest, Darrell immediately thought of 
Don, a longtime friend who had been involved in local politics 
for a number of years. The only thing was, Don was not a member 
of the President’s political party, nor was he particularly a fan. 
Still, Don was not going to pass up an opportunity to go to the 
White House and happily accepted.

BUSINESS COMMUNICATION 
[  105  ]
On the day of the event, Don thought he had never seen as 
excited a group of adults as those who were assembled to meet 
the President. When the President arrived, he spoke briefly to 
each person, and when it was his turn, gave Don his complete 
and undivided attention. Don knew he was briefed on the guests 
in attendance but was still amazed and flattered when the 
President referenced the alma mater they shared and asked Don 
if he had had a particularly demanding professor. He had, and 
they shared a laugh at how difficult his course was. They spoke 
for only a few moments, but Don left the event in awe, knowing 
he had been in the company of a great conversationalist. 
Good conversationalists are polite. They know how to approach 
and join existing conversation groups. They know how to make 
smooth introductions and include everyone in conversations. 
They arm themselves with appropriate topics and steer clear of 
any that might be divisive or offensive. Good conversationalists 
know how to make seamless transitions from one topic to another, 
when to interject humor, and how to handle tricky situations such 
as conversational lulls or mistakes. They are good listeners and 
show interest in others. They do not argue, interrupt, or correct. 
Finally, good conversationalists know when it’s time to leave a 
conversation group and gracefully move on. 
THE COMFORTABLE CONVERSATIONALIST
A
A Be polite! Focus on others, not on your electronic device. 
Be present in the moment; don’t look around to see who 
might be more important or interesting to talk to. 
A
A Join the group. It’s always easier when someone invites 
you into a conversation group, but feel comfortable joining 
one on your own. Never stand by yourself looking bored or 

excuse me
[  106  ]
texting. Catch someone’s eye, smile, extend your hand, and 
say, “Hello, I’m Joan Smith.” Do not apologize for 
approaching a person or group at an event to which you 
were invited. It’s your job!
A
A Make introductions. A good conversationalist is not shy 
about introducing herself. When making your introduction, 
offer a genuine smile, a warm, dry hand, full eye contact, 
and say your first and last name. In the social arena, age and 
gender determine the order of the introduction. Men are 
traditionally introduced to women and younger persons to 
older persons. In a social setting, you would say, “Mrs. 
Adams, may I introduce Mr. Phillips?” In a professional 
setting, rank is the determining factor, not gender or age. 
Persons of lower rank or power are introduced to persons of 
higher rank or power. You would say, using their real names, 
“John Client, I would like to introduce Ann Boss. Ann Boss, 
this is John Client.” This order is followed because a client 
of any level outranks fellow employees of any level, even 
bosses and company presidents. After all, without clients, 
there are no companies! 
A
A Include everyone. Make eye contact with everyone, even 
those who are not talking. They will feel part of the group 
and may be encouraged to join in. Ask for their opinions 
about the topic at hand or what brought them to this event. 
A
A Be prepared. An experienced conversationalist knows the 
few seconds after an introduction can be awkward. Be 
ready with conversation topics to smooth the transition. 
When one-on-one, always be prepared to hold up at least 
50 percent of a conversation. Tried and true topics like the 
weather, sports, or observations about the venue are 
always good icebreakers. Steer clear of risky topics such as 

BUSINESS COMMUNICATION 
[  107  ]
religion or politics, or anything of a personal nature. Be 
creative! Eleanor Roosevelt would use the alphabet to get 
a conversation started. “Are you an art enthusiast?” or “Do 
you like baseball?” (Or cars, dogs, etc.) These will allow 
you, if need be, to break an awkward pause. 
A
A Cover up mistakes. Ignore the mistake if you can: if you 
can’t, downplay it. Say, “I do that all the time!” The person 
who made the mistake will be grateful, and you can 
immediately move on. If you made the mistake and it goes 
unnoticed, keep it that way. Otherwise, apologize or laugh 
it off and let it go. 
A
A Squelch inappropriate remarks or topics. Tricky situations 
need someone to take control and smooth things over 
without causing embarrassment for the person who 
introduced the topic or for others in the group. If possible, 
pretend you didn’t hear the comment, and change the 
subject. If necessary, be more direct, and say, “Can we talk 
about something else?” or “I’m sorry, I don’t agree,” or “I 
don’t think that’s appropriate.” Then move on to a new 
subject—or a new conversation group. 
A
A Know how to move on. Never monopolize others. The actual 
length of time you are in a conversation depends upon what 
you are talking about and with whom, but generally, be 
prepared to move on after about five to seven minutes. Say, 
“It was lovely speaking with you,” or “Enjoy the evening,” or 
“I hope we meet again!” Better to have ended a conversation 
with someone wishing it had lasted longer than having him 
regret he had to talk to you for so long! 
The road to becoming a good conversationalist is bound to 
include some speed bumps. Keep trying. Most people won’t 

excuse me
[  108  ]
even notice if you get a name wrong or mispronounce words. 
They’ll be too concerned with the impressions they are making 
upon you! 
The Power of Speech
Charlotte’s organizational skills were unmatched. As executive 
assistant to the managing partner at an international law firm, 
she meticulously kept her boss’s calendar, prioritized matters 
that needed his attention, scheduled his meetings, arranged 
his travel, maintained his correspondence, and screened his 
visitors. Charlotte researched information for her boss, as well 
as prepared spreadsheets, took meeting minutes, organized 
expense reports, reconciled charge card statements, made 
reservations, and bought and sent business gifts. When asked, 
she offered her perspective and gave advice. And on top of all 
of these responsibilities, she supervised the entire adminis- 
trative staff.  
Charlotte was perfect except for one thing. She had a dreadful 
telephone manner. She was abrupt with callers, including clients 
and board members, dismissive of staff, argumentative with 
vendors and service providers, and rude to solicitors. At best she 
had an imperious tone, at worst she raised her voice in anger to 
callers she thought had wasted her valuable time. But she never 
did any of these things within her boss’s earshot. 
And then one day, he unexpectedly walked into the office 
and heard her on the telephone. That was Charlotte’s last day 
as executive assistant to the managing partner. She wasn’t 
fired, but was immediately relieved of her responsibilities 
and demoted. In front of the whole staff she had treated so 

BUSINESS COMMUNICATION 
[  109  ]
disrespectfully, she emptied her desk of her personal be- 
longings into a box and carried that box out of the executive 
suite to a cubicle at the far end of the building.
The way you say something is far more important than the 
words themselves. Tone of voice conveys confidence, enthu- 
siasm, respect, and interest, or the lack thereof. Pay attention 
to the delivery of your messages, because they can be easily 
misinterpreted and tarnish your brand in the process. Speaking 
patterns matter, too. Are you a high talker? A low talker? A  
fast, slow, loud, or close talker? Do you wander from the point 
or supply unnecessary detail and take too long to finish what 
you are saying? If you have ever gotten feedback about your 
speech, consider it a gift and take it seriously. 
Keep in mind that it’s possible you’re getting feedback 
without realizing it. Do others often ask you to slow down, speak 
up, or repeat what you’ve said? Do they sometimes finish 
your sentences or supply words? Are you ever asked to lower 
your voice, either verbally or with a “keep it down” gesture? 
These are signals that indicate you may want to work on your 
speech. 
Speaking too softly can make you come across as timid or 
unsure of your message. Speaking too loudly can make you seem 
aggressive. A very rapid rate of speech may indicate to others 
nervousness, overexcitement, or impatience. Taking too long to 
make a point may come across as someone who likes to hear 
himself talk. 
Any of these speech patterns may annoy, frustrate, or cause 
concern to others. As such, it makes sense to try and modify 
them. Some characteristics are easier to change than others. But 
since strong communication skills are important for success, 
improvements are worth the effort.

excuse me
[  110  ]
SPEECH TWEAKS
A
A Speak louder. Think about what you want to say before you 
say it! Breathe from the diaphragm, and speak at an even, 
measured pace. Practice by reading aloud, and ask for 
feedback. Tune in to nonverbal cues. If others appear to be 
straining to hear, raise your voice, but do not shout.
A
A Speak more softly. Record yourself in conversation to 
determine your volume relative to others. Practice speaking 
more quietly. Strive for warmth and resonance in your 
voice. Speak less. Use nonverbal cues to relay your message 
instead of words alone.
A
A Slow down your pace. Enunciate each syllable. Have a clear 
message in mind, and speak in full sentences. Insert 
pauses, or “commas,” into your speech. Control emotions.
A
A Speed up your pace. Read aloud and time yourself to get to 
a pace of about 150 words per minute. Introduce emotion 
into your voice. 
A
A Speak succinctly. Employ an economy of words, and be as 
concise as possible. Make sure conversations are not ser- 
mons. Use appropriate vocabulary, not fancy words.
Professional resources are available to help you. Investing in 
voice coaching, improv lessons, or public speaking courses, such 
as those offered by Toastmasters, could quickly get your 
speaking skills up to par. Pulitzer Prize–winning American 
public affairs columnist William Raspberry said, “Good English, 
well spoken and well written, will open more doors for you than 
a college degree. Bad English, poorly written, will slam doors 
that you didn’t even know existed.” 

BUSINESS COMMUNICATION 
[  111  ]
Words still matter. Polite expressions that used to be 
commonplace and much appreciated are too often missing 
from many modern vocabularies. “You’re welcome” has been 
replaced by “No problem,” “Yup,” or “Uh-huh.” “I’m sorry” is 
now a shrug of the shoulders, an “Oh well,” or a “What ev.” 
“Hello” and “Good morning” are now “Hey,” “How’s it goin’?” 
or “S’up?” As always, the culture of the group dictates the 
norm, and if you are among coworkers who speak in a certain 
way, by all means feel free to join in. But generally, professional 
settings require more formal speech, especially if relationships 
are new, are one-time-only encounters, or involve persons 
from other countries. It is then best to err on the side of tradi- 
tional politeness and offer a full-throated “Hello,” “Thank 
you,” or “I’m sorry.”  
When conversing with someone from another country, it is 
important to remember that the meaning of even a seemingly 
unambiguous word like yes is not universal. In some cultures, 
such as the Japanese, it is considered rude to say no. You may get 
a hai to something you say, but that only means someone hears 
or understands you, not necessarily that he agrees. 
Mark Twain once said, “The difference between the right 
word and the almost right word is the difference between 
lightning and a lightning bug.” Choose your words carefully, 
and use only those you can truly own. Know what the words 
mean, how they are pronounced, and the right context in 
which to use them. My friend mixes up common sayings so 
much that we’ve actually come to welcome and delight in them. 
This Ivy League graduate has notably said, “I’d swallow my 
sword for him” (fall on my sword), “Fair complete” (fait accom-
pli), and “That’s some beautiful blink” (beautiful bling). Among 

excuse me
[  112  ]
friends, such malapropisms can be funny and endearing, but 
business associates could be left wondering. 
The words you use are an important element of your brands. 
Ban annoying terms, words, and clichés such as “touch base,” 
“circle back,” “deep dive,” “value-add,” “deliverable,” “band- 
width,” “synergize,” “killing it,” “socialize,” and “low-hanging 
fruit.” Resist peppering conversations with the latest slang. 
These words and terms can come across as unprofessional and 
exclusionary and are often dated within months. However, sites 
like onlineslangdictionary.com will keep you up on the latest, 
and allow you to understand the jargon. Avoid saying “utilize” 
or “signage” when “use” or “sign” work just as well. Steer clear of 
using words and phrases that made Financial Times columnist 
Lucy Kellaway’s annual list of the “worst corporate guff.” She 
said, “2015 broke all records for obfuscation, euphemism and 
ugliness.” Examples included nouns used as verbs such as “to 
effort,” “to language,” and “to front burnerize,” and euphemisms 
such as “ventilate” underperformers (fire), “bilateral telephonic 
meeting” (phone call), and “be careful of the optics of your 
personal brand” (tuck your shirts in).7  
We all need to use good grammar. Saying “Me and Jim” 
instead of “Jim and I” will make colleagues who speak correctly 
wonder how someone managed to graduate from school and get 
a job without learning the basics of grammar. 
In an article in CNN iReport, “Decline in Grammatical and 
Writing Skills of the New Generation Due to Techspeak,” Fran 
Alston says the language, structure, punctuation, tone, and format 
used in communicating via electronic means, or “techspeak,” is hav- 
ing a bad effect upon grammar. “There is a growing concern . . . 
among  scholars who fret that the wide use of ‘techspeak’ is a real 
threat to the structure and real essence of languages.”8

BUSINESS COMMUNICATION 
[  113  ]
Electronic communication suffers most from the increase of 
“techspeak,” but it has also crept into verbal communication. 
Commonly used terms and acronyms among millennials can 
leave older workers clueless. A useful resource for anyone who 
wants to learn or confirm the meanings of technology terms is 
“The Top 30 Internet Terms for Beginners, 2016” by Internet 
basics expert Paul Gil.9 People can also consult sites such as con-
nexin.net, onlineslangdictionary.com, and slang.org for help. 
Understanding the language of today’s workplace will give 
digital immigrants more confidence in their interactions with 
younger coworkers. Digital natives need to be patient and 
helpful with older peers as they become conversant with new 
terms and acronyms. 
Enunciation and regional accents are other aspects of speech 
to be conscious of. Speaking clearly, with as few fillers as 
possible (um, ah, like, you know, etc.), makes us sound far more 
articulate and thoughtful. Regional accents might require 
attention, too. Boston’s “Paak the caah in Haavaad Yaad” is a 
real thing. Famous for dropping and adding R’s, Bostonians 
don’t go to California; they go to “Californier.” They drink 
“wata,” not water. 
Hearing an authentic Boston accent is, for me, comforting 
because it means home. But to people from other places, a strong 
Boston accent may sound provincial. If others can’t understand 
you or tease you about your accent, try to minimize or even lose it 
if you can—or risk being seen as unsophisticated or unintelligent.
How do you lose a regional accent? Listen to newscasters! 
Their job is to disseminate information and build trust with the 
widest possible audience. To accomplish this, they must deliver 
news without a hint of regionalized accents. Try to emulate their 
speaking style by repeating their words with the same enunciation. 

excuse me
[  114  ]
It goes without saying, using foul language or making dis- 
paraging remarks about others reflects badly on those using or 
making them. It could also cost promotions or jobs. Swearing 
raises red flags about an individual’s maturity, self-control, and 
even intelligence. Foul language is offensive to many and can 
become an HR issue, especially if it is deemed offensive from 
gender, religious, or cultural perspectives. Swearing is tolerated 
in some industries more than others, but in general, using foul 
language does not enhance one’s brand and may impact one’s 
future.
The Good Listener
It’s 8:00 Wednesday morning in Atlanta, and Zoe has arrived at 
her desk. There is an incoming call from her boss, MaryAnn, 
who is on an extended business trip to Tokyo. “Why is she 
calling at this hour? It’s 9:00 P.M. Tokyo time!” Zoe says under 
her breath. 	
Then, like a ton of bricks, it hits Zoe: her boss is checking on 
the materials for this Friday’s meeting—the materials Zoe hasn’t 
sent! Before she left last week, MaryAnn had instructed her to 
FedEx to Tokyo 10 bound hard copies of the comprehensive 
proposal she would need for the client meeting, along with small 
gifts for each of the attendees. Originally, MaryAnn was going 
to carry them with her in her luggage, but with 10 days until the 
meeting, she decided it would be easier to have them shipped. 
In her haste to get all of the predeparture travel details 
buttoned up, Zoe had only been half-listening to MaryAnn’s 
laundry list of postdeparture instructions, thinking she’d deal 
with them later. Now, just two days before the meeting, there is 

BUSINESS COMMUNICATION 
[  115  ]
not enough time to get the shipment to Tokyo. She braces herself 
and takes the call. She knows, too late, she should have listened 
more carefully. What could she possibly say to her boss now? She 
is filled with dread as she picks up the phone.
Listening is the great and rare gift you give to others. It shows 
respect and validates feelings. It allows them to vent emotions, 
gain perspective, clarify thinking, and develop trust. Listeners 
benefit, too. Greater understanding, fewer mistakes, improved 
morale, saved time, solved problems, and increased productivity 
are the results of good listening. Listening boosts reputations 
and strengthens career prospects. Listening is the magic bullet. 
So why don’t people listen? 
In part, it is because human beings have a limited attention 
span, estimated at just eight seconds. People are also so consumed 
by content on the Internet that they can barely remember their 
own birthdays, let alone the details of what others are telling 
them. It seems that an increase in the use of technology is met 
with a commensurate decrease in attention span. 
The myth of multitasking is another barrier. Many people 
think they can effectively listen and engage in other activities at 
the same time. But there is zero evidence to confirm that. John 
Medina, author of the book Brain Rules, says, “The brain 
naturally focuses on concepts sequentially, one at a time . . . to 
put it bluntly, research shows that we cannot multitask.”10 Ryan 
Weaver, marketing analyst at Mentor Works Ltd., the financing 
consultancy, says “the proper word for what is commonly 
referred to as multitasking is ‘task-switching,’ and it is an 
imaginary skill.”11 No matter what it’s called, studies point out 
that it doesn’t work. When people try to perform multiple tasks 
at once, they decrease their productivity and increase their 
errors. And relationships suffer.  

excuse me
[  116  ]
Short attention spans, multitasking, and a scarcity of time 
combine to make listening a challenging undertaking at best. 
Add to this the fact that most people are not all that interested 
in issues that do not directly impact them, and listening takes a 
hit. But listen we must! And it requires real effort. 
Listening well means putting aside our own feelings and 
thoughts to absorb the speakers’ thoughts and feelings. It does 
not necessarily mean agreeing with what others say, only that 
we hear what they say. Listening well means giving undivided 
attention, tuning into and mirroring others’ emotions, relating 
as best we can to what is being said, encouraging speakers to say 
more, and paraphrasing often so speakers know they are 
understood. Good listeners don’t push conversations in 
particular directions. Instead, they immerse themselves in what 
others are saying and feeling and then, if appropriate, share 
insights, answer questions, or offer solutions.
 THE CAREFUL LISTENER 
A
A Remove distractions. Give the person you are listening to 
your undivided attention. Turn away from your computer 
screen. Mute your phone. Look directly at the person 
speaking. And perhaps take the conversation to a private 
room to minimize interruptions. 
A
A Be receptive. Don’t judge what is being said, finish sen- 
tences, supply words, change the subject, or commandeer 
the conversation.
A
A Provide feedback and convey empathy. Emotionally con- 
nect with the person you are listening to and let 
them know you are interested and understand. Offer 

BUSINESS COMMUNICATION 
[  117  ]
conversational “door openers” such as “That’s inter- 
esting, please go on” or “I’m glad you said that!” Tune in 
to their emotions by saying, “That sounds exciting!” (Or 
frustrating, confusing, overwhelming, etc.) Use nonverbal 
cues: nods, smiles, furrowed brows, or looks of surprise 
or delight.
A
A Maintain discretion. Loose lips sink more than ships. They 
can sink your business, your career, and your finances. 
They can even land you in jail. Gossip breeds ill will, poor 
morale, lost productivity, and permanently damaged 
relationships. Betray a confidence and people will see you 
as untrustworthy, unprofessional, insecure, or just plain 
mean. Conversely, the person who demonstrates she can 
be trusted wins friends and allies and gains a reputation as 
someone who is mature and professional.
As you advance in your career, the need for clear, sensitive 
communication will grow. Without strong communication 
skills, there may not be advancement. Warren Buffet, Richard 
Branson, Mark Zuckerberg, and Oprah Winfrey have followed 
different paths to success, but all are exceptional communicators. 
Each in their own way has learned how to engage in conversation, 
read and send nonverbal cues, and listen well. 
REMEMBER
A
A Nonverbal communication says volumes. Read and use 
nonverbal cues to your advantage.
A
A Eye contact has enormous power. It shows respect, 
engenders trust, and helps strengthen brands.

excuse me
[  118  ]
A
A Good things come to good conversationalists. Practice 
your skills until conversation is one of your strongest skills.
A
A Listening well reaps great rewards. Use the knowledge and 
trust that respectful listening creates to become an 
exemplary employee, colleague, and business partner.  

119
chapter 6 
electronic communication 
Smart Rules for Smart Devices 
“Electric communication will never be a substitute for the 
face of someone who with their soul encourages another 
person to be brave and true.” 
—C HARLES DIC KENS
J
osh cannot live without his devices. What if a client emails 
him? What if his buddy texts him with playoff tickets? What 
if a cancellation gets him a table at that new Thai restaurant? 
What if his apartment application is approved? He’s got to stay 
connected. Period.  
But now, he is at this important meeting and they have all 
been instructed to close their laptops and put away their phones. 
Everyone quietly complies, including Josh, who tries not to 
show his irritation. 
While the meeting drones on, Josh itches to look at his phone. 
He’s been waiting all morning for a client’s final decision on an 
important contract. “I’ll just take a quick peek under the table,” 
he thinks. Moments have passed, and now Josh, lost in reading 

excuse me
[  120  ]
all his messages, suddenly becomes aware of the dead silence in 
the room. He glances up to see all eyes on him. Josh quickly 
realizes that he has been called on to answer some question and 
that he never even heard his name called. 
Red faced, he sheepishly asks, “Could you repeat the 
question?”
Now that we have mastered the art of face-to-face com- 
munication, we can exhale a sigh of relief and go back to the 
comfortable, controlled world of electronic communication. In 
the digital world, we’re in charge. We communicate with 
whom we want, when we want, for how long we want, and by 
what means we want. In the digital world, we do not need to 
concern ourselves with the unpredictability inherent in 
in-person interactions. 
Digital communication is, by great margins, the mode of 
choice for younger generations. Traditionalists still tend to favor 
face-to-face conversations when possible. Baby boomers like 
in-person encounters but do engage via telephone, email, and 
text. Generation X prefers email or text communication. 
Generation Y almost exclusively prefers text or social media. 
And Generation Z, the next on the workplace horizon, wants 
FaceTime.  
These generalizations can sometimes be helpful, but it is a 
mistake to assume everyone in a category conforms to their 
generation’s predominant communication style. My 90-year-old 
mother, a remarkably savvy digital communicator, regularly 
Skypes with her children and grandchildren, one of whom is her 
Navy pilot grandson in Okinawa.  
 You need to determine the best mode of communication for 
a given set of circumstances, and then undertake it skillfully. 

ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION 
[  121  ]
Consider the means by which others prefer to communicate, and 
adapt to their preferred style. Think about what you’re trying to 
accomplish, and then decide whether face-to-face, voice-to-voice, 
or text-based communication is the way to go. 
Electronic communication disseminates information with 
speed, accuracy, and efficiency, but it is less effective in building 
relationships than face-to-face conversation. In his article, 
“Technology vs. Face to Face,” Barry Siskind cites a report 
prepared by the Harvard Business Review comparing face-to-face 
communication with electronic communication. He concludes 
that in a number of key areas, including developing new 
relationships, negotiating, maintaining relationships, and 
overcoming cultural barriers, face-to-face communication beats 
electronic by overwhelming percentages.1
Telephone Skills
Mark has worked very hard to land his new position at a highly 
regarded graphic design agency, after graduating from one of 
New York’s top schools. But now that he is on the job, some grim 
realities have settled in.  
Mark presumed that work on actual projects would take up 
at least 90 percent of his time. He had failed to anticipate the 
incredible number of meetings, emails, and telephone calls 
every workday would include and the impact these would have 
on his project work. He is especially bothered by the lengthy, 
rambling email and phone messages he gets.
Mark was reminded of his college days when his mother 
would call and leave him long, detailed messages. Mark, most 

excuse me
[  122  ]
often, did not even listen to them and almost never called back. 
He had too much work to do. One day he got a call from his 
father, who told him that if he did not start returning his 
mother’s calls, he would have to pay for his own phone plan. 
That got Mark’s  attention.
Mark’s boss, a respected and tenured VP in the company, was 
now coming down the hallway. And he did not look pleased. His 
boss says to Mark, “I left you two urgent voicemail messages 
this morning about a client deadline that has been moved up. 
Why haven’t you responded?” Mark was going to admit that he 
hadn’t even listened to the messages, when his boss said, “In the 
future, I expect you to respond promptly. I would rather not 
have to walk to your office to get your attention.” Mark starts to 
apologize, but his boss turns and walks away.
Mark now knows that listening to messages and returning 
calls is important, not just to his mother—it’s important to him 
if he wants to keep his job. 
Millennials would rather do anything—anything—than talk 
on the telephone. Or leave or listen to voicemail messages. They 
consider phone calls to be invasive, time-consuming, impractical, 
and “old school.” Millennials so strongly prefer communicating 
through text and social media that many are not even sure how 
to leave voicemail messages. In his New York Times article, “At 
the Tone, Leave a What?” Teddy Wayne says, “Having grown up 
in a text-friendly culture, with unmediated cellphone access to 
friends, they [millennials] have had little formative experience 
leaving spoken or relayed messages over the phone.”2
Many millennials just don’t see the point of leaving voicemail 
messages. If a number shows up on someone’s phone, that means 
that person should call back, right? The problem is, not everyone 
realizes this is an expectation. And even if they do, they are 

ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION 
[  123  ]
reluctant to return a call with no attendant message, thinking it 
could have been a misdial or “pocket dial.” They may also not 
recognize the number. 
It’s not just millennials who have an aversion to talking on 
the phone; many of their older colleagues feel the same way. 
Once, the telephone was the only technology available, but now 
they too like the freedom and flexibility of text-based 
communication. Boomers and traditionalists will still usually 
answer the phone, but not always. Leaving a voicemail message 
was once second nature for them, but today even they do not 
necessarily like to do so. Like their younger colleagues, this 
generation has begun to experience a kind of performance 
anxiety and vulnerability. They feel a lack of control over how 
their messages will be judged—and whether or not their calls 
will be returned. 
Despite all the talk about the lack of actual talk, telephone 
conversations may be experiencing a resurgence. People have 
begun to miss the sound of a human voice, the subtle nuances of 
tone, the intimacy, the clarity, and the immediacy. According to 
Jenna Wortham’s New York Times article, “Pass the Word: The 
Phone Call Is Back,”3 tech companies and entrepreneurs are 
introducing voice-centered mobile application services that 
strive to marry voice and convenience, the best of both worlds. 
The reassurance of a human voice, however and whenever it is 
heard, is once again in demand. 
Collaboration is the predominant concept in today’s 
workplace. Even as the tools of collaborative technology become 
more sophisticated, the seemingly old-fashioned methods of 
e-communication—telephone and email—are not going away. 
Industries such as financial services and insurance, among 
many others, still rely heavily on cold calling to conduct and 

excuse me
[  124  ]
solicit business. Companies also rely on the well-honed 
telephone skills of employees in call centers to attract and retain 
business, and to guard the reputations of their brands. Even the 
largest e-commerce companies in the world, including Amazon 
and eBay, need telephone representatives to step in when 
technology falls short in meeting their customers’ needs.
Remember switchboard operators? Those cheery-voiced 
humans who knew how to quickly and correctly route calls and 
actually made callers feel that they appreciated their interest in 
their organizations? They still exist, but in rapidly declining 
numbers. The position of a switchboard operator, or company 
telephone operator (actual switchboards haven’t been used since 
the 1960s), may soon be extinct. Now direct-dial extensions, 
automated systems, and the occasional receptionist handle all 
incoming calls. 
Still, it’s trickier than ever to actually get someone on the 
phone. If callers can even find a company’s phone number, they 
will often reach a recording encouraging them to visit the 
company’s website because “we are experiencing heavier than 
normal call volume.” A caller is required to navigate a maze of 
recorded options, all with further options of their own, to 
finally get to the right person or department. Those making 
business calls increasingly find people won’t answer unless the 
calls were agreed to and scheduled in advance. An impromptu 
call is now often considered inconvenient, intrusive, and even 
inconsiderate. 
Business Calls
When answering or placing a business call, you have one chance 
to set the tone for a relationship. Since up to 70 percent of a 

ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION 
[  125  ]
phone message is conveyed in tone of voice, it’s not what you 
say—it’s how you say it.
A
A Answer professionally and enthusiastically, ideally by the 
second ring. Offer a greeting, “Hello” or “Good morning,” 
followed by the company or department name and your full 
name. Put a smile in your voice. If callers identify themselves, 
refer to them by their name and add “Mr.” or “Ms.” Use first 
names only if invited.
A
A Use good grammar, speak clearly, listen well, and give the 
call your undivided attention. Others will know if you are 
reading, typing, or otherwise distracted. Do not eat, drink, 
or chew gum while on the call. Be aware of background 
noises.
A
A Ask permission before placing someone on hold, and wait 
for an answer. If it is a lengthy hold, come back within a 
minute to update the caller on the status of your behind- 
the-scenes efforts.
A
A Show politeness, patience, and respect unfailingly, regard-
less of the caller’s demeanor. A call is often precipitated 
by a problem. If a caller is upset, let him speak. Apologize 
for his inconvenience. This does not mean you are neces- 
sarily accepting responsibility for the problem, but simply 
acknowledging he is upset. Often, this is all that is needed 
to diffuse emotion and get the conversation on a positive 
track.
A
A Treat every call as important. Sometimes you won’t know 
until after the fact just how important a call or caller was. 
Placing calls reflects on your brand and your company’s brand, 
too. When initiating calls:

excuse me
[  126  ]
A
A Organize your thoughts before the call. Make sure you 
identify yourself. If the person was not expecting your call, 
assess her tone of voice. It will convey her openness to 
speaking with you. Asking if your call is convenient at this 
point allows the person the choice of continuing the 
conversation. This, on its own, often relaxes the recipient 
enough to continue. If it is not a good time, ask when would 
be a better time.
A
A Leave enough, but not too much, information on voicemail. 
Speak clearly and slowly. Leave your name and number at 
the beginning of the message and at the end. Do not leave 
ambiguous or personal messages or bad news on voice- 
mail. 
Have you noticed that virtually no one returns calls anymore? If 
a call is not a cold sales call, the reasons are myriad. It could be 
that the caller failed to leave a recognizable name or intelligible 
number. It could be that the recipient is away, consumed by work, 
or never listens to messages. It could be that whatever precipitated 
the call, such as following up on an inquiry or proposal, has been 
put on the back burner by the recipient. It could also be that 
someone is no longer interested in pursuing the conversation or 
business relationship and, rather than being up front about this, 
just hopes the caller will give up and go away. 
Whatever the reason, it is confusing and disheartening when 
a call is not returned, especially if there is a preexisting business 
relationship or the other person initiated the dialogue. Try not 
to take it personally. You may follow up once and maybe even 
twice, but after that, it is better to let it go. Relentlessly pursuing 
someone not interested in communicating at that moment does 
not generally strengthen a relationship. Instead, focus on other 

ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION 
[  127  ]
projects. Oftentimes, the person will circle back to you when the 
timing is right. 
If you are the one who initiated a dialogue or requested a quote, 
proposal, or information, it is courteous to return follow-up calls 
or emails. Even if your answer is “no” or “not now,” you will have 
respected the other person’s time and preserved a relationship 
that you may need or want again in the future.
Cell Phones
There are officially more mobile devices in the world than there 
are people, now numbering upwards of 7 billion. As mobile 
phones—cell phones, satellite phones, and smartphones—
continue to proliferate, the opportunities to bother others while 
using them do too, at an equal pace. We have all probably been 
guilty of a mobile phone faux pas at some point. If so, it may be 
time for a phone self-intervention.
CELL PHONE SELF-INTERVENTION 
A
A Keep mobile phones off of meeting tables. Otherwise, 
others will presume that it is only a matter of time before 
the conversation is superseded by an incoming call or text. 
Known as “phubbing,” short for phone snubbing, this 
practice bothers people. Kelly McGonigal, author of the New 
York Times article “The Willpower Instinct,” says, “Research 
shows just having a phone on the table is sufficiently 
distracting enough to reduce empathy and rapport between 
two people who are in conversation.”4 Among business or 
social peers, keeping your phone out may be acceptable, but 
among clients or higher-ups, it is better to put it away. 

excuse me
[  128  ]
A
A Do not use a mobile phone at a business, social, or family 
meal. Excusing yourself to the restroom every 10 minutes or 
texting under the table are obvious tactics to circumvent 
this rule. In some circles, phone use at restaurants has been 
drastically curtailed by dining companions who agree to 
put their phones in the center of the table: Whoever answers 
a call or text first pays the bill!
A
A Use a phone in social situations only if it benefits the group. 
If you need to get directions, make reservations, call a cab, 
clarify a point, or get a sports score in which everyone is 
interested, use your phone. If your group’s culture allows 
for phone use, feel free. But do not be the first, as a domino 
effect will quickly take hold.
A
A Do not use a mobile phone in a church or a synagogue, or 
at any solemn occasion such as a wake or memorial service. 
Do not use a phone in a doctor’s office, at the movies, at the 
gym, in a locker room, at parties, or while ordering or 
checking out. And of course, no texting while driving or 
walking. In 2015, a woman was hit when she walked into 
the path of a freight train while texting. Miraculously, she 
survived. 
A
A Take photos only with permission and never with unsus- 
pecting persons in the background. These may end up on a 
public feed, which would be an invasion of their privacy.
Telephone Options 
Andrew would have preferred the Quiet Car on his Amtrak trip 
from New York to Boston. But since he will probably need to 
answer a couple of calls, he chooses Business Class. This way, he 

ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION 
[  129  ]
can take any necessary calls and still enjoy the relative 
tranquility Business Class typically affords. When Connor 
boards in New Haven, Andrew quickly realizes today’s trip 
would not be typical. 
Once seated, Connor, a guy with cockiness to spare, im- 
mediately gets on his devices and puts his phone on speaker so 
he can have both hands free to type. At a decibel level the 
entire car can hear, Connor’s conversations include a litany of 
complaints about his demanding employer, his difficult client, 
and his complicated love life, replete with individual and 
company names. 
Andrew is uncomfortable. And from the body language the 
other riders are exhibiting, he knows they are as well. So he 
decides to ask Connor if he would please lower his voice and 
take the call off speaker. Connor looks at Andrew. “If you want 
quiet, go to the Quiet Car,” he says, making a dismissive gesture 
as he continues his loud conversation. 
Speakerphones
Speakerphones are great for hands-free phone conversations, 
but they can be uncomfortable for those at the other end. If a 
conversation is between just two people, a headset is a better 
option, as it allows for both convenience and privacy. However, 
once you are hands-free, the temptation to multitask can be 
overwhelming. If you are prone to this temptation, it may be 
better to pick up a handset. 
At work, a respectful, productive speakerphone meeting 
follows a pattern. After securing a private room, the meeting 
leader begins the call by asking permission to put someone on 
speaker. She then introduces others in the room, or asks them 

excuse me
[  130  ]
to introduce themselves. Throughout the call, participants 
identify themselves before speaking and speak at normal 
decibel levels. If anyone leaves or joins the call midway, the 
person on speaker is always advised. The call is given undivided 
attention by all participants, who refrain from holding side 
conversations, eating, or using other electronic devices. The 
meeting leader wraps up the call and thanks everyone for 
attending. 
Conference Calls and Videoconferences  
All of the guidelines for speakerphone calls apply to conference 
calls. Because conference calls are generally more formal and 
involve more people, they require some additional guidelines 
as well. 
Conference call organizers send invitations with all 
pertinent call-in information and agendas in advance and 
reminder notices the day before and/or morning of the call. If 
there is a service provider, they test all technology beforehand 
so there are no problems on the big day. Agendas include all 
items that will be covered and who will be responsible for 
addressing them. If there are primary speakers on the call, it 
will include their bios. 
Attendees prepare for the call by completing any assignments 
or reading indicated, and by jotting down questions and points 
they would like to raise. Participants call in at least three 
minutes before the scheduled start time, using reliable phones 
to avoid dropped calls. When the organizer has not muted the 
call, attendees mute their phones and check to be sure they have 
actually done so. This is an especially important point for those 
working from home offices, where distractions abound. 

ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION 
[  131  ]
Participants stay focused, adhere to the agenda, and bring 
ancillary matters up after the call. It is tempting to do any 
number of other things during a conference call, from answering 
email to running to the restroom. But that is to be avoided, as 
invariably that will be the very moment the call participant is 
asked for his input. 
Videoconferencing, or real-time audio/visual communication 
between or among individuals or groups, is the technology of 
choice for companies wanting a solution for cost-effective 
collaboration. Videoconferencing requires all of the preparations 
and precautions of speakerphone and conference calls, but since 
participants are now seen, attention to nonverbal cues becomes 
important as well. Whether they are sitting in a conference 
room or a home office, participants will take great care with 
their attire. Since everything is on display, they will make sure 
furnishings and décor reflect professionalism. Spaces will be 
uncluttered, artwork will be tasteful, accoutrements will be 
appropriate. Overflowing wastebaskets, crammed bookshelves, 
and bobblehead figures will be out of sight. 
Email
Annabelle has her hands full. As assistant athletics director for 
a Division One college, she is responsible for special programs 
for student athletes. She also meets with a fair number at the 
behest of their coaches for individual instruction. There are 
more than 30 teams, and with an otherwise full schedule, 
Annabelle’s calendar is jammed every day of the week. Still, 
she is happy to give of her time to those who need extra 
guidance. 

excuse me
[  132  ]
What makes Annabelle less happy are some of the attitudes she 
encounters. Even though their coaches have required them to 
meet with Annabelle, she sometimes feels like they think they are 
doing her a favor. She received an email from a student athlete 
with the subject line empty, no salutation, no closing, and no 
context. In its entirety, it read, “Hi when do you want to do this.”
Complaints about email are deafening and universal. In-boxes 
full of messages with missing subject lines, misspelled words, 
improper grammar, inappropriate language, and indecipherable 
acronyms are just some of the grievances. A succession of “Reply 
All” messages is the biggest complaint. In some organizations, 
real-time group messaging apps such as Slack, which eliminate 
the dreaded “Reply All,” are replacing internal email. 
Group-messaging apps are quickly catching on and may 
eventually become standard for internal communication. But 
they will still require adherence to guidelines for professionally 
written email.
According to the Radicati Group, the technology market 
research firm, email is still the go-to form of business 
communication. Email Statistics Report indicates:
A
A The number of business email accounts will reach 1.1 
billion by the end of 2017. 
A
A The number of business emails sent and received per user 
per day will increase from 122 in 2015 to 126 in 2019. 
A
A Email addresses are still required to access IM and social 
networking sites and are also needed for online 
transactions such as banking and shopping.5
Despite all of the other ways to communicate, work email is going 
to be with us for the foreseeable future. This is not good news for 

ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION 
[  133  ]
many millennials, who look at email much like voicemail: 
something to be tolerated until it finally dies. Millennials are 
often perceived as being unable or unwilling to write professional 
emails; indeed, many have not written a full sentence since they 
were in school. As a result, the quality of millennials’ writing 
skills is considered one of their biggest impediments in getting 
jobs, and once on the job, in getting ahead. 
All generations are at the mercy of carelessly crafted, hastily 
sent emails. Nancy Flynn, founder and director of the electronic 
policy training and consulting firm ePolicy Institute, says a lot 
of people don’t realize that “email creates the electronic 
equivalent of DNA. There’s a really good chance of emails being 
retained in a workplace’s archives, and in case of a lawsuit, they 
could be subpoenaed.”6
A lot is at stake as seemingly bright people learn the hard way 
every day. Professionals at the highest levels in their fields have 
lost their jobs, ruined their reputations, and suffered extreme 
personal, financial, and health consequences as a result of 
carelessly crafted, hastily sent emails. 
You can avoid these problems by, first of all, never ever 
emailing when angry. It may feel good for a moment, but remorse 
and all its ugly ramifications will quickly set in. If you simply 
must vent, do so with a trusted companion—your dog or cat 
maybe—or write your complaint out in longhand and then throw 
it away. Do absolutely anything but electronically communicate 
anger. It will become part of your permanent digital dossier. 
Unless there is no other way, do not use email for highly 
personal messages such as those about illness, death, divorce, or 
pregnancy. These are emotionally charged messages, better 
shared face-to-face or at least voice-to-voice. Be extremely 
careful of the content of professional emails. If your company is 

excuse me
[  134  ]
ever sued, your emails could become part of e-discovery, the 
process of gathering ESI (electronically stored information) for 
legal purposes. Apply the standard of “if you would not say it 
face-to-face, do not write it in an email.” Studies show that 
people are much braver when communicating from behind a 
screen and that the lack of nonverbal cues makes typewritten 
messages sound much more aggressive than intended. 
EMAIL GUIDELINES  
A
A Use the subject line to summarize the focus of the mes-
sage. Incorporating “URG,” “REQ,” or “FYI” lets recipients 
know if the email requires immediate attention, a request 
is being made, or information is simply being conveyed. 
Double-check email addresses before hitting the send 
button. Send only relevant emails to those who need to 
receive them.
A
A Do not send “Reply All” or “CC All” messages unless abso-
lutely necessary. Use the CC field if someone needs to be 
privy to an email but does not need to respond. Use the To 
field if a response is requested from the recipient. Use BCC 
(blind carbon copy) ethically, and not to mislead that an 
email exchange is confidential. Protect others’ email 
addresses, contact information, and messages by not 
forwarding them without their permission. 
A
A Read through email threads completely before responding 
or forwarding. Once our names are attached, it is a tacit 
admission that we have read them. Before writing, 
determine how formal the email should be based upon the 
relationship with the recipient. Greater formality is in order 
with clients, company executives, persons from cultures 

ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION 
[  135  ]
where formality is valued, and those we do not know well. 
Apply business letter–writing standards by including an 
appropriate salutation and closing. Make sure sentences are 
properly structured and words are correctly spelled. 
Observe the rules of capitalization and punctuation.
A
A Allow words to convey their meaning and emotion. Steer 
clear of emoticons and emojis in professional emails. Avoid 
using all capital letters, no capital letters, multiple 
exclamation points, bold typeface, bright colors, or flashing 
text. Also avoid marking every email “high-priority” or 
using RR (Read Receipt). Recipients find these annoying.
A
A Proofread all emails. Use but do not rely solely upon 
grammar check and spell-check. Read emails aloud to be 
sure they reflect the intended tone. Do not send or 
forward jokes, chain mail, political or religious messages, 
virus warnings, fund-raising appeals, or inspirational 
sayings. If forwarding an email, edit out all extraneous 
information and include a brief personal note. Be concise 
and brief and make one main point. I know of one 
executive who on principle will not read past two lines in 
an email. Use bullets.
A
A Respond to emails promptly. If you cannot respond at least 
by the end of the day, have an “out of office” message 
automatically sent back to the recipient. 
Hardware
Freelance marketing consultant Evelyn loves the flexibility and 
comfort of her home office. And she is thrilled she no longer 
needs to fight the rush hour traffic that made her commute so 

excuse me
[  136  ]
grindingly stressful, a commute she had made for years. Still, it 
can be lonely. 	
That’s why the nearby coffee shop Evelyn discovered came to 
be a sanctuary for her. Perfect for freelancers like herself, it was 
never too crowded or noisy and always had friendly, familiar 
faces behind the counter and at the tables, too. Evelyn could get 
her work done while enjoying freshly brewed coffee and low-key 
fellowship with others whose workdays were organized 
similarly to hers. 
This truly was, for her, a little piece of heaven. But lately, a 
new clientele has upset the welcoming feel of the shop. There is 
a man whose music is so loud that even with his earphones on, 
Evelyn cannot concentrate. Another man watches movies at full 
volume, compounding the situation. Then there is the college 
student who takes up two tables and four chairs for her coat, 
papers, and all her electronic devices. Finally, there is the 
woman who purposely overhears Evelyn’s conversations and 
then comments upon them! It’s just not the same anymore.
 Evelyn is reluctant to give up the coffee shop, but already 
several of her acquaintances have stopped coming. Evelyn is 
pretty sure she will be next. 
In public places, consideration for live human beings always 
takes precedence. When listening to audio on a laptop or tablet 
in a public place, use headphones to avoid disturbing others. 
Sometimes it is okay to physically spread out a little, but during 
busy times, be aware of space constraints and adhere to the rule 
of one chair and one electronic device on a table per customer. 
With regard to public Wi-Fi, remember that public bandwidth 
may be limited; save the downloading of huge files or the 
watching of movies for home. Also, remember that public 

ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION 
[  137  ]
networks are by definition less secure. Use a virtual private 
network (VPN) service for a secure Internet connection.
The Message
Barbara realizes that things have changed considerably in the 
nearly 25 years since she joined the hospital as an X-ray 
technician. She still loves her work and welcomes the advances 
in technology that help her do her job better. And she delights in 
mentoring new hires as they come through the department, 
even though she could, now, be their mother. Their energy and 
enthusiasm are infectious and keep her on her toes. 
One thing Barbara is having a hard time getting used to is the 
way younger folks communicate. It’s like they are speaking a 
foreign language. Take today’s text from a new employee, Ava, 
who Barbara is helping on a project: B- JTLYK, will be l8; h8 
traffic! F2F ASAP? Project FUBAR! TY, SYS! 
 Not wanting to admit she is completely lost, Barbara goes 
online to research the meaning in the message. Aha! Ava just 
wants to let Barbara know that she will be late as she is stuck in 
traffic, which she hates! But when she gets to work, can they 
have a face-to-face meeting as soon as possible? The project Ava 
is working on is fouled up beyond all recognition, and Ava would 
be very grateful for Barbara’s help. She will see her soon! 
Acronyms and Abbreviations
Since the essence of text-based communication is brevity, some 
acronyms and abbreviations may be okay as long as the reader 

excuse me
[  138  ]
readily understands what the writer intends and the message is 
appropriate. In business emails they should be rarely used, as 
such shorthand could come across as unprofessional. But 
professionals still want to be familiar with the most often used 
communication shortcuts. There are a number of excellent 
sources for Internet jargon, including netlingo.com and the 
Internet Slang Dictionary. A visit to one of these sites will get 
you up to speed with ICYMI, EOBD, TL;DR, AFK, and NSFW 
(especially) in no time! 
Texting
Despite its foibles—wretched autocorrect and messages that go 
astray, get sent too soon, or are indecipherable—text messaging, 
or SMS (short messaging service), is still immensely popular. 
Yes, it has lost ground among the 18–24 age group to apps like 
WhatsApp and Snapchat, but texting is still the go-to among 
business professionals. When communicating by text, the 
urgency of the message should be taken into consideration. 
Some people see and read their texts immediately, others not for 
hours or even days. If in doubt, it’s safer to call.  
 TEXTING TIPS 
A
A Consider whether a text is the best mode of communica-
tion with a particular person. Even if you have your boss’s 
number, a text might not be her preference. However, if she 
texted you in the past, and the information is appropriate, 
then feel comfortable using this medium. If someone sends 
you a text, reply in kind, instead of with a phone call. When 

ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION 
[  139  ]
a text exchange gets lengthy, it is appropriate to suggest a 
phone conversation to speed things up. With group texts, 
include only those who really need to see them. 
A
A Spell words out in professional texts. Use punctuation 
even if it seems laborious and unnecessary. If using the 
voice-to-text feature, carefully review the text before 
sending it, as it may read nothing like what you intended. 
Tone, humor, and sarcasm can be easily misinterpreted via 
text; use these sparingly. 
A
A Do not walk and text; never drive and text. The Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention says that each day 9 
people die from distracted driving and more than 1,000 
are injured.7 
A
A Allow others to respond as they can. Do not send suc- 
cessive follow-up texts or a snarky “Anyone there??” Be 
aware of the timing of your text. On the West Coast, you 
may still be at work at 8:00 P.M., but your East Coast 
business partner who sleeps with his phone next to him 
will be awakened by your text.
Instant Messaging
Instant messaging is real-time communication between 
individuals via the Internet, similar to a private chat room. IMs 
are practical for internal communication, especially when 
collaboration is desired. But it is not a perfect solution for 
everyone. Many find IM intrusive yet do not want to disable it 
for fear of missing important messages. The rules of good 
grammar, tone, professionalism, and brevity apply to IMs as 
they do for all text-based communication.

excuse me
[  140  ]
IM GUIDELINES
A
A Do not, generally, send IMs to strangers. Some people do 
not mind and actually solicit them, but others consider 
them presumptuous. Ask how someone wishes to be 
contacted. Use a greeting before launching into your 
message, and ask if the IM recipient has time to chat. 
A
A Use and respect status messages. If someone has set her 
status as “Do Not Disturb,” then do not disturb her! 
A
A Use acronyms carefully. Acronyms are slightly more 
acceptable with internal IMs, but when in doubt, spell 
it out. 
A
A End an IM exchange with a sign-off. Rather than run the 
risk of leaving someone hanging, end with a “Thank you” 
or “It was nice talking with you” message.
A
A Address one point at a time. Wait for a response before 
moving on to the next point. If your message must be 
divided into multiple thoughts for the sake of clarity, 
insert a line break between each thought. For a lengthy 
exchange, it may be better to ask if the person has time  
to talk.
The Company Intranet 
When used respectfully and thoughtfully, the company intranet 
provides an efficient platform for internal communication and 
collaboration. Employees use the intranet to internally 
crowd-source ideas and gain feedback on initiatives. Used 
effectively, the company intranet supports a corporate culture, 
disseminates information, and enhances productivity.

ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION 
[  141  ]
A
A Learn your organization’s intranet “Dos and Don’ts.” The 
system administrator may have a formal document and 
colleagues can also quickly get you up to speed. 
A
A Determine if you are ready to have a document reviewed or 
commented on. In some organizations, once a document is 
saved on a shared platform, it is fair game for anyone’s 
comments and edits. Never pass off someone else’s content 
as your own. 
A
A Keep your user name and password secure. Do not store 
sensitive information, including pin numbers, credit card 
numbers, and bank account numbers on the intranet.  
The ways in which you can communicate and collaborate will 
only become more sophisticated over time. It won’t be long 
before holographic telepresence technology allows for in- 
room communication with real-time, full-motion, 3-D images 
of colleagues continents away. As technology continues to 
develop at a breakneck speed, it can seem overwhelming. If 
you remember to practice the Platinum Rule, you will be 
just fine.
REMEMBER
A
A Text communication will never equal the power of the hu-
man voice. Developing telephone skills is time well spent. 
A
A Email continues to be the go-to means of business com-
munication. Professionals are judged by their email 
practices and the content and tone of their messages. 
A
A Human beings take precedence over electronic devices. 
Attached as we are to them, we must look up from and put 
down our devices. 

excuse me
[  142  ]
A
A Professionalism never takes a holiday. Appreciate the 
speed and convenience of text and instant messaging, 
but never forget that text-based communication lives 
forever.

143
chapter 7
twitter, etc. 
Acing Social Media
“Technology is a good servant but a bad master.” 
—GRETC HEN RUBIN
D
rew and Will, both 22 years old, have spent their entire lives 
together. They grew up in the same town, went to the same 
schools, worked together at the same summer jobs, and are now 
graduating from the same college. In a few weeks, they will start 
new careers: Drew heading off to a top tech company in 
California and Will to a plum financial services job in New York 
City. It’s bittersweet to go their separate ways. But tonight they 
will celebrate! 
They wrack their brains to come up with the perfect setting, 
when it dawns on Drew that his family’s best friends have not 
yet left for the summer for their beach house by the shore. Every 
year, his family spends time at this beautiful waterfront home. 
These friends have even invited Drew to stay weekends on his 

excuse me
[  144  ]
own, trusting him so much that they let him know where they 
keep the spare key.	
“This will be perfect!” Drew thinks. They will “borrow” this 
lovely beach house for just a few hours, and no one will be the 
wiser. And they will be ultracareful. Drew shakes off any 
reservations; he is, after all, practically a member of the family. 
They wouldn’t really mind. So Drew and Will text their friends 
on the drive down to the shore, inviting them to a low-key 
gathering and emphasizing low-key.
In the blink of an eye, what they envisioned as a small 
gathering of friends turns into a raucous melee of 100 people. 
Beer, wine, and food are spilled on the furniture and rugs. 
Couples are in the bedrooms upstairs. The kitchen is a disaster. 
Soon inebriated partiers begin to post the festivities on social 
media. Sure enough, someone, a neighbor, recognizes the house 
and alerts the owners.  
Police cars arrive at the scene, and Drew and Will spend the 
night in the county jail. The next day, they stand in front of the 
judge, lawyers quickly assembled, with parents, the friends 
whose home they used, and a reporter from the local newspaper. 
They face a total of 23 counts, including charges of breaking and 
entering and reckless endangerment of minors. Drew and Will, 
hands shaking, enter their pleas: “Not guilty, Your Honor.” A 
court date is set—three weeks after they were to jet off to their 
new jobs and new lives. 
Social media have revolutionized the business world. As 
recently as 2003, Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter did not exist. 
Now, they are so much a part of our daily lives that we scarcely 
think about how new and world-changing these technologies 
are. At this writing, the largest platform is Facebook, followed 
by YouTube, Reddit, Twitter, Pinterest, and Instagram.1 

TWITTER, ETC. 
[  145  ]
Snapchat is also huge, especially among those under 34 and the 
savvy companies marketing to them. Live video streaming, such 
as Twitter’s Periscope app, is also gaining momentum, as are 
podcasts. All sites share cyberspace with countless more focused 
on every demographic and interest imaginable.
Your Digital Footprint
A social media devotee since its beginning, Sarah keeps up with 
her numerous friends, some going all the way back to junior high 
school. All through her 20s and now early 30s, Sarah has shared 
the big moments of her life online—her college graduation, 
engagement, wedding, travels, jobs, and the most cherished 
news of all, the arrival of her children. She has loved learning 
about all of her friends’ milestones as well. Sarah can’t imagine 
her world without social media and wonders how her parents’ 
generation survived without it.
Now, with family, work, and volunteering, Sarah is busier 
than ever before. It occurs to her that she has lost track of all of 
her sites and her activities on them, especially those from years 
ago. She’s always been careful with what she shares, but now 
that she is in management, she wonders if there is possibly 
something lurking in her past posts that would not fit her image 
today. She doesn’t think so, but decides it’s better to be safe. 
Tomorrow, she will do a thorough social media review.
Personal and organizational digital footprints are growing 
larger by the second. With every post, visit, share, tag, like, snap, 
and forward, social media users leave traces of digital DNA that 
can never be erased. The chilling implications of this fact have 
resulted in an increased interest in the “right to be forgotten,” a 

excuse me
[  146  ]
controversial topic involving the removal of Internet search 
results containing incriminatory information about one’s past. 
It is a complicated issue with freedom of speech, information 
integrity, and censoring implications that will likely not be 
resolved any time soon. In 2014, Google lost a battle with the 
European Court of Justice over failing to comply with their 
ruling on this matter. Regardless of how the issue is ultimately 
resolved, you would be wise to heed Jeffrey Rosen’s warning. In 
his New York Times article, “The End of Forgetting,” he says, 
“It’s not just that the web and social networking threaten your 
privacy. It’s that there is no way in the digital age to move on, to 
start over—to erase your digital past.”2
There is a lot at stake in your use of digital technology, 
including your safety, security, reputation, relationships, 
finances, credit worthiness, insurability, and employment. In 
real life, if you are lucky, the mistakes you make may be 
forgotten. Online, mistakes live forever. There is no way to reset 
your reputation, no way to declare “digital bankruptcy,” no way 
to start over. And transparency, a good thing in relationships 
and business dealings, has a price online. The worst thing you’ve 
done will be the first thing someone finds when they search 
your name. 
The list of bright, successful people who have gotten into 
trouble on social media is very long. All we need to do is read or 
watch the news on any day via any medium to learn of yet 
another prominent person going down in flames due to 
ill-considered online activities. These missteps often cost them 
everything. Others survive them, but only after offering public 
apologies. Companies are also not immune to social media 
gaffes, and many highly regarded organizations have had to do 
extensive online damage control. With so many cautionary 

TWITTER, ETC. 
[  147  ]
tales, and the widely held feeling that by now we should know 
better, it is a wonder that this is still happening. Still, for many, 
the temptation to vent online is irresistible. 
Social media also pose serious potential dangers for 
companies. Data loss, security breaches, compliance violations, 
reputation damage, compromised intellectual property, and 
leaked strategy initiatives are some of the risks. CNBC’s Mark 
Fahey says one of the most costly consequences of social media 
misuse is lost productivity. In his article, “Time Wasted on 
Facebook Could Be Costing Us Trillions of Dollars,” he wrote 
that time spent on Facebook alone is costing employers $3.5 
trillion in squandered productivity.3 
Realization of the potential impact of online transgressions 
is increasing. To help manage their online brands, some 
individuals and organizations are hiring reputation repair and 
management companies, often for a hefty fee. These companies 
try to bury, not remove, unsavory online articles and references. 
They also monitor social media for new problematic items that 
might pop up. 
It is possible to fix a less-than-perfect digital dossier without 
investing enormous amounts of time and money. And a great 
deal can be done for free. First, start with an online audit. Even 
if you’ve done one in the past, content constantly changes 
without your knowledge, consent, or control. If any new 
questionable tweets, photos, or videos are discovered, delete 
them, and ask friends to do the same. Second, consistently add 
new content to bury potentially damaging items. According to 
Dorrie Clarke, a marketing strategy consultant, “No one but 
your worst enemy will bother to visit page 20 on a Google search; 
most will stick to the first page or two.”4 Videos rank high on 
Google searches, so she advises including a video blog to ensure 

excuse me
[  148  ]
that people see what you want them to see. She also recommends 
a traditional blog and a robust social media presence, including 
profiles on LinkedIn, Facebook, and Twitter. 
Keep in mind that it is far easier to make a good impression 
online than it is to unmake a bad one. Protect yourself by not 
airing personal grievances or angry opinions, no matter how 
justified you might feel, or posting anything that could be 
considered racist, sexist, or any other “ist” you can imagine. 
Never engage in online shaming, a dreadful practice often 
equated with cyberbullying. Make sure all of your online content 
is relevant and useful, and apply the same standards for virtual 
communication that you use in real life. This means listen more 
than talk, respect others’ opinions, apologize for mistakes, avoid 
arguments, express appreciation, and always be accountable.
Businesses are very much aware of the reach and power of 
social media. With upbeat stories and positive news items, they 
seek to attract followers and build relationships through “social 
selling.” Their ultimate goal is to convert leads into clients, and 
clients into brand advocates. But like personal users, businesses 
are not immune to costly social media failures. Companies that 
have tried to disguise online promotions with “sympathy” for 
national tragedies and natural disasters have paid dearly for 
their greed and insensitivity. Human error is also an ever-present 
risk. Ryan Holmes, CEO of Hootsuite, wrote about a particularly 
embarrassing tweet sent by a major international brand, when 
an employee unknowingly linked an X-rated photo to a response 
to an unhappy customer. It went to the company’s entire Twitter 
following and stayed up a full hour before someone noticed and 
took it down.5
To expand their reach, companies are increasingly tapping 
into their employees’ social media networks, positioning 

TWITTER, ETC. 
[  149  ]
themselves to take advantage of the enormous marketing 
potential these offer. Studies show that millennials especially are 
far more influenced by online endorsements made by their friends 
than they are by direct marketing from brands. Companies that 
use their employees as brand ambassadors must be careful 
because they are at risk by association. Many are implementing 
social media training programs to help employees understand 
their organization’s social media strategies, online best practices, 
and the benefits to them of being brand ambassadors. 
Companies need to avoid heavy-handed approaches. 
Employees cannot be coerced into offering up their networks, 
nor can there be any infringement on their rights to free speech 
under the National Labor Relations Act. 
Even as professionals learn the basics of social media, they 
will continue to educate themselves in their use. When Jon 
Thomas, director of strategy for advertising agency TracyLocke, 
is asked why a pristine social media presence is so important for 
professionals, he says, “As publishing becomes increasingly 
ubiquitous, where anyone can share their thoughts on their own 
blog, on Medium.com, LinkedIn, YouTube, Facebook, or even in 
140 characters on Twitter, the idea of a résumé encapsulating 
the identity of a professional is rapidly becoming outdated.” He 
added, “Sure, I can dig through your résumé and listen to your 
answers in an interview, but if I can understand how you think 
and approach your profession from what you publish online, I 
can get a much clearer picture of your approach to our business, 
and more importantly, what your impact might be on our 
business.” Esta Singer, digital media specialist and founder of 
the social media consulting firm, s.h.e. CONSULTING, says a 
“social media presence means you don’t need to work at being 
found online. You’ve built a positive reputation by building 

excuse me
[  150  ]
strong relationships, posting timely and relevant information, 
engaging followers, and demonstrating integrity. Having an 
online presence means you are able to demonstrate and share 
value.”
There is still a percentage of the working population that, for 
reasons of privacy, safety, personal preference, or the risks 
described, chooses not to use social media. But if a professional 
is not searchable, especially on LinkedIn, it immediately begs 
the question “Why not?” or “What is he trying to hide?” Today, 
social media is where the business conversation takes place, 
with or without us. We need to be part of the conversation. 
The Cyber Citizen
In a moment of self-reflection, Edward wonders how he got so 
mean and judgmental. The 55-year-old senior executive at Class 
A Spaces, a leading commercial real estate firm, has mentored 
countless young folks over the years. He was always happy to do 
so and has taken great pride in their accomplishments. Edward 
credits his own success to his mentors and the amazing network 
he built over 25 years in the business. 
Things are so different now from when he started. Back then, 
networking was done face-to-face over business meals and 
after-hours drinks and at conferences and sporting events. 
Edward has always loved those in-person connections and 
knows the relationships he developed from them are largely 
responsible for his success. Today, networking is almost all 
electronic. Edward understands the time-saving appeal of 
mass-networking, but is not as sold on the value or quality of 
some of the relationships that come from it. 

TWITTER, ETC. 
[  151  ]
Take LinkedIn. On any given day, Edward receives multiple 
invitations to connect, the majority of which come from people 
he doesn’t know. Most of the invitations are impersonal and 
seem hastily sent. All are blatantly self-promotional, about what 
he can do for them. To be honest, he isn’t inclined to do anything 
for them. It’s difficult to endorse people who have unprofessional 
profiles or share strong political or social views. His credibility 
is at stake. It’s hard for him to reject these invitations even 
though that is his inclination. Edward again wonders just how 
and when he became so mean and judgmental. 
The ever-changing and ever-growing number of social media 
platforms makes it unfeasible to learn the individual best 
practices for every one of them. The good news is you do not 
need to. Adhering to basic guidelines for use with all media is 
almost all that is required to keep your brand intact. It is 
important, however, to learn the differences between the major 
platforms, as each has its distinct purpose and personality. 
When you want to clearly understand what should be shared on 
a specific site, think first of the three Ps: whether the information 
is suitable for public, private, or professional audiences. 
Even when using platforms as intended, you need to discern 
the fine line between being appropriately social and inap- 
propriately annoying. We all have the “friend” who cannot go 
one day without posting yet another cloying platitude, detailed 
description of her awesome life, or cat video. Observe what 
happens on the various platforms. Social media offer swift, 
often stinging feedback. Sometimes just not doing as others do 
is all that is required. 
We have identified respect as the basis for all personal and 
professional success. There is no place where respect, or the lack 
of it, is more starkly displayed than on social media. The reach, 

excuse me
[  152  ]
speed, and permanency of behavior on social media can literally 
make or break a career. Online respect is not only a good thing, 
it is also imperative for workplace survival. 
On social media, respect starts with adopting the attributes 
of a good cyber citizen. In his book, Unmarketing, Scott Stratton 
describes the concept of “social currency.” He says if one wants 
value from social media, one has to first build currency.6  Once 
someone has proven to be helpful, his network will be more 
willing to help in return. Like a bank, you can’t make a with- 
drawal until you have made a deposit!	
	
Respect your privacy and others’ privacy. A teacher was fired 
simply because someone else posted a photo of her having a beer 
at a bar while on vacation. Be considerate about what you share 
on your own and on your friends’ pages and feeds. If a message 
is at all personal, send it to the person directly. 
Very important: Never post anything that could jeopardize 
the safety or personal property of yourself or others. This means 
you do not share anyone’s home address, current location, or 
travel plans. It is estimated that 80 percent of burglars glean 
information from social media to plan their activities. Criminals 
employ Google Street View to stalk homes, view Facebook to 
monitor check-ins at hotels and airport lounges, and use location 
data garnered from posted pictures to know when someone is 
not at home. Users themselves often openly advertise and 
chronicle their comings and goings via posts and photos, giving 
thieves extremely useful information. 
You can avoid being a victim of “cyber casing” by not sharing 
upcoming travel plans online, not checking in from remote 
locations, and not posting photos until you are home. Keep 
your phone from giving away your location by disabling geotags 

TWITTER, ETC. 
[  153  ]
and GPS tracking and by not publishing photos directly from 
your phone.
Online best practices require that you consider how your 
friends’ posts reflect on you. If their posts often include 
inappropriate language, photos, or humor, it may be time to 
rethink these connections. Some worry that to “unfriend” 
someone on Facebook, especially if he is a family member or 
longtime friend, will do irreparable harm to that relationship. 
Luckily, privacy settings allow for stealth ways to limit what 
people see without having to blatantly unfriend them. These 
include “hiding” people from your feed, using privacy features 
to customize what others see, and turning off chat features with 
particular friends or blocking them. You can, of course, actually 
unfriend people, too. They won’t be notified, but will probably 
figure it out. 
All major social media platforms have privacy settings and 
sharing features. These differ from site to site and seem to 
constantly change, making it hard to keep up. Staying current 
with and using sites’ privacy settings are the best ways to protect 
your brand and relationships. 
First impressions matter online, as they always do in life in 
general. Regardless of the platform, always introduce yourself; 
don’t assume others will know who you are. When inviting 
someone to join your network, include a brief, warm, 
personalized note, not the generic message provided by the 
platform. In completing your professional profile pages, use an 
actual photo of yourself at the age you are now. Your baby photo, 
however cute, can be confusing and possibly seen as inauthentic 
or unprofessional. On all sites, use good grammar and check 
your spelling.

excuse me
[  154  ]
Just as in real life, you choose your friends in cyberspace and 
they choose you. Sometimes you receive connection requests 
from people you do not know or from people you do know but do 
not wish to connect with. You do not need to accept every 
request nor will all of your requests be accepted. Many people 
have strict guidelines for themselves about whom they will 
accept as connections. Some will just connect with immediate 
family, others with extended family and close actual friends, 
and others with anyone who invites them! Don’t take it 
personally if your request is not accepted. Some think it is rude 
to ignore friend or connection requests; others think it more 
humane to let them sit in pending mode rather than reject them 
outright. Who knows? In the future, you may want to connect 
with this person. It may be better not to burn a bridge. 
The intervals at which you post may also reflect upon your 
social media savvy. SumAll, a data analytics company, offers 
these posting guidelines: Facebook, two times a day (more 
than that, and likes and comments will drop off); LinkedIn, 
one time a weekday; Google+, three times a day; Twitter, three 
times a day; Instagram, up to two times a day; Pinterest, up to 
five times a day; and a blog, up to two times a week.7 But social 
media guru Esta Singer says there is no magic number and that 
the “frequency depends upon your audience and relevance of 
the information you are posting.” Your posting intervals will 
likely vary depending on what’s happening at any given 
moment in your life or in your connections’ lives. The bottom 
line: Good judgment is key, as you may be judged by your posting 
frequency. 

TWITTER, ETC. 
[  155  ]
The Social Network
At 65 years old, Stephen is a Facebook novice. For years, his 
out-of-state daughters had been asking him to set up an account 
so they could share photos and videos of his grandchildren and 
generally stay up on one another’s lives. Stephen used to think 
Facebook was for kids, but now most of his friends have accounts. 
So he finally decided he would take the plunge. 
But it’s been hard for him to get the hang of it. Wall posts, 
status updates, timelines, messages, lists, privacy settings—it’s 
all overwhelming. And boy, is he making mistakes. Yesterday, 
he sent a long message to an old friend he recently reconnected 
with, catching him up on 20 years of his life: relationships, 
work, health—it was all there. Stephen soon got a private 
message back from his friend. “Did you really intend to post on 
my timeline?” his friend asked. “I don’t know . . . I think so . . . 
why?” Stephen wrote back. 
His friend explained that timeline messages are visible to all 
of his friends and that in the future, he might want to share 
these messages privately. Lesson learned—the hard way, thinks 
Stephen. 
A scenario like this is unthinkable to digital natives, but to 
those just getting their feet wet in social media waters, it 
happens all the time. Digital natives have an edge over their 
older colleagues with regard to social media etiquette, mostly 
because they wrote the rules! As this technology evolved, they 
learned which behaviors were acceptable and welcomed on the 
various platforms and which were not. Now that guidelines 
have been widely agreed on and adopted, later social media 
entrants can quickly get up to speed with a little research and a 
lot of good judgment.  	

excuse me
[  156  ]
As a card-carrying digital immigrant, I reached out to my 
network, which includes some folks who make their living in 
social media. These experts vetted my advice and shared their 
own best practices for the most popular social media sites. 
Meant to be a primer, the following may be brand new 
information for digital immigrants or a review for digital 
natives. For those who live and breathe social media, it will 
serve as a simple reminder of the importance of practicing good 
habits.                 
Social Sites   
Fifty-eight year-old Christine, CEO of a large apparel company, 
has so far resisted the pressure. Christine has heard from her 
executive team how important it is for her to have a social media 
presence and about the benefits to the company of a CEO who is 
seen as accessible, transparent, and responsive. But the few 
spare moments she has after her typical 80-hour workweek she 
wants to spend with her family, not tweeting or posting updates 
on LinkedIn. Besides, it just seems complicated and too risky. 
Christine has seen other executives get into big trouble and have 
to apologize for their online mistakes. And although she would 
never tell this to her team, in her opinion all of this “sharing” is 
a bit beneath the dignity of a CEO. 
Still, she pays her executive team to give her this kind of 
advice, whether she likes it or not. She asks her assistant to 
arrange some time with the PR Department to get her set up. 
She is going to need their help. 

TWITTER, ETC. 
[  157  ]
Facebook 
Facebook is a social networking website that enables users to join 
networks of friends, family, and people with similar interests. A 
Facebook profile is one’s personal account on Facebook. Here, 
people can “friend” others, post photos and videos, “like” and 
share others’ posts, send messages, and provide updates. 
Depending upon privacy settings, a user’s friends may see a user’s 
posts on his “wall” and have the ability to comment on his posts. 
Only one Facebook profile can be associated with a name. While 
not a business-oriented site, Facebook has implemented a feature 
that allows users to add professional skills to their profiles, 
increasingly leveraging its users’ vast social connections to 
compete in the job search market. 
In his article for Yahoo Tech, “11 Brutal Reminders That You 
Can and Will Get Fired for What You Post on Facebook,” Dan 
Bean shares these stories: 
A
A An employee posts, “I hate my boss,” and gets the comment, 
“You do realize we’re friends on fb, right?”
A
A A young intern says he cannot come to work due to a family 
emergency. He shows up the same day on Facebook in a 
photo at a Halloween party, dressed as a wand-wielding 
fairy.
A
A An employee posts “ . . . so happy to be listening to T4F, 
while pretending to work,” and gets the comment, “We are 
the people who pay you while you pretend to work. Please 
come and see me.” 
A
A A young man posts a photo of himself doing drugs and gets 
the comment, “ . . . give me a good reason not to fire you 
first thing Monday morning.”8

excuse me
[  158  ]
In contrast to a profile, a Facebook page is a business account 
through which brands ask customers and prospects to like their 
pages to follow their brands. Here, they can also advertise with 
Facebook ads. To have a Facebook page, one must first have a 
Facebook profile. However, one can then have as many pages as 
he desires. It’s important to keep personal and business 
connections and profiles separate. One reason is that use of a 
personal account to promote a business is against Facebook’s 
terms of service, which may result in Facebook deleting the 
account. Equally important is that content shared on personal 
and business accounts is, or at least should be, meant for 
distinctly different audiences. 
A Facebook page is a great way for a business to grow a 
following, establish credibility, and measure engagement 
results. It’s important to take time to learn best practices for this 
medium and to remember that it’s a two-way conversation. All 
comments, both positive and negative, require a response.
When using your personal Facebook account, it is 
recommended that you “friend” only people you actually know 
and like. But for many users, younger people especially, it is still 
a “more friends the merrier” scenario. On average, those in the 
18–24 age range have 649 Facebook friends.9 Interestingly, U.S. 
News and World Report cites an Oxford University study that 
says of all our Facebook friends, only four are actual friends—the 
same number we have in real life.10 When deciding upon how 
many Facebook friends you want to have, it is wise to remember 
that the greater the number of Facebook friends, the greater the 
risk of information falling into the wrong hands.

TWITTER, ETC. 
[  159  ]
 ANNOYING HABITS 
A
A Spamming. Soliciting, promoting, or selling of any kind is 
considered spam. On Facebook, most people are fine with 
requests for donations to charities or personal causes, but 
draw the line at crowdfunding requests for leisure travel, 
a sabbatical in Provence, or a new boat!  
A
A “Vague booking.” Posting intentionally ambiguous updates 
can come across as narcissistic or passive aggressive. Posts 
like “NEVER again  . . .” or “This can’t go on  . . .” cause 
concern and/or irritation among friends. 
A
A Providing TMI. Too much information includes photos of 
recent surgery scars, 50 vacation photos, or a baby’s naked 
behind. If you must share, be extremely selective about 
who sees these posts.
A
A Jeopardizing others’ privacy. As proud as parents are of 
their children, by posting their photos and activities, they 
are making privacy and safety decisions that could have 
lifetime implications for those too young to consent. The 
advice is to think carefully about what and how often you 
post about others, especially children. In France, parents 
can now be sued by their adult children and possibly jailed 
for having posted their photos on social media without 
their permission. 
A
A “Humble bragging.” The practice of packaging good news 
as though it’s actually an inconvenience is both obvious 
and insufferable. “Our Billy just got accepted at Harvard 
and Yale. Poor thing, now he has to decide between his 
dad’s alma mater and his mom’s!” Actual bragging gets old, 
too. Facebook is for sharing one’s happy news among real 
friends and family members, as long as such posts do not 

excuse me
[  160  ]
dominate and self-congratulation is kept at bay. Promoting 
friends’ good news is great, provided it’s someone you 
actually have a relationship with in real life. Otherwise, it 
can seem creepy. But if the good news is about you or an 
immediate family member, allowing friends to share it 
whenever possible has a much nicer ring!
There are some everyday Facebook practices that can help us 
avoid potentially sticky situations. They include making sure we 
send private messages for two-way communication, refraining 
from posting status changes unless all affected parties have 
been notified (a young man learned his parents were divorcing 
when he saw that his mother had changed her status to single), 
and being careful about checking in from Starbucks when we 
are supposed to be home sick! But perhaps the easiest way to 
make sure our Facebook friends actually stay our friends is to 
subject our posts to these three filters: Is it interesting? Is it 
helpful? Is it entertaining? If our posts meet these criteria, we’ll 
stay a welcome Facebook connection.
LinkedIn 
A LinkedIn user recently garnered an extraordinary number 
of comments when she posted a picture of herself in a bikini, 
admittedly and purposely to gain attention. It worked, but 
judging from many of the comments, not in an entirely 
favorable way.
LinkedIn is a business-oriented social networking website for 
professional summaries, industry-related groups, networking 
events, and career marketing. It also has messaging functions 
that allow users to post status updates and to share or like 

TWITTER, ETC. 
[  161  ]
content posted by others. As of August 2016, LinkedIn had 450 
million members worldwide.11 In June 2016, Microsoft acquired 
LinkedIn for $26.2 billion. Said Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella, 
“Think about it: how people find jobs, build skills, sell, market, 
and get work done and ultimately find success requires a 
connected professional world.” 
While there are now networking sites that cater to pro- 
fessionals of all stripes and at all stages of their careers, LinkedIn 
is still very much the premier destination. With newer features 
that seem to have a distinct social slant to them, many users are 
beginning to lament what they consider the “Facebookification” 
of LinkedIn. An increasing number of nonbusiness-related posts 
including the sharing of personal stories, political views, and 
even one’s availability for dating are putting the site’s profes- 
sional status at risk. 
Some see this evolution as a sign of the times, a reflection of 
the melding of personal and professional lives, and not 
necessarily a bad thing. Why wouldn’t individuals want to take 
full advantage of their entire networks? As features of the 
largest social media sites become more commonly shared and 
the major sites themselves increasingly indistinguishable, this 
cross-pollination may indeed be the way of the future. But for 
now, most feel drawing a distinction between how personal and 
professional sites are used is a good thing. 
To protect the value and integrity of your relationships on 
LinkedIn, most say to connect only with people you have 
actually met. Others say it’s okay to connect with people you do 
not actually know if you have other people in common or share 
professional interests. If you do not know someone personally, 
request an introduction or explain who you are and why you 
want to connect. Referencing that you heard someone speak, or 

excuse me
[  162  ]
read and enjoy her blog, or share an alma mater may just garner 
you a new connection.  
BEST PRACTICES
A
A Take advantage of vanity URLs. They are easier to remember 
and more personal. Write a professional summary/bio. Be 
honest on your profile. Former colleagues and bosses will 
note embellishments and inconsistencies. Complete your 
LinkedIn page, and update it regularly. An old or abandoned 
page raises red flags.
A
A Ask for recommendations only of people who are familiar 
with you and your work. Reciprocate recommendations 
whenever possible. Endorse others for their skills as you see 
fit and thank others for their endorsements. 
A
A Accept invitations promptly. Unless you have a good reason 
not to accept an invitation (you do not know someone, or 
you do—but think he would not reflect well upon you), 
accept an invitation when it is received. 
A
A Join groups and associations to harness the expertise of 
your fellow LinkedIn members. Be sure to read and then 
follow the group’s rules. You can certainly start your own 
group but make sure you are able to commit to it.
A
A Avoid excessive self-promotion. Examples include using 
groups or associations to promote your services or content 
or posing a problem and then answering it with a promotion 
of you or your company.

TWITTER, ETC. 
[  163  ]
Twitter 
Susie Poppick of Money shared a story about a city clerk in 
California’s Bay Area who she said was asked to resign for 
“allegedly tweeting during council meetings when she was 
supposed to be taking down meeting minutes.” The woman 
resigned, writing in her letter that it was a “mind-numbingly 
inane experience I would not wish upon anyone.”12 
Twitter is a social networking and micro-blogging service 
that enables its users to send and read messages known as 
“tweets.” Tweets are text-based posts limited to 140 characters 
displayed on the author’s profile page and delivered to the 
author’s subscribers, who are known as followers. Other Twitter 
users may also view tweets unless the author specifically elects 
to limit dissemination of tweets to followers only. As of June 
2016, Twitter users could also post 140-second videos.
Twitter is different from other social media in that there is no 
acceptance process for followers of your feed. It is possible to 
protect your tweets, but that will limit the business and 
networking benefits you seek. Some people argue that you 
should follow everyone who follows you and use lists to keep 
track of those you truly care to follow. You are under no 
obligation to follow someone who tweets content that is of no 
interest to you or is obviously self-promotional, regardless of 
whether they follow you or not. 
Esta Singer offers her perspective on the importance of this 
site to professionals: “Twitter is akin to a worldwide social 
gathering. You’re meeting and mingling among people you know, 
have met, or will meet. You’re having conversations, and sharing 
ideas or information you think could benefit others. Most 
importantly, you are building relationships. Be authentic. Be 

excuse me
[  164  ]
transparent.” She adds, “There is an etiquette to Twitter most of 
us have already learned: extend a virtual hand, offer something of 
value, say ‘thank you’ when someone shares or re-tweets your 
tweet. While the Twittersphere is ever-expanding and endless, 
always be mindful, it is not about the quantity of followers you 
amass, it’s about the quality of connections you create.”     
BEST PRACTICES
A
A Remember this is a two-way personal communication tool. 
Add more value than you request. Social media guru Chris 
Brogan offers this guideline: “Promote other people 12 
times to every 1 self-promotional tweet.”13 Don’t ask for 
re-tweets. Contribute relevant and interesting content and 
it will be re-tweeted. 
A
A Create a list of Twitter accounts you truly care about. Too 
many, and it’s hard to keep up. Make sure your bio is 
complete with a photo, full description, and link to further 
information about you. An incomplete bio is a sign of a 
spammer.
A
A Keep Twitter exchanges brief, not more than three each 
way. After that, use a more practical means for com- 
municating, such as email or telephone. Use the @ symbol 
for talking directly to individuals in moderation. Following 
long @ exchanges can quickly become tedious for the 
others not involved in the exchange. 
A
A Use the hashtag (#) sign to make content, conversations, 
and trends searchable. Long a staple on Twitter, it is used 
to categorize subjects, find related content, and gain wider 
audiences. The hashtag has been criticized for its overuse 
and, as such, should be used thoughtfully. This means not 

TWITTER, ETC. 
[  165  ]
overloading posts so the subject itself is indecipherable 
and not using long, cryptic hashtags. 
A
A Be extremely careful of the messages you post. If you must 
address a private matter, do so via direct message (DM), 
not in front of your entire Twitter audience. 
Summary
As you traverse the ever changing, tricky terrain of social media, 
commit to learning as much as you can about the unique 
characteristics of the various sites. Do take the social media 
plunge even at the risk of making mistakes. Keeping in mind the 
basics of authenticity, transparency, respect, and relevancy will 
keep you on the right track.
REMEMBER
A
A Social media has changed the world. Engage in ways that 
favorably burnish your brand, and you will be considered 
credible, competent, and current. Be consistent on plat- 
forms.
A
A Digital footprints are forever. Personal reputations and 
company brands are at risk through social media misuse. 
Take precautions to mitigate these risks. 
A
A Social media benefits are incalculable. It’s a matter of 
making the decision to join the online conversation.

167
chapter 8
business dining 
Observing the Formalities
“If you ever have to choose between ‘advanced accounting 
for overachievers’ or ‘remedial knife and fork,’ head for the 
silverware.” 
—HARVEY MAC K AY,  
author of Swim with the Sharks Without Being Eaten Alive
F
or a month, Miguel had been planning what he hoped would 
be the perfect visit to Boston for his biggest client and his 
wife. He arranged for them to be picked up in a limousine at the 
airport and whisked off to the exclusive Boston Harbor Hotel, 
to a luxury suite with a view overlooking the Boston skyline. 
Knowing his client loved lobster, Miguel made reservations for 
the best table at the famous Legal Harborside on Boston’s 
waterfront. To cap off the evening, Miguel arranged for a private 
harbor cruise.
Miguel planned their next day with the same meticulous 
attention to detail. He knew his client’s wife loved Asian art and 
arranged for a private docent tour of the Asian art collection at 
the Museum of Fine Arts. Afterwards, they made their way to 

excuse me
[  168  ]
historic Fenway Park for a Red Sox game. The special day ended 
with a late dinner at Mistral and a box of Montecristo #2 cigars 
for his cigar-loving client. 
Miguel’s preparation paid off. Everything came together to 
create an impeccable experience. Impressed, his client told 
Miguel it was “the best weekend he and his wife have ever had” 
and that he looked forward to a long, mutually beneficial 
partnership. It was a perfect ending to the perfect weekend, just 
as Miguel had hoped for.
Alas, Miguel’s business dining and entertaining experience 
was one that few ever actually experience. Because there are so 
many moving parts with client entertainment, something is 
bound to go wrong and almost always does. Guests arrive late or 
not at all. Reservations go astray. Crowded, noisy dining rooms 
hinder conversations. Kitchens get backed up. Service is slow. 
Wrong or incorrectly cooked meals arrive at the table. Servers are 
surly. Glasses topple, silverware falls, and food flies. Guests argue 
or over-imbibe. And all of this happens before the credit card is 
declined. And these are just the business meals. Every other client 
entertainment vehicle has its own inherent potential perils.
Business dining is rife with risk, but it is a risk the serious 
professional wants to take as often as possible. You can expand 
opportunities, acquire information, garner advice, gain 
introductions, and strengthen bonds, all for a pittance in the 
investment of time and money. Business dining is the perfect 
vehicle for welcoming business partners, celebrating good news, 
rewarding major milestones, showing gratitude, delivering 
apologies, and sharing important or difficult news. 
The savvy professional knows a business meal is not about 
the food. In calm and comfortable surroundings, away from the 
frantic pace of the office, a guest is far more likely to let her 

BUSINESS DINING 
[  169  ]
genuine persona emerge, laying the groundwork to establish 
true rapport. 
The Business of Hospitality
Jack, head of sales for a financial organization, had been looking 
forward to his company acquiring a significant piece of business. 
They had had serious competition but, still, he was confident 
they would ultimately win the deal. So, after months of pursuit, 
it came as something of a shock when he learned they did not. 
When Jack asked the president what the decision had rested 
on, he was assured that the problem was not his company’s 
proposal, which was very competitive in all areas. 
“It was a tough call,” he told Jack. In the end, it was the social 
relationship the other company had created and the pleasant, 
easy rapport they had established. The climax was a magnificent 
formal dinner they arranged for his company’s entire executive 
team and their spouses. “They not only wined and dined us,” he 
said, “they made us feel like family.”
Every detail of the dinner had been meticulously planned. 
The spectacular view from the top floor allowed guests to see a 
setting sun as it melted into the evening twilight and 
intermingled with the candle-lit tables, all reflected off of 
floor-to-ceiling windows. And then there were the quietly 
beautiful place cards—minor works of art, with each attendee’s 
name handwritten by a calligrapher.
The president believed that if this was the level of prep- 
aration and respect he and his company could expect as clients, 
this was the place for them. “Those place cards closed the 
deal,” he told Jack. 

excuse me
[  170  ]
Breaking bread in business has always been about 
strengthening relationships. And it is as important today as it’s 
ever been. But a dedicated dining experience outside of the 
office for the purposes of building a relationship is out of sync 
with the way millennials do things. It makes no sense to them, 
especially when they can grab fruit, yogurt, or a Kind bar from 
the office kitchen and keep on task. Why pay for food and drinks 
when their employers offer them for free? Relationship building 
for this cohort is done across the open-plan office or via social 
media, not at formal place settings. Traditional business 
entertaining is becoming less of a priority to older generations 
as well. 
This is shortsighted. The significance of hospitality has a long 
history, dating back to the first recorded writings some 5,000 
years ago. One reference of this was found in the Teachings of 
Khety, c. 2100 BCE:1 
“Give the stranger olive oil from your jar, 
And double the income of your household.
The divine assembly desires respect for the poor
More than honor for the powerful.” 
Throughout history, hospitality was the means through which 
generosity, honor, and respect were shown. It serves the same 
purpose in the 21st century. 
Globally, the significance of business dining and entertaining 
cannot be overstated. A critical component of establishing trust, 
business dining in the international arena determines whether 
or not there will be a subsequent business relationship. 
The Financial Times has a wonderful, semi-regular column 
in its magazine, How to Spend It, called “The Captain’s Table.” 
In this column, they interview extraordinarily successful 

BUSINESS DINING 
[  171  ]
businesspeople about where in the world they most like to dine 
and their thoughts on the business dining experience itself.  
Richie Nanda, executive chairman of the international 
security firm Topsgrup India said, “I would say that 80 percent 
of my business is, in some way, conducted over lunch and dinner. 
I am very much into relationships, and believe that to form good 
ones and conduct successful business you need to be relaxed—
and that often comes as a result of enjoying a good meal on a 
one-to-one basis.”2 Joseph Sitt, president and CEO of Thor 
Equities, a global portfolio and development pipeline, says, “My 
mentor, an Egyptian businessman called Joseph Chehebar, once 
told me ‘If you don’t have a meeting set up over a meal that day, 
then don’t come to work.’”3
In the U.S., entertaining of clients often follows successful 
business dealings, but around the world, they are integral 
throughout the entire process.
International dining customs vary widely, and serious 
professionals go to great lengths to prepare themselves 
accordingly. They know that when dining with Japanese clients, 
you never pour alcohol for yourself. Among Arabs, you do not 
use your left hand to eat, as that hand is considered unclean. 
Attire, introductions, gift-giving, conversation, dining etiquette, 
the significance of alcohol, toasting, and after-hours 
entertainment are just some of the important elements that are 
carefully researched before dining with international business 
partners.
In the U.S., if we entertain at all, it is often for practical 
reasons. We are busy and our clients and colleagues are busy, 
but we want to meet, and we have to eat. So we opt for the “two 
birds with one stone” approach and convene over a meal. This 
may seem an efficient tactic, but may also leave a great deal of 

excuse me
[  172  ]
potential on the table. Working breakfasts and luncheons are 
perfectly fine if billed as such up front. And, of course, if clients 
want to talk business over meals, we are happy to comply. But if 
stronger alliances are what we are after, we need to let the 
balance of conversation be about nonbusiness items. 
While you are learning about your dining companion over a 
business meal, you too are under the microscope. Your guest is 
on the lookout for clues about you—your personality, your 
integrity, and how much you value this relationship. The amount 
of thought you give to the choice of venue, the invitation, the 
greeting, and the seating of your guest are also under evaluation. 
How you interact with the server, order wine, steer the 
conversation, deal with the unforeseen, and pay the bill are, too. 
At a business meal, your grace, generosity, and personal 
characteristics are on display and contribute to your guest’s 
evaluation of you and your overall suitability as a business 
partner. 
Business dining opportunities involve more than just those 
with clients and prospects. Coworkers, employees, and bosses 
get to see us eat every day. And the people who hold our 
professional futures in their hands notice us as we wolf down 
our overstuffed Italian subs, our chins dripping with olive oil. 
Business dining is also a big part of the interview process, 
especially if the job will include face-to-face client interactions. 
A prospective boss does not invite a candidate to lunch or dinner 
because she thinks he is hungry. Her concern is how this person 
would fare in an unscripted and unpredictable social situation 
that may require any combination of good judgment, flexibility, 
humor, kindness, and consideration. 
Walt Bettinger, CEO of Charles Schwab, the brokerage and 
banking company, uses the business dining experience to 

BUSINESS DINING 
[  173  ]
evaluate how well job candidates deal with adversity. In an 
interview with Adam Bryant of The New York Times, he said he 
takes candidates to breakfast, arrives early, and asks the server 
to deliberately mess up the candidate’s order. “That will help me 
understand how they deal with adversity. Are they upset? Are 
they frustrated? Or are they understanding? Life is like that and 
business is like that.”4 He says it gives him a window into their 
hearts, not just their heads. 
Prospective employers are also carefully observing how 
comfortable candidates are in sophisticated surroundings, how 
appropriate are their choices of food, drink, and conversation, 
how aptly they display dining skills, and whether they glance at 
their electronic devices. A false step in any of these areas could 
cost an otherwise qualified candidate a job offer.
One might agree that dining skills are important, but question 
whether the lack of them is an issue. It is. We have mentioned 
that one of the biggest obstacles millennials face in the workplace 
is their perceived lack of social skills, dining skills among them. 
Many think that the decline in teaching manners, traditionally 
done at home, began in the 1970s as women began to enter the 
workplace in greater numbers. Scheduling demands put the 
family dinner on the back burner, so to speak. As a result, the 
basics of how to use silverware and engage in respectful 
conversations, and why the telephone is not answered during 
the meal, went untaught. But if this theory is correct, it is not 
only millennials who missed out on these important lessons—a 
fair share of their older colleagues may have as well. 

excuse me
[  174  ]
Hosts and Guests 
Bill didn’t really mind that his guest had picked out the 
restaurant. It was his city after all, and he knew the best places. 
And Bill thought as long as his prospect was happy, the better 
the chances their relationship would get off to a great start.  
When Bill gets to the restaurant, he takes a peek at the menu. 
The prices are eye popping! Still, that was okay because this guy 
seemed like the real deal. His guest arrives and, after a bit of 
small talk, Bill invites him to order. “Okay,” he says to Bill. Then, 
to the server, he says, “I’ll start with a dozen oysters, then the 
Caesar salad, and the prime rib, rare.” After a momentary pause 
to mentally calculate the bill so far, Bill asks his guest if he’d like 
wine. “Sure,” he says, asking the server to “bring us your best 
bottle of Cabernet.” 
Bill tries in vain over dinner to engage his prospect in 
conversation, each time only to be met by the man chewing a 
mouthful of food and gulping his wine. When dinner is finished 
and dessert offered, the client asks for the menu once again. He 
orders not just dessert, coffee, and an after-dinner drink for 
himself but, to Bill’s astonishment—dinner and dessert to take 
home to his wife! 
The long evening finally nears its end and the check comes. 
As Bill reaches for his wallet, the client crumples his napkin into 
a ball and says to Bill, “Great dinner—thanks! My wife’s gonna 
love this,” holding up his wife’s take-home dinner order.               
In delving into the subject of business entertaining, a good 
place to start is with the responsibilities of hosts and guests. 
Unlike the social arena in which such roles are not always 
defined, in business they generally are. And both factions need 
to know their responsibilities to play their parts accordingly.

BUSINESS DINING 
[  175  ]
Before an invitation is extended, a host must know why she is 
extending it. Being clear on what a host hopes to accomplish will 
inform all decisions to follow. Next is the choice of venue. 
Perhaps the occasion is a quick introductory or information- 
sharing meeting, where coffee at a local cafe or even the 
company cafeteria works well. Maybe it is a more leisurely 
get-to-know-you luncheon, where a quiet venue is the best 
choice. It could be a celebratory dinner, where nothing short of 
a five-star restaurant with an excellent wine list will do. 
When selecting a venue, the host considers her guest’s 
convenience, comfort, and taste. If the guest’s food preferences 
are not known, the host opts for a restaurant with a wide 
assortment of popular foods. Most restaurants that cater to 
business clientele have selections that appeal to all comers, 
including vegetarians, pescatarians, carnivores, vegans, and the 
gluten-free. Some quick online menu research will reassure a 
host that her guest’s preferences, whatever they are, will be 
accommodated. A host does not, however, ask the guest to 
choose the restaurant. This puts undue pressure on the guest to 
discern what level of hospitality the host has in mind and what 
her own food preferences might be. But the host can suggest 
different kinds of food, for example, Japanese, Italian, seafood, 
steak, etc., to get a sense of what her guest might like.
It’s always a good idea for a host to scope out the prospective 
establishment before taking a valued client or prospect there. 
Are the food and service top-notch? Is the noise level 
acceptable? Does the table spacing allow for a private con- 
versation? Is the décor tasteful? Is the menu understandable? 
Knowing that the venue will be suitable in all regards gives a 
host confidence and allows her to focus on the building of the 
relationship.   

excuse me
[  176  ]
Once a venue is selected, an invitation is extended. Usually, a 
telephone or email invitation will suffice, but for a formal event 
such as a ceremony or banquet, a printed or engraved invitation 
may be in order. The formality of the event also dictates how far 
in advance an invitation is extended. For casual meals, it can be 
as short as a few days; for special occasions, it should be at least 
three weeks before, perhaps preceded by a “save the date” 
announcement.
On the day, the host arrives early, ready to greet her guest. If 
the guest gets there first and does not see his host, he may be 
concerned about having gotten the day, time, or place correct. Or 
he may just wonder why the host isn’t there—not a question a host 
wants a guest to ask. A host checks her guest’s coat and keeps the 
ticket to retrieve it later. The maître d’ escorts the guest to the 
table, and the host follows the guest. Once at the table, the host 
invites the guest to be seated in the best seat, which could be the 
one with the beautiful view or the most comfortable-looking 
chair. The guest sits to the right of the host at a table for four. If it 
is a table for two, they sit across from one another. 
Immediately upon sitting, the host removes her napkin from 
the table and puts it in her lap. Menus will be presented after 
which the server, or ideally the host, invites the guest to have 
something to drink. If the guest accepts and chooses a drink 
containing alcohol, the host also orders a drink, although it does 
not need to be alcoholic. Having familiarity with the menu, the 
host makes suggestions to the guest, including some selections 
from the high end of the menu’s price range. This allows the 
guest to feel comfortable ordering without concern for price. If 
the guest does order lobster or Kobe beef at the host’s suggestion, 
she is prepared to order something commensurately expensive 
to relieve him of any concerns about being extravagant. Once 

BUSINESS DINING 
[  177  ]
the meals have been selected, the host offers the guest wine to 
accompany the meal. If there are two people dining and only 
one drinking wine, or if different kinds of wine are preferred, it 
is perfectly acceptable for diners to order wine by the glass. 
Otherwise, it is up to the host to order wine by the bottle. After 
the drinks arrive and the meals have been ordered, it’s time to 
get down to the business. The business of building a relationship, 
that is. 
Throughout the meal, the host stays in complete control. She 
interacts with the server as needed, keeps the conversation going, 
handles any difficult situations that might arise, constantly 
anticipates her guest’s needs, and ends the meal gracefully. She 
has already made arrangements with the server or maître d’ to 
hold the check rather than present it at the table, sidestepping any 
possible awkward discussion about splitting the tab or leaving the 
tip. The meal over, the host escorts her guest from the restaurant, 
retrieves his coat, tips the coat-check person, and walks the guest 
to the front door. There, if a cab is needed, the host either hails 
one or tips the doorman for doing so. 
When the host is a woman and the guest a man, or the guest 
is considerably older than the host, complications can arise. This 
is because some men and some older people feel more com- 
fortable in the role of host. Both men and women want to guard 
against behaviors that hint at gender distinctions, and all want 
to avoid presuming that the older person automatically pays the 
bill. To ensure there is no question about who is hosting, one lets 
the server or maître d’ know upon her arrival that she is the 
host. The staff will then proceed accordingly, deferring to the 
host and guest as appropriate in their respective roles.
There are many things over which we have no control at 
business meals. Preparing for the inevitable hiccups, literal or 

excuse me
[  178  ]
otherwise, that are just part of the dining experience allows us 
to go with the flow. Staying calm, ignoring what we can, tactfully 
handling what we must, and laughing off the rest is the best 
approach. No matter what happens, it is truly never the end of 
the world. And who knows? It may even end up being a bonding 
moment!
What has the guest been up to while the host has been 
orchestrating this impeccable dining experience? Ideally, he has 
been displaying exemplary dining skills and enjoying this 
wonderful hospitality. A good guest knows this is his host’s 
show and does not usurp her responsibilities in any way. 
The Mechanics of a Meal
Frank is ravenous. He comes to this business conference every 
year, mostly because they always host dinner at the best steak 
house in the city. He looks forward to this big, delicious dinner 
more than any other part of the conference.
Seated at the table, he grabs his napkin and gives it a big 
flap before tucking it under his chin. Now ready, he orders a 
gargantuan steak, to be broiled to his specifications, and a 
double order of thick-cut fries, golden and crisp, just the way he 
loves them! He holds his knife and fork, clenched in each fist, as 
though he were going to carve the beast himself.
In his mind, there is nothing better than this. Except, darn it, 
they always ruin things by bringing broccoli. Frank sure as heck 
is not going to let this broccoli get in the way of his perfect steak 
dinner. So he takes the bread off of his bread plate and puts it on 
the tablecloth. He then tips his dinner plate and pushes all the 
broccoli florets on to the empty bread plate. 

BUSINESS DINING 
[  179  ]
There, problem solved. 
First impressions always begin with limited information. 
There is the tendency to think that if someone is skilled in one 
area, say quantum physics, they are also skilled in another, say 
basic utensil-holding. If the person is not skilled at holding a 
fork, the thinking goes, how can he possibly be trusted with 
subatomic particles?  
First Impressions
When there is a large group of attendees at an event or formal 
dinner, there may be a receiving line to allow attendees to meet 
the host and guest of honor. Since all eyes are on the VIPs in a 
receiving line, it is important to avoid boisterous behavior in line. 
Keep your right hand free for a handshake, and move quickly 
through the line. Next, it is time to meet and mingle. Savvy 
professionals take full advantage of this opportunity, because 
they know it may be the only chance they have to talk with certain 
people. Once seated, they are primarily responsible for talking 
with the persons to their right and left. It is inconsiderate to 
ignore one’s immediate dining partners in favor of those one 
deems more interesting or important across the table.
At the table, diners wait until all—or at least most—table 
companions are ready to sit down before they sit down 
themselves. They allow the host to indicate where they should 
sit, or if there are place cards, they sit accordingly. Diners enter 
their chairs from the chair’s right side to avoid colliding with 
persons seated to their left. In the business arena, where the 
focus is not on gender distinctions, men do not pull out women’s 
chairs or rise when they rise. However, if a woman (or a man) 
receives such treatment, she (or he) accepts it gracefully.

excuse me
[  180  ]
Once everyone is seated, guests wait for the host to remove 
his napkin from the table before doing so themselves. If the host 
neglects to do so once everyone is seated, diners may discreetly 
place their napkins in their laps. At fine restaurants, guests take 
in stride that servers may drape their napkins across their laps 
for them. The request for a dark-colored napkin may seem 
reasonable to avoid lint on one’s clothes or lipstick or food stains 
on one’s napkin, but it is not advised. The restaurant may not be 
able to accommodate the request, and it could come across as a 
bit persnickety. 
Posture at the table is important. Sit up straight, but not stiffly, 
with both feet on the floor. When engaging in conversation, turn 
your head, not your whole body, to the person with whom you are 
speaking. Keep elbows and forearms off the table, and control 
nervous habits such as drumming fingers, tapping utensils against 
glasses, and excessively stirring drinks. When drinks or food 
arrive, wait until the host lifts his glass or a utensil before lifting 
yours. The host may offer a welcoming toast, and often glasses are 
clinked, but this is not necessary at business meals. 
Napkin Etiquette
A napkin, of course, goes in the lap. If it is a large folded napkin, 
the crease goes toward the waist. A smaller napkin may lay flat 
in the lap. Never flap your napkin in midair to unfold it. During 
the course of a meal, if you wish to take a sip of a drink after 
having taken a bite of food, dab the corners of your mouth with 
your napkin first. This avoids the possibility of errant crumbs 
landing in or on the rim of the glass. Never tuck your napkin into 
your collar or belt or hoist your tie over your shoulder or tuck it 
into your shirt to protect it. 

BUSINESS DINING 
[  181  ]
If you must leave the table for a moment, your napkin is 
placed on the seat of your chair, which indicates you are 
returning. Some people do not like the thought of placing a 
napkin where they and others have sat, and this is under- 
standable. However, a soiled napkin placed back on the table can 
be unsightly for other guests. The server may also infer from 
this placement that you have left and proceed to clear your place 
setting. At an upscale restaurant, a napkin left on the chair will 
be quickly refolded by the server and replaced to the left of the 
plate or draped over the arm of the chair. 
The most important thing to remember about napkins is to 
please use them! Licking your fingers or using the tablecloth to 
wipe them off is simply uncivilized behavior. Once the meal is 
finished, the host will place his napkin loosely folded to the left 
of the plate. Guests then do the same.
Silverware
There are many different styles of eating around the world, but 
the styles encountered most often in the U.S. are the American 
and Continental. In the American style, the fork is held in the 
nondominant hand, which for most is the left hand, and the 
knife is held in the dominant hand. The diner cuts his food, 
places the knife on the right side of the plate, blade facing in, 
and switches the fork to the other hand to eat. Food is scooped 
with the tines of the fork up. Only one kind of food, such as 
meat, vegetable, or potato, is eaten at a time. The American 
style calls for the hands to be placed in the lap when not 
holding silverware 
In the Continental style of eating, the utensils are held in the 
same fashion as in the American style, but after cutting, the food 

excuse me
[  182  ]
is speared or pushed onto the fork with the knife and is 
immediately brought to the mouth, tines of the fork down. More 
than one kind of food can be on the fork, although the bite itself 
should not be too big. When resting between bites of food, the 
Continental style allows for the wrists to rest on the edge of the 
table. 
The question about which style is preferred in the U.S.—
American or Continental—comes up often. The answer is the 
style with which one is most comfortable. Many people like the 
Continental style because it seems elegant and efficient. Others 
like the American style because the angle of the fork allows for 
greater ease in eating some foods, especially those that lend 
themselves to being scooped such as peas, rice, and corn. Either 
style is perfectly acceptable, as is alternating between the styles, 
depending on the food. 
The order of the use of silverware is simple: Start with the 
utensil farthest from the plate. If the table has been set 
incorrectly, use the utensil you know is correct. If you are 
missing a utensil, it is appropriate to ask for it. You can tell from 
the way the table has been set how many courses will be offered 
and in what order they will arrive. For a three-course meal of 
soup, entrée, and dessert, you will find a soupspoon to the far 
right of your setting, a knife next to the soupspoon (to the 
soupspoon’s left but to the right of the plate), and a fork to the 
left of the plate. Above the plate will be a dessert spoon with its 
handle to the right and directly below it, a dessert fork with its 
handle to the left. If you are ordering your own courses, the 
correct utensils will be brought to you for each course. 
One of the most mentioned dining pet peeves is the way in 
which people hold their utensils. It is difficult to ignore someone 
holding a fork in a clenched fist or encircling its handle as if it 

BUSINESS DINING 
[  183  ]
were a flute. Spoons are often held in similarly inappropriate 
manners, and some diners use their knives like saws. It may be 
challenging to overcome lifelong bad habits, but with practice it 
can be done.
A spoon is held properly by placing the thumb on top of the 
handle at its widest part and placing the handle of the spoon 
between the first and second fingers. This allows one to spoon 
soup away and sip from the side of the spoon. 	
A fork starts out in the nondominant hand, tines down, with 
the forefinger on the back of the handle and the tip of the finger 
no farther down the handle than to where the handle and tines 
meet. If the fork is switched to the dominant hand, as in the 
American style, the tines are up, and the utensil is held as one 
would hold a pencil. 
A knife starts out in the dominant hand for cutting. Similar to 
the way in which the fork is held, the forefinger comes down the 
back of the handle to no farther down than where the handle 
and the blade meet. In the Continental style of eating, the knife 
is used to help secure food onto the fork. In the American style, 
the knife is placed down on the plate, blade facing in, and the 
fork is switched to the dominant hand to eat. 
Once silverware is picked up from the table, no portion of it 
rests on the table again. If a diner wishes to rest between bites 
of food, the silverware is placed in a resting position. I favor a 
resting position of the inverted “V” with the tines of the fork 
facing right, tines down, and the blade of the knife facing left, 
blade in, as if to form a tent. Some employ the resting style of 
the fork on the lower portion of the plate facing left, at about 
the 5 o’clock–8 o’clock position, and the knife on the upper 
portion, facing the same way at about the 2 o’clock–11 o’clock 
position. Either position is fine as long as the server and other 

excuse me
[  184  ]
diners have a clue as to what someone is trying to signal with 
his silverware. 
When you are finished eating, make this clear by placing the 
fork and knife next to each other, knife above the fork, with 
blade facing in, in a 10 o’clock-4 o’clock position. The tines of the 
fork may be up or down. Most important, do not strew the 
silverware haphazardly about the plate. 
The Crystal
The most important thing to remember about crystal is that if it 
has a stem, it is held by the stem. If it doesn’t have a stem, it is 
held by the glass, or bowl, in the middle to bottom area, not near 
the rim. A large-stemmed red wine glass may certainly be held 
near the base of the bowl to make sure it is steady, but a white 
wine glass is held in the middle of the stem to avoid warming the 
wine with the heat of the hand. Do not hold the wine glass by its 
base or cupped in the hand as you would a brandy snifter.
Dining Decorum 
Rich can’t wait to share his success. And the annual meeting of 
the retail sales managers of the national chain Yardley Auto 
Parts is just the place to do it! Rich’s store is beating sales records 
by huge amounts. He decides this is the perfect chance to tell 
the new company president all about it. He will stand out from 
the sea of 150 managers while the president is still getting to 
know the staff.
Rich makes his rounds, chatting with other attendees, all the 
while searching the tables to see where he is seated. Sure 

BUSINESS DINING 
[  185  ]
enough, his place card puts him at a table at the opposite end of 
the room from the president’s table. Confident the meeting 
planner placed the cards randomly, Rich decides he will 
surreptitiously switch his place card with one at the president’s 
table. Rich can’t help but smile, pleased with this brilliant plan. 
The meal is about to begin, and Rich sits down at the head 
table with the president. Just as he starts his conversation with 
his fellow diners, he feels a tap on his shoulder. It is the meeting 
planner. “I’m sorry,” he says. “You are seated at table 10. You 
have to move.” His cheeks burning red hot with embarrassment, 
Rich stumbles to stand up and quickly walks to his seat at the far 
end of the room. 
Rich stood out, all right, in a way neither he nor the new 
president would ever forget.   
Seating and Conversation
The guest of honor, if there is one, is seated to the host’s immediate 
right. The second-ranking guest is to the host’s left. If there is a 
cohost, he sits at the opposite end of the table from the host, with 
third- and fourth-ranking guests to his right and left, respectively. 
All other diners are seated in the middle of the table. The host 
speaks with the guest of honor first and at some point during the 
meal, “turns the table” to speak with the second-ranking guest. 
All other diners follow suit as well as they can, speaking with the 
available persons on either side of them.
While conversations between two people work best, there 
will occasionally be an uneven number of diners or odd seating 
configuration at the table. Sometimes several people will be 
involved in one discussion. If everyone remembers their primary 
conversation responsibilities, no one will be ignored or excluded. 

excuse me
[  186  ]
Appropriate conversation topics over business meals are the 
same as they are for all business encounters. This means 
avoiding any that are potentially divisive or personal. If you are 
upbeat, show genuine interest, listen well, and interject humor 
whenever possible, you will be a sought-after dining companion. 
Laughter, interest, and enthusiasm are all welcome at business 
meals. Boredom, negativity, and fatigue are not. You must “sing 
for your supper” or stay home. 
Toasting
If done well, toasting is an extraordinarily powerful tool. 
Unfortunately, business professionals miss countless 
opportunities to honor clients and colleagues with words of 
praise or thanks. Toasting is actually easier than you might 
think. It simply involves sharing a sentiment that is well 
thought-out, sincerely and briefly. That’s it. Some people avoid 
making toasts because of the enormous pressure they feel it puts 
on them to be at once brilliant, original, and hysterically funny. 
Even professional comedians and speakers can’t always hit that 
high a mark. Just remember to keep the spotlight squarely on 
the honoree when making the toast and you will relieve yourself 
of a great deal of pressure.  
 TOASTING GUIDELINES
A
A The host makes the toast. It occurs after the main course 
has been cleared, during the dessert course. The host 
stands and says, “May I have your attention please? We are 
here tonight in honor of  . . .” At a small gathering, the host 
may stay seated. For a short toast, the host may hold his 

BUSINESS DINING 
[  187  ]
glass throughout; for a longer one, he may pick it up at 
the end.
A
A The host invites attendees to raise their glasses. In the 
U.S., it is appropriate to toast with wine, champagne, or 
water. All raise their glasses in the direction of the guest of 
honor and do not clink their glasses among themselves. 
The honoree is the only person who does not raise a glass; 
it is incorrect to drink to oneself. 
A
A The honoree reciprocates. A toast of thanks is offered to 
the host and to everyone who has attended by the honoree. 
All join in, raising their glasses to the host. 
Challenges
Challenging situations come up at every meal, and savvy diners 
handle them deftly. You should call as little attention to them as 
possible and ignore them if you can. Never embarrass a dining 
companion by belaboring an incident. 
THE PROPER RESPONSE
A
A If you drop something on the floor, leave it there—whether 
food, silverware, or a napkin. If the item is a hazard, such 
as a fork in a main traffic area, place it under the table. Do 
not use it or place it on the table again.
A
A If you find something inedible in your food, such as an olive 
pit, bone, or gristle, or worse, a bug or strand of hair, 
quietly bring it to the server’s attention. Do not upset 
dining companions by sharing this information. 
A
A If you have food stuck in your teeth, take a sip of water or 
quietly excuse yourself and tend to it in the restroom. If 

excuse me
[  188  ]
you see something on another’s lip, chin, or tooth, address 
discreetly. Point to your mouth with raised eyebrows or 
whisper the information.
A
A If you must cough or sneeze, turn away and down toward 
your elbow or over your shoulder. You needn’t leave the 
table, unless you have a prolonged attack or need to blow 
your nose. Never use a napkin as a handkerchief, but if 
unavoidable, ask for a replacement. 
A
A If you spill a beverage, right the glass, blot the spill, and ask 
for a clean napkin. Pick up spilled food with a clean spoon 
or knife, or fingers if necessary, and put it on the plate. 
Leave crumbs on the table; the server will attend to them. 
A
A If your guest drinks too much alcohol, be discreet. Quietly 
arrange with the server to not offer or pour any more 
alcohol. If you are not sure your guest can safely drive, 
insist on driving him home or call a cab.  
Dining Dos and Don’ts
There are a number of telling behaviors in business dining 
situations that distinguish those who have taken the time to 
learn the intricacies from those who have not. Here are some 
important tips.
 THE DOS
A
A Remember, your bread plate is to the left of your plate, and 
your drinks are to the right. The acronym BMW, for bread, 
meal, and water, is a great way to remember this. 
A
A Cut no more than one or two bites of food at a time. Take 
small bites and swallow any food in your mouth before 

BUSINESS DINING 
[  189  ]
taking a sip of a drink. Chew with your mouth closed. 
Once food is on your utensil, put it immediately into your 
mouth. 
A
A Check coats and umbrellas when possible. Purses, brief- 
cases, papers, eyeglasses, mobile phones, and medication 
should be kept off of tables. 
A
A Avoid food choices that may be problematic to eat. Save 
lobster, ribs, and tacos for dining with friends and family. 
Familiarize yourself with the ways in which to eat various 
foods. 
A
A Pay with a credit card or a standing account. Do not pay 
with cash. 
THE DON’TS
A
A Treat restaurant servers or staff disrespectfully. Execu- 
tives often take prospective employees out to meals not 
to see how they treat them, but to see how they treat the 
servers. 
A
A Use your fingers to push food. Don’t slurp, burp, or smack 
your lips.
A
A Announce your food likes, dislikes, allergies, or latest diet. 
Never complain about the venue, the food, or the service, 
especially if you are a guest. Do not comment on food 
choice, offer dietary advice, or monitor consumption. Do 
not ask to taste others’ food.
A
A Move or rearrange a place setting for your ease in eating. 
Do not wipe off spotty silverware or crystal, rotate your 
plate, or push your plate away at the end of the meal.
A
A Ask for a doggie bag, whether host or guest, even if the 
server mentions it.

excuse me
[  190  ]
Throughout the meal, diners carefully and silently monitor the 
tempo and tenor of the meal to make good judgments about 
what to do next. If they notice that everyone has finished a 
course, they put their utensils in the finished position as well. If 
everyone else orders a drink, first course, and dessert, they do, 
too. Of course, they do not have to order exactly what others 
order, but participating in all courses and drinks keeps the pace 
of the meal even and allows others to enjoy what they wish 
without fear of rushing or holding others up.  
REMEMBER
A
A Understand the connection between business dining and 
relationships, reputations, and financial rewards.
A
A Execute host and guest responsibilities faithfully.
A
A Practice the mechanics of the business meal.
A
A Observe all elements of dining decorum.

191
chapter 9 
the social side of business 
Knowing the Basics for Every Situation
“A man’s manners are a mirror in which he shows his portrait.”
—JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE
J
ared had it made in the shade. A top student in a prestigious 
MBA program, he had just landed a coveted summer 
internship at a prominent financial services company. Jared 
knew all he had to do was ace this internship and a six-figure job 
offer was guaranteed him upon graduation.
All the interns were invited to a welcome-to-the-firm dinner 
in the luxurious, usually off-limits, executive dining room. Jared 
ordered a glass of fine Merlot, even though the hosts had 
preordered wine for the dinner. He enjoyed the wine thoroughly, 
ordering two more glasses before the main course arrived. 
When Jared’s meal came, it was not cooked to his specifications—
he’d ordered his steak medium-rare, not medium, he curtly 

excuse me
[  192  ]
reminded the server—so he sent it back. While he waited, he 
asked for another glass of wine. 
Now confidently holding court at his end of the table, Jared 
proudly shared his achievements with whoever was within 
earshot. With a barely detectable slur in his words, he spared no 
detail about the numerous awards he’d received and the work 
he’d put into achieving his stellar GPA. Throughout the dinner, 
Jared jumped into conversations when they interested him, 
always relating the topic to his accomplishments, and checked 
texts when he was not interested. Toward the end of the meal, 
Jared noticed many eyes were on him. Terrific, he thought. 
They’re impressed! That they were appalled was completely lost 
on him. If the executives had any doubts about offering him a 
future full-time position, this dinner put that question to rest. 
Jared had miserably and, unknowingly, failed this crucial test. 
The social side of business encompasses everything from a 
cup of coffee to a five-course meal, and savvy business 
professionals are comfortable in all of these social situations. 
Regardless of the formality of the event, the same guidelines for 
hosts and guests apply, as do all of the dos and don’ts of dining: 
Arrive early, do not use electronic devices, and correctly handle 
the silverware, crystal, and napkin. The only thing that changes 
is the venue. 
Entertaining Clients
Advertising executive Emily often entertained clients at 
breakfasts, taking them to her elegant city club with its beautifully 
appointed dining room with fresh flowers, immaculate white 
table cloths, attentive service, and magnificent panoramic views 

THE SOCIAL SIDE OF BUSINESS 
[  193  ]
of the city below from the 36th floor. Her guests were always 
impressed. But today, she was in her new prospect’s city. It had 
taken her months to get on her calendar, and her prospect had 
made it clear that her schedule was very tight. When she suggested 
breakfast, Emily quickly and happily agreed. She’s always had 
great luck at business breakfasts! But where?
It had to be distinctive, convenient, and suitable for a business 
conversation. Emily knew she had one chance to impress this 
prospect and had to get it right. She did some online recon- 
naissance and found a charming bistro close to her client’s 
office. The website showed off its lovely décor and people in 
business suits engaged in conversations. It looked ideal! 
Emily arrived early but was immediately told there was a 
15-minute wait—and her prospect was already on her way. When 
they were finally seated, it took another 10 minutes to get coffee 
and menus. The server was rushed, telling them that they were 
shorthanded. Thirty minutes after they sat down, their orders 
arrived, eggs cold and toast overdone and rock hard. Their water 
glasses and coffee cups remained empty as Emily tried in vain 
to get the server’s attention. 
Her prospect announced she really had to get back. She 
gathered her things, thanked her host, and left. Emily could not 
even walk her to the door, never mind back to her office, as she 
waited for the bill. Emily left glum, realizing she had 
accomplished nothing but wasting her prospect’s valuable time. 
Lesson learned: A pretty website does not ensure a great 
experience. Emily had failed to do enough due diligence and lost 
out on promising business in the process.

excuse me
[  194  ]
Coffee
Meeting a client or prospect for coffee is a modest investment of 
time and money and a great way to make introductions, further 
relationships, or discuss ideas in an informal setting. Once, 
coffee was almost exclusively associated with the morning, but 
now virtually any time of day that works for your client is 
appropriate for coffee. 
You can make this mode of entertainment special from the 
very beginning by picking your guest up at her office. You 
eliminate potential issues of transportation or traffic, which 
could affect arrival times, parking, and seating, and the bonus is 
that your guest will feel valued. If you use your own car instead of 
a hired car, make sure it is spotlessly clean and odor-free. An 
additional nice touch is to have bottled water and possibly mints 
or hard candy available. A friend of mine in real estate does this 
and tells me that these small gestures are noticed and appreciated 
every time.
If picking your guest up is not feasible, ask her in advance 
what you can order for her. This saves time when schedules are 
tight. Arrive early to scope out a table. In a self-serve 
environment, invite your guest to sit, then place and pay for your 
orders. Offer your guest both something to eat and drink, and 
follow suit so she feels comfortable in partaking.            
Choose a venue that is conducive to a business conversation. 
Meeting at a private club or café where the staff knows you, 
where good service is guaranteed, and where you can handle 
the bill out of sight is ideal. Engage in small talk until the coffee 
arrives, then introduce the business topic you want to discuss. 
Keep your voice low in places where you might be overheard.

THE SOCIAL SIDE OF BUSINESS 
[  195  ]
Coffee is, of course, meant to be quick and casual. Ask your 
guest how much time she has, keep an eye on the clock, and let 
her know when the time for her departure approaches. If the 
conversation is going well, she may extend it. If not, your guest 
will appreciate that you have been respectful of her schedule. As 
always, thank your guest for joining you.
Breakfast
More formal than coffee, breakfast is a great way to secure 
valuable in-person time with clients and prospects in a 
cost-effective, time-sensitive way. Clients are often more 
relaxed at breakfast, the challenges of the day not yet having 
consumed their attention. And if your client happens to work 
on billable hours or has a hard stop at the end of the day, 
breakfast may be the only time you can see him. Breakfast is 
quieter and more personal than later meals, and the service is 
usually swift.
Breakfast meetings can begin as early as 6:30 A.M. and go as 
late as 8:30 A.M. If your guest orders something to eat, follow 
suit, but order foods that are manageable, quick, and healthful. 
It will not go unnoticed if your guest has a nonfat yogurt with 
fruit and you have a breakfast of bacon, eggs, and home fries, 
with a tall stack of pancakes on the side!
Engage in small talk until the coffee comes, then switch to 
business. When the food arrives, either reintroduce casual 
conversation or keep the business topic going. Time is of the 
essence at breakfast meetings, and it is not incorrect to talk 
business throughout.

excuse me
[  196  ]
Lunch
Lunch meetings are meant for relationship-building and 
business talk in equal measure. Lunch, more formal and more 
social than coffee or breakfast, is also more expensive and takes 
more time. It is a greater investment on the part of your client as 
well, a testament that you are worth the time! 
Midday meals differ in other ways as well. Over lunch, a host 
offers his guest a cocktail or wine, although in the U.S. this offer 
will generally be declined. The days of the three-martini lunch 
are long gone, and it is rare, but not unheard of, to drink alcohol 
at lunch. Still, in some parts of the country, and at some venues, 
the offer of beer or wine at lunch may be welcomed. In cultures 
where drinking at lunch is customary, guests may also take you 
up on this invitation. Generally, it is best to make the offer, 
recognizing that you do not need to join in unless you want to. 
Never drink alcohol at lunch if your guest is not drinking.
Another way lunch differs from coffee or breakfast is the 
point at which the topic of business is broached. The host begins 
by engaging in small talk, transitioning to business talk after the 
meals are ordered and prior to their arrival. Once the meal 
arrives, he reverts to lighter topics of conversation. Business 
talks may be picked up again after the main course over coffee.
When business talk is the main purpose of getting together, 
lunch in the boardroom, the executive dining room, or even the 
company cafeteria can make good sense. Savvy hosts know that 
even these venues present golden opportunities for them to 
make great impressions on their guests. If food is delivered to a 
meeting room, having real glasses, plates, silverware, and 
napkins available makes hosts stand out. Guests notice and 
appreciate not having to grapple with plastic forks, flimsy paper 

THE SOCIAL SIDE OF BUSINESS 
[  197  ]
plates, cracking plastic cups, and barely useable napkins. If 
lunch is in a cafeteria, a host walks through the food lines with 
her guest or meets him at the cashier to pay for their food. A very 
nice touch is to arrange to have a company higher-up stop by the 
table to greet a special guest. A host would make the introduction 
and facilitate a brief conversation. It is one more chance to let a 
guest know how valued he is by the organization at all levels.
Tea
One of the best-kept secrets among business entertaining 
cognoscenti is afternoon tea. The ambiance of an elegant dining 
room overlooking a beautiful vista, with white linens on the 
table and a gleaming silver tea service at the ready, is hard to 
beat. Warm scones, crustless tea sandwiches, assorted sweets, 
and a reviving cup of freshly brewed tea form a welcome 
scenario for many a harried businessperson. Tea has all of the 
elements of a lavish entertainment experience, including 
sophisticated surroundings, superior service, and excellent 
food, but little of the expense. 
Entertaining over tea reaps great personal branding rewards 
for hosts who are seen as creative, cultured, and respectful of 
others’ time. Afternoon tea is offered at venerable hotels and 
restaurants in almost all big cities, and most do a splendid job. 
Drinks
Hosts can make the most of the relatively brief time they have 
with clients over after-hours drinks by giving a great deal of 
thought to the venue. A good choice is a high-end restaurant 
where you are known to the staff. There, you will be greeted and 

excuse me
[  198  ]
welcomed by name at the door and can introduce your guest to 
the restaurant captain. Your party can then be seated at a 
reserved table where complimentary cocktail accompaniments 
such as nuts and olives are often served and drink orders swiftly 
taken. 
If your guest orders alcohol, you as host would follow suit 
but would limit your consumption to one drink. Sometimes a 
host may offer his guest another cocktail, but only after 
acknowledging the guest’s presumed time constraints. If the 
guest is in no hurry and the host’s schedule allows, he may 
suggest dinner, for both hospitality and safety reasons. Too 
much alcohol on an empty stomach is a recipe for disaster, a 
scenario with which the host does not want to be associated. 
The superb service, ambience, and drinks in this setting make 
your guest feel honored and set the stage for a wonderful, 
enduring relationship. 
Dinner
Dinner is the most social of business experiences. It is also the 
one that involves the greatest investment of time and money. In 
the U.S., dinner with a client usually comes after a business 
relationship is well underway. But there is still a great deal to 
learn about business partners over dinners—their histories, 
their personal lives, and their goals. There may be even more to 
learn than a host bargained for if alcohol is involved and 
inhibitions are lowered. Bonds are either cemented over 
business dinners—or permanently fractured. It makes sense to 
treat this opportunity with the kid gloves it deserves.
In addition to all of his other host responsibilities, at dinners, 
the host has one more: the ordering of wine. This is a responsibility 

THE SOCIAL SIDE OF BUSINESS 
[  199  ]
he undertakes not only because it’s his job, but also because 
there are risks associated with relinquishing the wine list. 
Countless sales reps have had to pay exorbitant bills after having 
trustingly invited their guests to choose the wine. A host also 
orders the wine because he does not want to put undue pressure 
on his guest, who may be embarrassed to admit he knows little 
about wine. 
A host should always be aware that when alcohol is involved, 
people often do and say things they regret or, worse, drive under 
the influence. A host must be keenly attuned to his guest’s 
condition and do all he can to allow him to save face without 
contributing to his intoxication. This could mean quietly 
working with the server to stop offering alcohol or engaging in 
a lengthy dessert course with lots of coffee. 
Dinners are an especially important part of entertaining 
international guests, who consider them the perfect oppor- 
tunities to evaluate potential business partners. However, 
among locally based associates, clients, or prospects, it’s 
important to remember that business dinners can cut into 
precious family and personal time. If you are meeting a client on 
her home turf and it is anything but a working dinner, it is 
considerate to invite her spouse as well. 
Wine
At a famous French restaurant in Boston, my host, a wine 
collector, ordered a $300 bottle of wine per the sommelier’s 
suggestion. The sommelier decanted the wine and, when it was 
time, poured a small amount in my host’s glass for him to taste. 
When the sommelier asked how the wine was, my host told him 

excuse me
[  200  ]
he thought the wine had turned. The sommelier then tasted it 
and announced that my host was mistaken, that the wine was 
perfectly good. What ensued was a polite yet tense exchange 
between two individuals both highly knowledgeable on the 
subject of wine. 
Ultimately, the sommelier took the wine back, and my host 
ordered another bottle at the same price point, which turned out 
to be fine. The experience for me was a somewhat unnerving 
joust between two experts. It was the first time I had witnessed 
the high stakes of the world of fine wine. 
One of the most pleasurable aspects of business dinners and 
life in general is wine. Widely enjoyed, wine is still intimidating 
to many. Lengthy wines lists, confusing terminology, vastly 
divergent prices, and the not-so-vague feeling that everyone 
knows more about the subject can send an otherwise confident 
business professional straight to the beer list. 
While the knowledge of wine can be passionately pursued, 
you needn’t become a Master of Wine to do just fine with any 
wine list you encounter. This is very good news, because this 
designation is very hard to come by. According to the Institute 
of Masters of Wine, there are currently only 342 people in the 
world who have achieved Master of Wine status.1 Of those who 
meet the arduous qualifications to sit for the grueling exam, 
only 10 percent pass. Master of Wine Jancis Robinson, who 
achieved the designation in 1984, said, “Master of Wine exams 
were for masochists when I took them . . . what is stunning is 
how popular this form of torture is today.”2 
Take heart, no one knows all there is to know about wine. 
Unencumbered by this pressure, you can instead educate 
yourself about wine and then blissfully enjoy it to your heart’s 
content. You can read books, take courses, and learn about wine 

THE SOCIAL SIDE OF BUSINESS 
[  201  ]
categories. You can attend wine tastings, download apps, and 
subscribe to wine publications. You can also ask to speak with a 
professional, as I did with Ashley Waugh, sommelier and general 
manager of the award-winning No. 9 Park restaurant in Boston, 
who kindly gave her imprimatur on the advice that follows. 
These steps will enable you to know as much about wine, if not 
more, than the vast majority. And they will ensure you are never 
cowed by a restaurant’s wine list again. 	     
A WINE PRIMER
A
A Table wine. Known as still wines, they contain only the juice 
of grapes. Table wines are bottled after fermentation, the 
process that converts the sugar of juices to alcohol. In the 
U.S., table wines, which are drunk with foods, are 7 percent 
to 14 percent alcohol. In Europe, table wine is defined as the 
most generic type of wine, sourcing grapes from all around 
the country. This type of wine cannot carry with it a varietal 
or region of origin on its label. Alcohol by volume (ABV) can 
range from 5 percent to 17 percent. 
A
A Fortified wine. This wine is strengthened with brandy or a 
spirit during its fermentation and is popularly consumed 
as an accompaniment to dessert. Fortified wines are 16 
percent to 23 percent alcohol.
A
A Aperitifs. These are flavored wines such as vermouth or 
Dubonnet. Aperitifs are often served before meals. Herbs, 
barks, roots, and other flavorings give aperitifs their 
distinctive flavors. Aperitifs are 15 percent to 20 percent 
alcohol.
A
A Sparkling wine. Champagne, Asti Spumante, and sparkling 
Burgundy are in this category. Sparkling wines get their 

excuse me
[  202  ]
bubbles through the refermentation of still wines or the 
addition of artificial carbonation. Sparkling wines are 5.5 
percent to 17 percent alcohol.
Most wines are described as white, red, or rosé, with the 
exception of fortified wines. White and red wines get their color 
not from the color of the grapes but from the ways in which they 
are made. White wines are made by simply pressing the grapes 
to extract the juice. Red wines are made by allowing the juices 
to ferment in contact with grape skins. Rosés are made by 
allowing juices to ferment with grape skins for a short time. 
Champagne, which is always a blend of wine, is categorized as 
brut (very dry), extra dry (less dry than brut), demi sec (slightly 
sweet), and sec or doux (very sweet). Popular white wines 
include Chardonnay, Riesling, Sauvignon Blanc, Pinot Gris, and 
Pinot Grigio. Popular red wines are Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, 
Pinot Noir, Syrah (or Shiraz), and Zinfandel. 
The Regions
Excellent wines are found throughout the world. The most 
well-known regions include:
A
A France. French wines are named for the regions from which 
they come. Bordeaux comes from Bordeaux, Burgundy from 
Burgundy, and Champagne from Champagne. Other regions 
include the Rhône River Valley for red wines and the Loire 
Valley and Alsace region for white wines. 
A
A Germany. German wines come from the valleys of the 
Rhine and Moselle rivers. Rhine wines, which come in 

THE SOCIAL SIDE OF BUSINESS 
[  203  ]
brown bottles, are full bodied. Moselle wines, which come 
in green bottles, are light and off-dry.
A
A Italy. Italian wines may come from Tuscany, Piedmont, or 
Sicily. Italian red wines include Chianti, Valpolicella, and 
Bardolino. Italian white wines include Soave and Orvieto. 
A
A United States. American wines are named either for the 
grape (varietal) or the European wine they resemble. Most 
American wine is made in California, although today wine 
is produced in all 50 states. 
Other well-known wine producing regions include Austria, 
Australia, Chile, Greece, Spain, Hungary, Switzerland, and 
Portugal. 
Aging  
White wines are usually ready to drink as soon as they are 
bottled. Exceptions include great wines from Bordeaux and 
Burgundy. Red wines require time to age properly, with the 
exception of Beaujolais Nouveau. Wines from Spain, Portugal, 
and Italy may be ready to be consumed within a year or two, but 
fine French wines may need 10 years. Champagne is best when 
consumed between 10 and 15 years of bottling. 
Ordering Wine
When ordering wine at a restaurant, always ask for the server or 
sommelier’s suggestions, regardless of your level of knowledge 
about wine. They will (or should) know which wines pair best 
with their menu selections. This way, you will get an excellent 

excuse me
[  204  ]
suggestion within your price range. To do this, point directly to 
a wine on the list, and ask the server what she thinks of that 
particular wine with the meals that have been chosen. She now 
knows your price range. Even if she has a different suggestion, 
she will offer you one close in price to the one you pointed out. 
Making sure the wine you are about to serve your guests is 
good requires you to take some steps. When the unopened 
bottle is presented to you at your table, first look at the label to 
ensure it is the wine and vintage you ordered. Once opened, 
look at the cork. Be sure it is neither soaked through nor 
crumbling, as either could indicate an issue with the wine. 
Once a small amount is poured for you to taste, swirl the wine 
with the base of the glass on the table, sniff the wine, and then 
taste it. If all is well, the server will pour first for your guests 
and then for you. 
How necessary are all these steps? The chance that the wine 
you ordered is bad is perhaps greater than you think. It is 
estimated that for wines with corks, anywhere from 2 percent 
to 10 percent have been “corked” or tainted. This means they 
have been contaminated by a chemical compound known as 
TCA, created by fungi that infected the cork and seeped into the 
wine. You will know if a wine is corked by its musty or moldy 
smell. Wine can also be oxidized, or exposed to air, which gives 
it a vinegary smell. It can be “cooked,” or exposed to heat, which 
makes it taste like stewed prunes. It can be refermented, or 
could have undergone a second fermentation in the bottle, 
which leaves it fizzy or bubbly. The proliferation of wines in 
bottles with screw tops and plastic stoppers have eliminated the 
chances they are corked, but these bottles can still be affected 
by improper handling and storage. Screw tops and plastic 
stoppers do not imply inferior wine. Good wine is also found in 

THE SOCIAL SIDE OF BUSINESS 
[  205  ]
boxes, although, as far as I know, boxes of wine have not yet 
found their way to the business dining table. 
Do taste the wine, but put affectations aside. At a business 
dinner, don’t “chew” the wine or make audible noises or 
contorted facial expressions. If you suspect something is wrong 
with the bottle, politely ask the server, not your guest, to taste it. 
At a reputable establishment, the server will take the bottle back 
without further ado even if he disagrees with your assessment. 
However, you are not allowed to return a perfectly good bottle 
you chose on your own simply because you didn’t like the taste, 
especially if that bottle is half empty! But if the server suggested 
it, and you truly do not like it, it is perfectly acceptable to let him 
know. A restaurant’s primary concern is its customers’ 
happiness. Besides, if it’s good, the wine will not go to waste. 
White wine does not need to breathe and is best served 
chilled. Young red wines, those under eight years old, are strong 
in tannic acid and need to breathe or be exposed to air for an 
hour or more. Mature red wines need no more than 30 minutes 
to breathe, and very old reds may not need to breathe at all. 
However, some sommeliers believe in advance decanting of 
some Burgundies and Barolos to allow them to “wake up” after 
long aging. Red wine is served at cellar temperature. White 
wines are served before red wines; dry wines are served before 
sweet wines. Champagne may be served at any time before, 
during, or after the meal. 
Wine pours vary from three to six ounces, and the size of the 
glass will have a bearing on how high it is filled. A red wine 
glass, which is usually larger than a white wine glass, is filled no 
more than halfway. This allows the wine “nose,” or fragrance, 
to be captured in the empty space. A white glass may be filled 
one-third to two-thirds full, depending upon its size. 

excuse me
[  206  ]
Traditionally, white wines were served with fish, chicken, 
pork, and veal, and red wines were served with meat, heavier 
dishes, and cheese. These rules have been relaxed to 
accommodate personal preferences. But as you educate yourself 
about wine, learning about tried and true food and wine pairings 
will be helpful. 
Of course, not everyone drinks wine. If you happen to be one 
of those individuals and are hosting a business meal, still offer 
your guest wine, but suggest she order it by the glass, or employ 
the server to make a recommendation. You need never explain 
nor apologize for not drinking alcohol, whether for health, 
religious, or personal reasons. Instead, order what you’d like. If 
you would prefer not to have to fend off questions, have sparkling 
water with lime. No one will know it’s not a gin and tonic.
If you do drink wine, familiarize yourself with wine 
terminology: vintage, varietal, acid, tannins, balance, body, 
nose, legs, etc. Know what dry, fruity, chewy, oaky, earthy, 
buttery, and velvety mean. Learn how to pronounce wine names. 
All of this information will allow you to ask intelligent questions 
about the wine and to understand the descriptions the server 
offers. There are a number of online resources to help you, 
including a website by Master of Wine Jancis Robinson, jancis-
robinson.com.
Not a wine drinker? Not to worry. Drinking beer is fine at 
many restaurants, especially casual venues that serve burgers, 
ribs, or pizza. If this is your choice, drink your beer from a glass 
that is filled in one pour, not from a bottle or can that is left on 
the table. But at fine restaurants when everyone else is drinking 
wine or alcohol, you may decide to sip sparkling water instead of 
standing out from the group by drinking a beer.

THE SOCIAL SIDE OF BUSINESS 
[  207  ]
Tipping
Familiarity with tipping guidelines is one more indication of a 
host’s sophistication and generosity. The standard for 
restaurant servers is now 20 percent of the pretax bill, adjusted 
higher or lower for the quality of service. But remember, many 
service issues, such as backed-up kitchens and incorrectly 
prepared food, are out of the server’s control. When seated at 
a bar, tip 15 percent when only drinks are served and 20 percent 
if food is included. If it is a buffet where a server brings you 
drinks but you serve yourself food, 10 percent to 15 percent is 
appropriate. Coat-check personnel are tipped $1 to $2 per coat; 
restroom attendants, $1 to $2; doormen, $2 to $5; and car 
valets, $3 to $5 upon car delivery. For a tip jar at a casual 
restaurant, contribute at your discretion. Do remember to have 
a supply of small bills on hand. Having only a $10 or $20 bill is 
not a sufficient reason to withhold a tip, and it’s extremely 
awkward to ask for change.
Activities and Events
Larry is reluctant to accept a golf invitation from a prospective 
vendor. He loves golf and would be thrilled to get out on this 
course, but there is something about the guy that rubs him 
wrong. Maybe it’s the not-so-subtle digs he takes at his 
competitors, or the “special” pricing he offers Larry that no 
other client gets, or the borderline inappropriate way he talks to 
Larry’s administrative assistant. Still, Larry likes the service 
this vendor’s company offers. He realizes he may be rushing to 
judgment and decides four hours on the golf course will give 

excuse me
[  208  ]
him an insight into the man’s character one way or the other. 
And so he accepts. 
Two hours into the game, Larry has all the information he 
needs. He knows as well as anyone how frustrating golf can be 
but has never seen such poor sportsmanship. When this 
would-be vendor is not whining, cursing, or throwing his clubs, 
he is giving other golfers advice and even talking on his cell 
phone. And although Larry can’t prove it, he is pretty sure the 
guy is cheating. Larry is glad he accepted the invitation because 
it has made his decision crystal clear—he will never do business 
with a company who employs this kind of person.
Sporting Events
A sporting event is a wonderful way to further a relationship 
with a client, whether you and your guest are participants or 
spectators. These events are entertaining and relaxing and offer 
the opportunity to develop common interests and bonds. 
Additionally, sporting events usually last at least two hours and 
sometimes the better part of a day, afternoon, or evening, 
providing rare uninterrupted time with valued clients or 
prospects.
HANDLING THE BASICS
A
A If you are a participant, strictly adhere to the guidelines for 
attire and play for the event. Your good sportsmanship will 
be under the microscope.
A
A If your guest is a participant, let him know ahead of time 
what equipment he will need, what to wear, who else might 
be accompanying you, and how long the event will take.

THE SOCIAL SIDE OF BUSINESS 
[  209  ]
A
A If you and your guest are arriving separately, deliver your 
guest’s ticket to his office the day of the event or meet at a 
designated time and place and hand the prepaid ticket to 
your guest. Do not pay for any fees or tickets in your guest’s 
presence. 
A
A If talking business, take your guest’s lead. She may just 
want to enjoy the event and save business discussions for 
another time. 
The Private Box
Entertaining guests in a private box lets them know that they 
are held in high esteem. It is critical that the hosts take great 
care with their duties and that guests also do their part. Hosts 
arrive early to greet guests, appropriately attired in either 
high-end business casual or suits if they are coming directly 
from the office. They offer guests refreshments, introduce them 
to others in the box, and facilitate small talk.
Boxes are divided into two spaces: one, an enclosed area for 
mingling and partaking of refreshments, and the other, actual 
seats for viewing the game. In this intimate gathering, hosts and 
guests talk with everyone, much as they would at a party. It is 
acceptable to let others know who you are and what you do, but 
do not engage in heavy business discussions or obvious sales 
tactics. Once in the seats, talk business only if your guest initiates 
it. In this close setting, boisterous behavior or overindulging in 
alcohol will be noticed and will not be forgotten.

excuse me
[  210  ]
Cultural Events
If you know your guest particularly enjoys cultural events, 
selecting a concert, a play, a symphony, or an opera will boost 
you into the business entertainer hall of fame. Scoring 
hard-to-find tickets demonstrates your thoughtfulness and 
generosity, and also your ingenuity and influence. Arrange for 
dinner beforehand, and attend to your guest’s comfort 
throughout the event to create an experience—and relationship—
for the ages.  
Colleagues
A manager due to speak at an employee awards dinner had had, 
unbeknownst to her boss, too much to drink. When she was 
called to the stage to recount the accomplishments of one of the 
award recipients, she stumbled up the stairs, seeming to barely 
make it to the podium. There, she immediately launched into a 
roast of the honoree with rambling, inappropriate remarks, 
laughing uncontrollably at her own jokes. When no one laughed 
with her, she told the assemblage to “lighten up.” The manager 
then abruptly shifted her tone and began to engage in an overly 
emotional tribute to the award winner, choking up tearfully as 
she described his character and accomplishments. After 
thoroughly embarrassing herself and her audience, she was 
escorted off the stage. All eyes were on her as she walked out of 
the event, her grim-faced boss beside her. She was not fired on 
the spot, but her position was eliminated a relatively short time 
afterward. 

THE SOCIAL SIDE OF BUSINESS 
[  211  ]
You’ve outdone yourself in the business entertainment 
arena. Now it’s time to kick back and enjoy yourself with your 
colleagues. After a long week, quarter, or year, you look forward 
to meeting up at a local watering hole or attending a 
company-sponsored party or event. You’ve earned this chance 
to let your hair down with team members and possibly even take 
advantage of face time with company higher-ups. What could 
possibly go wrong?  
Whenever we are with our colleagues, our brands are on 
display. And whenever alcohol is served, our good judgment and 
professionalism are on display, too. Socializing with colleagues 
in a setting that sounds, tastes, looks, and feels like a party lulls 
employees into thinking it is a party. In fact, it is the most 
treacherous professional terrain they will ever encounter. The 
boss who hits on his subordinate, the employee who complains 
about his salary, the employee who spreads gossip to sabotage a 
coworker, the employee who belligerently argues his political 
views, the two teammates who conspicuous flirt then 
mysteriously disappear—none of this goes unnoticed. 
 At formal company events, employees who accept an 
invitation and don’t attend, or don’t formally accept and do 
attend (sometimes with uninvited guests), are as problematic as 
those who come too early, too late, or dressed inappropriately—
or who spend the entire evening on their electronic devices.
 BEST BEHAVIOR
A
A Respond promptly to an invitation. Go if you have accepted. 
A great deal of time, effort, and expense is involved in any 
event. To cancel at the last minute or to skip the party 

excuse me
[  212  ]
entirely (except in the case of an emergency) is extremely 
inconsiderate. 
A
A Do not ask to bring a guest. If you are invited to bring a 
guest, and do, his behavior and dress reflects on you. A 
preparty briefing about who’s who and what you hope to 
accomplish is time well spent.
A
A Greet hosts and senior persons. Do not involve them in 
lengthy conversations, however, as they need to circulate 
among all of the guests. Take the opportunity to talk with 
those you may not see on a daily basis.
A
A Be enthusiastic! Participate in the event’s activities, and 
encourage others to do so as well. But remember, it is not 
your job to be the “life of the party.” Email or send a note 
of thanks to the host the next day. It will be appreciated 
and perhaps the only one he receives.
Many times impromptu social events will pop up such as drinks 
with colleagues, casual dinners, and activities such as shopping, 
walks, and bike rides. The advice is to consider going to as many 
of these as you can without impacting your work-life balance. 
They represent terrific ways to bond with coworkers, glean useful 
information, and generally keep up with what’s happening within 
the organization. Expenses associated with such occasions are 
not normally covered by the company, so be prepared to pay an 
equal share, even if you are not drinking alcohol. 
Never become the company freeloader. At after-hours drinks 
with their team, one colleague was always the first to grab the 
check and divvy up the amount due per person. All contributed 
their fair shares, no questions asked, until one day someone 
noticed that the “banker” was the only one who did not contribute 
to the bill. He also kept the change for himself! Needless to say, 

THE SOCIAL SIDE OF BUSINESS 
[  213  ]
this was the last time he was in charge of the bill. No word on 
whether he was invited for drinks again. 
We’ve learned how much skill is associated with business 
dining and entertaining. We may have been swayed to consider 
that there could be life outside of cyberspace and that interacting 
face-to-face might actually be enjoyable. In fact, we may just be 
encouraged enough to put our electronic devices down, at least 
for a moment, and bask in the warmth of real-life smiles. 
REMEMBER
A
A Entertaining clients and prospects is an art. Hone this skill 
and undertake it with deliberation, and it becomes an 
incredibly powerful professional tool. 
A
A Wine is an important element of business entertaining. 
Learn about wine, and appreciate the relationship-building 
opportunities that come with this knowledge.
A
A Entertaining special people in special ways creates endur-
ing bonds. Distinguish yourself as a business professional 
by entertaining in sophisticated settings. 
A
A Socializing with colleagues is work, not play. Build rapport 
within the bounds of unassailable conduct, as this is the 
course for professional success.

215
chapter 10
new frontiers 
Future-Proofing Your Career
“Real generosity towards the future lies in giving all to the 
present.”
—ALBERT CAMUS
A
t 64, Louisa is about to go on her first job interview in 40 
years. After a rewarding career as a high school French 
teacher, it’s time to retire, but she’s not ready to sit on the porch 
watching the world go by. She loved teaching, but now she asks, 
“What else can I do?” 
Completing an online skills inventory, Louisa was surprised 
to find out how many skills she had acquired over the years. 
Communication and listening skills had been a big part of her 
job as a teacher, of course, but she had never given any thought 
to how much time she had spent leading, mediating, planning, 
analyzing, and problem solving. Her excellent people skills 
meant she was able to relate to everyone, and she was even 
current with her tech skills—a big bonus. Her best friend, Mimi, 

excuse me
[  216  ]
the high school’s Spanish teacher, came upon the perfect match 
for Louisa’s skills and interests.
Mimi and Louisa roamed the world together during their 
many summer vacations, and this got Mimi thinking. “What,” 
she asked Louisa, “were the things we always did no matter 
where we traveled?”  
“You mean shopping?” Louisa said with a laugh. “Well, after 
shopping and sightseeing,” she continued, “we went to every 
gallery, saw every ballet and concert, and went to all of the 
museums.” 
“That’s it!” Mimi said, “Why not look at a new career in the 
art world, in a museum? I even know someone right here in our 
city you could call.”
That’s how Louisa landed her interview as an arts education 
coordinator for the city’s museum of fine arts. First, she 
packaged her résumé to align her skills with the responsibilities 
of the job. She became thoroughly versed in art terminology and 
familiarized herself with the museum’s current and future 
exhibitions. She also got up to speed on what was happening in 
other major museums around the world. 
Quietly confident but excited, Louisa dresses impeccably and 
arrives early and ready on the day of her interview. She 
immediately hits it off with her interviewer, and they share 
stories of their world travels and the museums they had both 
visited. Louisa’s interviewer suddenly reveals a pleasant 
surprise. “I want you on my team. When can you start?”

NEW FRONTIERS 
[  217  ]
The Future Workplace
Tomorrow is coming. In some cases it is already here. Tech- 
nological advancements, increased automation, outsourcing, 
and a concept of work largely defined and designed by and for 
millennials will shape the near future of our professional lives. 
This will happen in ways we cannot yet truly comprehend. The 
good news is that the interpersonal skills you have mastered so 
far will position you well for what comes next. But you will need 
to exhibit even greater judgment and dexterity in deciding 
when, how, and to what extent to employ them. 
Wedded as we are to technology, it will never replace the 
need for human connection. In the future workplace, techno- 
logical skill will be common among all employees and no longer 
a distinguishing competitive advantage. What will dis- 
tinguish individuals is what has distinguished them through- 
out time: the ability to establish respectful relationships. 
In its 2016 Evolution of Work study, ADP Research Institute 
says there are five overarching trends employers need to know 
about: choice and flexibility, real-time learning, increased 
autonomy, stability, and personally meaningful projects. The 
report also finds that the workplace will see increases in global 
recruiting, contract hiring, social media collaboration, mobile 
device-centered work, flexible retirement, flat corporate 
structures, work-life integration, and technology-monitored 
productivity.1
In his Forbes article, “Ten Workplace Trends You’ll See in 
2016,” Dan Schawbel writes about an increase in the rehiring of 
baby boomer retirees, either as consultants or to take on 
leadership roles. He sees a revamp of parental leave as 80 million 
millennials embark upon a baby boom of their own, and he also 

excuse me
[  218  ]
sees a redesign of office spaces to accommodate workers’ 
preferences.2
Jacob Morgan, author of the Forbes article, “The Future of 
Work Is About Flexibility, Autonomy, and Customization,” has 
created the acronym FAC: flexibility to work where, when, and 
how one chooses, autonomy to be responsible for one’s work 
effort, and choice to work on projects that are most individually 
meaningful.3
In her article in Fast Company, “What Work Will Look Like 
in 2025,” Gwen Moran says the jobs that will be most in demand 
are those that require emotional intelligence such as sales 
positions, those that are hard to automate such as health care 
and personal services, and those requiring trade skills, or 
specific training, such as science, technology, and math.4
Among the challenges for professionals in the future 
workplace is an acceptance of the fact that job security no longer 
exists—there is no gold watch for 25 years of faithful work. In 
her Daily Mail article, “Will YOUR Job Exist in 2025?” Jenny 
Awford quotes Martin Chen, chief operating officer of Genesis 
Property, a real estate developer in China. Chen says that 
“experts now believe that almost 50 percent of occupations 
existing today will be completely redundant by 2025.”5 As 
artificial intelligence, robots, drones, and smart machines 
continue to redefine the workplace, jobs requiring repetitive 
tasks are particularly at risk. Higher skilled jobs in the 
administrative, clerical, and production areas are also on the 
chopping block, along with the roles of tax preparer, loan officer, 
and insurance appraiser. 
 Stress levels will be high and burnout will be a widespread 
problem as companies and employees try to do more with less 
time, money, and resources.  

NEW FRONTIERS 
[  219  ]
Yes, burnout, a term introduced in the 1970s, is rearing its 
ugly head again. In her Forbes article, “Overcoming Burnout: 
Five Ways to Get Back on Track at Work,” Vicky Valet quotes 
Christina Maslach, Ph.D., professor of psychology at the 
University of California, Berkeley, and author of the “Maslach 
Burnout Inventory.” Dr. Maslach says, “It’s not just that people 
have a bad attitude, it’s that they are working in a socially toxic 
workplace.” She says it is not primarily workload, time 
pressures, and exhaustion that cause burnout; it is a lack of 
workplace civility. “Something as little as someone rolling 
their eyes can wear away at you. It’s also sarcastic tone of voice, 
being nasty and rude. It’s what you say, how you say it, and how 
you act.”6
Two separate 2015/2016 studies by Willis Towers Watson, 
a global risk management and insurance brokerage, offer 
another view. These studies indicate that employers and 
employees alike think insufficient staffing is a major contri- 
buting factor to burnout, but they disagree on its other top 
causes. Employers rank lack of work-life balance and tech- 
nology that keeps employees tethered to their work as the 
biggest stressors, but employees say low pay and organization 
culture are the real issues.7
Burnout has dramatic personal and organizational conse- 
quences, impacting physical and mental health, employee 
absenteeism, tardiness, and productivity.   
Communicating and collaborating across divergent schedules 
and time zones with team members and business partners, some 
continents away, will require enormous flexibility and well- 
honed communication skills. Members of the “gig economy” 
will find the number of bosses with whom they will need to get 
along expanding exponentially. The allure of being one’s own 

excuse me
[  220  ]
boss will be quickly balanced by the realization that each new 
client brings a new boss, and sometimes decisions are made by a 
team with multiple stakeholders.
Gloria Larson, president of Bentley University, says, “Specialty 
skills, which were once assigned to dedicated positions, are now 
expected and required across several job categories.” Social 
media skills will be required of everyone, not just those on the 
marketing team.8 Richard Newton, author of the book The End 
of Nice: How to Be Human in a World Run by Robots, says, “The 
profoundly human skills of interpersonal communication, 
empathy, and compassion, along with others such as creativity, 
problem-solving, and caring, are the ones people will get hired 
for in the future.”9 
By having a respectful attitude, professionals can develop 
the soft skills of communication, empathy, and collaboration 
that their future success requires. Professionals will also need 
agility to quickly change gears when necessary; humility to 
admit what they do not know; generosity to help others in 
need; tenacity to see projects through; courage to deal with 
uncertainty; tolerance to work with people of different ages, 
cultures, and levels of experience; good judgment to keep 
things in perspective; kindness to encourage others; and 
resilience to try, fail, and try again. A sense of humor and 
sufficient rest, nutrition, and exercise will also help.
THE FUTURE-PROOF CAREER 
A
A Take responsibility for your future career. Know that you 
are now responsible for creating and managing your 
career, where once employers dictated career paths and 
next-step promotions. 

NEW FRONTIERS 
[  221  ]
A
A Commit to continued career development. Take advantage 
of free company training or invest in training at your 
expense and time. Stay current on industry trends and 
changes, follow thought leaders, and nurture your 
professional network. You could repackage your skills as a 
consultant, trainer, or freelancer.
A
A Hone your interpersonal and technical skills. Understand 
that these are the nonnegotiable assets for success now 
and in the future. 
A
A Consider a new career. Know what you like and what you 
are good at—then prepare to do it. The future holds great 
opportunity for creative boutique businesses. 
The workspace has undergone dramatic changes. Designed to 
increase productivity, inspire creativity, facilitate collaboration, 
and promote health and well-being, workspaces are beginning 
to look more like homes, gardens, and pubs than the soulless, 
monochromatic grids of the past. If you happen to work for 
Deloitte, the professional services organization, in its new 
Montreal office space unveiled in late 2015, you have 18 different 
workspaces from which to choose. In addition to a personal 
workstation (with or without a treadmill), you have quiet rooms, 
flex spaces, lounges, cafés, bistros, outdoor spaces, fitness 
facilities, and a concierge at your disposal.
Companies understand workspaces have a great impact on 
employee experience and help them attract and keep key talent. 
They also know that the more comfortably and efficiently they 
allow for work-life integration, the happier, less stressed, and 
more productive their employees will be.
Employees need to respect their employers’ intent in 
providing on-site amenities. One client said that literally nothing 

excuse me
[  222  ]
is safe from being taken home at her company, from food, drinks, 
and supplies to toilet paper! Such unprofessional work behaviors 
do not go unnoticed by employers and coworkers.  
Many now no longer choose to fight traffic to get to the office. 
Using electronic devices and team collaboration tools such as 
Slack, they do their jobs wherever they are. Those who want or 
need space for meetings, a sense of community, or a roof over 
their heads on a temporary or occasional basis, can use shared 
office space as an option. Organizations such as WeWork provide 
monthly rental of desks and private offices. Business is booming. 
Founded in 2010, this organization now boasts 109 locations in 
30 cities around the world. Freelancers, entrepreneurs, and 
knowledge workers are huge fans of this shared office concept. 
Businesses also see the benefit, especially for their remote 
workers.
However your workplace is configured, your brand is always 
on display. This means being aware of your surroundings and of 
those you might inadvertently disturb with audible 
conversations, noise-emitting electronic devices, or wafting 
food aromas. It also means paying attention to your attire, 
grooming, and everyday behaviors. By attending to such 
seemingly small considerations as holding doors open, keeping 
common areas clean, and being professionally cordial, you will 
be viewed as an all-star office mate. There could also be ancillary 
benefits, as that person next to you might be the source of your 
next great idea or a potential client!

NEW FRONTIERS 
[  223  ]
Gen Zs 
It has been a particularly exhausting week, and Dan, manager 
of recruiting, is weary. A lengthy email had just come to him 
from the vice president of Human Resources, ending with “I’ll 
need your report and recommendations next week. We need to 
understand these Gen Zs and what we have to put in place to 
attract them.” 
In his 37-year career in commercial insurance sales, Dan has 
worked with three generations in addition to his fellow baby 
boomers. He has listened to countless stories about the early 
days from the firm’s 76-year-old founder, has commiserated 
with the boomers about whether they will ever be able to afford 
to retire, has reassured his 40-something colleagues that they 
are not being overlooked in favor of tech-savvy millennials, and 
has tried to keep up with the millennials’ constant need for 
positive feedback. 
Dan is simply worn out by the disparate, never-ending 
expectations of an employee base that spans more than 50 years. 
And now his boss tells him he has to start planning a strategy for 
ways to attract an entirely new generation—Gen Z. 
Dan knows this is going to be a huge challenge, compounded 
by the firm’s 20th century corporate culture: Old school values, 
hierarchical management, and pay-your-dues-and-you’ll- 
get-promoted thinking prevail as surely as they did when the 
company was founded. Sure, they have installed the obligatory 
foosball tables and now offer unlimited snacks to keep 
millennials quiet, but these are merely stopgap measures. The 
company has an enormous amount of catching up to do, 
especially if it wants to compete for the most talented members 
of this new generation. Maybe the expectations of Gen Zs will 

excuse me
[  224  ]
provide the push the company needs to finally get into the 21st 
century.
Dan writes his report, addressing the challenges the firm will 
face in appealing to this huge new cohort as well as the expensive 
initiatives they will need to offer. He just hopes they don’t shoot 
the messenger. 
No discussion of the future of work would be complete 
without an eyes-wide-open look at the next generation knocking 
at the door. Most agree Gen Z is the first generation of true 
digital natives. The oldest of them are just a year or two away 
from joining the workforce. Born approximately between 1994 
and 2014, Gen Z could be some 60 million strong and is poised 
to redefine the workplace once again. 
Who are the Gen Zs? According to Anne Kingston’s article 
“Get Ready for Generation Z” in Maclean’s, “They are smarter 
than Boomers, and way more ambitious than Millennials,” and 
are “educated, industrious, collaborative, and eager to build a 
better planet.”10
“Meet Generation Z: Forget Everything You Learned About 
Millennials,” a presentation by the New York advertising agency 
Sparks & Honey, says members of Gen Z are mature, future 
thinking, humble, realistic, and entrepreneurial. They embody 
a collective social consciousness and value education and 
working for success. They like live-stream media such as Twitch 
and Ustream and communicate via FaceTime and Skype. Gen Zs 
also have challenges that may be related to the extent of their 
electronic device use: short attention spans, a lack of situational 
awareness, imprecise communication, and obesity.11
Gen Zs, known also as centennials, iGeneration, and 
Homeland Generation, are thought to be far more private and 
pragmatic than their millennial brethren. The children of Gen 

NEW FRONTIERS 
[  225  ]
Xers, they have seen the problems brought on by over-sharing 
on social media and prefer sites like SnapChat and Whisper to 
the permanency of Facebook posts. Having lived through global 
conflict and the Great Recession, Gen Zs are also considered 
cautious, serious, and prone to worry. 
Constant Connectivity
Hannah’s mom is worried about her 20-year-old daughter. She 
wonders what ever happened to the energetic, happy young girl 
she once was, the girl who would come bounding through the 
front door after school eager to share her day’s activities or her 
newest crush, with her cheeks ablaze after soccer practice. 
Hannah’s mom remembers a healthy, athletic young woman 
brimming with vitality, cheer, and confidence.
 Over the past year, everything has changed. Her daughter 
now has bags under her eyes, has gained weight, and is so pale. 
Hannah’s college grades are falling. And she never seems to 
leave the house! The few times her mother actually sees her, 
Hannah seems depressed.  
Hannah’s mom gets up her courage again and knocks on her 
daughter’s door. She knows her concerns will not be well 
received, but she believes her daughter’s life is at stake and she 
just can’t ignore it. “I’m fine, mom. Just leave me alone!” yells 
Hannah from behind the closed door.
But something is clearly wrong, and Hannah’s mom is 
convinced it has to do with the amount of time she spends on her 
devices. She’s heard stories about the online bullying, the 
shaming, the trolling, and she knows that in some cases, these 
activities have had tragic consequences. If she could just talk to 

excuse me
[  226  ]
her daughter, face-to-face, she could find out what’s going on 
and maybe help. 
So she knocks. And knocks. And knocks. After five minutes, 
the door opens. Hannah emerges from her room, seemingly 
resigned to a conversation and maybe just a tiny bit relieved. 
“Okay, let’s talk,” she says.
Constant connectivity brings real risks to users’ work, 
privacy, relationships, and health. Most of us know this 
intuitively, but few of us actually believe that these risks apply 
to us. In the article “Health Benefits of Unplugging and Going 
Screen-Free This July 4,” The Huffington Post reports “over- 
engagement with social media can cause anxiety [and] feelings 
of low self-esteem.”12 A ceaseless barrage of photos of people 
engaged in awesome activities with their awesome friends can 
elicit feelings of jealousy, insecurity, and loneliness in those not 
similarly engaged. Increased social media activity often comes 
at the expense of decreased physical activity with weight gain 
and sleep affected as a result. A study from the website Science 
Daily found that the blue light of a tablet lowers melatonin, the 
sleep hormone.13
Online activity also harms relationships, interpersonal 
communication skills, and mental health, according to Sophie 
Breene, author of “Why Everyone Should Unplug More Often.” 
She says research indicates that “social media is the millennials’ 
‘drug of choice’ and to many in this cohort, a self-described 
addiction.”14 Other potential problems include depression and 
poor posture, as well as sight, circulation, digestive, and skin 
issues. It can also cause wrist, neck, and other muscle strain. 

NEW FRONTIERS 
[  227  ]
The Unplugged Life
Did you know there is a National Day of Unplugging? Starting on 
the first Friday each March, participants pledge to unplug from 
technology for 24 hours. An outgrowth of the Sabbath Manifesto, 
the National Day of Unplugging is meant to encourage one day a 
week to “unwind, unplug, relax, reflect, get outdoors, and 
connect with loved ones.”15 Its website, nationaldayofunplugging.
com, offers resources and news about events, as well as some of 
the many great reasons people choose to unplug.
In 2010, the World UNPLUGGED project polled students 
from around the world who gave up social media for 24 hours. 
They reported feelings of freedom, liberation, peace, and 
solitude, and they had more time to engage in creative thinking, 
be with family and friends, talk, listen, read, enjoy the sunshine, 
laugh, eat, drink, chat, wander, jog, walk through the park, listen 
to the birds, and engage in hobbies.16
Digital Detox
John can’t believe it. His company is coming up to the end of a 
very challenging quarter with sales goals unmet and now wants 
the management team to go on a “digital detox” retreat—
whatever that is. “Why now?” John thinks. He is irritated. Every 
quarter, it takes a Herculean effort on his part to push his team 
to the finish line. Constant email status updates, texts of 
encouragement and warnings in equal measure, and links to the 
fabulous resort they will be going to if they come in first are just 
some of the ways he keeps them motivated. 

excuse me
[  228  ]
Sure, he may rely a bit heavily on technology to keep his staff 
on task. And yeah, it’s been a while since he’s “seen” his teenaged 
kids other than on social media or “spoken” with his wife during 
the day other than by text. But that is just the way things are 
these days. This is not the time for him to be without his devices, 
especially for an entire weekend!
 But knowing he needs to get on board if he wants to stay 
employed, John makes the trip to the beautiful campsite a few 
hours away. Dutifully complying with the rules, he turns his 
devices and watch over for safekeeping until the end of the 
retreat. At first, John literally does not know what to do with his 
hands. He reflexively checks his pockets for the phone not there 
and looks at his naked wrist where his watch used to be. “This 
is going to be hard,” he thinks.
In the common area, John takes a look at the activity board. 
A nature walk, hmm, that might be a good way to take the edge 
off. Archery? He hasn’t done that since summer camp. Then 
there’s yoga—that’s something he’s always wanted to try. John 
spies a colleague and is ready to commiserate about their forced 
getaway, when his relaxed-looking colleague tells him excitedly 
that he’s getting ready for the hike. Does John want to come? 
After the day’s activities, there is an evening around the 
campfire with an outdoor buffet, a corny but fun sing-along, and 
talks about their plans for tomorrow. 
Maybe this isn’t so bad, John thinks. He has forgotten about 
reaching for his phone and the quarterly sales figures. Looking 
forward to the next day’s activities, he’d love to try his hand at 
printmaking and is not going to miss the scavenger hunt and 
tug-of-war. And he has a surprise for his colleagues at tomorrow 
night’s talent show: It’s high time they knew what a great singer 
he is! After an exhausting day in the fresh air, John is ready for 

NEW FRONTIERS 
[  229  ]
sleep. He drifts off thinking about all the fun that awaits him. 
But he also knows, when tomorrow comes, if he chooses, he can 
do nothing at all but breathe in and out and look at the gorgeous 
scenery surrounding him. Nice!
THE DIGITAL DETOX 
A
A Declare your independence. You are not your technology. 
It is a tool. You have control.
A
A Start slow. Designate a time each day to power down. Fill 
that time with other activities: yoga in the morning, 
meditation in the afternoon, dinner with family or friends 
in the evening, reading a novel before bed. Work up to a 
tech-free half or full day. 
A
A Reduce temptations. Engage in activities that make the 
technology virtually impossible like skiing, cycling, 
swimming, cooking, painting, sculpting, dancing, knitting, 
board games, tennis, or playing the tuba. Work on a 
crossword or jigsaw puzzle. 
A
A Cut down on social media checks. Limit yourself to once 
or twice a day. Discover how little you miss it. Use an away 
message to let others know you are fine, just momentarily 
unreachable. Emergency messages will get through.
A
A Ban technology from the bedroom and dinner table. Make 
it off-limits in conversations. 
A
A Take advantage of apps. Apps such as Offtime and Checky 
are designed to help you observe and limit your tech use. 
Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook said, “Every year, I take on a 
personal challenge to learn new things and grow outside my 
work at Facebook.” In 2016, he announced he would run 365 

excuse me
[  230  ]
miles at the pace of one mile a day. In 2015, he vowed to read one 
book every two weeks. “I’ve found reading books very 
intellectually fulfilling. Books allow you to fully explore a topic 
and immerse yourself in a deeper way than most media today.”17
The Eternal Truths
“Boy, is he going to get an earful from me!” yells Matt, the owner/
manager of a busy city copy shop, to his long-time employee, 
Leslie, and to anyone else within earshot. On any given day, he 
would have requests for a dozen rush jobs in addition to his 
regular customers’ orders. Matt is actually glad for the rush jobs 
because when people are in a hurry, they don’t mind paying more 
to go to the head of the line. “It’s great for business—and business 
is great,” he always says.
But there is one problem: the local delivery company he uses 
for these jobs. Matt has given them an enormous amount of 
business over the years, mostly because they are the only game 
in town. But WeDeliver’s employee turnover rate is high—
really high—especially among its bicycle couriers. This means 
inexperienced workers and lost, late, missed, and damaged 
deliveries. On countless occasions, Matt has had to refund the 
money of many an angry customer and provide complimentary 
services just to keep them coming back. 
Matt has complained dozens of times, and the owner of 
WeDeliver always promises to do better. But within a week, it 
is back to the same problems, accompanied by calls from 
unhappy customers. Matt has threatened to take his business 
elsewhere, but that’s an empty threat—there is no other place 
to take his business. In fact, Matt is pretty convinced the 

NEW FRONTIERS 
[  231  ]
delivery company owner doesn’t even take his complaints 
seriously anymore. 
So for the second time this week, the fifth time this month, 
and who knows how many times this year, Matt calls the owner 
with his usual frustrations and dissatisfactions. Afterwards, 
Leslie, his quiet, loyal, long-time employee, asks Matt if she can 
offer a suggestion. Gently reminding him of how many years 
this has been a problem, and the toll it has taken on them all, she 
asks, “Why don’t we hire our own delivery person?”
Merriam-Webster defines eternal truths as “valid for all time.” 
The phrase is usually associated with the words of major 
historical and cultural figures whose teachings have stood the 
test of time, such as Socrates, Aristotle, and René Descartes. 
Aristotle said, “We are what we repeatedly do. Greatness, then, 
is not an act but a habit.” The principles in George Washington’s 
Rules of Civility: The 110 Precepts That Guided Our First President 
in War and Peace also provides examples of such timeless 
counsel. Inspired by the writings of Jesuit tutors, our first 
president copied out these rules and carried them with him as a 
guide for his life and work.
The precepts include the following:
“Wear not your clothes foul, ript or dusty, but see they are 
brush’d once every day at least, and take heed that you ap-
proach not to any uncleanliness.”18
Translation: Attire and grooming matter greatly!
Do eternal truths exist in today’s professional arena? By 
observing behaviors over a long period of time that result in 
similar outcomes, perhaps we can lay claim to our own set of 
personal truths. The year 2017 marks 22 years for me in the 
field of etiquette and protocol. Over these years, I have had the 

excuse me
[  232  ]
privilege of discussing the importance of respect and civility 
in the workplace with thousands of undergraduate and 
graduate students, newly hired employees, and tenured 
professionals. All have inspired me and shaped my perspective 
on life and work.
MY ETERNAL TRUTHS
A
A Past behavior is a strong indicator of future behavior. 
Individuals and organizations can change, but it takes a 
concerted, consistent effort and a long time to change 
others’ minds about them. 
A
A Insincerity can be spotted a mile away. A successful rela- 
tionship, whether personal or professional, is not possible 
without both perceived and genuine respect. 
A
A Everyone deserves the benefit of the doubt. Adopt the 
belief that everyone is trying his or her best and you could 
probably eliminate 95 percent of workplace strife.  
A
A You will not always be liked. Do your best and hope for the 
best in return. 
A
A Everyone wants to be heard. You needn’t agree, just listen. 
A
A Things change. As time marches on, there is no percentage 
in not also changing.
A
A Everyone makes mistakes. Stress, fear, and fatigue can 
bring out the worst in anyone. Cut others slack, and while 
you are at it, cut yourself some slack, too.
A
A “I’m sorry” are two of the most powerful and underused 
words in business. Acknowledge mistakes and you 
strengthen relationships. 
A
A Reputations are fragile. Take great care with your own and 
with others’ reputations.

NEW FRONTIERS 
[  233  ]
A
A Time is fleeting. Think about how you spend your days. You 
will never get them back.
A
A Learning is lifelong. It’s required of us all, and that’s a great 
thing. 
What are your truths? Learn to trust your judgment and your 
gut feelings, and let your experiences and observations be your 
guide. Act in ways that respect rather than challenge the truths 
you have observed, both in your life and others’ lives, and you 
will save time, energy, and consternation. This will also allow 
you to focus on the things you can change. 
Integrating all of this advice at once may seem daunting, but 
do not despair. While you are adding to your skills and 
burnishing your brand, there is a shortcut that can buy you time. 
One quality above all others will virtually guarantee your 
personal and professional success, regardless of where you are 
in your journey. It is the quality of empathy. 
Renowned physicist Dr. Stephen Hawking said, “The human 
failing I would like most to correct is aggression. It may have 
had survival advantage in caveman days, to get more food, 
territory or [a] partner with whom to reproduce, but now it 
threatens to destroy us all.”19 The quality he would most like to 
magnify? Empathy—because “it brings us together in a peaceful, 
loving state.” Writer George Orwell, also a strong voice for 
empathy, lived briefly on the streets of London with those on the 
fringe of society. He wrote about his experience in Down and 
Out in Paris and London, a book still referenced more than 80 
years later as one of the most powerful on the subject of empathy. 
Practice the skills you have learned consistently. Try to 
understand rather than judge. Listen attentively and use 
nonverbal cues carefully. Try to “walk a mile in another’s shoes.” 

excuse me
[  234  ]
Further develop your empathy skills by showing appropriate 
curiosity, using affirming language, and being fully present in 
the moment.
REMEMBER
A
A Respect is the cornerstone of all successful relationships. 
The right attitude is not enough. Respect requires aware- 
ness, intention, and execution. 
A
A Technology is a tool over which we have complete control. 
Unplug and look up from your devices. Your health, hap- 
piness, productivity, and relationships depend on it.
A
A Empathy is the most powerful of all human qualities. In per- 
sonal and professional relationships, if you are able to 
display true empathy, you will succeed. 
“Here’s looking at you, kid.” —Rick to Ilsa in Casablanca

235
conclusion
W
e have taken a look at the importance of respect and civility 
in today’s workplace from both macro and micro points of 
view. Depending upon one’s age and experience, the information 
offered here is brand new, familiar, or a combination of both. For 
all, these pages serve as a reminder that good business manners 
still matter, even if today they seem scarce or manifest 
themselves in unfamiliar ways.
But there may be a few lingering questions. For instance, you 
might agree that all things being equal, interacting respectfully 
is a good thing. But when critical matters are at stake, can’t too 
much emphasis on “politeness” get in the way? The answer to 
this question is no. It’s when a situation is most precarious that 
civility is most needed. In fact, a calm, respectful approach may 

excuse me
[  236  ]
be the only thing that keeps a situation from going from serious 
to unsalvageable. 
You might then ask what the point is of being the only 
well-mannered person in the room. Couldn’t that be considered a 
sign of weakness? The answer again is no. Maintaining 
composure, especially when others do not, is a sign of tremendous 
strength. The person who does this serves as a powerful role 
model. Even if others are not behaving in a similarly constructive 
fashion, they are still watching.
Well, at least you can point out when others are being rude, 
right? As tempting as it might be to do so, the answer is yet again 
no, for a number of reasons. First, adults are responsible for 
their own behavior. Good manners preclude an individual from 
correcting another, with the exception of his underage children, 
even if his intentions are sincere. Second, there is a slight chance 
that you are reading the situation wrong. Commenting upon it 
will underscore this. Third, even if you are reading the situation 
correctly, try to overlook others’ transgressions as much as 
possible. This is a good policy, because it is only a matter of time 
before you make a mistake, and you’ll be grateful that someone 
does the same for you. Finally, no matter how justified, no one 
ever appreciates being corrected, especially in front of others. 
Relationships suffer permanent damage as a result.
But what if someone asks for advice or feedback on her 
behavior? That’s okay, isn’t it? The advice is to tread very care- 
fully here. If the relationship is a trusted one and the advice is 
earnestly solicited, you may offer feedback, but only if it is not 
personally directed. You can say you have employed or observed 
or read about techniques for handling the situation in question, 
and let the person distill this information as he sees fit. But do 

CONCLUSION
[  237  ]
not agree with another’s self-assessment of his failings or, worse, 
point out ones he had not even mentioned.  
But don’t you run the risk of being seen as inauthentic if you 
don’t offer honest feedback? Only if the content of the message 
is itself untrue. Careful thought must be given to the wording of 
difficult messages, but it is nonetheless absolutely possible to get 
such a point across civilly. In fact, for credibility and profes- 
sionalism, the calm delivery of a message is always more 
powerful than an emotion-filled one. Not every attendant 
feeling has to be shared in the process.
Organizations can certainly put into place rules of conduct, 
mission statements, and best practices to help guide their 
employees’ behavior. And if individuals are 100 percent sure 
that they are witnessing disrespect, they can confront it. But 
even then, it is done by expressing the impact of someone’s 
words or behaviors, not by calling into question his character or 
calling him rude. 
So, even if under extreme provocation, you cannot give in to 
uncivil behavior or directly correct others who do, you might 
ask, “What’s in it for me?” This is a good question. 
To answer it, all we need do is think back upon the times we 
let our emotions take over. Even though we felt justified at the 
time, it usually did not take long for remorse to set in. For most 
of us, our impatience or less-than-courteous words and actions 
quickly came back to haunt us. What’s in it for all of us is not 
having to deal with such regrets in the future—or at least not 
having to deal with them as frequently. This is made easier 
when we remember that someone’s bad behavior usually has 
little to do with us and far more to do with what that person is 
feeling or enduring at the time.

excuse me
[  238  ]
A friend shared with me this story: While searching for a 
parking space near his doctor’s office, he noticed a parked 
truck that was taking up two spaces. With no other spots 
available, he pulled up beside the truck, rolled down his 
window, and politely asked the driver who was sitting in the 
front seat if he would mind moving up slightly so he could 
park. The driver glared at him and angrily told him no, 
including an obscene gesture for emphasis. Taken aback, my 
friend nonetheless did not react. After circling for another 15 
minutes, he finally found a spot several blocks away and arrived 
at his appointment 5 minutes late. 
When he exited the building 30 minutes later, he noticed the 
man still sitting in his truck. As he passed by, the man got out of 
the truck and approached him. Not knowing what to expect, my 
friend was surprised by what happened next. The man said he 
had been waiting for him—to apologize. He went on to say he 
was having a particularly bad time at work and that he thought 
he was about to be fired. However, he said that that was no 
excuse for his behavior and that he was truly sorry. My friend 
immediately accepted his apology. He assured him he knew that 
bad days could get the better of anyone—they had of him in the 
past. Each left the encounter feeling a bit better—my friend for 
not compounding the situation by reacting to bad behavior and 
the man for apologizing for his. 
We have outlined the many career benefits that accrue to 
those who practice the Platinum Rule, including being a part of 
building a better workplace. But in the end, civility is its own 
reward. In employing this rule, one’s relationships with others 
vastly improve. But it is the relationship with oneself that 
benefits most. It is an unqualified win, from every perspective.

239
Among the many things I have learned on this journey is that it 
takes a multitude of talented, kind, and generous individuals to 
make the idea of a book a reality. I am deeply indebted to my 
clients and advisors for their encouragement and for the 
experiences they shared. Some are directly quoted in these 
pages, others served as inspirations for stories shared and advice 
offered. My sincere thanks to Amanda Addeo, Wendy-Lee 
Austin, Barbara Brooks, Anne Calhoun, Andrea Carlson, 
Lawrence Carlson, Penni Connors, Robert Cuomo, Ph.D., Diane 
Danielson, Kurt DelBene, Gisele Garceau, Richard Garcia, Tully 
Hannan, John Heroux, Mike Hines, Kevin Holian, Carmella 
Kletjian, Sue Kline, Gabriella LaMonica, Katherine McEleney, 
Patrick Malone, Dan McCarthy, Rosemary Murphy, Alison 
Quandt, Gary Roderick, Jean Ruggeri, Kristen Scott, Esta Singer, 
Mark Steinberg, Lynda Stevens, Barbara Thomas, Jon Thomas, 
Mike Trombetta, Deanna White, and Jackie Wilbur. I also thank 
Lewis Lapham, Lisa Pierpont, and Michael Salmon for their 
support and the key introductions they made on my behalf. 
I am most grateful to Ellen Kadin, executive editor of 
AMACOM books, for taking a chance on this fledgling author 
and to my skilled literary agent, Michael Snell, for his expert 
guidance and continuous encouragement. My sincere thanks go 
acknowledgments 

acknowledgments
[  240  ]
to my talented editor, Patricia Snell, for her painstaking efforts 
and keen direction and to Libby Koponen and Nichole Bernier 
for their vital editorial contributions.
I am also very grateful to friends who, with unwavering 
support, have seen me through this process. Special thanks go 
to Claudia Clark, Ron Clarke, Kathy Gallinaro, Colleen Jerwann, 
Debbie Monosson, Francis O’Keefe, Ted Patrikas, Vince Spiziri, 
Janie Walsh, Sara Wilhelm, and Beth Witte. 
To all of my Thomas, Hannan, and McCarthy family members 
for enthusiastically taking this journey with me: a huge thank 
you. Special thanks to Barbara, Nina, and Robert for their 
wonderful help and countless pep talks. And profound thanks to 
Jean, my mother, for too many things to mention. Finally, to 
Donald, my champion from day one: I could not have done it 
without you. Thank you. 

241
INTRODUCTION
1	
Christine Pearson and Christine Porath. The Cost of Bad Behav-
ior: How Incivility Is Damaging Your Business and What to Do 
About It. New York: Hardcover Portfolio, 2009.
CHAPTER 1
1	
Milton J. Bennett (1979). “Overcoming the Golden Rule: 
Sympathy and Empathy.” In D. Nimmo (Ed.), Communication 
Yearbook 3. International Communication Association.       
2	
Steve Gruenert and Todd Whitaker. School Culture Rewired: How 
to Define, Assess, and Transform It. Alexandria, VA: ASCD, 2015.    
3	
Christine Pearson and Christine Porath. The Cost of Bad Behav-
ior: How Incivility Is Damaging Your Business and What to Do 
About It. New York: Hardcover Portfolio, 2009.  
4	 Mike Miles. “Workplace Bullying Costs Companies Billions, 
Wrecks Victims’ Health.” SmartSign blog. December 13, 2012. 
http://www.smartsign.com/blog/costs-of-workplace-bullying/.    
5	
Kevin L. Nadal. “Sexual Orientation Microaggressions in 
Everyday Life: Experiences of Lesbians, Gays, Bisexuals, and 
Transgender Individuals.” PsycEXTRA Dataset. Accessed 
November 2, 2016. doi:10.1037/e615782009-001.
6	
Steve Mintz. “Workplace Values and Expectations of the 
Millennial Generation.” Workplace Ethics Advice, April 28, 
2016. http://www.workplaceethicsadvice.com/2016/04/28/.  
notes

NOTES
[  242  ]
7	
Erik Sherman. “6 Oldest CEOs in America in 2015.” Fortune,  
December 12, 2015. http://fortune.com/2015/12/13/oldest-ceos- 
fortune-500/.  
8	
Rebecca Riffkin. “Average U.S. Retirement Age Rises to 62.” 
Gallup, 2014. http://www.gallup.com/poll/168707/average- 
retirement-age-rises.aspx.  
9	
“U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.” U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
2015. http://www.bls.gov/.    
10	 “Center for American Progress.” Center for American Progress, 
2050. https://cdn.americanprogress.org/.     
11	 Ibid.
12	 “Center for American Progress.” Center for American Progress, 
2012. https://www.americanprogress.org/.     
13	 Sarah Kate Ellis. “GLAAD CEO: Tim Cook Is a Game-Changing 
Exec for LGBT Workforce.” Time, October 31, 2014. http://time.
com/3551490/tim-cook-is-a-game-changing-exec-for-lgbt- 
workforce/.     
14	 Steven Petrow. “LGBT Etiquette, by Steven Petrow, the (Mostly) 
Well-Mannered Syndicated Columnist.” Stevenpetrow.com, 
2016. http://www.stevenpetrow.com/gay-manners.html.    
15	 Brandon Bailey. “Facebook Offers More Options for Members to 
Describe Their Gender.” Mercury News, February 13, 2014. 
http://www.mercurynews.com/business/ci_25137519/facebook- 
offers-more-options-members-describe-their-gender.     
16	 Miranda Perry. “How to React When Someone Comes Out: Dos 
and Don’ts for Straight Allies.” Care2.com, April 12, 2016. http://
www.care2.com/causes/how-to-react-when-someone-comes- 
out.html.  
17	 Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP). “Disability 
Etiquette.” United Cerebral Palsy, 2015. http://ucp.org/
resources/disability-etiquette/.     
18	 “Disability.” Center for American Progress, 2016. https://www 
.americanprogress.org/issues/disability/view/.     

notes
[  243  ]
19	 John A. Challenger. “Survey: 53% of Employers Concerned 
About Retirement Plans, Brain Drain.” Challenger, Gray & 
Christmas, Inc., 2016. https://www.challengergray.com/press/
press-releases/survey-53-employers-concerned-about-
retirement-plans-brain-drain.     
CHAPTER 2
1	
Peter Dizikes. “Putting Heads Together.” MIT News, October 1, 
2010. http://news.mit.edu/2010/collective-intel-1001.   
2	
Ken Sundheim. “15 Traits of the Ideal Employee.” Forbes, April 
2, 2013. http://www.forbes.com/sites/kensundheim/2013/04/0
2/15-traits-of-the-ideal-employee/#2b4a36bd7c94.  
3	
Vivian Giang. “The All-Time Worst Interview Mistakes Job 
Candidates Have Made.” Business Insider, January 16, 2014. http:// 
www.businessinsider.com/worst-job-interview-mistakes-2014-1.  
4	 “Survey: 60% of Employers Checking Your Social Media.” 
Challenger, Gray, & Christmas, Inc., May 13, 2014. https://www.
challengergray.com/press/press-releases/survey-60-employer
s-checking-your-social-media.  
5	
Jens Maier. “Corporate Universities.” In The Ambidextrous Or-
ganization: Exploring the New While Exploiting the Now. 
Springer, 2015. Accessed August 22, 2016. https://books.google.
com/books?id=fOcHCgAAQBAJ&lpg=PT13
7&ots=rJhDYrKaMX&dq=Gil%20Press%20an%20attitude%20
by%20businesses%20%2C%20
nonprofits&pg=PT137#v=onepage&q=Gil%20Press%20an%20
attitude%20by%20businesses%20,%20nonprofits&f=false.  
6	
Jerome Maisch. “Big Data’s Impact on Human Resources.” Digi- 
mind blog. Accessed August 22, 2016. http://digimind.com/blog/ 
competitive-intelligence/big-datas-impact-in-human-resources/.  
7	
James A. Martin. “Does Your Klout Score Matter?” CIO, 
January 27, 2014. http://www.cio.com/article/2379266/
consumer-technology/does-your-klout-score-matter-.html. 

notes
[  244  ]
8	
Anne Fisher. “The Most Ridiculous Interview Questions.”  
Fortune blog, April 5, 2011. http://fortune.com/2011/04/05/the- 
most-ridiculous-job-interview-questions/.
9	
Jacquelyn Smith. “What to Do When You’re Offered a Job and 
You Need More Time to Decide.” Yahoo.com, June 3, 2015. 
http://finance.yahoo.com/news/politely-postpone-accepting-job- 
offer-175800901.html.  
10	 John Rossheim. “How to Help Millennials Fill the Soft Skills 
Gap.” Monster Hiring Resource Center. Accessed August 23, 
2016. http://hiring.monster.com/hr/hr-best-practices/workforce- 
management/employee-performance-management/millennial-soft- 
skills.aspx.  
11	 Sue Shellenbarger. “Just Look Me in the Eye Already.” Wall 
Street Journal, May 28, 2013. http://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB10001424127887324809804578511290822228174.  
12	 Carmine P. Gibaldi. “11 Ways for Older Employees to Stay 
Relevant at Work.” Business Insider, August 22, 2012. http://
www.businessinsider.com/11-ways-for-older-employees-to-still- 
feel-relevant-at-work-2012-8.  
CHAPTER 3 
1	
Napoleon Hill. Think and Grow Rich: Teaching, for the First 
Time, the Famous Andrew Carnegie Formula for Money-Making. 
Meriden, CT: Ralston Society, 1937.  
2	
Al Ries and Jack Trout. Positioning: The Battle for Your Mind. 
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981. 
3	
Tom Peters. “A Brand Called You.” Fast Company, August 31, 
1997. Accessed August 23, 2016. http://www.fastcompany.
com/28905/brand-called-you.  
4	 Dan Schawbel. “Chapter 1: The Brand Called You.” In Me 2.0: 
Build a Powerful Brand to Achieve Career Success. New York: 
Kaplan, 2009.  

notes
[  245  ]
5	
Yesenia Rascon. “Expert Advice: 8 Tips for Building Your 
Personal Brand—NerdWallet.” Nerdwallet.com, June 9, 2014. 
https://www.nerdwallet.com/blog/loans/student-loans/
expert-advice-8-tips-building-personal-brand/.  
6	
Henry Blodget. “Let’s Get One Thing Straight—Apple Had No 
Choice but to Oust Steve Jobs.” Business Insider, September 23, 
2013. http://www.businessinsider.com/apple-had-no-choice- 
with-steve-jobs-2013-9.  
7	
Jim Rohn. “Rohn: The One Thing That Determines How 
Successful You Can Be.” Success.com, May 22, 2015. http://
www.success.com/article/rohn-the-one-thing-that-determines- 
how-successful-you-can-be. 
8	
Charles R. Swindoll. “The Importance of Attitude.” Insight for 
Living Ministries, July 20, 2015. http://www.insight.org/
resources/daily-devotional/individual/the-importance-of- 
attitude. 
9	
“A Look at the Shocking Student Loan Debt Statistics for 2016” 
Student Loan Hero™, Inc.  Accessed November 2, 2016. https://
studentloanhero.com/student-loan-debt-statistics.
10	 Ali Meyer. “Census Bureau: 30.3% Millennials Still Living With 
Their Parents.” CNS News, February 17, 2015. http://www.
cnsnews.com/news/article/ali-meyer/census-bureau-303-millennials- 
still-living-their-parents.  
11	 Robert Armstrong. “Sorry JPMorgan, Smart Guys Still Wear 
Suits.” Financial Times, June 8, 2016. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/
0/7b9bb1bc-2d56-11e6-bf8d-26294ad519fc.html.   
12	 Seth Harden. “Commuter Driving Statistics.” Statistic Brain, 
March 4, 2016. Accessed August 25, 2016. http://www.statistic 
brain.com/commute-statistics/.  
13	 “Distracted Driving: Facts and Statistics.” National Highway 
Transportation Safety Administration/U.S. Dept of Trans- 
portation. Accessed August 25, 2016. http://www.distraction 
.gov/stats-research-laws/facts-and-statistics.html.  

notes
[  246  ]
CHAPTER 4
1	
Tim Kastelle. “Hierarchy Is Overrated.” Harvard Business Re-
view, November 20, 2013. https://hbr.org/2013/11/hierarchy- 
is-overrated.    
2	
Atlassian. “You Waste a Lot of Time at Work Infographic.” 
Atlassian.com. Accessed August 25, 2016. https://www 
.atlassian.com/time-wasting-at-work-infographic.     
3	
Anna Codrea-Rado. “Open-Plan Offices Make Employees Less 
Productive, Less Happy, and More Likely to Get Sick.” Quartz, 
May 21, 2013. http://qz.com/85400/moving-to-open-plan-offices- 
makes-employees-less-productive-less-happy-and-more-likely- 
to-get-sick/.  
4	 Gensler. “2013 U.S. Workplace Survey.” Gensler.com. Accessed 
August 25, 2016. http://www.gensler.com/uploads/documents/ 
2013_US_Workplace_Survey_07_15_2013.pdf.    
5	
Statistic Brain. “Employee Theft Statistics.” Statisticbrain.com, 
September 7, 2015. http://www.statisticbrain.com/employee- 
theft-statistics/.   
6	
Adam Vaccaro. “Your Office’s Fridge-Raiders Are Stealing 
Much More Than Food.” Inc.com, April 7, 2014. http://www.inc 
.com/adam-vaccaro/workplace-lunch-thieves.html.
7	
Hajo Adam and Adam D. Galinsky. “Enclothed Cognition.” 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 48, no. 4 (July 2012): 
918-25. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2012.02.008.
8	
Glassdoor Team. “Top 20 Employee Benefits & Perks.” Glassdoor 
.com (blog), February 3, 2016. https://www.glassdoor.com/blog/ 
top-20-employee-benefits-perks.   
9	
Matt Richtel. “Housecleaning, Then Dinner? Silicon Valley 
Perks Come Home.” New York Times, October 19, 2012. http://
www.nytimes.com/2012/10/20/us/in-silicon-valley-perks-now- 
begin-at-home.html.    
10	 Adam Jones. “The Spies in the Cellar Are Now Sidling Up to 

notes
[  247  ]
Your Desk.” Financial Times, December 28, 2014. http:// 
www.ft.com/cms/s/0/9412d776-89b4-11e4-8daa-00144feabdc0 
.html#axzz4IMrGp6Bj.   
CHAPTER 5
1	
Ben Decker and Kelly Decker. “The Top Ten Best (and Worst) 
Communicators of 2015.” Decker Communications (blog),  
December 16, 2015. https://decker.com/blog/the-top-ten-best- 
and-worst-communicators-of-2015/. 
2	
Brian O’Keefe. “The Man Who’s Reinventing Walmart.” For-
tune, June 4, 2015. http://fortune.com/2015/06/04/walmart-ceo- 
doug-mcmillon/. 
3	
Sam Walton. “10 Rules for Building a Business.” Walmart.com. 
Accessed August 27, 2016. http://corporate.walmart.com/our- 
story/history/10-rules-for-building-a-business. 
4	 Amy Cuddy. “Your Body Language Shapes Who You Are.” TED 
.com, June 2012. https://www.ted.com/talks/amy_cuddy_your_ 
body_ language_shapes_who_you_are?language=en. 
5	
Patryk Welowski and Kasia Welowski. “How Micro Expressions 
Predict Success: Patryk & Kasia Wezowski at TEDx UHasselt  
Salon.” TEDxTalks video, November 13, 2013. http://tedxtalks 
.ted.com/video/How-Micro-Expressions-Predict-S.  
6	
Skills You Need. “Body Language, Posture and Proximity.” 
Skillsyouneed.com. Accessed August 27, 2016. http://www 
.skillsyouneed.com/ips/body-language.html.
7	
Lucy Kellaway. “Time to Get Stoked by the Year’s Worst Cor- 
porate Guff.” Financial Times, January 3, 2016. http://www 
.ft.com/cms/s/0/a989fc5c-aa4b-11e5-9700-2b669a5aeb83.html 
#axzz 4IXz6u1OT. 
8	
Fran Alston. “Decline in Grammatical and Writing Skills of the  
New Generation Due to Techspeak.” CNN iReport, March 25,  
2014. http://ireport.cnn.com/docs/DOC-1112008. 

notes
[  248  ]
9	
Paul Gil. “The Top 30 Internet Terms for Beginners, 2016.” 
About.com Tech, June 5, 2016. http://netforbeginners.about 
.com/od/internetlanguage/tp/the-top-internet-terms-for- 
beginners.htm. 
10	 John Medina. “The Brain Cannot Multitask.” Brain Rules blog, 
March 16, 2008. http://brainrules.blogspot.com/2008/03/brain- 
cannot-multitask_16.html.
11	 Ryan Weaver. “Multitasking Isn’t Possible, So Stop Hurting Your 
Own Productivity by Attempting It.” Techvibes, January 31, 2014. 
CHAPTER 6 
1 	 Barry Siskind. “Marketing: Technology vs Face-to-Face.” 
Salesgravy.com. Accessed August 28, 2016. https://www.
salesgravy.com/sales-articles/insurance/marketing-technology- 
vs-face-to-face.html.   
2 	 Teddy Wayne. “At the Tone, Leave a What?” New York Times, 
June 14, 2014. http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/15/fashion/
millennials-shy-away-from-voice-mail.html.      
3 	 Jenna Wortham. “Pass the Word: The Phone Call Is Back.” New 
York Times, September 20, 2014. http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/ 
2014/09/20/pass-the-word-the-phone-call-is-back/.  
4  	 Verena Von Pfetten. “Read This Story Without Distraction (Can 
You?).”  New York Times, April 29, 2016. http://www.nytimes 
.com/2016/05/01/fashion/monotasking-drop-everything-an
d-read-this-story.html.     
5	
Sarah Radicati and Justin Levenstein. “Email Statistics Report, 
2013-2017.” Radicati.com PDF, April 2013. http://www.radicati 
.com/.   
6	
Alina Tugend. “What to Think About Before You Hit ‘Send.’” 
NYTimes.com, April 20, 2012. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/ 
04/21/your-money/what-to-think-about-before-you-hit-send 
.html?_r=0.

notes
[  249  ]
7	
“Distracted Driving.” Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, March 7, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/
motorvehiclesafety/Distracted_Driving/index.html.  
CHAPTER 7 
1	
Statista. “Social Networks—Statistics & Facts.” Statista.com. 
Accessed August 30, 2016. https://www.statista.com/topics/ 
1164/social-networks/. 
2	
Jeffrey Rosen. “The Web Means the End of Forgetting.” New 
York Times, July 24, 2010. http://www.nytimes.com/2010/ 
07/25/magazine/25privacy-t2.html.  
3	
Mark Fahey. “Facebook Costs Trillions in Wasted Producti- 
vity.” CNBC.com. February 4, 2016. http://www.cnbc.com/ 
2016/02/04/facebook-turns-12--trillions-in-time-wasted 
.html.  
4	 Dorie Clark. “How to Repair a Damaged Online Reputation.” 
Huffingtonpost.com, April 21, 2015. http://www.huffingtonpost 
.com/dorie-clark/how-to-repair-a-damaged-o_b_811000.html.  
5	
Ryan Holmes. “5 Lessons from U.S. Airways’ Social Media 
Scandal (Column).” Marketingmag.ca, April 22, 2014. http://
www.marketingmag.ca/advertising/5-lessons-from-us-airway
s%E2%80%99-social-media-scandal-column-108394. 
6	
Scott Stratten. Social Currency in Social Media. Performed by 
Scott Stratten. YouTube.com, June 3, 2009. https://youtu.be/
MjsOwr_whHc.
7	
Kevan Lee. “Infographic: How Often Should You Post on Social 
Media?” Digital image. Sumall.com, February 25, 2015. https://
blog.bufferapp.com/how-often-post-social-media. 
8	
Daniel Bean. “11 Brutal Reminders That You Can and Will Get 
Fired for What You Post on Facebook.” Yahoo.com, May 6, 2014. 
https://www.yahoo.com/tech/11-brutal-reminders-that-you-can- 
and-will-get-fired-for-84931050659.html.  

notes
[  250  ]
9	
Marketing Charts. “18-24-Year-Olds on Facebook Report an 
Average of 649 Friends, Up from 510 Last Year.” Marketingcharts 
.com, March 10, 2014. http://www.marketingcharts.com/onlin
e/18-24-year-olds-on-facebook-report-an-average-of-649-frie
nds-up-from-510-last-year-41233/. 
10	 Rachel Dicker. “You Only Have Four Real Friends on Facebook, 
Study Says.” U.S. News & World Report, January 29, 2016. 
http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2016-01-29/only-four- 
facebook-friends-are-your-real-friends. 
11	 Statista. “LinkedIn: Number of Users.” Statista.com. Accessed 
August 30, 2016. http://www.statista.com/statistics/274050/
quarterly-numbers-of-linkedin-members/.
12	 Susie Poppick. “10 Social Media Blunders That Cost a  
Millennial a Job.” Time.com, September 5, 2014. http://time.
com/money/3019899/10-facebook-twitter-mistakes-lost- 
job-millennials-viral/. 
13 	 Chris Brogan. “My Twitter Presence.” Chrisbrogan.com, 
August 12, 2010. http://chrisbrogan.com/my-twitter-presence/.
CHAPTER 8
1	
Kevin D. O’Gorman. “Dimensions of Hospitality: Exploring 
Ancient and Classical Origins.” In Hospitality: A Social Lens, 
17-32. Advances in Tourism Research. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 
2007. http://www.academia.edu/279771/
Dimensions_of_Hospitality_Exploring_Ancient_Origins.   
2	
Christina Ohly Evans. “Jorge Pérez’s Dining Boltholes.” 
Howtospendit.ft.com, July 29, 2016. http://howtospendit.
ft.com/food/110513-jorge-prezs-dining-boltholes.    
3	
Simon De Burton. “Richie Nanda’s Dining Boltholes.” 
Howtospendit.ft.com, July 10, 2015. http://howtospendit.
ft.com/food/87421-richie-nandas-dining-boltholes.    
4	 Adam Bryant. “Walt Bettinger of Charles Schwab: You’ve Got to 

notes
[  251  ]
Open Up to Move Up.” New York Times, February 4, 2016. 
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/07/business/walt-bettinge
r-of-charles-schwab-youve-got-to-open-up-to-move-up 
.html.   
CHAPTER 9
1	
Institute of Masters of Wine. “Institute of Masters of Wine 
Partners with Wine in Moderation.” Mastersofwine.org, April 
21, 2016. http://www.mastersofwine.org/en/news/index.cfm/
id/E6377FCE-7418-4F83-9C5B24E8A98F3B84.      
2	
Jancis Robinson. “Masters of Wine.” Financial Times, 
September 13, 2013. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/c92eb238-1a0
5-11e3-93e8-00144feab7de.html.    
CHAPTER 10
1	
“The Evolution of Work Study: The Changing Nature of the 
Global Workplace.” Publication. ADP Research Institute, 2016. 
http://www.adp.com/tools-and-resources/adp-research- 
institute/research-and-trends/research-item-detail.aspx?id=
DF55E8A7-906A-4E81-A941-E886886BC9B2. 
2	
Dan Schawbel. “Ten Workplace Trends You’ll See in 2016.” Forbes, 
November 1, 2015. http://www.forbes.com/ sites/danschawbel/ 
2015/11/01/10-workplace-trends-for-2016/ #e60b31f222c1.    
3	
Jacob Morgan. “The Future of Work Is About Flexibility, 
Autonomy, and Customization.” Forbes, September 22, 2015. 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/jacobmorgan/2015/09/22/th
e-future-of-work-is-about-flexibility-autonomy-and-customi-
zation/#794bd3e32d59.    
4	 Gwen Moran. “What Work Will Look Like in 2025.” Fast  
Company, May 19, 2015. https://www.fastcompany.com/ 
3046332/the-new-rules-of-work/what-work-will-look-like- 
in-2025.    

notes
[  252  ]
5	
Jenny Awford. “Will Your Job Still Exist in 2025? New Report 
Warns 50 per Cent of Occupations Will Be Redundant in 11 
Years Time.” Daily Mail, November 8, 2014. http://www.
dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2826463/CBRE-report-warns-5
0-cent-occupations-redundant-20-years-time.html.    
6	
Vicky Valet. “Overcoming Burnout: Five Ways to Get Back on 
Track at Work.” Forbes, June 23, 2015. http://www.forbes.com/
sites/vickyvalet/2015/06/23/overcoming-burnout-five-ways- 
to-get-back-on-track-at-work/#5dcf7c1e491b.     
7	
Willis Towers Watson. “Staying@Work™ Report: Employee 
Health and Business Success.” Willistowerswatson.com, March 
10, 2016. https://www.willistowerswatson.com/en/
insights/2016/03/stayingatwork-report-employee-health-an
d-business-success.    
8	
Gloria Larson. “How to Future-Proof Your Career: Start with 
Hybrid Job Skills.” PreparedU: Careers. Bentley.edu, March 2, 
2016. http://www.bentley.edu/prepared/Careers/all?page=7.    
9	
Richard Newton. The End of Nice: How to Be Human in a World 
Run by Robots. Amazon Digital Services LLC, 2015. https://
www.amazon.com/End-Nice-robots-Kindle-Single-ebook/dp/
B00W1Y91VC.   
10	 Anne Kingston. “Get Ready for Generation Z.” Maclean’s, July 
15, 2014. http://www.macleans.ca/society/life/get-ready-fo
r-generation-z/.    
11	 Sparks & Honey. “Meet Generation Z: Forget Everything You 
Learned About Millennials.” Slideshare.net, June 17, 2014. 
http://www.slideshare.net/sparksandhoney/generation-z-fina
l-june-17/56.     
12	 The Huffington Post. “Health Benefits of Unplugging and 
Going Screen-Free This July 4.” Huffington Post blog, July 4, 
2013. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/07/04/health-ben-
efits-of unplugging_n_3528710.html.   

notes
[  253  ]
13	 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI). “Light from 
Self-Luminous Tablet Computers Can Affect Evening 
Melatonin, Delaying Sleep.” ScienceDaily. August 27, 2012. 
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2012/08/120827094211.
htm.
14	 Sophia Breene. “Why Everyone Should Unplug More Often.” 
Greatist, June 24, 2015. http://greatist.com/happiness/
unplugging-social-media-email.   
15	 Reboot. “About.” The National Day of Unplugging. Accessed 
August 31, 2016. http://nationaldayofunplugging.com/about-us/.    
16	 International Center for Media & the Public Agenda. “About the 
World Unplugged.” The World UNPLUGGED blog. Accessed 
August 31, 2016. https://theworldunplugged.wordpress.com/
about/.  
17	 Mark Zuckerberg. “Mark Zuckerberg’s Facebook Page.” 
Facebook.com, January 3, 2016. https://www.facebook.com/
zuck/posts/10102577175875681.    
18	 George Washington and Richard Brookhiser. Rules of Civility: 
The 110 Precepts That Guided Our First President in War and 
Peace. New York: Free Press, 1997.
19	 Jonathan O’Callaghan. “Aggression Could Be Our Downfall: 
Survival of the Human Race Depends on Kindness and 
Co-operation, Says Stephen Hawking.” Daily Mail, February 19, 
2015. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2960508/
Survival-human-race-depends-weeding-aggression-says-
Stephen-Hawking.html.    

255
abbreviations, 137–138
acronyms, 137–138, 140
activities, invitations to, 207–208
after-hours drinks, 197–198, 
212–213
afternoon tea, 197
age differences
in dining practices, 177
respecting, 13
see also generation(s)
agility, 220
Airbnb, 91
airplane travel, 66–67
“The All-Time Worst Interview 
Mistakes Job Candidates 
Have Made” (Vivian Giang), 
28
Alston, Fran, on techspeak, 112
American style of eating, 181, 182
Angelou, Maya, on what people 
remember, 1
apologies, 237
appearance
for job interviews, 38, 39
in professional presence, 56–61
when telecommuting, 88
Apple, 52
Aristotle, on greatness, 231
Armstrong, Robert, 58
attention span, 114
“At the Tone, Leave a What?” 
(Teddy Wayne), 122
attitude(s)
changing, 62
for future success, 220
hiring for, 28
negative, 54–55
positive, 55–56
and professional presence, 
53–56
of team members, 81
authenticity, 237
automobile transportation, 63–64
autonomy, 218
Awford, Jenny, 218
baby boomers, 10–12
and brain drain, 21–22
communication preferences of, 
120
and telephone communication, 
123
Bean, Dan, 157
behavior
disrespectful, 4
in restaurants, 128, see also 
business dining
sexist, 15–16
see also business behavior
index

INDEX
[  256  ]
benefits
choices of, 90–92
company culture’s influence on 
use of, 70–73
unused, 71
Bennett, Milton J., 2
Bettinger, Walt, on business dining, 
172–173
Bezos, Jeff, on personal brand, 48
bias, unconscious, 5, 7–8
bicycle travel, 67
big data, 31
Blodget, Henry, on Steve Jobs, 52
blogs
frequency of postings on, 154
in job search, 36
video, 147–148
Bluford, Guion, 12
body language, see nonverbal 
communication
Boston financial and equity, 34
brain drain, 21–22
Brain Rules (John Medina), 114
brand(s)
company, 125
employees as ambassadors for, 
148–149
personal, 49–53, 125, 211, 222, 
see also professional presence
reputation repair and 
management for, 147
Branson, Richard
as communicator, 117
setbacks encountered by, 52
breakfast meetings, 195
Breene, Sophie, on social media, 
226
Brogan, Chris, on Twitter, 164
Buffett, Warren, 10
as communicator, 117
on reputation, 69
burnout, 218–219
business behavior, 69–94
and benefits choices, 90–92
for business meetings, 77–80
in cubicle areas, 82–85
every day manners in, 74–77
and new workplace realities, 
92–94
with open offices, 83–86
and organizational structure, 
70–73
on teams, 80–81
and types of work schedules, 
86–90
and workspace arrangements, 
82–86
on your first day, 73
business communication, 95–118
conversational skills for, 97–98, 
104–108
eye contact in, 102–104
importance of, 96–98
listening skills for, 114–117
nonverbal cues in, 98–102
speaking skills for, 108–114
on teams, 81–82
when telecommuting, 88
business dining, 167–190
challenging situations in, 
187–188
crystal etiquette in, 184
dos and don’ts for, 188–190
first impressions in, 179–180
and hospitality as part of 
business, 169–173
host and guest roles in, 174–178
international customs for, 171
invitations for, 176
napkin etiquette for, 180–181
seating and conversation in, 
185–186
significance of, 170
silverware etiquette in, 181–184

INDEX
[  257  ]
toasting in, 186–187
using phones when, 128
venue for, 175
see also entertaining clients
business meetings, see meetings
bus travel, 66
Camus, Albert, on generosity 
towards future, 215
Capital One, 40
“The Captain’s Table” column, 
170–171
Care 2, 18–19
career, future-proofing, see 
workplace trends
carpools, 64–65
cell phones, 127–128
Challenger, John A.
on brain drain, 21
on online missteps, 30
Chen, Martin, on future 
occupations, 218
choice, 218
civility
and burnout, 219
as its own reward, 238–239
in precarious situations, 235–236
respect as foundation of, 3–4
when giving difficult messages, 
237
civility training, 6
Clarke, Dorrie, on adding online 
content, 147
coffee meetings, 194–195
collaboration
as predominant workplace 
concept, 123
via intranet, 140
videoconferencing for, 131
colleagues, social events with, 
210–213
common areas, 85–86
communication
in business, see business 
communication
cultural differences in, 17
face-to-face, 120, 121
in future workplace, 219–220
nonverbal, see nonverbal 
communication
preferred modes of, 120–121
technologies for, see electronic 
communication
verbal, 99
company intranet messages, 
140–141
conference calls, 130–131
connectivity, 225–230
constant, risks associated with, 
225–227
and digital detox, 227–230
feeling of need for, 119–120
Connor, Penni, on Eversource, 72
Continental style of eating, 181–183
conversational skills, 97–98, 
104–108
in business dining, 185–186
of good listeners, 116–117
and nonverbal cues, 100
Cook, Tim, 17
corporate culture
and benefits, 92
and employee monitoring, 93–94
glassdoor.com rankings of, 7
and realities of company 
structure and benefits, 70–73
respectful, 5–6
and standards of attire, 58–59
cover letters, 35–36
cubicle areas, 82–85
Cuddy, Amy, on body language, 99
Culp, Ron, on Klout, 31

INDEX
[  258  ]
cultural differences
in dining practices, 171
in distances between people, 101
in eye contact, 103
in nonverbal communication, 100
in use of dining utensils, 181–182
in word choice, 111
cultural diversity, 16–17
cultural events, 210
culture, see corporate culture
Cuomo, Robert J., on people 
leaving, 4
cyberbullying, 148
“cyber casing,” 152–153
cyber citizenship, 150–154
“Decline in Grammatical and 
Writing Skills of the New 
Generation Due to 
Techspeak” (Fran Alston), 
112
Deloitte Consulting, 40, 91, 221
Dickens, Charles, on 
communication, 119
Digimind Insights, 31
digital communication, see 
electronic communication
digital detox, 227–230
digital footprint, 145–150
digital immigrants, 44–45
attire of, 58
attitudes of, 55
early workspaces of, 82–83
social media etiquette for, 
155–165
and techspeak, 113
digital natives, 43–44
attitudes of, 55
Gen Z as, 224
and organizational structures, 
71, 72
and social media etiquette, 155
and techspeak, 113
dining, see business dining
discretion, 117
disrespect, 4–7
addressing, 8–9
ways of showing, 3
distance, categories of, 101
diversity
cultural, 16–17
gender, 15–16
and LGBT community, 17–19
and people with disabilities, 
19–20
respect for, 13–21
and veterans, 20–21
Down and Out in Paris and London 
(George Orwell), 233
drinks
with colleagues, 212–213
meeting clients for, 197–198
see also wine
education, 45
Einstein, Albert, on learning, 45
electronic communication, 119–142
email in, 131–135
hardware for, 135–137
during meetings, 79
messaging in, 137–141
telephone options in, 128–131
telephone skills in, 121–128
“11 Brutal Reminders That You Can 
and Will Get Fired for What 
You Post on Facebook” (Dan 
Bean), 157
Ellis, Sara Kate, 17
email(s), 131–135
complaints about, 132
following interviews, 38, 40
guidelines for, 134–135

INDEX
[  259  ]
millennials’ attitude toward, 133
precautions with, 133–134
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, on 
manners, 47
emotions
controlling, 237
in emails, 133
nonverbal conveyance of, 99
empathy, 233–234
employees
as brand ambassadors, 148–149
disrespectful behaviors of, 4
theft by, 85, 221–222
unconscious biases of, 7–8
“The End of Forgetting” (Jeffrey 
Rosen), 146
Entelo, 31
entertaining clients, 168
for after-hours drinks, 197–198
for afternoon tea, 197
at breakfast meetings, 195
in business process, 171
at coffee meetings, 194–195
for dinners, 198–199, see also 
business dining
generational attitudes toward, 
170
at lunch meetings, 196–197
significance of, 170
social situations for, 192–199
venues for, 193, 194, 196, 197
see also business dining
enunciation, 113
ePolicy Institute, 133
Ernst & Young, 40
eternal truths, 230–234
ethnic diversity, 14
European Court of Justice, 146
events, invitations to, 207–210
Eversource, 72
experience, respect for, 9–13
eye contact, 43, 100, 102–104, 106
FAC (flexibility, autonomy, choice), 
218
Facebook, 144, 157–160
“Baby Cash” at, 91
cost of time spent on, 147
frequency of postings on, 154
job candidates’ presence on, 30
as job search tool, 32
open-plan offices at, 84
unfriending on, 153
face-to-face communication, 120, 
121
facial expressions, 99, 100, 102
Fahey, Mark, 147
“15 Traits of the Ideal Employee” 
(Forbes), 27
Finnegan, Orlaith, 31
first impressions, 73
in business dining, 179–180
online, 153
and rebranding, 52
flat organizational structure, 70–72
flexibility, autonomy, choice (FAC), 
218
flextime, 89
Flynn, Nancy, on email, 133
Ford, Henry, Sr., on the little things, 
77
foul language, 113
Four Seasons, 6
“The Future of Work Is About 
Flexibility, Autonomy, and 
Customization” (Jacob 
Morgan), 218
future-proofing your career, see 
workplace trends
Gates, Bill, 52
gender attitudes
in business dining, 177, 179
generational differences in, 11, 12

INDEX
[  260  ]
gender diversity, 14–16
General Motors, organizational 
structure of, 71
generation(s), 10–12
attitudes toward hospitality 
among, 170
baby boomer, 11–12
Generation X, 12
Generation Y/millennials, 12
interview challenges for, 42–46
traditionalist, 11
see also individual generations
Generation X, 12
communication preferences of, 
120
size of, 10
Generation Y, see millennials
Generation Z
attracting employees from, 
223–225
communication preferences of, 
120
“Get Ready for Generation Z” 
(Anne Kingston), 224
Giang, Vivian, 28
Gibaldi, Carmine P., 45
Gil, Paul, 113
glass door, 70–73
glassdoor.com, 7, 39
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, on 
manners, 191
Golden Rule, 2
Google
open-plan offices at, 84
organizational structure of, 72
and “right to be forgotten,” 146
Google+, frequency of postings on, 
154
Google searches, 147–148
grammar, 112
Gray & Christmas, Inc., 21
group messaging apps, 132
Gruenert, Steve, 4
Hawking, Stephen, on aggression, 
233
“Health Benefits of Unplugging and 
Going Screen-Free This July 
4,” 226
hierarchical structure, 71, 72
Hill, Napoleon, 50
hiring, 25–46
and generational differences, 
42–45
interview experience in,  
37–42
and job search, 36–37
process for, 28–33
respect as criterion in, 6
and résumés and cover letters, 
35–36
for social skills, 27–28
Hodges, Will, on impact of 
terminology, 18
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, Sr., on 
speaking, 95
Holmes, Ryan, 148
hospitality
significance of, 170
see also business dining; 
entertaining clients
hot-desking, 89–90
hoteling, 89–90
“Housecleaning, Then Dinner?” 
(Matt Ritchel), 92
“How to Help Millennials Fill the 
Soft Skills Gap” (John 
Rossheim), 43
“humble bragging,” 159–160
humility, 220

INDEX
[  261  ]
IM (instant messaging), 139–140
image, see professional presence
in-person interviews, 39–42
Instagram, 144, 154
instant messaging (IM), 139–140
Internet Slang Dictionary, 138
interviews
dining skills in, 172–173
in-person, 39–42
preparing for, 26–27
red flags in, 28
Skype, 38–39
telephone, 37–38
typical questions in, 34–35
intimate distance, 101
intranet messages, 140–141
introductions, making, 106
job boards, 36
job offers, 40–41
Jobs, Steve, 52
job search, 36–37
job security, 218
job-sharing, 86–87, 90
Jones, Adam, on surveillance, 93
judgment, 220
“Just Look Me in the Eye Already” 
(Sue Shellenbarger), 43
Kastelle, Tim, on flat structures, 
71–72
Kellaway, Lucy, 112
kindness, 220
Kingston, Anne, on Gen Z, 224
Klout Scores, 31–32
Larson, Gloria, on specialty skills, 
220
Lawrence, Brian, on personal 
brands, 51–52
learning, 45
legal environment, generational 
differences in, 11, 12
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and 
Transgender (LGBT) 
community, 17–19
Lincoln, Abraham, on preparing, 25
LinkedIn, 32, 144, 160–162
being searchable on, 150
frequency of postings on, 154
job candidates’ presence on, 31
networking via, 151
presence on, 30
profile and postings on, 32
listening skills, 81, 103, 114–117
Luddites, 29
lunch meetings, 196–197
Lyft, 65
MacKay, Harvey, on silverware,  
167
Malone, Tom, on social skills, 27
management, disrespectful 
behaviors of, 4
Marriott, J. Willard, Jr., 10
Martin, James A., 31
Maslach, Christina, on burnout, 219
Masters of Wine, 200
McGonigal, Kelly, on phones on the 
table, 127
McMillan, Doug, 96–97
meals
business, see business dining; 
entertaining clients
using phones at, 128
Medina, John, on multitasking, 114
“Meet Generation Z” (Sparks & 
Honey), 224
meetings, 77–80
attendees’ responsibilities for, 
79–80

INDEX
[  262  ]
meetings (con’t)
breakfast, 195
coffee, 194–195
lunch, 196–197
organizer’s responsibilities for, 
77–79
when telecommuting, 88
mentoring, 22
messaging, 137–141
acronyms and abbreviations in, 
137–138
group messaging apps for, 132
instant, 139–140
text, 122, 123, 128, 138–139
via company intranet, 140–141
microaggression, 5
micro expressions, 99
Microsoft, 161
Miles, Mike, 4–5
millennials (Generation Y), 10, 12
attire of, 61
brand marketing to, 149
and business dining 
experiences, 170
communication preferences of, 
120
conversational skills of, 97
and email, 133
as interviewers, 44–45
job interview challenges for, 
43–44
and organizational structures, 
71, 72
social skills of, 173
and telephone communication, 
122–123
writing skills of, 133
mobile phones, 127–128
modeling respect, 4, 7–8
monitoring employees, 93–94
Monosson, Debbie, 34
Moran, Gwen, 218
Morgan, Jacob, on workplace 
trends, 218
multitasking, 114
Nadella, Satya, on LinkedIn, 161
Nanda, Richie, on business dining, 
171
National Center on Workforce 
Disability, 19
National Day of Unplugging, 227
netlingo.com, 138
networking
in-person, 150
in job search process, 36
online, 150–151, see also social 
media
Newman, Jordan, on benefits, 92
Newton, Richard, on skills for the 
future, 220
nonverbal communication, 17, 54, 
98–102
of conversational readiness, 
100–101
and distance preferences, 
101–102
eye contact as, 43, 100, 102–104, 
106
facial expressions as, 99, 100, 
102
office arrangements, see 
workspaces
office-sharing, 89–90, 222
older workers, 45
conversational skills of, 97–98
and organizational structures, 
72
and telephone communication, 
123
see also baby boomers; digital 
immigrants; traditionalists

[  263  ]
INDEX
“The One Thing That Determines 
How Successful You Can Be” 
(Jim Rohn), 54
online audit, 147
online brand, 51
online presence, 30, 149–150
online shaming, 148
open-plan offices, 83–86
organizational structure, 70–73
organizations, disrespectful 
behaviors of, 4
Orwell, George, 233
“Overcoming Burnout” (Vicky 
Valet), 219
Overcoming the Golden Rule (Milton 
J. Bennett), 2
part-time employees, 89
“Pass the Word” (Jenna Wortham), 
123
Pearson, Christine, 4
Periscope app, 145
perks, 90–92
Perry, Miranda, on being an ally, 
18–19
personal brand, 49–53, 125, 211, 222, 
see also professional presence
Personal Branding Book (Dan 
Schawbel), 51
personal distance, 101
“person-first language,” 19
persons with disabilities, 14, 19–20
Peters, Tom, 50
Petrow, Steve, 17–18
phone, see telephone 
communications
phubbing, 127
Pinterest, 144, 154
planes, 66–67
Platinum Rule, 2, 141, 237
podcasts, 145
Poppick, Susie, 163
Porath, Christine, 4
Positioning (Al Ries and Jack 
Trout), 50
positive reinforcement, 7
posting intervals, 154
power, body language conveying, 
99
presence
online, 30
on social media, 149–150
see also professional presence
Press, Gill, on big data, 31
privacy
and connectivity, 226
in digital age, 146
and social media use, 150, 152, 
153
and workspace arrangements, 
83–86
privacy settings
on Facebook, 157, 159
on job sites, 36
on social media, 153, 155
private boxes, 209
productivity
with job-sharing, 90
and multitasking, 115
in open-plan offices, 83–84
with teams, 81
with telecommuting, 87
professional distance, 102
professional presence, 47–68
appearance in, 56–61
attitude in, 53–56
and modes of travel, 61–68
and rebranding, 48–53
when dining with clients, 172
and word choice, 112
public distance, 102
public workspaces, 128–129, 
136–137

INDEX
[  264  ]
racial diversity, 14
Raspberry, William, on good and 
bad English, 110
readyprepinterview.com, 39
rebranding, 52–53
Reddit, 144
regional accents, 113
reputation
online, 146–147
personal, see professional 
presence
resilience, 220
respect, 1–23
for age differences, 13
benefits of, 5–6
and brain drain, 21–22
and disrespect, 4–7
for diversity, 13–21
for experience, 9–13
as foundation of civility, 3–4
as hiring criterion, 6
importance of, 235–236
modeling, 4, 7–8
positive reinforcement of, 7
on social media, 151–153
ways of showing, 3
see also civility
restaurant behavior, 128, see also 
business dining
résumés, 35–36, 149
retaining talent, 91–92
retirement, 10, 21, 22
rewards, 7
Ride, Sally, 12
Ries, Al, 50
“right to be forgotten,” 145–146
Ritchel, Matt, on blending life and 
work, 92
Robinson, Jancis
on Masters of Wine, 200
website of, 206
Rohn, Jim, on attitude, 54
Roosevelt, Eleanor, 107
Rosen, Jeffrey, on “right to be 
forgotten,” 146
Rossheim, John, on Gen Y, 43
Rubin, Gretchen, on technology, 143
Rules of Civility (George 
Washington), 231
Sai Baba, on speaking, 51
Schawbel, Dan
on personal branding, 51
on workplace trends, 217–218
Schlumberger, 40
School Culture Rewired (Todd 
Whitaker, and Steve 
Gruenert), 4
Schultz, Howard, 6
sexist behavior, 15–16
sexual harassment, 15
sexual orientation diversity, 14, 
17–19
shaming, online, 148
shared offices, 89–90, 222
Shellenbarger, Sue, on eye contact, 
43
short messaging service (SMS), 138
Singer, Esta
on number of postings, 154
on social media presence, 
149–150
on Twitter, 163–164
Siskind, Barry, 121
Sitt, Joseph, on meetings over 
meals, 171
skillsyouneed.com, 101
Skype interviews, 38–39
Smith, Jacquelyn, on refusing 
positions, 41
SMS (short messaging service), 138
Snapchat, 145

INDEX
[  265  ]
social distance, 102
social media, 143–165
communicating via, 122
connection requests on, 154
digital footprint on, 145–150
first impressions on, 153
Gen Z’s preferences for, 225
good citizenship in, 150–154
as hiring consideration, 29–30
and Klout scores, 31–32
learning rules for, 155–156
mistakes made in, 146–147
overengagement with, 226
and personal brand, 50
posting intervals on, 154
potential dangers of, 147
privacy and sharing features on, 
153
respect on, 151–153
and variety of social sites, 
156–165
social media presence, 149–150
social situations, 191–213
at activities and events, 207–210
with colleagues, 210–213
entertaining clients in, 192–199
knowledge of wine for, 199–206
tipping in, 207
using phones in, 128
see also business dining
social skills, 25–46
generational differences in, 
42–45
hiring for, 27–28
and hiring process, 28–33
and interview process, 33–42, 
173
of millennials, 173
“Sorry, JP Morgan, Smart Guys 
Still Wear Suits” (Robert 
Armstrong), 58
spamming, 159
Sparks & Honey, 224
speakerphones, 129–130
speaking skills, 108–114
conversational, 104–108
and enunciation, 113
and foul language, 113
and grammar, 112
and regional accents, 113
and speech patterns, 109–110
and techspeak, 112–113
and word choice, 111–112
speech patterns, 109–110
sporting events, 208–209
stereotypes, 51
structure, organizational, 70–73
Sue, Derald Wing, on 
microaggression, 5
SumAll, 154
surveillance, 93–94
swearing, 113
Swindoll, Charles, 54
Systrom, Kevin, on Doug McMillan, 
96–97
Talent Bin, 31
taxis, 65
tea, entertaining over, 197
Teachings of Khety, 170
teams, 80–82
technologies
in the future workplace, 217, 218
generational experiences of, 11, 
12
Gen Z’s time spent with, 225
and workspace arrangements, 
83
see also specific types of 
technologies
“Technology vs. Face to Face” 
(Barry Siskind), 121

INDEX
[  266  ]
techspeak, 112–113
telecommuting, 87–89
telephone communications
for business calls, 124–127
with cell or mobile phones, 
127–128
with conference calls/
videoconferences, 130–131
options for, 128–131
skills for, 121–128
on speakerphone, 129–130
and voicemail, 122–123
telephone interviews, 37–38
“Ten Workplace Trends You’ll See 
in 2016” (Dan Schawbel), 
217–218
text messaging, 138–139
acronyms and abbreviations in, 
137–138
generational preferences for, 
122, 123
while driving or walking, 128, 
139
theft
and “cyber casing,” 152–153
employee, 85, 221–222
Think and Grow Rich (Napoleon 
Hill), 50
Thomas, Jon, on résumés, 149
Tiffany & Co., 58
“Time Wasted on Facebook Could 
Be Costing Us Trillions of 
Dollars” (Mark Fahey), 147
tipping, 207
tolerance, 220
tone of voice, 99, 109, 125
traditionalists, 10, 11
and brain drain, 21
communication preferences of, 
120
and telephone communication, 
123
train travel, 66
transportation services, 65
travel
by automobile, 63–64
by bicycle, 67
in carpools, 64–65
on foot, 67–68
modes of, 61–63
personal brand and, 61–68
by plane, 66–67
in taxis or transportation 
services, 65
by train or bus, 66
trends for the future, see workplace 
trends
Trout, Jack, 50
trustworthiness, 117
truths, eternal, 230–234
Twain, Mark, on word choice, 111
tweets, 163
Twitter, 163–165
frequency of postings on, 154
job candidates’ presence on, 30
open-plan offices at, 84
as world-changing technology, 
144
Uber, 65
unconscious bias, 5, 7–8
United Cerebral Palsy, 19
URLs, vanity, 162
“vague booking,” 159
Valet, Vicky, 219
vanity URLs, 162
verbal communication, 99
veterans (former military), 14, 20–21
videoconferences, 131
videos, in Google searches, 147–148
voice, tone of, 99, 109, 125
voicemail, 122–123

INDEX
[  267  ]
Walmart, 96, 97
Walton, Sam, on communication, 97
Washington, George, 231
Waugh, Ashley, 201
Wayne, Teddy, on phone messages, 
122
Weaver, Ryan, on multitasking, 114
Welowski, Kasia, 99
Welowski, Patryk, 99
WeWork, 222
“What Work Will Look Like in 
2025” (Gwen Moran), 218
Whitaker, Todd, 4
“Will YOUR Job Exist in 2025?” 
(Jenny Awford), 218
wine, 198–206
aging of, 203
ordering, 203–205
regions producing, 202–203
types of, 201–202
Winfrey, Oprah, as communicator, 
117
word choice, 111–112
workforce diversity, 14
workplace trends, 216–234
challenges with, 218–220
in connectivity, 225–230
for digital detox, 227–230
and eternal truths, 230–234
and future-proofing your career, 
220–221
and Gen Z characteristics, 
223–225
and new workplace realities, 
92–94
overarching, 217
in physical workspaces, 221–222
work schedules
and business behavior, 86–90
for flextime employees, 88
with job-sharing, 86–87, 90
for parents, 90–91
for part-time employees, 88
for telecommuters, 87
workspaces, 82–86
in common areas, 85–86
in cubicle areas, 82–85
evolution in forms and function 
of, 84
monitoring and surveillance in, 
93–94
in open offices, 83–86
in public spaces, 128–129, 
136–137
and sharing offices, 89–90
for telecommuters, 88
trends for, 221–222
Wortham, Jenna, 123
writing skills
for emails, 135
of millennials, 133
YouTube, 31, 144
Zappos, 7, 71
Zillow, 91
Zuckerberg, Mark
as communicator, 117
on personal challenges, 229–230

269
about the author
ROSANNE J. THOMAS, President, Protocol Advisors, 
Inc. 
Rosanne J. Thomas is a certified Etiquette and Protocol 
Consultant, and founder of Protocol Advisors, Inc., of Boston, 
Massachusetts. Ms. Thomas travels the country presenting 
training programs designed to instill confidence and help 
professionals achieve their personal goals for success. 
Recognized as an expert in her field, Ms. Thomas makes 
frequent appearances on television, radio, and in print. She was 
featured in The Boston Globe’s “Miss Manners on Wall Street,” 
and has contributed to the WCVB TV show Chronicle, as well as 
to WHDH, WBZ, and FOX TV programs. Additionally, she has 
been interviewed by CBS This Morning, MTV, and National 
Public Radio and has been featured in articles by The Wall Street 
Journal, Newsweek Magazine, and Entrepreneur Magazine. Ms. 
Thomas’ professional background also includes eleven years 
with the internationally renowned Tiffany & Co. 

Free Sample Pages from  
The Power of Presence
When some people speak, everyone listens. These are the lucky 
few with “presence”— that subtle magnetic quality that signals 
authority and integrity. But can anyone build a strong, inspiring 
presence? Absolutely. 
The Power of Presence demystifies this elusive quality and 
reveals how to get more of it. As a CEO coach, PR executive, and 
political consultant, author Kristi Hedges has witnessed even 
high-level leaders and executives struggling to connect and 
communicate. Her experiences helped her develop her unique 
I-Presence™ model for inspiring and motivating others. Her 
highly readable and insightful guide, The Power of Presence, is 
filled with practical tools, strategies, exercises, and personal 
stories from years spent coaching leaders.  Read a sample right 
here: 

[  271  ]
CHAPTER 1
What Are You Thinking?
Executive presence begins in your head. It resides in how you think
about yourself, your abilities, your environment, and your potential.
Nearly everyone has an excellent presence; it may simply mani-
fest itself in another part of your life. Perhaps you are charismatic
and conﬁdent as your son’s baseball coach, or you are empathetic
and inspiring to your best friend. You give a bang-up speech at your
college friend’s 40th birthday party, or have just the right words to
encourage your sister.
Most of what you need is right there
in you, waiting to be tapped for your
professional life.
If you are concerned that having ex-
ecutive presence means faking it, con-
sider yourself reassured. The kind of
presence that attracts other people to
you, makes your team want to move mountains for you, and propels
you ahead is the opposite of fake. It is pure authenticity—being
more of the person you already are, without the mental subterfuge
that gets in the way.
Intentionality is the driver 
of presence. All the commu-
nication tips in the world
won’t make up for your
thought patterns.

Free Sample from The Power of Presence
[  272  ]
I-Presence starts with “intentional” presence, because it is the
driver. There are no tips or tricks that will make up for a lack of
intentionality. In fact, sometimes tips can make things worse.
Many executives, fresh from tip-laden training in public speaking,
find themselves even more nervous and less authentic than before
because it feels forced. They have all the same feelings and anxieties
about speech giving, but now they are also trying to remember to
stand this way or gesticulate that way. You can buy an expensive
car with all the latest features and a GPS, but if you don’t know
the address of your destination, you won’t get where you want 
to go.
You need to pick up the right intentions and let go of what’s in
the way.
Intentional Is as Intentional Is Perceived
You may be thinking, “Isn’t every functioning professional inten-
tional? If I weren’t, I couldn’t keep my job.” Well, yes, you’re right.
And I bet you can point to many times in your day when you aren’t
as thoughtful about your actions as you could be—especially as it
relates to your presence. And we can easily call out this tendency in
other people, too.
Let me take a moment to describe what I mean by being inten-
tional: I deﬁne having an intentional presence as understanding
how you want to be perceived and subsequently communicating in
a manner so that you will be perceived the way you want. It means
aligning your thoughts with your words and actions. And it requires
a keen understanding of your true, authentic self, as well as your
impact on others.
There are different kinds of intentions. Some are broad and rel-
atively stable, such as when you declare, “I want to be a visionary
leader.” Other intentions are situational, such as, “In this strategy
session, I must be the catalyst for change.” We’ll discuss various
types of intentions in the chapters in Part 1, and how to put them
into practice in your life.
Trust that intentions change your presence. I see it every day.
You will, too.

Free Sample from The Power of Presence
[  273  ]
You Are What You Think, Even When 
You’re Not Paying Attention
In January 2001, Harvard Business Review featured an article by Jim
Loehr and Tony Schwartz labeling today’s executives as corporate
athletes.1 The article addressed how to bring an athletic training
methodology to the development of leaders. This approach makes
tremendous sense on a number of levels, and especially in terms of
mental conditioning.
Anyone who follows sports knows the importance of an athlete’s
focus. We all admired Michael Phelps at the Beijing 2008 Olympics
as he listened to his iPod stone-faced, concentrating, before he dove
into the water. We respect an athlete’s ability to use positive visuali-
zation and intention, and readily acknowledge its beneﬁt.
Somehow, though, outside of athletics such rituals seem unnec-
essary or even silly. It reminds us of Al Franken’s famous Saturday
Night Live character Stuart Smalley saying to himself in the mirror,
“I’m good enough, I’m smart enough, and doggone it, people like
me.” Taking the time to have the discussion with yourself about
what you want to accomplish with your presence may seem more
like pop psychology/self-help than hard-core executive training.
Guess again. Taking the time to ﬁgure out what you want your
presence to convey is a critical and powerful ﬁrst step. That is the
image of yourself you want to keep in mind as you do your own
dive into the water. It’s your mental aim.
The Wrong Internal Conversation: Why I’m a 
Disaster at Golf (and You Might Be, Too)
As you develop your mental aim, you also need to determine what
conversation is currently in your head and how it may need to
change. Even when you aren’t paying attention, your internal con-
versation is always happening.
Scott Eblin, author of The Next Level, convincingly describes in-
tention as a “swing thought,” likening it to the last thing golfers think
before their club strikes the ball.2 (Eblin is a coaching colleague from
Georgetown, and I have to thank him for the original comparison of

Free Sample from The Power of Presence
[  274  ]
intention to athletic focus—a common reference that’s helpful for so
many people to think about.)
For anyone who has played golf, you readily get the swing-
thought idea. And even if you haven’t, you can probably understand
how hitting that tiny ball dead-solid perfect requires a whole lot of
mental focus. It’s the make-or-break factor.
When I was in my early thirties, I decided to learn golf. I took
lessons, got the right clubs, and practiced diligently. At the driving
range with the pro, I wasn’t half bad. However, I was terrible when
I got on the course. Competitive and averse to failure, I was self-
conscious about how I played compared to others around me. I’d
choke when I got to the tee and have an all-around miserable game.
When I was paired with other golfers, it got even worse. Still I kept
trying, remaining furious at myself for hitting well in practice and
then falling apart on the course. After a few years with no improve-
ment, I gave it up.
My golf-playing days were before I was a coach. At the time, I
didn’t have the ability to fully understand what was happening.
When I got up to the tee, my swing thought was literally, “Don’t
embarrass yourself.” Is it any wonder that I was such a disaster?
Negative swing thoughts are alive and well off the golf course. I
hear them from clients all the time, either stated or unstated. They
include:
— I can’t speak in public.
— I’m not a people person.
— I’ll appear self-promoting.
— I’m an introvert and can’t network well.
— I’m just not good in these situations.
— I don’t have what it takes to play the ofﬁce politics game.
Any of these pretexts sound familiar? If this is where you are
placing your mental focus, you can bet it’s showing up in your pres-
ence, and maybe even screaming.
Neuroleadership is discussed in-depth in Chapter 9. One of the
main ﬁndings of those studying in this ﬁeld is that our intentions ac-
tually shape how the human brain functions. The intentions that we
hold in our head, either positive or negative, create mental shortcuts

Free Sample from The Power of Presence
[  275  ]
that become a veritable path of least re-
sistance. The more we think something,
the easier it is for our mind to process
it. That’s why it’s critical to be fully
aware of any negative thoughts block-
ing your progress. I’ve included an ex-
ercise (see sidebar) to help you “uncover your negative thoughts.”
Uncover Your Negative Thoughts
Find a quiet space to contemplate what you believe to be true about
your presence. Write down any negative thoughts that may hold you
back.
• What do you currently think about your own executive presence
and your ability to affect it?
• What assumption of yours is getting in the way or holding you
back, and why? How long have you felt this about yourself?
• Try on the idea that you already possess the presence you seek
in the various areas of your life. What’s your reaction?
Knowing what our limiting thoughts are, and replacing them
intentionally, is the only way to create a different possibility. Even-
tually, the possibility becomes the new and improved shortcut.
How Intention Plays in the Course of Work
A few years ago, I was coaching Alan S., a senior executive at a
Fortune 500 ﬁnance company. He was frustrated because he felt
that with his experience and background, he should be perceived as
a high-performer with the C-suite in his grasp. Yet he was passed
over for a promotion. Believing his communication style might be
to blame, Alan hired me as his executive coach to work on it.
As I do with most engagements, I started out by speaking with
Alan’s colleagues to get an accurate picture of how he was perceived
by other people. (See Chapter 4 for how to conduct your own presence
The intentions we hold in
our head create mental
shortcuts that become a
path of least resistance.

Free Sample from The Power of Presence
[  276  ]
audit.) Their take was that Alan was rarely positive about other peo-
ple’s suggestions. They felt that since he was overly critical, it was best
to avoid him. He had great skills, they said, but it was easier to stay
clear of him than to solicit his help. Who had the time in a busy day to
be dragged down?
At ﬁrst, Alan bristled at this feedback. He thought of himself as
a pragmatist, but overall a positive person. After we delved into his
thinking patterns, it became clear that more often than not, his prag-
matism caused him to look for what could go wrong in a situation.
Only after debunking every negative would he entertain any positive.
We also assessed situations where he had face time with his colleagues
and corporate ofﬁcers: executive team meetings. Because there were
so many voices competing during meetings, he tended to hang in the
back of the room because he didn’t see his contribution as additive
(pragmatism again). When I asked what his thoughts were in the
meetings, he realized his internal dialogue was, “Don’t say anything
stupid.” Sometimes he even scowled without knowing it, either in
reaction to a comment or his own thoughts.
Not surprisingly, Alan was unintentionally making an impres-
sion, even though he believed that being in the background would
keep him from making one. As I came to learn, he was actually a
very caring person, but most of his colleagues didn’t venture close
enough to learn that about him.
After diagnosing what wasn’t working, we began to create some
new intentions that felt right to Alan. To develop them, we looked at
leaders he respected and wanted to emulate, both inside the company
and in his personal life. He stated a personal intention that he wanted
to be seen as capable, positive, and helpful—someone his colleagues
actively sought out. Next, we began determining when his stated in-
tention counteracted his actions. One was obvious: He needed to
smile more. He also made a conscious
decision to hold back reservations when
others brought ideas to him; in fact, he
would even encourage what was good
about their suggestions. He began to
drop by people’s ofﬁces, just to talk or offer help. And he completely
changed his role in executive team meetings by sitting near the middle
of the room and making a point to contribute something encouraging
in every session.
An intentional presence
 creates the desired emo -
tional reaction in others.

Free Sample from The Power of Presence
[  277  ]
We used the exercise shown in Figure 1-1 to recognize and
change Alan’s intentions. This may be a good starting point for you
as well to begin noticing how intention plays in your life.
Great Intentions Create Great Reactions
Executive presence at its core is about creating an impression on
others. You want your presence to propel you ahead in your work
life by getting your desired reaction. Every day is a bombardment
of opportunities to persuade, inﬂuence, motivate, attract, or inspire
others.
Being intentional about your presence means that you must
play in the realm of emotions. Humans are emotional beings, and
we process information on emotional terms. Think about how you
take in the presence of other people. They create an emotional reac-
tion in you. It could be comfort, disdain, fear, excitement, or curios-
ity. If you think of your favorite boss or leader, you are very likely to
conjure up emotional terms to describe that person.
With your presence, you are trying to marry your intent with
another person’s perception. This is where authenticity plays a big
role. It’s nearly impossible to make another person feel excitement,
for example, if you aren’t excited; likewise, you won’t bring out
someone else’s conﬁdence if you aren’t conﬁdent. (Many of us have
endured enough halfhearted corporate pep rallies to know how in-
authentic they are.)
Figure 1-1.  Exercise to Observe Intention.
For one week, notice what you are 
thinking right before you enter 
situations where you need to be 
on your game or want to have a 
powerful impact. Is your mental 
aim constructive or destructive?
Determine what you would like for 
your presence to communicate,
such as confidence, capability,
integrity, patience, etc. 
For the second week, try on this 
new thought before each of the 
same meetings. 
What changes do you see?

Free Sample from The Power of Presence
[  278  ]
The Story of Steve and Stan: An Internet Sensation
Macworld 2007, the huge conference for Apple computer and elec-
tronics devotees, provides a perfect example and an unexpected
cautionary tale of a missed intention.
Each year, Macworld draws about 20,000 attendees fiercely
devoted to all things Apple and immersed in its unique culture set
by the late CEO Steve Jobs. It’s also where Jobs delivers the
keynote debuting new Apple products and creating multimillion-
dollar buzz overnight. Jobs is known for his electric presenting
style. In video of the event, he takes the stage with a mix of humor,
excitement, authenticity, and just the right touch of mischief. In
his trademark black turtleneck, jeans, and sneakers, he looks
casual and relaxed. He talks to the audience as if they are old
friends swapping stories. You can sense the energy in the room lift
when he walks in. The audience can’t wait to be inspired by the
visionary Steve Jobs.
Often, Jobs had other CEOs from partner companies join him
onstage. They knew what the audience expected. They matched his
enthusiastic tone and casual dress and understood that it was their
job to keep up the energy level. After all, part of Macworld is the ex-
perience of being caught up in—and identifying with—the excite-
ment of the Apple brand. Apple equals cutting edge, and you’re
cutting edge for being there.
A funny thing happened in 2007, the year Jobs revealed the ﬁrst-
generation iPhone with Apple’s distribution partner AT&T. As usual,
Jobs was magnetic. Unveiling the iPhone to a hushed crowd, he gar-
nered cheers as he described the functionality. The crowd was ripe
for more. Jobs introduced Stan Sigman, then CEO of Cingular,
AT&T’s wireless division. When Sigman came onstage, it was appar-
ent that he looked different: He was dressed in a polished suit more
appropriate for a boardroom than this conference hall with a rowdy
crowd at Macworld. Still, the audience gave him the beneﬁt of the
doubt as he spoke enthusiastically, from the heart, about the ﬁrst time
he saw the iPhone prototypes.
Then it all fell apart. Sigman reached in his pocket, brought out

Free Sample from The Power of Presence
[  279  ]
cue cards, and proceeded to read for seven of the longest minutes in
the history of Macworld. His comments were disconnected and
uninspired, sounding as though they came straight from the boiler-
plate of an AT&T press release. He looked physically stiff and un-
comfortable. While we can’t be sure that he didn’t have an intention
for his talk, he certainly didn’t convey one. He overlooked the emo-
tional reaction his presence should have had on the audience, and
instead left everyone feeling bored, at best, and at worst, disappointed
that Apple had picked such a dull partner.
The Stan Sigman experience became an Internet sensation im-
mediately. Bloggers wrote about it, audience members posted com-
ments, and journalists picked it up. YouTube videos went viral. He
became the poster child for poor executive presence.
I show this video frequently in workshops where people are
stunned that someone at Stan Sigman’s level would present so badly.
But it is about more than presentation skills. Sigman rose through the
ranks of telecommunications and built a hugely successful company.
He knows how to present. He failed to determine the emotion he
wanted to impart and then set the intention that would inspire that
emotion in others. His presence should have conveyed excitement,
creativity, and innovation. If he had succeeded, 20,000 people would
have been a lot happier. It was an anemic beginning, unbeﬁtting a
culture-changing product.
Build a Strong Intention (or How to Be More 
Steve than Stan)
Intention has the power to work for us or against us, so why not
cultivate it for good? In this book I discuss cultivating two types of
intention:
— Your personal presence brand
— Situational intentions
Taking the time to consider, develop, and use both kinds of in-
tention have far-reaching implications for your presence.

Free Sample from The Power of Presence
[  280  ]
Your Personal Presence Brand: The Big Intention
Your personal presence brand is what you want your presence to
convey overall. It shows your core values and beliefs. It reﬂects your
personality. Forward-looking and far-reaching, it is how you aspire
to present yourself at work, and potentially in the rest of your life as
well. Your personal presence brand is backed by your actions, which
I discuss in detail in Chapter 2. Like any brand, your personal pres-
ence intention doesn’t change on a whim. It’s relatively static, build-
ing over time. Ideally, it’s an internal touchstone, a reminder of how
to present the best version of you.
The sidebar “Determine Your Personal Presence Brand” contains
an exercise to help you cultivate yours.
Determine Your Personal Presence Brand
1. Fill out the following chart. Start with whichever column is easiest
or go back and forth as necessary.
Qualities I admire/
What I want my presence 
value in others
to convey
2. Look at the column of qualities you want to convey and condense
or rank them into a top 5 list.
3. Reﬂect on your list. What do these qualities have in common? Try
to create a sound bite, acronym, or archetype for these qualities.
For example, “Jack Welch of the education industry.” Also abbre-
viate as much as possible: “Credible and Compelling; Visionary
and Vocal—C2V2,” or “Catalyst for innovation—CFI,” or “Pinch
hitter for critical programs.” It can be anything you can keep in
your thoughts—all that matters is that it has meaning and reso-
nance for you.

Free Sample from The Power of Presence
[  281  ]
Once you have your personal presence brand ﬁgured out, keep
it top of mind. Post it on your desk or on your computer desktop if
that helps. Return to it at times when you need to communicate
strategically, exhibit presence, or even make an important decision.
It is an always-available reminder of what you want to reinforce
about yourself to others.
Your Situational Intention: “In the Moment” Calibrations
So, your personal presence brand—and the intentions that drive it—
remains steady. But you are constantly calibrating your situational
intentions depending on the circumstances at hand. And while situ-
ational intentions should build and never detract from your personal
presence brand, different situations require different actions. A
leader’s personal presence brand may be “inspirational visionary,”
but that’s going to be applied differently in a sales pitch than in a cor-
porate meeting to announce a restructuring.
Your situational intention is about creating a desired impact.
Rarely is it a one-size-ﬁts-all scenario. I mentioned that people process
information and events in emotional terms, and often this is a good
place to focus your situational intention. Consider what emotion you
want to invoke in your audience and you are generally close, if not
spot on, to what your intention should be.
Craft a Situational Intention
Before your next communications event, answer these questions:
1. How do you want your audience to feel about this exchange?
2. What emotion do you need to embody?
The answers to these two questions outline your situational inten-
tion. (Hint: Because you need to embody what you want to impart, the
answers are generally the same.)
The exercise I’ve outlined in the sidebar “Craft a Situational In-
tention” isn’t the only approach that will work, but it is one of the

Free Sample from The Power of Presence
[  282  ]
most effective. Again, just as in the personal presence brand, it is
less about specific verbiage or semantics and more about what cre-
ates the mind frame for you. A former workshop participant of
mine once told me that she’d applied a situational intention of “We
deserve to win!” and landed a multimillion-dollar client. You can’t
argue with that!
Now Try This: The Intentionality Frame
Typically, employees are most likely to interact with leaders at meet-
ings. Meetings are, in fact, a fertile training ground to learn to use in-
tentions effectively. And because of the repeated exposure (most
meetings occur on a regular basis), the rewards are huge.
The types of meetings you attend (e.g., small groups, board
meetings, sales calls) may be different depending on your position,
but the dynamics are the same. Many of us overlook the importance
of meetings. Some of us even approach them with disdain because
they get in the way of “real” work. Actually, meetings are your best
chance to make a positive impression on others. Learning how to
contribute effectively, manage your points adeptly, and display con-
ﬁdence are part of moving up the ranks of any  company. Careers
are made (and waylaid) from interactions in meetings.
For many executives, meetings are also the places where impor-
tant ideas are communicated and where other people assess their
thought patterns and strategic ability. All eyes are watching—and
determining what the person speaking is made of. Here’s a tool
called the Intentionality Frame to help you align your intentions to
your contributions in meetings. The Intentionality Frame can be
adapted to practically any situation.
Let’s say, for example, that you need to have a meeting with an
underperforming team that you supervise. You want to learn the
root cause of the performance problem so that you can correct the
issue. It helps if you have a personal presence brand you can reﬂect
upon ﬁrst. Then you know to set a situational intention for how you
want to come across and what your presence needs to convey. For
the sake of this discussion, let’s make your situational intention
“gravity with openness.” Your situational intention goes in the
center of the frame, as shown in Figure 1-2. Normally when we as-
semble the points we want to make, we do it either in our head or in

Free Sample from The Power of Presence
[  283  ]
a vertical list. Instead, use the Intentionality Frame to make your
points along the outer edge of the frame. If your intention is gravity
with openness, your points around the frame might be (1) there’s a
clear issue though the cause is uncertain, (2) let’s focus on solutions
rather than blame, (3) it’s important for everyone to commit to change
from this meeting . . . and so on as you go around the frame. When
you use this tool, your points stay in greater alignment with your in-
tention. It’s a visual trick—a mental reminder—to communicate your
intention. You can also see that if your initial reaction were to start with
some version of “If you don’t improve performance, there’ll be serious
consequences,” it would not support your intention. That’s too heavy
on gravity with no room for openness.
I often use the Intentionality Frame to help people have tough
conversations. I start by having them write lists of points they want
to make to the other person. Then they
apply the Intentionality Frame. It’s al-
ways amazing to me how much their
points change! That’s why this tool is
useful for keeping conversations fo-
cused, on track, and close to the goal.
Again, it demonstrates the power of intentions.
The Intentionality Frame can be used for public speaking, execu-
tive brieﬁngs, one-on-ones, and sales meetings—virtually any type of
human  interaction.
Meetings are a fertile train-
ing ground for trying inten-
tional communications.
Figure 1-2.  Intentionality Frame.

Free Sample from The Power of Presence
[  284  ]
You’ve Got the Power of Intention, Now Use It
You started this book with an idea that you wanted to strengthen
your executive presence. After reading this chapter, hopefully you
are beginning to see how negative thoughts can hold you back and
how setting a positive intention enhances your presence. It’s a mental
game, but as with any game, it takes practice. Ideally, you will have
a consistent and overarching intention for your leadership style, as
well as an ability to create situational intentions. It’s critical to stop,
determine the reaction you want to elicit, and set the right intention.
In the next chapter we’ll discuss how to support your intention
through your body language and actions.
Key Takeaways from Chapter 1
1.
Being intentional about your presence is similar to having an
athlete’s mental focus.
2.
Uncover any negative thoughts you have about your presence
that are getting in your way. Know what’s playing just below
your consciousness.
3.
Set a positive intention for the kind of presence you want to
convey overall. That’s your personal presence brand. For inspi-
ration, consider what leaders had an inﬂuence on you.
4.
Set unique intentions for situations where you interact with
others. Your intention should match the desired reaction from
others, usually in emotional terms.
5.
Use meetings as an effective training ground for establishing an
intentional executive presence.
Ideas I Want to Try from Chapter 1:

Other Best-Sellers from AMACOM:
Lead with a Story: A Guide to Crafting Business 
Narratives That Captivate, Convince, and Inspire
Stories do much more than entertain—they actually engage your 
audience’s brains, creating an experience in which they learn a 
lesson, share a belief, and envision results as if they were there. 
This enormously practical and inspiring book lets you in on one 
of the most important leadership techniques that exists, and 
shows you how to use it naturally and effortlessly in every area 
of your work. 
People Styles at Work . . . and Beyond 
The book reveals the strengths and weaknesses of four different 
people styles, providing practical techniques that work both on 
the job and off. Now including all new material on personal 
relationships, parenting, and more, this is the ultimate guide 
anyone can use to enhance even the most difficult relationships. 
Just Listen: Discover the Secret to Getting Through to 
Absolutely Anyone 
Barricades between people become barriers to success, progress, 
and happiness; so getting through is not just a fine art, but a 
crucial skill. Just Listen gives you the techniques and confidence 

excuse me
 [  286  ] 
to approach the unreachable people in your life, and turn 
frustrating situations into productive outcomes and rewarding 
relationships.
Talking to Crazy: How to Deal with the Irrational and 
Impossible People in Your Life
Difficult people can make life hard, but a select few can make it 
hell. The boss with nonsensical demands. The spouse who 
explodes at nothing. The overly emotional coworker, hostile 
neighbor, or friend who frequently bursts into tears. Top-ranked 
psychiatrist and communication expert Mark Goulston unlocks 
the mysteries of the irrational mind, and explains how faulty 
thinking patterns develop. His keen insights are matched by a 
set of counterintuitive strategies proven to defuse crazy 
behavior, along with scripts, examples, and exercises that teach 
you how to use them.
Ask More: The Power of Questions to Open Doors, 
Uncover Solutions, and Spark Change
Ask More puts questions at the center of every conversation. 
Author Frank Sesno, an Emmy Award–winning journalist, has 
spent decades questioning global leaders and everyday people 
alike. He draws on his formidable interviewing skills to break 
down the art of inquiry into eleven categories of questions, each 
designed for a different purpose. Ask More recounts dozens of 
stories of people who have used questions to discover and excel. 
Whether you’re trying to manage a project, solve a problem, or 
confront an adversary, these stories are inspiring. They show 
how to ask, what to listen for, and how to link your questions to 
your goals. 

AMACOM  Books 
Our Mission
We help you lead a more satisfying and successful life through 
books that drive professional and personal growth.
Our Books
We specialize in business books, but we also publish titles in 
health, fitness, parenting, and popular psychology, because you 
don’t leave life behind when you go to the office.
Our Authors
We publish the people you trust,  from business legends  
Brian Tracy and Phillip Kotler, to life experts Mark Goulston 
and Michelle Segar.

Great skills drive great performance. When true talent
transformation takes place, the possibilities for better
business outcomes are almost unlimited.
American Management Association is widely recognized as a world leader in
professional development. We support the goals of individuals, organizations, and
government agencies with a complete range of talent transformation solutions.
Our flexible training fits your learning preferences, your busy schedule—and your
ongoing career and business needs.
Learn more at www.amanet.org or call 1-800-262-9699
Don’t just train—
transform
n  Learn with AMA anytime, anywhere.
n  Be part of a transformative and unique learning experience.
n  AMA helps you solve the problems you’re facing now.
n  Maintain your competitive edge.

Bulk discounts available. For details visit:
www.amacombooks.org/go/specialsales
Or contact special sales:
Phone: 800-250-5308
Email: specialsls@amanet.org
View all the AMACOM titles at: www.amacombooks.org
American Management Association: www.amanet.org
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in 
regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the 
publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional 
service. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a 
competent professional person should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Thomas, Rosanne J., author.
Title: Excuse me : the survival guide to modern business etiquette / Rosanne 
   J. Thomas.
Description: New York : AMACOM, [2017] | Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016059931| ISBN 9780814437919 (hardcover) | ISBN 
   9780814437926 (ebook)
Subjects:  LCSH: Business ethics.
Classification: LCC HF5387 .T476 2017 | DDC 395.5/2--dc23 LC record available 
at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016059931
© 2017 Rosanne J. Thomas
All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
This publication may not be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in whole or in part, in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written 
permission of AMACOM, a division of American Management Association, 1601 
Broadway, New York, NY 10019.
The scanning, uploading, or distribution of this book via the Internet or any other 
means without the express permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable 
by law. Please purchase only authorized electronic editions of this work and do 
not participate in or encourage piracy of copyrighted materials, electronically or 
otherwise. Your support of the author’s rights is appreciated.
About AMA
American Management Association (www.amanet.org) is a world leader in talent 
development, advancing the skills of individuals to drive business success. Our 
mission is to support the goals of individuals and organizations through a complete 
range of products and services, including classroom and virtual seminars, 
webcasts, webinars, podcasts, conferences, corporate and government solutions, 
business books, and research. AMA’s approach to improving performance 
combines experiential learning—learning through doing—with opportunities for 
ongoing professional growth at every step of one’s career journey.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

