Experience 
Design
A Curated Collection of Chapters 
from the O'Reilly Design Library

©2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. D1813
Short. Smart. 
Seriously useful.
Free ebooks and reports from O’Reilly 
at oreil.ly/fr-design
Data-Informed 
Product Design
Pamela Pavliscak
Laura Klein
Design for  
Voice Interfaces
Building Products that Talk
Free ebooks, reports and other articles​ on UX design,
data-informed design, and design for the IoT.
Get insights from industry experts and stay current
with the latest developments from O’Reilly.

	  
Experience Design 
A Curated Collection of Chapters  
from the O'Reilly Design Library 
As a designer, you know that continuously learning about the 
latest methodologies, tools, and techniques is critical to your 
success. O’Reilly Design books provide experienced designers with 
the knowledge and guidance to continue to build on your skillset. 
Whether you’re interested in designing for Internet of Things (IoT), 
adopting Lean UX, or understanding the principles for creating 
user experiences in a multi-device ecosystem, there’s something 
in this sample for you. We’ve selected titles from published and 
forthcoming books that span Process (Lean UX), Strategy, Data-
Informed Design, Designing for IoT, Branding, Behavioral 
Economics, Designing Across Devices, and more. 
	  
	  
	  
 
	  

	  
For more information on current and forthcoming Design 
content, check out www.oreilly.com/design 
 
Mary Treseler 
Strategic Content Lead 
mary@oreilly.com 
 

	  
Designing Connected Products 
Available in Early Release:  http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920031109.do 
Chapter 1. What’s Different About UX for the Internet of Things? 
Chapter 8. Interface and Interaction Design 
UX Strategy 
Available in Early Release: http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920032090.do 
Chapter 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy 
 
Designing with Data 
Available soon: http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920026228.do 
Chapter 1. Data-Driven vs Data-Informed Design: Does It Matter? 
Chapter 4. The Culture of Data 
Lean Branding 
Available now: http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920032106.do 
Chapter 3. Brand Strategy 
Lean UX 
Available now: http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920021827.do 
Chapter 5. MVPs and Experiments 
Designing for Behavior Change 
Available now: http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920030201.do 
Chapter 3. Strategies for Behavior Change 
Designing Multi-Device Experiences 
Available now: http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920027089.do 
Chapter 1. An Ecosystem of Connected Devices 
Chapter 3. The Continuous Design Approach 
Designing for Emerging Technologies 
Available soon: http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920030676.do 
Chapter 1. Designing for Emerging Technologies 
Chapter 2. Intelligent Materials: Designing Material Behavior 
 


Chapter	  1.	  	  What's	  different	  about	  UX	  design	  for	  the	  internet	  of	  
things?	  
Chapter	  2.	  	  Things:	  the	  technology	  of	  connected	  devices	  
Chapter	  3.	  	  Networks:	  the	  technology	  of	  connectivity	  
Chapter	  4.	  	  Product/service	  definition	  and	  strategy	  
Chapter	  5.	  	  Understanding	  Users	  
Chapter	  6.	  	  Translating	  research	  into	  product	  definitions	  
Chapter	  7.	  	  Embedded	  Device	  Design	  
Chapter	  8.	  	  Interface	  Design	  
Chapter	  9.	  	  Cross-­‐Device	  Interactions	  and	  Interusability	  
Chapter	  10.	  	  Key	  interactions	  
Chapter	  11.	  	  Designing	  with	  Data	  
Chapter	  12.	  	  Evaluation	  and	  Iterative	  Design	  methods	  
Chapter	  13.	  	  Interoperability	  
Chapter	  14.	  	  Designing	  Complex	  Interoperable	  Products	  and	  
Services	  
Chapter	  15.	  	  Responsible	  IoT	  Design	  
	  

1 
What’s different about UX for the 
internet of things?  
Introduction 
UX design and human-computer interaction emerged in a world of desktop 
computing. But our experience of computing has changed radically in the last 10-15 
years. Many of our interactions now take place on mobile phones, tablets, e-readers 
and smart TVs. And it’s common to use one service across multiple devices with 
different form factors (figure 1-1). 
Figure 1-1: BBC iPlayer can be used on connected TVs, games consoles, set top 
boxes, smartphones, tablets and desktop computers. 
We’re still figuring out the best ways to design for new devices and experiences. 
Interactions can happen in a wide variety of contexts, especially for mobile devices. 
They can happen on a variety of scales, such TV UIs (user interfaces) viewed from 
10 feet away. Even academic researchers in HCI (human-computer interaction) have 
published relatively few papers on cross-platform design. 
Designing for IoT raises all the challenges of cross-platform design, and more.  
An obvious difference is the much wider variety of device form factors, many 
without screens (e.g. figure 1-2). 
Figure 1-2: the Lockitron connected door lock is one of a huge number of connected 
devices with no screen. 
Less obvious differences include the effects of many IoT devices being only 
intermittently connected. And even a simple task, like unlocking a door, can quickly 
become complex when it forms part of a system spanning many interconnected 
devices, services and users. 
IoT is still a technically driven field. At the time of writing, the UX of many IoT 
products is some way off the level expected of mature consumer products. For 

example, the UK government commissioned a study on the usability of connected 
heating systems in late 2013. They found that none of the 5 major connected heating 
devices on the market in the UK offered a good UX1. 
In this chapter, we begin by introducing the differentiators that make UX design for 
IoT a new and challenging domain. 
This chapter introduces: 
• 
What’s different about UX for IoT  
• 
A design model for IoT 
It considers the following issues: 
• 
The challenges of distributing functionality across multiple devices (see page 3) 
• 
How the focus of the UX is increasingly in the service (see page 3) 
• 
Whether we are ready for the real world to start behaving like the internet (see 
page 3) 
• 
How the ways devices connect to the network affects the UX (see page 4) 
• 
How multiple devices create more complexity for the user to understand (see 
page 5) 
• 
How controlling distributed devices is similar to programming (see page 6) 
• 
The problems of having many different technical standards (see page 7) 
• 
How what seem like simple systems can rapidly become complex (see page 7) 
• 
How data is at the core of many IoT services (see page 8) 
• 
The layers of UX thinking required to create a successful IoT product: from UI 
and interaction design all the way down to the platform (see page 9) 
How is UX for IoT different? 
Designing for IoT comes with a bunch of challenges that will be new to designers 
accustomed to pure digital services. How tricky these challenges prove will depend 
on: 
• 
The maturity of the technology you’re working with 
• 
The context of use or expectations your users have of the system 
• 
The complexity of your service (e.g. how many devices the user has to 
interact with). 
 
                                                           
1 Amberlight Partners for the Department of Energy and Climate Change, 2013: ‘Usability 
testing of smarter heating controls’. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/266220/usabilit
y_testing_smarter_heating_controls.pdf 

Below is a summary of the key differences between UX for IoT and UX for digital 
services. Some of these are a direct result of the technology of embedded devices and 
networking. We’ll explain the technology issues in more detail in chapters 2 and 3. 
But even if you are already familiar with embedded device and networking 
technology, you might not have considered the way it shapes the UX. 
 
Functionality can be distributed across multiple devices with different 
capabilities 
IoT devices come in a wide variety of form factors with varying input and output 
capabilities. Some may have screens, such as heating controllers or washing 
machines (see figure 1.3). Some may have other ways of communicating with us 
(such as flashing LEDs or sounds) (see figure 1.4).  
 
Figure 1-3: The Honeywell evohome connected radiator valve has a basic LCD 
screen 
 
Figure 1-4: The GlowCaps connected pill bottle lid uses light and sound notifications 
to remind the user to take medication 
 
Some may have no input or output capabilities at all and are unable to tell us directly 
what they are doing. Interactions may be handled by web or smartphone apps. 
Despite the differences in form factors, users need to feel as if they are using a 
coherent service rather than a bunch of disjointed UIs. It’s important to consider not 
just the usability of individual UIs but interusability: distributed user experience 
across multiple devices (e.g. figure 1-5).  This is explained further in chapter 10: 
Cross-device Interactions and Interusability. 
 
Figure 1-5: The Nest thermostat can be controlled by the on-device UI, a smartphone 
app or a web app 
 
The locus of the user experience may be in the service 
Although there’s a tendency to focus on the novel devices in IoT, much of the 
information processing or data storage often depends on the internet service. This 
means that the service around a connected device is often just as critical to the 
service, if not more so, than the device itself. For example, the London Oyster 
travelcard is often thought of as the focus of the payment service. But the Oyster 
service can be used without a card at all via an NFC enabled smartphone or bank 
card (figure 1-6). The card is just an ‘avatar’ for the service (to borrow a phrase from 
the UX expert Mike Kuniavsky)2. For more on service business models see chapter 
4: Product/service definition and strategy. Service design is covered in chapter 7. 
 
                                                           
2 Mike Kuniavsky, ‘Smart Things: Ubiquitous Computing User Experience Design’, Morgan 
Kaufmann 2010 

Figure 1-6: The London Oyster service can be used with an NFC phone or bank card 
instead of an Oyster card. 
We don’t expect internet-like failures from the real world 
It’s frustrating when a web page is slow to download or a Skype call fails. But we 
accept that these irritations are just part of using the internet. By contrast, real world 
objects respond to us immediately and reliably.  
 
When we interact with a physical device over the internet, that interaction is subject 
to the same latency and reliability issues as any other internet communication. So 
there’s the potential for delays in response and for our requests and commands to go 
missing altogether. This could make the real world start to feel very broken. Imagine 
if you turned your lights on and they took 2 minutes to respond, or failed to come on 
at all. 
 
In theory, there could be other unexpected consequences of things adopting internet-
like behaviors. In the Warren Ellis story ‘The Lich House’3 a woman is unable to 
shoot an intruder in her home: her gun cannot contact the internet for the 
authentication that would allow her to fire it. This might seem far-fetched, but we 
already have objects that require authentication, such as Zipcars (figure 1-7). 
 
For more information on networking and its impact on UX, see chapter 3 on 
Networks. 
 
Figure 1-7: When you book a Zipcar online, the service sends details of the 
reservation to the car. Swiping your card authenticates you as the person who made 
the booking. 
 
IoT is largely asynchronous 
When we design for desktops, mobiles and tablets, we tend to assume that they will 
have constant connectivity. Well-designed mobile apps handle network outages 
gracefully, but tend to treat them as exceptions to normal functioning. We assume 
that the flow of interactions will be reasonably smooth, even across devices. If we 
make a change on one device (such as deleting an email), it will quickly propagate 
across any other devices we use with the same service. 
 
 
 
Many IoT devices run on batteries, and need to conserve electricity. Maintaining 
network connections uses a lot of power, so they only connect intermittently. This 
means that parts of the system can be out of sync with each other, creating 
discontinuities in the user experience. For example, your heating is set to 19C. You 
use the heating app on your phone to turn it up to 21C. But it takes a couple of 
minutes for your battery powered heating controller to go online to check for new 
instructions. During this time, the phone says 21C, and the controller says 19C 
                                                           
3 http://www.iftf.org/fanfutures/ellis/ 

(figure 1-8). 
 
Figure 1-8: schematic of heating system with app and controller giving different 
status information. 
 
For more on the technical background see chapters 2 and 3 on Devices and 
Networks. For more on the design impact see chapter 10: Cross device interactions 
and interusability. 
 
Code can run in many more places 
The configuration of devices and code that makes a system work is called the system 
model. In an ideal world, users should not have to care about this. We don’t need to 
understand how a conventional internet services, like Amazon, works in order to use 
it successfully.  But as a consumer of an IoT service right now, you can’t always get 
away from some of this technical detail. 
 
A typical IoT service is composed of: 
• 
one or more embedded devices 
• 
a cloud service 
• 
perhaps a gateway device 
• 
one or more control apps running on a different device, such as a mobile, 
tablet or computer. 
 
Compared to a conventional web service, there are more places where code can run. 
There are more parts of the system that can, at any point, be offline. Depending on 
what code is running on which device, some functionality may at any point be 
unavailable.  
 
For example, imagine you have a connected lighting system in your home. It has 
controllable bulbs or fittings, perhaps a gateway that these connect to, an internet 
service and a smartphone app to control them all (e.g. see figure 1-9). You have an 
automated rule set up, to turn on some of your lights at dusk if there’s no one home. 
If your home internet connection goes down, does that rule still work? If the rule runs 
in the internet service or your smartphone, it won’t. If it runs in the gateway, it will. 
As a user, you want to know whether your security lights are running or not. You 
have to understand a little about the system model to understand which devices are 
responsible for which functionality, and how the system may fail. 
 
Figure 1-9: The Philips Hue system consists of connected bulbs, a gateway, an 
internet service and a smartphone app 
 
It would be nice if we could guarantee no devices would ever lose connectivity, but 
that’s not realistic. And IoT is not yet a mature set of technologies in the way that 
ecommerce is, so failures are likely to be more frequent. System designers have to 
ensure that important functions (such as home security alarms) continue to work as 

well as possible when parts go offline and make these choices explicable to users.  
 
For more on matching system models to users’ conceptual models see chapter 6: 
Translating research into product definitions.  
 
Devices are distributed in the real world 
The shift from desktop to mobile computing means that we now use computers in a 
wide variety of situations. Hence, mobile design requires a far greater emphasis on 
understanding the user’s needs in a particular context of use. IoT pushes this even 
further: computing power and networking is embedded in more and more of the 
objects and environments around us. For example, a connected security system can 
track not just whether the home is occupied, but who is in, and potentially video 
record them. Hence the social and physical contexts in which connected devices and 
services can be used is even more complex and varied.   
 
Remote control and automation are programming-like activities 
In 1982, the HCI researcher Ben Shneiderman defined the concept of direct 
manipulation. User interfaces based on direct manipulation “depend on visual 
representation of the objects and actions of interest, physical actions or pointing 
instead of complex syntax, and rapid incremental reversible operations whose effect 
on the object of interest is immediately visible. This strategy can lead to user 
interfaces that are comprehensible, predictable and controllable.”4 Ever since, this 
has been the prevailing trend in consumer UX design (see e.g. figure 1-10). Direct 
manipulation is successful because interface actions are aligned with the user’s 
understanding of the task. They receive immediate feedback on the consequences of 
their actions, which can be undone. 
 
Figure 1-10: MacPaint was an early example of a popular direct manipulation 
interface 
 
IoT creates the potential for interactions that are displaced in time and space: 
configuring things to happen in the future, or remotely. For example, you might set 
up a home automation rule to turn on a video camera and raise the alarm when the 
house is unoccupied and a motion sensor is disturbed. Or you might unlock your 
porch door from your work computer to allow a courier to drop off a parcel. 
 
Both of these break the principles of direct manipulation. To control things that 
happen in future, you must anticipate your future needs and abstract the desired 
behavior into a set of logical conditions and actions. As the HCI researcher Alan 
                                                           
4 This text quoted from Ben Shneiderman, ‘Direct Manipulation for Comprehensible, 
Predictable and Controllable User Interfaces, Proc. ACM International Workshop on 
Intelligent User Interfaces '97, ACM, New York, NY (1997), 33-39 

Blackwell points out, this is basically programming5. It is a much harder cognitive 
task than a simple, direct interaction. That’s not necessarily a bad thing, but it may 
not be appropriate for all users or all situations. It impacts usability and accessibility. 
 
Unlocking the door remotely is an easier action to comprehend. But we are distanced 
from the consequences of our actions, and this poses other challenges. Can we be 
sure the door was locked again once the parcel had been left? A good system should 
send a confirmation, but if our smartphone (or the lock) lost connectivity we might 
not receive this. 
 
For more information, see chapter 13: Designing complex interoperable products 
and services. 
Complex services can have many users, multiple UIs, many devices, many rules 
and applications 
A simple IoT service might serve only one or two devices: e.g. a couple of connected 
lights. You could control these with a very simple app. But as you add more devices, 
there are more ways for them coordinate with one another. If you add a security 
system with motion sensors and a camera, you may wish to turn on one of your lights 
when the alarm goes off.  So the light effectively belongs to two functions or 
services: security, and lighting. Then add in a connected heating system that uses 
information from the security system to know when the house is empty. And assume 
that there are several people in the house with slightly different access privileges to 
each system. For example, some can change the heating schedule, some can only 
adjust the current temperature. Some have admin rights to the security system, some 
can only set and unset the alarm. What started out as a straightforward system has 
become a complex web of interrelationships. 
 
For a user, understanding how this system works will become more challenging as 
more devices and services are added. It will also become more time consuming to 
manage.  
 
For more information, see chapter 13: Designing complex interoperable products 
and services. 
Many differing technical standards make interoperability hard 
The internet is an amazing feat of open operating standards, but, before embedded 
devices were connected, there was no need for appliance manufacturers to share 
common standards. As we begin to connect these devices together, this lack of 
common technology standards is causing headaches. Just getting devices talking to 
one another is a big enough challenge, as there are many different network standards. 
Being able to get them to co-ordinate in sensible ways is an order of magnitude more 
                                                           
5 Personal communication. See Blackwell, A.F. (2002). What is programming? In Proceedings 
of PPIG 2002, pp. 204-218. 
 

complicated. 
 
The consumer experience right now is of a selection of mostly closed, manufacturer 
specific ecosystems. Devices within the same manufacturer’s ecosystem, such as 
Withings, will work together. But this is the only given. In the case of Withings, this 
means that devices share data with a common internet service, which the user 
accesses via a smartphone app (see figure 1-11). Apple’s Airplay is an example of a 
proprietary ecosystem in which devices talk directly to each other. 
 
Figure 1-11: The Withings ecosystem of devices. 
 
We’re starting to see manufacturers collaborating with other manufacturers too. So 
your Nest Protect smoke detector can tell your LIFX lightbulbs to flash red when 
smoke is detected. (This is done by connecting the two manufacturer’s internet 
services rather than connecting the devices). 
 
There are also some emerging platforms which seek to aggregate devices from a 
number of manufacturers and enable them to interoperate. The connected home 
platform Smart Things supports a range of network types and devices from 
manufacturers such as Schlage and Kwikset (door locks), GE and Honeywell 
(lighting and power sockets), Sonos (home audio), Philips Hue, Belkin and Withings 
(see figure 1-12).  But the platform has been specifically configured to work with 
each of these. You cannot yet buy any device and expect it to work well with a 
platform such as Smart Things.  
 
Figure 1-12: The Smart Things gateway and some compatible devices. 
For the near future, the onus will be largely on the consumer to research which 
devices work with their existing devices before purchasing them. Options may be 
limited. In addition, aggregating different types of device across different types of 
network tends to result in a lowest common denominator set of basic features. The 
service that promises to unify all your connected devices may not support some of 
their more advanced or unique functions: you might be able to turn all the lights on 
and off but only dim some of them, for example. It will be a while before consumers 
can trust that things will work together with minimal hassle.  
For more information, see chapter 13: Designing complex interoperable products 
and services. 
IoT is all about data 
Networked, embedded devices allow us to capture data from the world that we didn’t 
have before, and use it to deliver it better services to users. For example, drivers 
looking for parking spaces cause an estimated 30% of traffic congestion in US cities. 
Smart parking applications such as Streetline’s Parker use sensors in parking spaces 
to track where spaces are free, for drivers to find via a mobile app (see figure 1-13). 
Opower uses data captured from smart energy meters to suggest ways in which 
customers could save energy and money (see figure 1-14). 

 
Figure 1-13: Streetline’s Parker app 
 
Figure 1-14: Sample Opower energy report. 
 
Networked devices with onboard computation are also able to use data, and in some 
cases act on it autonomously. For example, a smart energy meter can easily detect 
when electrical activity is being used above baseload. This is a good indicator that 
someone is in the house and up and about. This data could be used by a heating 
system to adjust the temperature or schedule timing.  
 
To quote another phrase from Mike Kuniavsky, “information is now a design 
material.”6 
 
See chapter 12: designing with data. 
 
A design model for IoT 
As shown above, designing for IoT will confront you with some extra challenges and 
complexity that you wouldn’t encounter on a purely digital service. You’ll need to 
think about some different and perhaps new areas of design that all serve to shape the 
UX. 
 
The two most visible and tangible forms of design for IoT are: 
 
• 
The UI/visual design: e.g. the screen layout and look and feel of the web or 
mobile apps, or devices themselves (see figure 1-15). (UIs don’t have to be 
visual, they can use audio, haptics and other channels as discussed in chapter 9. 
But it’s rare for a service to have no screen based UI at all).  
• 
The industrial design of the physical hardware: the form factor, styling and 
capabilities of the connected devices themselves (see figure 1-16). 
 
Figure 1-15: The Philips Hue UI allows users to change the colour of light emitted 
by an LED bulb. 
 
Figure 1-16: The Nest thermostat has a striking industrial design  
 
UI and industrial design are important but not the whole picture. The UX is not just 
shaped by what the user can see or encounter directly. To create a valuable, 
appealing, usable and coherent IoT service we have to consider design on many 
different layers.  
 
                                                           
6 Mike Kuniavsky, ‘Smart Things: Ubiquitous Computing User Experience Design’, Morgan 
Kaufmann 2010 

In 2000, Jesse James Garrett produced his ‘Elements of User Experience’ diagram 
(and subsequent book) to explain how different design specialties fit together in web 
UX design7. This represented the different types of design required, where 
uppermost layers (i.e. visual design, information, interface and navigation design) are 
most visible to the user, but depend on the structure provided by the lower layers 
(e.g. site objectives, content requirements), which are dealt with earlier in the project. 
Just as there were dependencies in his model, where work that was not directly 
apparent to the user determined aspects that they could directly experience, so 
designing for connected products has a similar flow, with critical decisions that affect 
UX made in early stages of the design.  
 
If you’re more familiar with engineering models, you might think of this as being a 
little like a technology stack (as in the internet network stack in chapter 3), in which 
each layer of technology is dependent on the lower levels functioning well. It’s not 
an exact analogy as the dependencies between different layers of design aren’t as 
rigid. But it’s a useful comparison to make the point that good design at the higher, 
more concrete layers requires a clear framework at the lower layers. 
 
IoT encompasses a broad spectrum of design specialties. Figure 1-17 sets out the ‘big 
picture’ of different types of design involved in creating an IoT service.  
                                                           
7 New edition: Jesse James Garrett, 2010: ‘The Elements of User Experience: User-Centered 
Design for the Web and Beyond (2nd Edition)’ 2010 
 

 
 
Figure 1-17: The ‘design stack’ for IoT 
 
This isn’t a set of discrete activities required in your project plan. It says nothing of 
user research, for example. Nor is it a set of job roles you need on your project. You 
might, for example, need data analytics, and you’ll certainly need engineers!   
 
It’s aspects of the user experience that need to be considered.  Some of these things 
will evolve in tandem. For example, UI, interaction design and interusability need to 
be thought about together. UX design at the platform layer will emerge as a need 
once you start adding multiple devices to a service.  
 
A good overall product requires integrated thinking across all these layers. A 
stunning UI means nothing if your product concept makes no sense. A beautiful 
industrial design can’t mask terrible service. 
 
Depending on the type and complexity of your service, layers will require more or 
less of your time. IoT services aspire to extend over more devices and become more 
complex over time, and the parts you need less now may become more relevant to 
you in future. 
 
UI/visual design 
UI/visual design refers to screen layout, visual styling and look and feel on a device. 
This is the form that a device interface takes. The outputs of UI/visual design are 
typically high fidelity screen mockups (figure 1-18). Not all UIs are visual, of course: 
for a gestural or audio interface, the equivalent function might be defining the 

aesthetics of the gestures or voice. 
 
Figure 1-18: visual design moodboard and UI scamps. 
 
See chapter 9, Interface and interaction design, for more details on designing UIs for 
embedded devices. 
 
Interaction design 
Interaction design is the design of device behaviors. Interaction designers shape the 
sequences of actions between the user and the device needed to achieve particular 
goals or activity. They also determine how to organize the user-facing functions of 
the device. For example, a heating controller might have several modes (such as 
schedule on/off or frost protection) and some hierarchical functions, such as schedule 
setting. The organization of these functions defines how easy or otherwise it may be 
for users to find their way around them. 
 
Interaction design is closely aligned to UI design in the sense that the two are usually 
done in tandem and often by the same people. But interaction design is primarily 
concerned with behaviors and actions, whereas UI/visual design is concerned with 
layout and aesthetics. (Just to confuse matters, some people use UI design as a 
shorthand term to include both interaction design and visual design). Typical outputs 
for interaction design might include user flows, low-medium fidelity interactive 
prototypes and, for a visual UI, screen wireframes (figure 1-19). 
 
Figure 1-19: interaction design deliverables 
 
You sometimes hear the term ‘information architecture’ used to describe 
organization schemes for functionality, but technically this refers to the equivalent 
activity for content-driven systems, such as content-based web sites. 
 
See Chapter 9, Interface and interaction design. 
Interusability 
Interusability is a relatively new term. It refers to the additional considerations of 
designing interactions that span multiple devices. The goal is to make the overall 
experience feel like a coherent service, even when the devices involved may have 
quite different form factors and input/output capabilities.   
 
Interusability isn’t a separate set of design activities. It’s an extra set of 
considerations to be addressed in tandem with interaction and UI design. The key 
differences to a single device UX design process would typically be: 
• 
Specifying which functionality belongs on each device 
• 
Creating design guidelines that span multiple device types 
• 
Designing cross-device user flows for key interactions 
• 
Designing multiple device UIs in parallel 
 

See chapter 10, Cross-device interactions and interusability. 
 
Industrial design 
Industrial design refers to the aesthetic and functional design of the physical 
hardware in the service: the choice of form, materials, and capabilities it may have 
(see figure 1-20). Connected devices contain electronic circuitry and radio antennae, 
which impose particular requirements on the industrial design. Devices can also have 
input and output capabilities, which require collaboration between industrial 
designers and UI/interaction design/interusability. 
 
See chapter 8, Embedded device design. 
 
Figure 1-20: industrial design process artefacts 
 
Service design 
A connected device is rarely a one-off purchase. It comes with the expectation of an 
ongoing service, at the very least the provision of the internet service that keeps it 
running, and customer support. All of this forms part of the user’s overall experience 
with the product.  
 
Service design is an emerging discipline which addresses this holistic view of user 
experience. It looks at the whole lifespan of a user’s experience with a service, 
provides a view of all the components of the user experience, and specifies how these 
function together as a coherent whole (see figure 1-21).  
 
As well as device interactions it might include: 
• 
Customer support interactions 
• 
Instructional guides 
• 
Marketing or sales materials 
• 
In-store experiences 
• 
Email communications and notifications 
• 
The UX of software updates and rolling out new functionality  
 
See chapter 7, Designing the service. 
 
Figure 1-21: service design process artefacts 
 
Conceptual model 
The conceptual model is the understanding and expectations you want the user to 
have of the system. What components does it have, how does it work, and how can 
they interact with it? It’s the mental scaffolding that enables users to figure out how 
to interact with your service.  Regardless of whether a conceptual model is designed 
or not, users will form one.  If they get it wrong, they'll struggle to use the system.  
IoT services are often inherently complex systems. You can create a clear conceptual 

model through careful system and interaction design and supporting documentation.  
You want users to feel in control from the start: confident that they will be able to use 
the system, even if they don’t understand all the details yet. 
 
See chapter 6, Translating research into product definitions 
 
Productization 
Productization is the activity of defining a compelling product proposition.  It 
addresses the audience, proposition, objectives and overall functionality of service 
(and often its business model).  Does your product solve a real problem for a real 
audience? Is it presented so that they understand that? Does it appeal to them? This 
isn’t always the domain of the UX designer on a project but it’s the underpinnings of 
good UX. All the front-end design in the world won’t make a killer product unless it 
does something of value for people, in a way that appeals to them and makes sense.  
 
See chapter 4, Product/service definition and strategy 
 
Platform design 
A platform is a software framework. It takes care of low-level details to help 
developers build applications more easily.  IoT platforms, such as Xively or 
Thingworx, make it easy to put data from connected devices onto the internet and 
enable devices to interoperate with each other.   
A software platform will aim to solve many technical issues, many of which may not 
directly have an impact on UX. For example, they may provide a way of collating 
device data in one place. But some platform functionality is very much to do with 
UX. 
For example, a platform may provide standard ways to: 
• 
Discover new devices and applications 
• 
Add them onto the system 
• 
Manage devices and users, and  
• 
Manage how devices share data 
These are basic building blocks for the UX. If they don't work well for your users, 
your UI and interaction design will be full of awkward workarounds. 
A more complex platform might also provide ways of organizing and coordinating 
multiple devices. For example, a user adds a light to an existing home system. They 
might reasonably expect the system to know that it should control it along with their 
other lights and/or offer it as part of the security system. It's not important to make it 
talk to the toaster. That may be common sense to a human. But the system won’t 
know that unless this kind of logic is encoded in the platform. 
Many IoT systems and services aren’t this complex yet, so you might not need to 
worry about platform design for some time to come. But in any system of 

interconnected devices, there will be design challenges that will require platform 
logic to solve. Designers should get involved in shaping platforms to ensure they 
support good higher-level UX. 
There is no commonly understood set of activities for this yet. Chapter 14, 
'Designing complex interconnected products and services', discusses what these 
challenges may look like and some of the approaches we might take to solving them. 
Chapter summary 
UX for connected devices is not just about UI and interaction design. It also requires 
designers to think about: interusability, industrial design, service design, conceptual 
models, productization and platform design.  
In summary, it differs from ‘conventional’ UX in the following ways: 
Embedded devices often 
save power by connecting 
only intermittently 
which 
means... 
parts of the system can be out of 
sync, creating discontinuities in UX 
Latency on the internet is 
out of your control (and 
reliability is not 100%) 
which 
means... 
although we expect physical things to 
respond immediately and reliably, 
this might not happen 
Code can run in many more 
places 
which 
means... 
users have to engage with the system 
model to predict how it will work if 
parts are offline 
Devices are distributed in 
the real world 
which 
means... 
social and physical context of use is 
complex and varied 
Functionality can be 
distributed across multiple 
UIs 
which 
means... 
designers need to consider not just 
usability but interusability 
Much of the information 
processing happens in the 
internet service 
which 
means… 
the service experience is often 
equally or more important than the 
single device UX 
Remote control and 
automation are 
programming-like activities 
which 
means... 
IoT breaks direct manipulation: the 
basis of most successful consumer 
UXes 
Many differing technical 
standards 
which 
means... 
getting things to work together is 
hard 
Complex services can have 
many users, many UIs, 
many devices, many rules 
and applications 
which 
means... 
understanding and managing how 
they all interrelate can be extremely 
difficult. Users will turn off if admin 
becomes too onerous. 

IoT enables us to capture 
and act on data we didn’t 
have before  
which 
means… 
designers need to understand how to 
use information as a design material 
 
 
 
 

8 
Interface and interaction design 
In this chapter we will look at interface and interaction design for connected products. 
Many connected products involve web and smartphone interfaces. But there are many 
good resources available on these platforms already. This chapter will focus on the 
possibilities beyond point-and-click or touchscreen interfaces. This has two reasons: 
First, point-and-click and touchscreen interfaces dominate the majority of UX design 
work. But both interface types are less likely to be used on embedded devices like smart 
thermostats and or smart plugs. 
Second, the Internet of Things provides an opportunity to redefine how we interact with 
digital devices. 
This second point is brilliantly argued by designer Bret Victor in his "Brief rant about the 
future of interaction design”. Victor discusses the diverse and intricate ways we use our 
hands on a daily basis. He critiques the many concept explorations that, although looking 
into the future, still revolve around touch screens. The aim of this chapter is to inspire 
designers to experiment with new ways of interacting with products. 
This chapter introduces: 
- 
The benefits and drawbacks of different interface types and interaction 
paradigms. 
- 
Design recommendations and best-practice examples of interface and interaction 
design 
- 
Specific interface design challenges for embedded devices. 
This chapter addresses the following issues: 
- 
Why a screen isn't necessarily better than no screen. 
- 
What strategic decisions designers face about the interactivity of a device. 
- 
How devices can receive complex input through simple interfaces. 
- 
How interfaces can reduce the amount of attention asked from users. 

- 
How interfaces can be kept accessible or universal. 
Types of interaction 
Our bodies and abilities define how we can ‘talk’ to devices (input). Our sensory system 
defines how we can ‘listen’ to devices (output). 
Yet, the way we interact with devices has so far been very limited. Tom Igoe and Dan 
O’Sullivan illustrated this in their book ‘Physical Computing’. Figure 8-1 shows their 
illustration of ‘how the computer sees us’. One eye instead of two because we only look 
at two-dimensional screens. One finger only, as we input through sequential tapping, 
which might as well be the same single finger. Two small ears to hear stereo audio output 
from laptop speakers and the like. 
 
Figure 8-1. ‘How the computer sees us’ from Physical Computing 
(Tom Igoe, Dan O’Sullivan) 
If the illustration were updated to include new interface technologies as they become 
available, it would gradually become more human-like. In the same spirit, this chapter 
aims to inspire you to think about different input and output possibilities. Think about 
some of the ways in which we could provide input, or receive output and how they might 
be used: 
Input through 
Used in… 
Touch, Press 
Physical controls, Touch screens 
Move & 
manipulate 
Tangible UIs 
Speech 
Speech recognition 
Whole body 
Gesture recognition, Proximity 
sensing 
Galvanic skin 
response 
 
Thoughts 
Brain-computer interfaces 
Heart rate 
Determine stress, anxiety, sleep,… 
 
Receive
put 
 out
through 
 
 
LEDs, Screens 
 
Sound, Voice output 
 
Vibration, Force feedback, shape 
 
Scent messaging 

 
Temperature output 
There are more interface types we could list. And not all the types we listed are readily 
applicable at the moment. Breaking down interaction into these components lets us 
combine them in different ways: A device might take voice input but output only through 
a screen. Or it might have physical controls, but only respond using a voice through a 
speaker. 
In this chapter, we will discuss combinations of inputs and outputs that are particularly 
relevant for connected products. 
Physical controls 
Physical controls are everywhere. Push buttons that activate something. Switches that let 
us chose between two states. Sliders and rotary knobs that let us set a value on a range or 
select between multiple settings. Figure 8-2 shows a few different kinds. 
 
Figure 8-2. A few physical controls from around a house (Photos from 
the author) 
Physical controls aren’t just input, sometimes they show a current setting. An electrical 
outlet switch controls the outlet, but also tells you if it’s on or off. The tactile nature even 
allows you to feel the switch in the dark and use it without seeing it. In electronic 
devices, this can make things complicated. When users can change a setting from more 
than one place, controls might need to be motorized (like HIFI systems where the volume 
knob rotates even when the remote is used). Or a combination of physical control and 
display is required. 
In addition to the type of control (button, switch, dial,…) designers also need to think 
about the tactile aspects. The haptic and tactile characteristics of a control influence the 
experience of a physical device. From the outside, they might be invisible.  
To enable designers to work with the nuances that exist, the specifications for controls 
include operating force graphs. Figure 8-3 shows such graphs for different versions of 
what (from the outside) looks like the same button. Note the differences in both stroke 
(the distance the button travels when pressed) and operating force (the force at which the 
button ‘activates’).  
 
             
Figure 8-3. Operating force specifications for different models of an 
identical looking button component. 
From the outside, a user won’t be able to spot that difference. But it will make a 
noticeable difference to the way the interaction feels. This has a practical aspect: making 
sure a button is harder to press so users don't triggered it by accident. There is also an 
emotional aspect: making sure pressing a button feels satisfying rather than flimsy.  

To get an idea for how nuanced the tactile quality of a button can feel, just read a few 
reviews on the blog http://knobfeel.tumblr.com. It's not exactly a serious resource, but it 
gives an idea of how a certain button feels to somebody over another one. For example, 
one of the reviews reads: “I don’t quite understand how it simultaneously is light to 
move, but [has] a heavy feel. The rotation can only be described as creamy.” 
Physical controls can become an identifying feature that makes a product stand out. 
Think of the click wheel control of the iPod. Another example is the Aether Cone (see 
figure 8-4): a connected speaker that uses physical controls as part of its minimalistic 
interface. The device combines voice input with physical controls. It learns about 
personal preferences and automatically curates a playlist. 
Rotating the front speaker grille slightly skips the current song. Rotating it further 
changes the entire musical genre. Pressing in the center of the speaker activates the voice 
input feature that lets users request specific songs. This interface is intriguing and makes 
the product stand out from its competition. 
  
Figure 8-4. Some of Aether Cone’s less obvious controls: Rotating the 
speaker grille and pushing in the centre of the speaker. 
Using unconventional physical controls that are integrated with the device design can 
have drawbacks. Discovering the controls can be hard when they are non-obvious. Users 
need to learn where the controls are and how they work. Good usability can also be a 
challenge. Controls defined by the form factor, instead of interaction requirements, might 
be suboptimal for the interactions required. Keeping controls to the bare minimum is 
often part of what makes a product simple and elegant. But too few controls can 
negatively influence the usability and value. A single control might need to do different 
things at different times. This means users have to switch modes or accept less 
functionality. If you’re using unconventional controls on your device, consider helping 
users with discovery and learning. To do this, you can utilize marketing and advertising 
to educate people about how they can use your product. The early TV adverts for Apple’s 
iPhone took this approach. The short clips demonstrated how features worked by 
stepping viewers through the interaction. This has no doubt helped early customers know 
how to use the device before they even bought it. Once a customer has purchased the 
product, the out-of-box experience (the moment where the product is taken out of its 
packaging) can help, too. Printed instructions that users reveal as they unbox the device 
or removable labels affixed to the product can convey essential information about its 
controls. 
Visual & screen interfaces 
Light output 
Almost every electronic device has at least one LED somewhere showing that it is 
switched on or indicating something. Connected devices often have more things to 
communicate. Hubs and bridges often have a number of LEDs to show a variety of 
connectivity statuses. When devices need to communicate even more, it can get 
complicated. Color-coding or blink patterns might be required to convey complex 
information through a simple LED. This can make understanding what is going on 
tedious. See the list in figure 8-5 that explains different light colors and blink patterns of 
the Toymail Mailman. 

 
Figure 8-5. When using only one multi-color light and different blink 
patterns, debugging can become more complicated. 
Light can also be the main interface of a device. The Ambient Orb (see figure 8-6) is a 
ball shaped device that glows in different colors. It can be configured to display data such 
as current energy prices or stock prices. Creator David Rose describes it as a “single-
pixel browser [that] glows a color to reflect online information”. Light here isn't a 
secondary signal, it’s key for the primary purpose of the device: Conveying information 
in a glanceable, ambient way, requiring less attention and providing less distraction.  
 
Figure 8-6. The Ambient Orb uses different colored light to display 
information, for example current energy prices. 
The Ambient Umbrella (see figure 8-7) uses light in a similar way. Its handle glows when 
it is going to rain to remind the owner to take it out. 
 
Figure 8-7. The Ambient Umbrella has a light integrated in its handle 
that lights up when rain is forecasted.                            
Visual input 
Users can also give device input through light or other visual means. A device can use a 
camera to interpret a graphical pattern like a barcode or a QR code. Devices can also use 
light sensors to react to ambient lighting conditions or receive input from other devices 
through LED blink patterns. 
Because these kinds of interactions and interfaces aren’t often referred to as ‘visual 
input’, we’ll discuss them in a separate section below called “Computer vision, barcodes 
& devices ‘seeing’”.  
 
Screens and displays 
Sometimes you need more than some lights. When a device needs to display complex 
information or users need to provide more sophisticated input, screens are more 
appropriate. As a UX designer you'll be familiar with screen-based user interfaces of 
smartphones or personal computers. But there is a range of (simpler) display types that 
require different design approaches UX designers are less likely to be familiar with. 
Custom segment displays 
Custom segment displays are what many cheap electronic devices use. Like the water 
filter system shown in figure 8-8. The underlying technology is often LCD (liquid crystal 
display). This means transparent segments become visible when an electric charge is 
applied. 
 
Figure 8-8. A custom segment LCD display. The overall display needs 
to be large enough to include all segments that might be shown. 

When creating a product with such a display, every possible state the display needs to be 
able to show needs to be considered in the design phase. Even segments that might only 
appear in certain situations need to be given real estate. If a heating controller can show 
temperature in both Fahrenheit and Celsius, segments for both ‘°C’ and ‘°F’ need to be 
part of the segmentation layout. They cannot be in the same place. 
Segment displays are low cost and use little power. But they are unable to display 
dynamic alphanumeric information. To do that, you can use a character set display. 
Character set displays 
Many will have seen a simple character set display in an electronic calculator. Typically a 
7-segment display was used (see figure 8-9). 
 
Figure 8-9. A 7-segment display used in a calculator. 
Character set displays work through systems of 7, 14 or sometimes 16 segments (see 
figure 8-10) that are switched on in combination to create numbers. 14 and 16-segment 
displays can also display basic alphabetic characters. 
 
Figure 8-10. The segment layout of 7, 14 and 16-segment displays. 
(Illustration from the author) 
Displays like this are cheap, but have a limited character set. A 7-segment system is only 
usable for displaying numbers. Other types such as 14- or 16-segment systems can 
display letters, but with limitations. See figure 8-11 for an example of the character set of 
a 14-segment display. 
 
Figure 8-11. The character set of a 14-segment display. 
By combining character set and custom segment displays, you can display both dynamic 
alphanumeric data and illustrations or graphical elements. Figure 8-12 shows such a 
combination used in a heating controller. A custom segment display that shows boiler and 
radiator illustrations is combined with a character set display for dynamic messages. 
 
 
Figure 8-12. Note the ‘Message display’ area using a 14-segment 
display. 
Segmented character set displays don’t have to be ugly. The creators of the CST-1 watch 
designed a custom segmented font to display numeric characters (see figure 8-13). 
 

Figure 8-13. The segmentation used by the CST-1 watch. Note the first 
digit misses unnecessary segments as it will only ever need to display 
“1” or “2” to display time. 
Dynamic displays 
Displays with the fewest limitations have a matrix of pixels each of which can be turned 
on or off individually. In principle, displays like this are the kind we’re all used to from 
smartphones or computer monitors. A notable distinction is between monochrome and 
color displays. 
Monochrome displays tend to be cheaper, but (as their name suggests) unable to display 
colors or shades. The Fitbit activity tracker uses such a monochrome OLED matrix 
display. It shows both alphanumeric information and simple graphics (see figure 8-14). 
 
 
Figure 8-14. The Fitbit activity tracker uses a monochrome matrix 
display. 
UX designers will be familiar with color pixel matrix displays from smartphones, laptops 
and tablet devices. Touch screens are essentially pixel matrix displays combined with a 
transparent touch sensitive layer. 
Electronic ink displays 
A more unusual display technology with unique advantages and disadvantages is 
electronic ink. 
Made popular through eBook readers like Amazon Kindle, the technology is used in 
more and more devices like connected watches or smartphones. Electronic ink displays 
resemble the appearance of paper and are easy to read in direct sunlight. Unlike the other 
technologies described above, they only require electricity to change the state, not to hold 
it. This means the device uses less power. 
This opens up new possibilities for designers, too. For example, an electronic ink display 
can show something when a device is off. To greet and guide users, a display could 
already show information when the user unpacks the product and hasn't even switched 
on. 
There are also some disadvantages that constrain the design. Electronic ink displays have 
a very low refresh rate. They also suffer from an effect called ‘ghosting’, where shadows 
from a previous display state can still be seen. This rules out interactions like scrolling, 
the use of mouse pointers or animations in the UI. 
Is a screen better than no screen? 
You might think it’s good to put a screen on a device where possible, but this isn’t 
necessarily the case. Screens and physical controls increase the cost of a device. They 
mean extra components and add design and development effort. 
When designing apps or websites a lot of work has already been done for designers. They 
can rely on platform features or design frameworks. If you add a screen to a connected 
device, you essentially need to develop an interaction paradigm from scratch. How do 
menus work? How do you navigate them? How do users learn the unfamiliar UI? 

Moreover, once a screen is available, it becomes harder to say ‘no’ to adding all sorts of 
information and features since real estate seems endless. So it becomes harder to keep 
devices simple and focused. 
That’s why designers need to take a step back early on in the design process to ask: What 
if this product didn’t have a screen? Could it still work? You might just discover an 
opportunity for a beautifully simple and easy-to-use connected product. 
Audio & voice interfaces 
Audio output 
Audio can be a useful output method. Users don’t have to look at the device directly and 
don’t even have to be in near it. At the same time, anyone who has experienced the 
persistent beeping of a washing machine that has finished a cycle or a smoke alarm 
indicating its low battery knows how annoying audio output can be. 
Audio is pervasive. Unlike lights, audio is almost never subtle. Sounds immediately 
trump visual indications. They are hard to ignore. Audio also has a bigger emotional 
character. This is obvious for speech: Tone and accent can be perceived as sympathetic 
and friendly, or the opposite. It’s also the case for other sounds: Pitch and quality 
immediately carry emotions. A sound can convey urgency like an ear-piercing high-pitch 
beep. Or it can convey a sense of satisfaction like a fulfilling swoosh sound when an 
email is sent. 
Voice interfaces 
Voice as output 
Instead of sound effects, audio output can also be used for computer-generated speech. 
This is a powerful method for providing a wide range of information. 
For example, the Nest Protect smoke alarm uses its speaker to play warning sounds. But 
it also gives more information using speech: A voice tells the user in which room smoke 
was detected. 
And we’ve all used car navigation systems that use speech. The advantage is twofold: We 
can keep our eyes on the road, and something that can be hard to convey visually is much 
easier explained in speech. An illustration can become confusing when it doesn’t match 
the real layout of the roundabout ahead, or when the junction involves a complex road 
layout that is quite straightforward when explained verbally. 
Voice as input 
Speech recognition has become an ordinary feature of smartphones. When it works it can 
be a quick way to give complex commands. Setting an alarm using a touch screen, for 
example, requires a series of steps. A voice command is quicker and often easier. 
Voice input can remove the need for many other controls. The Amazon Dash (see figure 
8-15), a device that lets users add items to a shopping list, only has two buttons: One to 
activate voice input, one for a barcode scanner. Voice input replaces an entire keyboard 
in this case. 
 
Figure 8-15. A person speaking into Amazon Dash 

But there are also a few challenges with the technology. 
Speech recognition is still unreliable. Anyone that has used it has encountered situations 
where commands were misinterpreted. Feedback mechanisms are required to confirm 
correct recognition. This can be done using a screen, but might defeat the purpose of not 
having to look at something. Confirmation can also be done through speech output. This 
quickly becomes a frustrating loop going back and forth. 
Another challenge is to know what commands are possible in the first place. Users must 
recall (instead of recognize) what ‘functions’ are available, or how they need to phrase 
commands. Devices with screens often display a list of possible commands to help users 
with this problem. 
Devices need to know when to listen for a command. One approach is to press a button, 
but this means the overall interaction isn’t hands free. Another approach is activation 
phrases like ‘Ok, Google’ that indicate that a command follows. The downside of this 
approach is that users agonize over the idea that a device is constantly listening to 
everything that is being said. It also makes false positive detection a problem - when you 
say something that sounds similar to ‘Ok, Google’. 
A prank exploiting this is to play Xbox online multiplayer games using the gamer name 
“Xbox sign out”. Other players will eventually say the name out loud, perhaps to vent 
their confusion about it in the game’s audio channel. If those players have the voice 
control features enabled, they will soon disappear from the game server. 
Tangible & tactile interaction 
Tangible user interfaces 
Tangible interfaces let users give input to a device or system through moving or placing 
physical objects or touching objects together. 
In 1992 designer Durrell Bishop created one of the earliest explorations of this idea. 
Bishop envisioned an answering machine that made messages tangible through marbles 
that represent messages. (See figure 8-16) 
 
Figure 8-16. Still from the concept video: The user places a marble 
into the message playback position. 
Colored marbles represent recorded messages. The machine releases them into a groove 
for the user to pick up. To play a message, the user places a marble into a depression on 
the surface of the machine. Playback stops as soon as the user removes the marble from 
that spot. Users can either keep messages by holding on to the marbles, or delete them by 
putting the marbles back into the answering machine through a hole. 
A more recent exploration of tangible interaction is the ‘Spotify Box’ designer Jordi 
Parra created as a student project. (See figure 8-17) 
 
Figure 8-17. Jordi Parra’s Spotify Box with a playlist token attached to 
the ‘play’ spot. 
The box plays music streamed from Spotify. By placing a physical magnetic token on the 
box users can select a playlist. No menu or button combination is required. This gives an 

analogue quality to the interactions with digital music. Users can label tokens or draw on 
them. They can also exchange them with other owners of the Spotify Box. 
The marble answering machine and the Spotify Box are interesting concepts because they 
explore giving something intangible (voice messages or music) a physical representation. 
This changes the nature of interaction with a digital system, turning it into something 
more direct and immediate. 
Tangible interfaces offer a way to simplify the control of a device. The direct and 
physical nature of manipulation can be easier to learn and understand than abstracted 
menu structures or conceptual mappings of controls. 
A great example of this are Sifteo cubes (see figure 8-18). They are matchbox-sized 
cubes with a screen that sense when they are next to each other. Through tilting, placing 
or rearranging them, kids can play educational and entertainment games across the cubes. 
 
Figure 8-18. Sifteo Cubes sense when they are next to each other to 
enable games played by manipulating and placing the cubes. 
A simpler example is the Muji ‘Multi Clock’ alarm clock. It’s a cubic device with labels 
for its four functions placed along each side of its display. Users select a function by 
orienting the clock with the corresponding label on the top. Figure 8-19 below shows the 
‘calendar’ function activated. 
 
Figure 8-19. The Muji Multi Clock with the calendar function 
activated. 
A promising application of tangible user interfaces is in musical instruments. The 
Reactable (see figure 8-20) is such a musical instrument with a tangible user interface.  
Musicians manipulate and create sounds using physical objects placed and moved on the 
table’s surface. The tangible nature means the musician can create and control many 
different sounds and keep the overview during a live performance. 
 
Figure 8-20. A Reactable in use making music. 
Experimenting with tangible user interfaces is thought provoking and inspiring. But 
interfaces involving many small physical tokens to manipulate or represent data have an 
obvious impracticality: If you lose parts the interface breaks. 
Imagine not being able to listen to messages because your cat or a child has made off 
with the marbles. So you need to think carefully about the application of tangible 
interfaces. 
Tactile output: Vibration, force feedback and shape shifting 
We’ve all experienced vibration alerts of our mobile phones. It’s a useful feature when 
it’s noisy or when sounds would cause disturbance. But it requires body contact, which 
few devices have reliably. 
The potential of tactile output is intriguing: Researchers at the University of Amsterdam 
have explored the use of vibration for cyclists. Their “vibrobelt”, a GPS based navigation 
using vibration, is worn around the waist and gives the cyclist tactile feedback when they 

need to take a turn. (http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/onepercent/2013/01/vibrating-
navigator-cyclists.html) Apples watch has a similar feature. It can 'tap' users on the wrist 
during navigation, using different taps for 'go left' or 'go right'. 
A much more sophisticated form of tactile output are force feedback mechanisms. These 
use motors to push back on the user in specific directions. Gaming joysticks use this to 
great effect to let players feel the g-forces involved in flying a plane for example. 
A more serious device using force feedback is the Geomagic Touch (see figure 8-21). 
This is a device that makes virtual objects tangible. 
 
Figure 8-21. The Geomagic Touch uses force feedback to make virtual 
objects tangible. 
The central feature is a pen-like device mounted on multiple motorized axes. Users can 
give input in three dimensions using the pen, but the device can also ‘push back’ in all 
three dimensions, too. The applications are specific, such as 3D CAD modeling or 
surgery robots. An advantage is that users can physically feel virtual boundaries. 
As with tangible interfaces, it's intriguing and inspiring to explore how tactile interfaces 
can change everyday interactions. The ‘Proverbial Wallets’ project from MIT explores 
this with financial data. The researchers created three prototype wallets, each using a 
different kind of tactile output for different kinds of data. 
The first wallet is ‘Bumblebee’. It uses vibration to notify the owner of every transaction 
that is happening with their bank account. The second is ‘Mother Bear’ (see figure 8-22). 
It uses its force feedback hinge mechanism to make it harder (or easier) to open the wallet 
depending on the current budget. The last is ‘Peacock’. It's a wallet that swells and 
shrinks, reflecting the balance in the owner’s account. 
 
Figure 8-22. One of the three prototype wallets from the ‘Proverbial 
Wallets’ project. 
Researcher Fabian Hemmert has explored the possibilities of tactile output in mobile 
phones. His prototypes include devices that shift their center of gravity and devices that 
shift their shape (see figure 8-23).  
 
Figure 8-23. Fabian Hemmert’s prototypes for shape- and centre of 
gravity shifting devices. 
As with the Proverbial Wallets, it is intriguing to think about the ambient representation 
of data. Instead of displaying it in concrete terms, users feel it while interacting with the 
device. Hemmert gives the example of representing progress through a playlist and the 
current song at the same time using the center of gravity. Or giving non-visual directions 
in navigation applications. 
Gestural interaction 
Gestural interactions exist on touch screens (like ‘swiping’ or ‘pinching’). Using 
computer vision, devices can also recognize mid-air gestures as user input. 

Perhaps one of the most famous examples is from the film Minority Report. Chief John 
Anderton (played by Tom Cruise) controls a computer system using both his hands in 
mid-air, almost like conducting an orchestra. (See figure 8-24)  
 
Figure 8-24. The film Minority Report made gestural control popular 
although it is an interface method with many flaws. 
The film has had major influence on the development of gestural interfaces. But research 
has since shown that gestural interfaces might not be appropriate for real world 
applications. Holding out your arms in front of your body, gesturing or doing precise 
motions for extended periods of time causes aching muscles and stiffness. This condition 
has been dubbed ‘Gorilla Arm’. Rumor has it that Tom Cruise had to take breaks from 
even just acting the scenes for the movie. 
Yet, industries like gaming have adopted gestural interfaces with great success. The 
Microsoft Kinect lets gamers control Xbox games or navigate menus without any further 
device or controller. Users wave hands or move their body to control what they want to 
do. 
Simpler forms of gesture interaction have also been integrated into more mundane 
products. The original Nest Protect smoke alarm had a featured called ‘Wave to hush’. 
The feature was meant to solve the problem of alarms going off because of burnt toast or 
smoky frying. Users could stand underneath the device and wave their hands at it to 
silence it for a short period of time. (See Nest’s illustration in figure 8-25) 
 
Figure 8-25. The now disabled ‘wave to hush’ feature let users silence 
the smoke alarm by waving their hand at it. 
But, the possibility of users unintentionally activating it (perhaps waving their hands 
during a real fire) could delay an alarm. In April 2014 Nest had halted sales and disabled 
the feature on already installed units to investigate potential problems with the feature. 
So, gesture interaction can be an elegant solution to interacting with a device that is hard 
to reach (like a smoke alarm). Yet, designers need to think carefully about the context 
and risk of false positives. 
Context-sensitive interaction 
Context-sensitive interaction is similar to gesture interaction, in that it revolves around 
the body. The difference is that context-sensitive interaction is user input in a less 
attentive manner. For example, instead of gesturing to make a command, simply being 
(or not being) in a certain room can provide input to a system, too. Context can also mean 
whether you're at home or standing at a bus stop, this can inform and tailor the user 
experience. Simpler still, being close by or further away from a product can be useful 
information to tailor an interface. 
David Rose, founder of Ambient Devices, demonstrated a product that works in such a 
way at the LIFT’09 conference. Rose showed a connected weather forecasting device 
with a screen and a proximity sensor.  
Using the proximity sensor, the device changes the amount of information it displays (see 
figure 8-26). 

 
Figure 8-26. Example illustration of a weather forecasting device that 
displays more or less information depending on the proximity of a 
person in front of it. (Illustration from Alfred Lui) 
When a user is standing across the room, the screen displays only essential information. 
The current outside temperature fills up the screen in large digits and the background 
gives clues to the weather (e.g. rain drops around the temperature). 
When the user is closer to the device, the screen shows more information using smaller 
fonts. It now includes a forecast for the next 24 hours. Finally, when users tap the device, 
it shows even more information. The interface is sensitive to proximity, which acts as a 
proxy to the user context. The device uses this context in two ways. It enlarges text to 
make it easier to read from across the room. It also reduces the amount of information 
given to reduce the cognitive load on the user. Instead of having to 'study' the weather 
forecast, users see the most essential information at a glance. 
The Aether Cone (figure 8-27) connected speaker is also context-sensitive. It's a mobile 
device that learns about the user’s musical preference in different rooms of the house. It 
uses this to automatically adjust what it plays based on what room the user places it in. 
 
Figure 8-27. The Aether Cone connected speaker remembers what 
music the owner prefers to listen to in different rooms. 
Like tactile interfaces, context-sensitive interfaces demand less of the user’s attention. 
This approach promises to make interacting with connected products less overbearing. In 
a way, less like operating a computer. 
Designing interfaces like this requires a good understanding of human behavior. 
Designers can only ever assume the user's context through a proxy that a device can 
sense, like location or proximity. It's the designer that needs to do the interpretation. He 
or she needs the human insight that people listen to different kinds of music in different 
rooms of the house. Careful user experience design then needs to ensure that the device 
works well, whether this is true for its particular user or not. 
Computer vision, barcodes & devices ‘seeing’ 
In this section, we'll talk about interfaces that involve devices seeing or responding to 
physical artifacts around them. By this we mean interactions such as face, object or 
pattern recognition, as well as simpler ways a device can receive input from a physical 
artifact.  
To clarify, computer vision isn't an interface type, it's an enabler. The gestural 
interactions we discussed above rely on computer vision. Simpler forms such as face 
recognition can enable useful features such as smartphones that can unlock using the 
owner's face. Face detection (instead of recognition) can enable smart cameras that 
automatically follow a person’s face. 
The power of these kinds of interactions is to simplify or remove user input. Compared to 
inputting a PIN code, it's faster and easier to just look at a device to unlock it. It may be 
less secure, but that is a different story. 

This power of simplification is also handy when users need enter information from the 
physical world (like a book title) to start a digital interaction. The Amazon Fire Phone 
introduced a feature that does just that. In figure 8-28 you can see device recognizing a 
physical book in front of it. It then displays relevant information and actions. 
 
Figure 8-28. Amazon’s Fire Phone can recognise objects and present 
relevant shortcut functions. 
In connected products, designers can use these kinds of interfaces to tailor the experience. 
For example by recognizing who is in front of a device. A challenge here is not to create 
a patronizing experience.  
The smart drinks vending machines installed in some train stations in Tokyo are a real-
world example that caused some debate due to their Orwellian characteristics. Instead of 
a glass through which available drinks can be seen, this machine displays its selection 
using a large screen on its front. The machine also uses a camera to determine the age and 
gender of whoever is standing in front of it. Based on this information the machine 
displays a targeted selection of drinks. For example, it is said to suggest a slightly sweeter 
beverage to a woman in her 20s.1 The device also captures the data and the actual choice 
the customer made for marketing analytics. The sensitivity to features like this is different 
in different cultures. Allegedly the Japanese customers don't share the views and 
concerns some bloggers and commentators expressed.2 
Marketing applications aside, there are also practical uses of such interfaces. A well-
known example is QR codes. It's a useful way for users to input complex information 
with a minimal interface. Instead of manually entering Wifi credentials, for example, 
users could present them using a QR code for a device to decode. 
Scanning a QR code requires a camera and the ability to interpret the image presented. 
This means the device to scan needs to be relatively complex. But the principle of 
encoding and transmitting information optically can be utilized simpler. The Electric 
Imp, a platform to connected device to Wifi, uses a light sensor (instead of a camera) to 
receive input. Users enter the Wifi credentials on a smartphone that then turns them into a 
flashing sequence performed by the screen. 
Electric Imp calls this process ‘BlinkUp’. The light sensor recognizes the sequence and 
the device decodes the information contained. 
The ‘Toymail’ connected kids toys use this platform to connect. See figure 8-29 for the 
key steps in the process. 
 
Figure 8-29. Wifi credentials are entered on a smartphone, the device 
is placed on the smartphone screen with its feet, the screen flashes on 
and off for a short period, an LED in one of the feet lights up green 
when the process succeeded. 
                                                           
1 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/japan/8136743/Japanese-vending-machine-
tells-you-what-you-should-drink.html 
2 http://globalitemagazine.com/2010/10/10/economy-japanese-embrace-human-feeling-machine/ 

Are QR codes good or bad? 
QR codes have a bad reputation amongst designers. The apps required to scan them 
haven’t reached widespread adoption. The outcome of scanning one often doesn’t match 
the effort required to scan a code in the first place. An Internet joke mocking this reality 
is a Tumblr blog that has been setup to collect pictures of people scanning QR codes. The 
irony is, since its creation in early 2012 no pictures have been posted to it. (See figure 8-
30). 
 
Figure 8-30. http://picturesofpeoplescanningqrcodes.tumblr.com/ 
But, when the scanning logic isn’t for the user to worry about, QR codes are a perfect 
means to input complex data quickly. Great examples are airplane boarding passes or 
event tickets stored on mobile phones. For connected products they can be a great 
method, too. A connected lock might use its door camera to validate a temporary key 
presented using a QR code. 
Multi-modal interaction & interface combinations 
When we talk to another person, we communicate using multiple channels at the same 
time. Speech, gestures, facial expression and body language work together. In a similar 
way, interaction with a connected device can combine different types of interfaces into 
one. This is called multi-modal interaction. 
A great example of this is the ‘Room-E’ project Jared Ficklin did at frog design (see 
figure 8-31). By combining gesture and voice interaction, Ficklin demonstrates how users 
can provide input similar to the way they would talk to another person. In his demo, 
Ficklin points at a specific light in the room (gesture input) and says “Computer, turn off 
this light” (voice input). The computer combines both inputs into a single command. It is 
able to understand that Ficklin specifies which light he means to switch off using the 
gesture. 
 
Figure 8-31. Jared Ficklin is demonstrating Room-E. A gesture 
(pointing at a lamp) is combined with voice input (“Computer, turn off 
this light”) to control the room. 
Although ‘Room-E’ is a prototype, it shows the potential of multi-modal interaction. By 
combining interface types, designers can create interactions that feel more like human-to-
human interaction. 
IoT specific challenges and opportunities 
Deciding on the level of interactivity of a connected device. 
Adding interactivity to a device is a cost question. Buttons, switches and the components 
required add to the bill of materials and increase development costs. It’s also a usability 
question. Designers need to strike a balance between easy-to-use devices and ones with 
many features and functions. This is sometimes referred to as the “flexibility usability 
tradeoff”. (See figure 8-32) 

 
Figure 8-32. The flexibility usability tradeoff as illustrated in the book 
“Universal Principles of Design” 
However, simple devices with little features have other disadvantages. They often rely on 
other devices for full-feature interaction. This makes them dependent on things outside of 
the designer's control, such as a working Internet connection or a compatible browser. 
Imagine you couldn't change the temperature in your house because of problems with 
your Internet service provider. 
An example of this approach is the Tado thermostat (figure 8-33). Users control it using a 
website and smartphone app. But the product offers a minimal degree of control on the 
device, too. A single physical button lets users switch the heating on or off as a fallback 
option. 
 
Figure 8-33. The Tado thermostat relies on smartphone apps and a 
website for control - but the box offers a minimal degree of control: A 
button on the side lets users switch the heating on. 
Only having few controls on a device is especially advantageous if you know your 
product will change and develop. In this case a supporting a physical interface quickly 
becomes a burden. 
There are ways to balance the benefits and drawbacks of physical controls. An example is 
BERG’s connected washing machine prototype ‘Cloudwash’ (see figure 8-34). The 
physical device has some controls that only cover selected functions. Full control is 
delivered through a smartphone app. But, users can perform the everyday tasks without 
needing the smartphone app. Also, the device uses a combination of physical controls 
with displays. This keeps the physical interface flexible within reason. 
 
Figure 8-34. BERG’s Cloudwash prototype uses displays to 
dynamically label physical controls. 
From BERG’s website:  
“The legends for these washes are in e-ink so they can be updated but still feel 
like part of the legends one would expect to find on a washing machine. They 
can be far more descriptive than the descriptions on a traditional dial, since 
there’s no need for generalisations like 'cottons.' We like human-readable 
descriptions like ‘Joe’s sports kit’ or ‘really really quick’ or ‘use this for baby 
stuff’.” 
Glanceable and ambient interfaces 
We’ve already touched on how designers can create interactions that require less 
attention. Considering the ever-increasing amount of information around us, this will 
become ever more important. We'll soon all crave a less distracting environment. 
This kind of interaction is already around us. Consider how a wall clock ‘disappears’ into 
our surrounding. We completely ignore it for the most part. The moment we’re interested 
in the time, we can get it at a glance. Even from across the room. We might only be able 

to see roughly the angle of the two main hands - but it’s enough to give us an idea of 
what time it is. If we want more detail, we can walk closer to see exactly what time it is. 
The ambient devices mentioned earlier want to achieve just that. These kinds of devices 
share certain characteristics. David Rose, founder of Ambient Devices, has created a list 
of these characteristics that designers can use. 
Pre-attentive  
Glance-able, no cognitive load required. 
Calm  
Non-intrusive, seamless with environment. Evergreen. Friendly. 
Universal  
No language, characters or numbers. 
Open  
Able to represent multiple types of data, coded, private. 
We highly recommend exploring how you could bring some of these characteristics into 
the products you’re working on. Even if it's just a thought experiment. 
Working with limited input and output capabilities 
A particular challenge in connected devices is to work around limited input and output 
capabilities. Many connected devices only require complex input rarely and a simple 
interface is sufficient most of the time. So how can designers handle these rare, but 
complex interactions without having to bloat the interface with capabilities that aren't 
needed most of the time? 
The Withings Smart Body Analyser provides a great example. The smart body scale 
supports multiple users each with their own accounts. It automatically identifies which 
user is standing on it by comparing the reading with its historic data. If the new reading is 
within a realistic extrapolation of only one account, it can only be that person. 
This doesn’t always work. When a reading is within range of more than one account, the 
device cannot reliably decide which user it is. In this case, the device needs user input. 
But instead of having specific controls for this situation, the designers found a solution 
that keeps the interface simple. They work with the capabilities available. In this case, the 
display shows a selection between the likely accounts. Users then lift either their left or 
the right foot to make a selection. (See figure 8-38) 
 
Figure 8-35. The Smart Body Analyser displays a choice between two 
users when it is unsure who the current reading belongs to. By standing 
only on the right or left side of the scale, the user can make a selection. 
Another strategy is to support devices with more capabilities. Navigating and controlling 
Apple TV with the minimalistic remote is sufficient for most of the time. When it comes 
to entering search terms or login credentials, using the remote becomes tedious. By 
supporting an iPhone as an alternative input device, users can switch to the more capable 
device when required. (See figure 8-39) 
 
Figure 8-36. Apple TV Remote, Remote App and TV interface. 
The Amazon Fire TV remote (see figure 8-40) uses speech recognition to overcome this 
same hurdle. Its remote has a dedicated button for voice search and users can speak a 

search term into the remote rather than having to type. That way, the interface stays 
simple even though complex input is possible. 
 
Figure 8-37. Amazon Fire TV remote 
Mobile and web UIs 
In addition to on-device interfaces, many connected products involve web interfaces or 
smartphone apps. General advice on how to design for these touch points is outside of the 
scope of this book. But in chapter 10: Key Interactions, we discuss how smartphone and 
web interfaces can help with specific challenges like setup or device management in the 
interaction with connected products. 
Universal Design & Accessibility 
It is easy to forget that many products we work on as designers are inaccessible or much 
harder to use for people with disabilities like visual impairment. Sometimes, products that 
used to be accessible even become less accessible with the integration of new 
technologies. Like washing machines that move from physical controls to touch screens. 
Connected products offer an opportunity to create more accessible and universal 
products. 
In this section we’ll take a brief look at accessible and universal design in relation to 
connected products. 
Accessibility 
There are many aspects of a physical device that designers need to consider to make it 
appropriate for users with a certain disability. Checklists published by organizations such 
as the Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB) help designers with this task. 
Below is an excerpt from the ‘handling’ section of RNIB's checklist “35 Questions to ask 
yourself when designing products for people with sight loss, disabilities and older 
people”. 
Checklist excerpt: Handling 
 
 
6. Is the product easy to orientate? Could a visually impaired and/or older person 
easily locate the front, back, top, and bottom of the product? 
Yes
No 
7. Does the product require little physical strength to use? Consider for example, 
an older person with arthritis – would they be able to lift, open, turn, grip or rotate 
the product to use it effectively? 
Yes
No 
8. Does the product have smooth edges and surfaces (not sharp or rough) and is 
without finger traps? Consider that an older and/or visually impaired person may 
have limited vision, reduced reaction time, motor control and dexterity. 
Yes
No 
 
The full checklist is a great tool if you want to make your product more accessible. It is 
available here: NEED LINK 
Another simple but powerful method that helps designers make products accessible is to 
simulate disabilities. You can close your eyes and see if you can still use your prototype. 

You can even use props to help you. Wear earplugs and earmuffs to simulate deafness. 
Or wear gardening gloves to simulate how somebody with arthritis might experience your 
product. (See figure 8-41) 
 
Figure 8-38. At a Hackathon organised by the non-profit ‘Enabled by 
design’, participants used gloves and modified glasses to empathise 
with low dexterity or vision conditions.   
A third strategy to create accessible products is to utilize existing accessible platforms. 
Android, iOS and the web all have great accessibility features built-in. If you don't have 
the resources to make your device accessible, a less resource intensive approach is to 
ensure you support these built-in features. You could make sure an app or website is 
available that lets users control every aspect of the product. Users can then use braille 
displays or built-in accessibility features like Apple’s VoiceOver to control your product. 
Universal design - we’re all disabled sometimes 
Universal design is a term coined by architect Ronald L. Mace. It refers to a design 
approach that aims to make products and environments usable for as many people as 
possible, regardless of their age or ability. Rather than designing for certain disabilities, 
the approach aims to create a design solution that works for everybody, whether disabled 
or not. You could say the approach assumes that everybody is disabled sometimes. 
Listening to music with headphones means you're temporarily ‘deaf’ to other audio alerts. 
Carrying your grocery shopping in one hand means you temporarily only have one hand 
available for other interactions. Universal design aims to make products usable in the 
broadest range of situations, whether the user is permanently disabled or not. 
When it comes to technology, this can mean including multiple modes of output and 
input. For example, including light output in a smoke alarm in addition to audio makes 
the product accessible to deaf users without alienating non-deaf users. Including audio 
cues and tactile signposting in a device like a washing machine make it accessible to 
blind users without alienating the sighted. 
Openness and compatibility with other systems also enable users create such systems 
themselves. For example, the Nest smoke alarm and the Lifx connected light bulbs are 
compatible. This means users can setup light bulbs to flash red in case of an alert from 
the smoke alarm. 
As part of your design process, you should spend some time examining your concept 
through the lens of universal design. The 7 principles of universal design can help with 
that. 
Principle 1: Equitable Use 
 The design is useful and marketable to people with diverse abilities. 
Principle 2: Flexibility in Use 
 The design accommodates a wide range of individual preferences and abilities. 
Principle 3: Simple and Intuitive Use  
Use of the design is easy to understand, regardless of the user's experience, 
knowledge, language skills, or current concentration level. 

Principle 4: Perceptible Information 
 The design communicates necessary information effectively to the user, 
regardless of ambient conditions or the user's sensory abilities. 
Principle 5: Tolerance for Error  
The design minimizes hazards and the adverse consequences of accidental or 
unintended actions. 
Principle 6: Low Physical Effort 
 The design can be used efficiently and comfortably and with a minimum of 
fatigue. 
Principle 7: Size and Space for Approach and Use 
 Appropriate size and space is provided for approach, reach, manipulation, and 
use regardless of user's body size, posture, or mobility. 
The 7 principles of universal design were developed in 1997 by a working group of 
architects, product designers, engineers and environmental design researchers. 
Chapter summary 
There are many different interaction channels through which users can control a 
connected product. They all have different benefits and drawbacks that designers need to 
be aware of to create the most appropriate interface. 
New kinds of connected products might require hitherto unfamiliar combinations of 
inputs and outputs to create intuitive and user-friendly experiences. To identify these, 
designers shouldn’t settle for familiar or established interfaces too quickly. Instead, they 
should experiment with and explore new possibilities of interacting with a device or 
system. 
Deciding on the input and output capabilities of an embedded device almost always 
involves compromising on either the device’s flexibility or its usability.  
As the number of devices people own increases, creating interfaces that require less 
attention, are less intrusive and require less cognitive load will become more important. 
But only some interface types are suitable to create such glanceable or ambient interfaces. 
When input and output capabilities are limited, designers need to develop strategies to 
enable edge-case interactions that require complex interaction. This can be about finding 
creative ways of using these limited capabilities, or about supporting other devices. 
Designers need to make sure devices are accessible or universal. Supporting multiple 
ways to input and output, relying on accessible software platforms and creating open 
systems that allow users to connect different devices together all help with this. 
In summary, the benefits and drawbacks of the interface types discussed in this chapter 
are: 
Physical controls 
are great… 

… for direct and fast control. Giving users access to something without having 
to find an app or navigate a menu. Think volume, mute or camera buttons on 
smartphones to provide quick access anytime. 
… when fine adjustments are required. Tactile qualities like friction and 
momentum can be leveraged. Controlling volume on a heavy, slow-to-rotating 
knob allows for finer adjustment than a slider on a touch screen. 
… to make a product more accessible for users with impaired vision. Blind 
users memorize button positions or affix tactile labels to guide them. Replacing 
all controls with a touch screen makes the product far less accessible to this 
group. (More on accessibility at the end of this chapter) 
 
are less appropriate… 
… on products that change and develop through software updates. For 
obvious reasons, it is hard to change controls around after the product is 
manufactured. Abstract labels (such as colors or shapes) or combinations with 
screens can keep physical controls dynamic. 
… when functions or settings can be controlled from multiple different 
places. Controls might need separate displays to show state. They might even 
have to be motorized to move autonomously. 
Lights 
are great… 
… for glance-able and non-intrusive information output. Whether it is about 
seeing something across a room, or integrating lights in a way where they don’t 
distract - lights are great to give simple feedback without asking a lot of 
attention. 
 
are less appropriate… 
… for conveying complex information. System status or error messaging can 
be complex with connected devices. With only few lights available, UX quickly 
becomes painful and complex (like interpreting blink patterns with the help of a 
manual). 
Screens 
are great… 
… for making physical objects dynamic. For example by combining screens 
with physical controls to get dynamic labels. 
… for keeping products flexible. Because the entire UI can be updated and 
changed through software, screens more easily enable updates and iterations 
through software. This depends on the screen technology used, though, as 
discussed above under ‘pre defined displays’. 
 
are less appropriate… 
… for keeping the user experience simple. Once a product has a screen, the 
ability to display more information at no extra cost can lure design teams away 
from simplicity. 

Audio output 
is great… 
… for urgent and time-critical alerts. Because audio is pervasive, it is great to 
quickly grab a user’s attention. 
… to give a product emotional qualities. The quality of sounds can be a great 
way to convey emotions. An audible alert can be designed to sound ‘efficient’ or 
‘playful’, depending on what the designer wants to achieve. 
is less appropriate… 
… for environments where it becomes annoying. The biggest challenge with 
audio is to not make it annoying. This requires a good understanding of the 
environment the product will be in and careful application of audio. 
Voice interfaces 
are great… 
… when other channels are occupied. Think car navigation. Drivers can keep 
eyes on the road and still get information. 
… to give complex information on an otherwise simple product. Think the 
Nest smoke alarm that uses speech to say where in the house smoke was 
detected. 
… for products with strong connectivity that are used in low noise 
environments. Speech recognition is often done server-side. A fluid experience 
requires good connectivity. Noise or other people talking make recognition less 
reliable. 
… for products where complex data input is required. Tasks that take a 
number of steps on a touch screen UI, like setting an alarm clock, are much 
simpler and faster using speech recognition. 
… when a minimal physical interface is desired. Although a device might be 
capable of complex input, the impact on industrial design and the physical 
appearance can be minimal.  
… for contexts where hands free interaction is desired. For example in the 
kitchen, to keep working while interacting with a device. Also to keep the 
device sterile because it isn’t touched. 
are less appropriate… 
… when the nature of commands and terms used is hard to pronounce or 
recognize. A speech controlled music player is likely to struggle with unusual 
artist and song names, not necessarily due to recognition, even just due to the 
fact that correct pronunciation might not be clear to users. 
… for products aimed at many different global markets. Not all languages 
might be reliably supported. A fast global rollout might be impossible. At the 
time of writing, even Apple’s Siri is not globally supported. 
Tangible user interfaces 
are great… 

… for digitally enabled experiences that don’t feel like interacting with a 
computer. Like museum exhibits that let visitors explore and experiment, or 
musical instruments like the Reactable that lets users interact with sounds and 
music. 
… for educational products. Learning through manipulating objects is widely 
accepted as an important aspect of education. Tangible user interfaces can keep 
learning experiences tactile while enhancing them with dynamic digital content. 
are less appropriate… 
… when keeping all parts together is critical. If lost parts mean lost data or 
lost access, the drawbacks of tangible user interfaces might outweigh their 
benefits. 
… when there is no time to learn. If the application doesn’t allow for a 
learning phase to let users understand how to use the interface, other interface 
types might be more appropriate. 
Tactile output 
is great… 
… for creating interfaces that demand less attention. Tactile output can 
reduce cognitive load. Instead of interpreting visual output, it can be faster (but 
less precise) to feel the information. 
is less appropriate… 
… (currently) for affordable, reliable systems. Mechanical systems involve 
friction, wear and tear, and they have a limited lifespan. 
Gestural input 
is great… 
… for video games. Gestural control makes games more immersive and 
physically challenging. 
… for short interactions. The ‘gorilla arm’ becomes a problem with lengthy 
use. If gestural interaction is kept short this is less of an issue. 
… when it is obvious what gestures are possible. Users need to know or recall 
what gestures are possible, or have a guide. 
is less appropriate… 
… when precision and lengthy interaction is required. Giving precise input is 
hard with gestural interfaces. Lengthy interaction leads to fatigue and muscle 
pains. 
… when false positive recognition can have serious consequences. 
Recognition is still unreliable and false positives can occur, gestural input is not 
appropriate if this can have serious consequences. 
… when there is no time to learn. If the application doesn’t allow for a 
learning phase to let users understand how to use the interface, other interface 
types might be more appropriate. 

Contextual interaction 
is great… 
… to manage levels of complexity with little interaction. Contextual 
interaction can be a great to move between levels or detail without requiring 
methodical user input. 
… when there is an intuitive or obvious relationship between contexts and 
device features. For example: Approaching a device and revealing information 
are easy to connect conceptually. 
is less appropriate… 
… when it might be perceived as patronizing. Limiting options or taking 
action on behalf of the user might be undesired and perceived as negative and 
overbearing. 
Computer vision & barcodes 
are great… 
… for replacing cumbersome input. Computer vision & barcodes can replace 
manual input like typing in WIFI credentials, URLs or book titles. 
are less appropriate… 
… when the interaction is more complex than its alternatives. If additional 
software (like a QR code reader) is required, the alternative interaction may be 
seen as simpler by users. 


Chapter	  1.	  What	  is	  UX	  Strategy	  
Chapter	  2.	  The	  Four	  Tenets	  of	  UX	  Strategy	  
Chapter	  3.	  Validating	  the	  Value	  Proposition	  
Chapter	  4.	  Conducting	  Competitive	  Research	  
Chapter	  5.	  Conducting	  Competitive	  Analysis	  
Chapter	  6.	  Storyboarding	  Value	  Innovation	  
Chapter	  7.	  Prioritizing	  Product	  Features	  
Chapter	  8.	  Running	  Experiments	  for	  Product/Market	  Fit	  
Chapter	  9.	  Conducting	  Guerrilla	  User	  Research	  
Chapter	  10.	  Designing	  for	  Conversion	  
Chapter	  11.	  Conclusion	  
	  

2 
The Four Tenets of UX Strategy 
After this very dense chapter, I’m going to teach you some cool lightweight tools and 
techniques for devising digital products. But first I need you to understand the theory 
behind my UX Strategy framework so that you will have context to understand how it 
relates to those tools and techniques. Don’t worry if some of the business terminology 
sounds bewildering. Just understand that a framework is simply a structure that keeps 
things contained, like a fence around a dog run. And a tenet is simply a principle, or a 
dogma (pun intended)! 
How I Discovered the UX Discovery Phase AKA UX Strategy 
When attorneys in the US are preparing for trial, each side is allowed to ask the other side 
for their evidence. That process is called “Discovery”. It’s designed to avoid "trial by 
ambush," where one side doesn’t learn of the other side’s evidence or witnesses until the 
trial, when there’s no time to obtain answering evidence. Obviously, when trying to win a 
court case or releasing a digital product, you want to do everything you can to avoid 
surprises. It is why one must be strategic. 
In 2007, I was exposed to my first incarnation of UX strategy. At the time, I was 
the UX lead at Schematic (now Possible) for the website redesign of Oprah.com. I flew to 
Chicago with the other team leads to meet with Oprah’s stakeholders to kick-off our 
Discovery Phase. No, Oprah wasn’t there. But the experience really opened my eyes to 
the world around me. I was intrigued about how our UX director, Mark Sloan, got 
everyone in the room on the same page by using consensus-building techniques such as 
content maps, vision statements, and feature prioritization exercises. Although I had 
already been designing for interactive for 15 years, it was my first time focusing my 
energy purely on strategy. 
 
Within weeks, our team submitted a discovery brief of the future site to the 
stakeholders. It contained personas, user scenarios, concept map analyses, and a 
recommended feature list. Upon approval, we were off and running on the 
implementation phase. The UX phase of the Oprah project took over six months of 
emotionally fueled hand-offs - there were hundreds of pages of wireframes and functional 
specifications traded between stakeholders, designers and developers. A full year later, 
the redesigned site actually launched! But I never looked at it. By then, I had moved on to 

another large agency with big projects and I could focus most of my energy on the 
discovery phase - the UX Strategy phase - of projects. 
 
Today, I run my own practice that specializes in user experience strategy. But I 
want to make it clear that my methodology is my version of user experience strategy and 
may be different from other UX strategists. Why is that? Well, the truth is that UX 
strategists in general are rare birds. There are currently only a few dozen of us in the 
wild, or at least that I’ve met in person. This might be because it’s inefficient for a client 
to hire two of us simultaneously on a project. Or maybe it’s because the discipline is just 
so new that we’ve yet to find each other. I actually went to the first UX Strategy 
conference in Atlanta last year. There were experts with job titles other than UX 
Strategist who talked about what they thought UX strategy was. It reminded me of the 
early days of the web or when UX design first hit the scene and how no one could agree 
on what the right definition was. And that’s OK. When a new discipline arises, there are 
always discrepancies in the frameworks and methodologies. It’s up to you to discern the 
value behind each one. 
 
Because this is my book, I’m going to teach you what I’ve learned, think, teach, 
and sell to clients. To me: UX strategy is an iterative process and a cross-functional 
initiative in which stakeholders, designers, product developers, and the marketing 
department work together to connect the dots between the customer’s experience and the 
business’ goals. It requires intense collaboration between team members no matter the 
work environment—startup, agency or enterprise—in order to prevent team members 
from working myopically. Because when everyone shares a product vision, things get 
done more cost-effectively and efficiently. 
 
More importantly, this process should be used to build a disruptive product. I 
don’t want to build another version of an average product that already exists. I want a UX 
strategy that will help build an innovative product with the potential to be sustained by an 
innovative business model. What’s the point in spending time and energy crafting a 
product strategy that isn’t unique? Or isn’t at least a better alternative to current solutions 
in the online marketplace? A stellar UX strategy is a means to achieve disruption in the 
marketplace. And to keep me from forgetting this, I have the sticker below on my laptop 
lid. 

 
Figure 2-1. Photo of a sticker on my laptop that says, “DISRUPTIVE 
INNOVATION IS THE NEW PUNK ROCK 
The Four Tenets of User Experience Strategy 
Here’s my UX strategy framework and equation: 
Figure 2-2. Diagram of a square that says “UX Strategy” with four 
circles in it that say “Business Strategy”, “Value Innovation”, 
“Validated User Research” and “Killer UX Design”  
UX Strategy = Business Strategy + Value Innovation + Validated User Research + Killer 
UX Design 
 
 
All of these tenets are too complex to understand in their entirety, so I’m going 
to break down the most important components that I need you to understand for this 
book. If you already have an MBA or have read a stack of business books, then you 
should be familiar with the basics. And if you haven’t, this is going to be a quick primer 
to get you up to speed on both traditional and contemporary business principles.  
TENET 1 - BUSINESS STRATEGY 
Business strategy is the top-line vision of the company. It is why the company exists. It 
ensures the long-term growth and sustainability of the organization. It is the basis for the 
core competencies and offerings, which are the products. In this book I will use the term 
“products” to describe goods and services.  

 
The business strategy is what gives the product makers their wherewithal to 
grow in the marketplace while beating the competition. The strategy identifies the 
company’s guiding principles of how it will position itself and still achieve its objectives. 
For this to happen, the business strategy MUST continually identify and leverage a 
competitive advantage. A competitive advantage is essential to the company’s long-term 
existence. 
 
In our rehab example, the stakeholder’s guiding principle was to help people get 
better care. Their original business strategy was to create a better system that matched 
empty beds in legitimate treatment centers directly with consumers that needed them. 
When their website failed to make this happen, they needed to step back and look at the 
entire industry. Going head-to-head in online advertising campaigns against unscrupulous 
direct competitors with deep pockets was a no-win situation. 
“In war, let your great object be victory, not lengthy campaigns.” 
—Sun Tzu, Art of War1 
 
In his classic book Competitive Advantage2, Michael E. Porter lays out the two 
most common ways to achieve a competitive advantage: cost leadership and 
differentiation. 
 
The advantage behind cost leadership comes from offering the lowest price for 
products in a particular industry. Whether it is the cheapest car, television or hamburger, 
this was the traditional way that companies achieved dominance in the marketplace. After 
all, allowing the private sector to compete without government regulation is what free 
market economy is all about! I mean, look at the rampant success of stores like Wal-Mart 
and Target. They can offer consumers the best prices and widest selection of 
merchandise. But what happens when prices hit rock bottom? Then the battle needs to be 
about what makes the product better. 
 
This brings us to Porter’s second type of competitive advantage: differentiation. 
Since we are product inventors planning to build disruptive technologies, this is where 
our actual power lies. With differentiation, the advantage is based on a new or unique 
product or a unique aspect of the product that customers will pay a premium for because 
of its perceived value. That perceived value is what transforms a simple little coffee shop 
and cup of joe into the crazy success story of Seattle-based Starbucks. There’s a reason 
why people pay $5 for a cafe latte—it’s the experience that’s also wrapped into the 
product. It starts the moment a customer steps into the store and ends when that person 
tosses their cup and sleeve into the trash. As consumers, we choose one product over 
another based on the things we personally value, ranging from the product’s usefulness to 
how much pleasure we derive from it. 
 
Today, differentiation is the product game changer. It’s completely 
revolutionized the way we communicate with the world. Consider when micro-blogging 
and Twitter hit the scene. It was derided for the 140-character limit, which required users 
to choose their words carefully. But the limit has made it a valuable perk, especially with 
respect to instant updates. The royal British wedding announcement between Will and 
Kate and even news of Osama bin Laden’s death broke on Twitter first. Even now, 
protesters from the Arab Spring, to Syria, to Venezuela continue to use the platform to 
                                                   
1  Sun Tzu, Art of War first published by Lionel Giles in 1910 
2 Michael Porter, Competitive Advantage, New York: The Free Press, 1985 

rally supporters and keep the world informed with up-to-the-second Tweets. Last spring 
(March 2014), Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdo’an tried to blackout the platform in 
Turkey. Within seconds of the shutdown, people began tweeting about it3.  
 
Another tool that uses differentiation to its advantage is the map app Waze. It 
combines social traffic with GPS navigation. By merely driving around with Waze open, 
users passively contribute traffic and other road data to the network. Users can also take a 
more active role by sharing road reports on accidents, police traps, or any other hazards 
along the way, helping to give other users in the area a heads-up about what’s on the 
road. In June of 2013, Waze (an Israeli startup) was acquired by Google for $1.1B. Now, 
Waze still offers its user experience to its users, but its data is also channeled into Google 
Maps.4 Clearly, Google recognized the competitive advantage of mass collaboration and 
chose to adopt Waze rather than compete against it.  
 
While these amazing products kick ass with their competitive advantages, they 
also achieve success through a sustainable business model. Traditionally, the purpose of a 
competitive advantage was to make a product that was self-sufficient through a revenue 
stream. A revenue stream is how the company gets paid. And when a customer pays more 
for the product than what it costs to make, value is created for the stakeholders. 
 
The process of business model construction is foundational to the business 
strategy, and there is not one way to do it. If you thumb through the seminal book 
Business Model Generation5 by Alexander Oswerwalder and Yves Pigneur, you’ll see 
there are hundreds of ways to skin a business model.  
Figure 2-3. Business model canvas goes here showing the nine 
essential building blocks 
But the importance of business models is often lost on young tech entrepreneurs. They 
grew up in a world where products like Facebook and Twitter started without obvious 
revenue streams and still managed to conquer the world without becoming solvent. 
However, if you were working on the web when the Dotcom bubble burst in the 1990s, 
you have first hand experience of all of the risks involved in creating products without 
proven revenue streams. When the investment money runs out, and there isn’t any more 
coming in, it is bleak. 
 
The mega-successful digital products that define our everyday lives didn’t just 
stumble onto business models, they innovated new ones. Facebook didn’t kick MySpace 
or Friendster’s ass because it was cheaper. It did it because it offered a differentiated user 
experience that was more valuable because of its utility.  It became a ubiquitous part of 
world culture because it was the de-facto communication tool that appealed to many 
types of people. It’s not that a few people adopted Facebook. Everyone adopted it, and 
that’s why it remains the undisputed social network of our time. That’s how Facebook 
built its business model. It’s able to use its mass adoption to prove its competitive 
advantage to other companies and sell that advantage through advertising and data 
mining. 
                                                   
3 “Twitter Blocked in Turkey as Prime Minister Pledges to 'Eradicate' It” 
(http://tinyurl.com/pfpy6g4) Mashable. March 20, 2014 
4 “New features ahead: Google Maps and Waze apps better than ever” 
(http://tinyurl.com/lx9sq8c) Google Maps’s Blog. August 20, 2013 
5 Alexander Oswerwalder and Yves Pigneur, Business Model Generation, Wiley 2010 

 
This is why it’s so important to understand how mass adoption of new 
technologies and business models interact. Also, as the product scales and the market 
evolves, the business strategy must be nimble. What may have been the business model 
or competitive advantage in the early life cycle of the product may not be the same in 
later phases. In the startup world, the business strategy generally revolves around getting 
just enough product/market fit to raise financing. For a mature company, the business 
strategy is more focused on the company’s core value proposition while keeping the 
company’s infrastructure and processes in place. That way it can continue to scale and 
remain competitive in an ever-changing marketplace.  
 
So why is understanding business strategy so important to the UX Strategy 
framework?  First off, strategy is a way of thinking. It’s not formulating and executing a 
perfect plan, but rather being able to research what’s out there, analyze the opportunities, 
run structured experiments, fail, learn, and iterate until you devise something of value 
that people truly want. While devising a solid strategy, we need to take risks and accept 
failure. Later, we’ll talk more about the difference between “smart failure” and “dumb 
failure”. We’ll learn how to fail smartly by doing small-structured experiments to 
validate that our strategy is moving us in the right direction. 
TENET 2 - VALUE INNOVATION 
Value! Value! Value! 
The word seems to be used everywhere. It’s found in almost all traditional and 
contemporary business books since the 1970s. In Management: Tasks, Responsibilities, 
Practices6 (1973), Peter Drucker talks about how customer values shift over time. He 
gives an example of how a teenage girl will buy a shoe for its fashion, but when she 
becomes a working mother, she will probably buy a shoe for its comfort and price. In 
1984, Michael Lanning first coined the term “value proposition” to explain how a firm 
proposes to deliver a valuable customer experience. That same year, Michael Porter 
defined the term “value chain” as the chain of activities that a firm in a specific industry 
performs in order to deliver a valuable product.  
All these perspectives on value are important, but let’s fast-forward to 2004 
when R.S. Kaplan7 discussed how intangible assets like computer software were the 
ultimate source of “value creation.” He says, “Strategy is based on a differentiated 
customer value proposition. Satisfying customers is the source of sustainable value 
creation.” 
 
Woah! There are a lot of things in that quote that align with what we just learned 
about business strategy—differentiation and satisfied customers. But there’s one thing 
that we didn’t discuss—the fact that we are designing digital products: software, apps  
and other things that users find on the Internet and use everyday.  Often the users of these 
digital products don’t have to pay for the privilege of using them. If a business model is 
supposed to help a company achieve sustainability, how can you do that when the online 
marketplace is overrun with free products? Well, we learned how many companies like 
Waze found a sustainable business model—sharing their crowd-sourced data made them 
lucrative to other companies like Google. But in order to get the data, they had to provide 
                                                   
6 Peter Drucker, Management: Tasks, Responsibilities, Practices. HarperBusiness, 1973 
7 Robert Kaplan, Strategy Maps. Harvard Business School Press, 2004 

value to their customer base for mass adoption, and that value was based entirely on 
innovation.  
 
“Innovative” means doing something that is new, original, and important enough 
to shake up a market. As W. Chan Kim and Renée Mauborgne describe in Blue Ocean 
Strategy8, value innovation is “the simultaneous pursuit of differentiation and low cost, 
creating a leap in value for both buyers and the company.” This is accomplished by 
looking for ways that a company can reduce, raise, lower and eliminate factors that 
determine the cost and quality of a product.  
 
When we transpose this theory to the world of digital products, the value 
proposition manifests itself as unique feature set. Features are product characteristics that 
deliver benefits to the user. In most cases, less features equals more value. Value can be 
created by consolidating features from relevant existing solutions (i.e. Meetup and Evite) 
and solving a problem for users in a more intuitive way (i.e. EventBrite). Value can be 
created by transcending the value propositions from existing platforms (i.e. Google Maps 
+ Crowdsourcing = Waze). Sometimes it’s consolidated from formerly disparate user 
experiences into one single solution (1-stop shop for a user task), i.e. sharing a video you 
made with your phone on YouTube, into one elegant simple solution (i.e. Vine and 
Instagram). We will deconstruct these complex techniques in Chapter 7 Storyboarding 
Value Innovation for Digital Products. 
 
But for now, let’s discuss the most important reason that we want to be unique 
and disruptive with both our products and our business models. There are bigger 
opportunities in unknown market spaces. We like to call these unknown market spaces 
“blue oceans.” This term comes from the book Blue Ocean Strategy that I mentioned two 
paragraphs ago. The authors discuss their studies of 150 strategic moves spanning more 
than a hundred years and thirty industries. They explain how the companies behind the 
Ford Model T, Cirque du Soleil and the iPod chose unconventional strategies rather than 
fighting head-to-head with direct competitors in an existing industry. The sea of other 
competitors with similar products is known as a “red ocean.”  Red oceans are full of 
sharks that compete for the same customer by offering lower prices and eventually 
turning a product into a commodity. 
Figure 2-4. Photograph of an unappetizing hamburger 
 
In the corporate world, the impulse to compete by destroying your rivals is 
rooted in military strategy. In war, the fight typically plays out over a specific terrain. The 
battle gets bloody when one side wants what the other side has - whether it be oil, land, 
shelf space or eyeballs. In a blue ocean, the opportunity is not constrained by traditional 
boundaries. It’s about breaking a few rules that aren’t quite rules yet or even inventing 
your own game that creates an uncontested new marketplace and space for users to roam. 
 
A perfect example of a company with a digital product that did this is Airbnb. 
Airbnb is a “community marketplace” for people to list, discover and book sublets of 
practically anything from a tree house in Los Angeles to a castle in France. What’s 
amazing about this is that their value proposition has completely disrupted the travel 
industry. It’s affecting the profit margins of hotels so much that Airbnb was banned in 
                                                   
8 W. Chan Kim and Renée Mauborgne, Blue Ocean Strategy. Harvard Business School 
Press, 2005 

New York City9. Its value proposition is so addictive that once customers try it, it’s hard 
to go back to the old way of booking a place to stay or subletting a property. 
Figure 2-5. Public domain photo of a legal doc or image from the AP 
showing Airbnb’s legal issues in NYC 
For instance, I just came back from a weekend in San Francisco with my family. 
Instead of booking a hotel that would have cost us upwards of $1200 total (two rooms for 
two nights at a 3.5 star hotel), we used Airbnb and spent half of that. But for us, it wasn’t 
just about saving money. It was about being in a gorgeous and spacious 2-bedroom home 
closer to the locals and their foodie restaurants. The 3% commission fee we paid to 
Airbnb was negligible. Interestingly, the corporate lawyer who owned this SF home was 
off in Paris with her family. She was also staying at an Airbnb, which could have been 
paid for using some of the revenue ($550+) from her transaction with us. Everybody 
won! Except, of course, the hotels that lost our business.  
 
Airbnb achieves this value innovation by coupling a killer user experience 
design with a tantalizing value proposition. A value proposition is the reason why 
customers accept one solution over another. Sometimes the solution solves a problem we 
didn’t even know we had. Sometimes it creates an undeniable desire.  A value 
proposition consists of a bundle of products/and or services (“features”) that cater to the 
requirements of a specific customer segment. Airbnb offers an unbeatable value 
proposition to both sides of its two-sided market—the people who list their homes and 
those who book places to stay.   
 
Airbnb chose not to focus on beating the existing competition (other subletting 
sites and hotels) at their game. Instead they made the competition irrelevant by creating a 
leap in value for all of their potential users. They did this by creating a marketplace that 
improves upon the weaknesses of all of their competition. Airbnb is more trustworthy 
than Craigslist. It has much more inventory than HomeAway and VRBO because listings 
are free. They provide an incredible amount of value along the way - from the online 
experience (booking/subletting) to the real-world experience (showing up on 
vacation/getting paid for your sublet).  
 
If you are looking to create such a value proposition, then read on. To create a 
Blue Ocean product, you need to change the way that people think about doing 
something. Value innovation is about changing the rules of the game. 
 
Airbnb did this by enabling a free-market sub-economy in which quality and 
trust were given a high value that spanned the entire customer journey from the online 
experience to the real world experience. And they catered to both of their customers (sub 
letters and renters) with distinct feature sets that turned what was once a creepy endeavor 
(short-term subletting) into something with incredible potential for everybody involved.     
 
Figure 2-6.  Visual illustration showing chart of value props for both 
hosts and guests corresponding to their distinct feature sets 
• 
Gives people an easy way for people to monetize their extra space and showcase it to 
an audience of millions.  
                                                   
9 “NY official: Airbnb stay illegal; host fined $2,400” (http://tinyurl.com/k7oyx3j) C|Net. 
May 20, 2013 

• 
Gives people an easy way to discover amazing and affordable places to stay all over 
the world.  
• 
A seamless user experience for both sides where the process of subletting and 
booking leaves both sides feeling pretty great about themselves.  
• 
A pricing strategy where Airbnb  takes a nominal cut (3%) of both sides of the 
transaction. Using Airbnb from the customer side now makes it less expensive and 
better than traditional methods. (Blue ocean) 
• 
Risk is low similar to Ebay because of user reviews of both sides. (Trust is value 
innovation.) 
There are many other products causing widespread disruption to the status quo. Uber, 
which matches drivers with people who need rides, is threatening the taxi and limousine 
industry. Kickstarter is changing the way businesses are financed. Twitter is disrupting 
how we get news. And we can never forget how Craig’s List broke the business models 
of local newspapers by providing us a far superior system for personal listings.  
TENET 3 - VALIDATED USER RESEARCH 
 
Not realizing a product’s value is one of the primary reasons that the product 
will fail. Stakeholders are dreamers in that they assume - instead of verify - what is 
valuable to their customers. Much like Kevin Costner in the movie Field of Dreams, 
these entrepreneurs believe that if they build it, they [the users] will come. But the truth is 
that any product is a risk. Remember our software engineer at the beginning of this book? 
His assumptions about what his customers wanted turned out to be wrong. His heart was 
in the right place. His idea was timely, different, very innovative and even had a unique 
and sustainable business model. But the users didn’t come. And when my team 
eventually went out and asked his target users, we found out they wouldn’t have paid for 
the product as it was being positioned. 
 
User research is how you verify that you’re on the right track with your value 
proposition. There are lots of ways to do it—ethnographic field studies, contextual 
inquiries, focus groups, diaries and journals, card sorting, eye-tracking, personas, and 
more. I don’t want to talk about any of these traditional methods. Instead, I want to talk 
about Lean Startup. 
 
It’s weird to admit, but before 2011 when Eric Ries’ Lean Startup10 (which you 
must read) went critical mass, founders didn’t make it their mission to confront customers 
“early and often.” The empirical, fast-moving, and transparent nature of Lean Startup 
riffed on ideas from Steve Blank’s customer development methodology11 and the highly 
theoretical Design Thinking approach. Sure, organizations had UX designers around to 
do “user-centric” design (as opposed to engineer-centric), but Lean Startup made 
conducting validated user research a make-or-break aspect of moving forward on a 
product. Lean Startup forced user research to become measurable.   
 
This leads us to our third tenet—validated user research. “Validation” is the 
secret sauce of the Lean Startup business approach. Validation is the process of 
confirming that a specific customer segment finds value in your product. Without 
validation, you are simply assuming customers will find use for your product. Validated 
                                                   
10 Eric Ries, Lean Startup. HarperBusiness, 2011 
11 Steve Blank, The Four Steps to the Epiphany. K&S Ranch Press, 2005 

user research goes beyond just observing and establishing empathy for potential users. It 
is a process based on a reality-check that focuses on direct feedback from interaction with 
users. It helps your team determine if the vision of your product is a dream or a potential 
nightmare.  
 
Eric Ries popularized the term “Minimum Viable Product.” It simply means 
learning if potential customers want your product by building just the core features of 
your value prop. This is far different from traditional product development in which 
building a prototype was often a simulation to show potential investors the future 
product. Instead, we build the MVP to test if customers want the product. By getting 
customer buy-in on our value proposition we are de-risking our product. And if users 
don’t like what they see, then we need to either “pivot” to a different customer segment 
or pivot to a different problem that our value prop can address.  
 
Iterations like the MVP require your team to immediately conduct research and 
gain validation before developing a solution. It helps verify that your team is targeting the 
RIGHT customer (something our rehab startup in Chapter 1 failed to do) and not just a 
general persona. Once you’ve validated that a specific pain-point addresses your end 
user’s needs and wants you will continue to add features, then test those features using 
the same research methods. This is known as the Lean Startup feedback loop of build-
measure-learn. Use your research to validate your decisions and ensure the product vision 
is aligned with the end user’s needs. Keep doing this and eventually you’ll have a killer 
user experience design.  
  
Validated user research is a collaborative process that should involve as mean 
members of the product team as possible. Collaboration will actually help organically 
build consensus on the value proposition. Now this may sound naive since we are all 
working in different environments with a range of folks with dynamic personalities who 
are in various positions of power. In an enterprise environment, there are typically many 
stakeholders who each have a say on the product requirements based on their personal 
agenda or preference. When I work for agencies, the product requirements are typically 
locked in stone during a requirements gathering phase that I’m not involved in. For me to 
suggest doing validated user research or creating an MVP to test during the design phase 
is blasphemy because it’s counterintuitive to the agency model. The last thing an account 
executive wants to hear from their UX resources are ways to cut the project fee down for 
their client.  
 
But if you find yourself in this familiar position, that’s the exact moment that 
you need to become intrapreneurial. Intrapreneurship is the act of behaving like an 
entrepreneur while working within a large organization. You need to decide to take the 
fate of the product into your own hands through assertive risk-taking and innovation. 
Stand up and ask for the extra week or two to conduct validated user research. If you get 
a “no” or are too afraid to ask, then it’s time to start working off-hours. The worst thing 
that can happen is that you will discover something about yourself and/or start looking 
for ways to improve your own work process. 
 
The bottom line is that confronting your users is non-negotiable. We must learn 
as quickly as possible if the idea we are working on is stupid and worthless. We need to 
have an open mind to experiment and to fail. That’s right, we are betting. And the odds 
are against us. But in the end, this approach is more cost-effective and efficient. 

TENET 4 - KILLER USER EXPERIENCE DESIGN  
Concision is the art and practice of using no more words than necessary to convey an 
idea. Airbnb facilitates a positive and trustworthy customer experience that starts online 
with a transaction and then moves offline in real-time. It culminates with both 
participants in the transaction hoping for positive reviews from each other. The entire 
user experience is built around the idea of making sure each guest and each host is a good 
customer. Airbnb not only provides a good user experience, it asks its users to help build 
it as well. 
 
For those of you who don’t know, the “user experience” (UX) is how a human 
feels when using the interface of a digital product while attempting to accomplish a task 
or goal. Yes, we can say a door handle is an interface and go off the non-digital highway 
into the world of 100% physical products. But in practice, the term user experience refers 
to whether a person had a good or bad time trying to utilize a digital product. The user 
experience of Vine starts when a mobile phone user opens the app and pushes down 
anywhere on the screen to capture a video. With simply one touch they’re instantly 
recording video of a special moment – maybe their child’s first lick of an ice-cream cone. 
Then painlessly with just a couple more taps, that video automatically lands on the 
Interwebs where grandma can immediately watch right from her Facebook feed.  
 
Killer UX Design is accomplished when a product allows its users to easily 
accomplish a goal with little resistance. Simply put, killer UX design enables an 
experience that is FRICTIONLESS! A killer user experience is also when a product team 
INVENTS something that people can’t live without, or at least don’t want to give up 
because it’s so much better than the way they used to do things. I know I would be 
hugely bummed if you took away the experiences afforded to me by my iPhone, 
LinkedIn, Airbnb, and Google docs.  
 
But killer UX design doesn’t happen by magic. It must be informed by business 
strategy, value innovation, and validated user research. And these are things that user 
experience designers don’t typically do.  
 
Traditionally (if I dare use that word for a discipline barely two decades old), 
user experience design is associated with deliverables for development and design 
execution—site maps, wireframes, process/task flows and functional specifications. 
Recruiters for enterprises and agencies identify user experience design with the job titles 
that create these deliverables, including interaction designer, information architect and 
UX designers. These definitions are used by large enterprises and agencies and are pretty 
much how user experience design is currently practiced.  
 
What ultimately happens in this “traditional” system is that the UX designer is 
often excluded. They miss the boat when it comes to making the important product 
decisions. Sometimes this is the fault of the UX designer because she is still learning the 
craft, or worse, perfectly content to hide behind her monitor knocking out wireframes. 
But if those wireframes are not informed by the business strategy and the user research, 
then stakeholders can expect mediocrity and copycat design.  
 
Killer UX design is accomplished when the UX designer works collaboratively 
with stakeholders and teammates at the idea’s inception. Then, the UX designer can be 
involved in designing structured experiments. These experiments need to be focused on 
how successful the value proposition can be communicated to the customer from the 
moment the customer hits the landing page. Using measurable results, design decisions 
can be made based on real evidence rather than hunches.  

 
Killer UX design is also about determining which key moments and features are 
absolutely critical to your product. We will explore techniques such as storyboarding and 
journey mapping that will weave key experiences together in simple and elegant ways. 
We will dissect successful products such as Vine and Snapchat that offer a “less is more” 
design approach. 
Figure 2-7. Screen shots of Vine, Snapchat, Waze interfaces 
 
Traditionally, UX designers tend to be more concerned with user engagement 
and design than with customer development and revenue generation. But it’s the latter 
that really concern business strategy. Decisions about user experience design should not 
be subjective because its goals are objective. You want to convert new users into satisfied 
customers who tell their friends to try your product. The common problem that UX 
designers really need to be aware of is just how much their decisions are tied to customer 
acquisition. Just think about any transactional website or even a simple sign-up process. 
The UX design should be very concerned with barriers to entry, which may prevent 
customers—even validated customers who have previously engaged with the product – 
from converting to customers (We’ll talk more about this in Chapter 10 - Designing for 
Conversion.) Wireframe layouts should be geared towards the desired response of the 
user. This is where UX design can really positively affect the visual design and content 
strategy because the look, feel, messaging, and calls-to-action really matter!  
 
Once a UX designer becomes proficient using these tools and techniques they 
begin to morph into a UX strategist. But as I said in the beginning of this Chapter, UX 
strategists are currently unicorns. You really need to pay your dues working as a UX 
designer, front-end developer and/or project manager because there’s a lot to understand 
about how software should work. And it takes time to understand the big picture.  
With practice and mindfulness, the UX designer will come to understand the product 
as a sum of its parts. This means that she must take the lead and define the product with 
features that balance user value and business value. She also must balance the level of 
effort needed to implement those features. To get a product out the door, the UX designer 
must be able to work collaboratively with stakeholders and teammates. It takes a lot of 
emotional intelligence to sell your UX concepts to both clients and developers. I’ve 
learned from experience that people don’t like working with “genius designers” or 
“design heroes.” So don’t expect to get a “seat at the table” by acting like an asshole. 
 
Sidebar - Top 10 Not-Strategies! 
1. A killer idea for a new product! 
2. A laundry list of features! 
3. A thoroughly researched game plan where all possible scenarios have been 
considered and is ready for implementation. No need for customer feedback 
because you are 100% certain you have nailed it! 
4. A creative permutation of trending buzzwords that were just used by another 
startup that raised financing. (i.e. Peer-to-peer Sharing Economies) 
5. A generic set of motivational statements (i.e. Go Team Challenge Conquer) 
6. An arrogant statement from some expert—“Our product sprung from the 
genius of Professor Iam Awesome, the visionary of Social Lean Disruption.” 

7. A hypothesis that has unvalidated risky assumptions—“Well, all women DO 
like pink.” 
8. A grandiose vision that doesn’t align with their core values that your company 
has no capability of delivering (i.e. A patent-pending, new-method-of-discovery 
dream).  
9. A vague affirmation that sounds like a good Hallmark card—“You, too, can 
achieve Social Lean Disruption.” 
10. The North Star 
 
RECAP 
I certainly don’t miss the heyday of Flash when designers went off the deep end creating 
game-like web interfaces for new digital products. But if we are inventing a product that 
does something new, that’s our chance to make a new convention. In Lean 
Entrepreneur12 Patrick Vlaskovits and Brant Cooper advocate “If you are doing best 
practices, you are not innovating.” This is a provocative statement because established 
interaction design patterns help make consistent user experiences. But there is no harm in 
breaking a rule or two through experimentation. That’s what Amazon did to become the 
superpower of successful transactions. By optimizing our product’s entire user 
experience, we help Alice trip down the rabbit hole. 
 
That is what UX Strategy is. 
 
So the real trick is to keep all four of these tenet “plates” spinning in the air. 
Figure 2-8. Illustration of a hipster-looking clown juggling plates 
 
In short, we need to think clearly to identify the problem we are trying to solve, 
and who our customer is. We need to learn everything about the existing market space. 
We need to be analytical so that we can identify opportunities that can be exploited. We 
need to pack a one-two punch of incredible user experience coupled with an innovative 
business model.  
 
There’s an existential reason that we want to get good at this. Life is short! Why 
waste our finite time on earth making something that nobody wants or uses?  Who 
knows… the whole planet could blow up tomorrow and we all might come back as slimy 
snakes with no hands and maybe even no Internet! So instead, let’s do things to safeguard 
our stakeholders and ourselves from the high probability of failure by “de-risking” our 
future products.  
                                                   
12 Patrick Vlaskovits and Brant Cooper, Lean Entrepreneur. Wiley, 2013 

Rochelle King &
 Elizabeth F. Churchill
 Designing
with Data
IMPROVING THE USER EXPERIENCE WITH A/B TESTING
Early Release
RAW & UNEDITED

	  
Chapter	  1	  Introduction	  
Chapter	  2	  Foundation	  of	  Data	  
Chapter	  3	  Business	  of	  Data	  
Chapter	  4	  Culture	  of	  Data	  
Chapter	  5	  Ethics	  of	  Data	  
Chapter	  6	  Early	  Stage	  Design	  and	  Data	  
Chapter	  7	  Middle/late	  Stage	  Design	  and	  Data	  
Chapter	  8	  Long	  Term	  Effects	  
Chapter	  9	  Conclusion	  
Case	  Studies	  
 

O’Reilly 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data Driven vs Data Informed 
Design:  Does It Matter? 
On March 14th, 2008, a product manager at Google began her keynote at SIGCSE 2008 in 
Portland, Oregon.  Entitled “Innovation, Design and Simplicity at Google”, Marissa 
Mayer outlined the vision that she had spearheaded at Google for almost a decade.   
In one section of her talk, she off-handedly explained the importance of testing different 
designs at Google, specifically for Google News.   
“There was a huge amount of iteration.  I think that our UI designer had had it with us by 
the end of that process, 64 iterations later.  It was very much worth it – Edward Tufte 
complimented [Google News] as the best designed page on the web.  I think that the 
reason that design has come to be is because of that iteration, and the acceptance that we 
won’t get it right the very first time we do something.  But we will try very hard to get 
data and evolve the design in a very scientific way.  I like to think of design as much 
more of a science than an art.  Let’s not say “top navigation is better than left”, let’s not 
say “this screen is better in blue”, let’s just put them both on the site, in what we call a 
split AB test where we take 1% of our user population and give them different designs 
and then see which one actually performs better.”1 
She repeated this mantra in several keynotes over the subsequent year.  At her AIGA 
keynote in October of 2009, she went into even more depth using examples to show how 
Google makes design decisions.   
                                                             
1  

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
The fourth slide of Marissa Mayer’s AIGA October 2009 Keynote 
 
“One of the techniques that we use is now known as split AB testing.  Amazon developed 
it around the same time Google did.  We did our first split AB test in 2000.  And what it 
basically means is that you take your user population and you split them into groups A 
and group B and you give them different experiences.  The idea being that then you can 
see, in a natural situation, what would happen if you made that change on the site. And, 
for all of our changes – you know, all design starts with an idea – but then we take that 
idea, we’ll do a usability test where we look at qualitatively, “are there any large 
problems?”, “is it generally understandable?”.  And once you get through those two 
hurdles, then it’s really about putting it on the site and letting the data – letting the 
metrics decide.  SO the best design along various metrics is what wins.” 
She goes on to explain, with data, why she had designers test 41 shades of blue within 
gmail.  At the time of writing, the full video can be found on the AIGA website, free of 
charge2.   
As many remember, this was extremely contentious.  Is testing 41 shades of blue still 
design?  When algorithms and humans collide, at what point does the human end and 
skynet begin?  This was on Doug Bowman’s mind in March of 2009.  In a very public 
departure, he derided Google’s practice of data driven design.   
                                                             
2 Marissa Mayer’s October 2009 AIGA keynote http://www.aiga.org/video-makethink-2009-mayer/ 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
“Yes, it’s true that a team at Google couldn’t decide between two blues, so they’re testing 
41 shades between each blue to see which one performs better. I had a recent debate over 
whether a border should be 3, 4 or 5 pixels wide, and was asked to prove my case. I can’t 
operate in an environment like that. I’ve grown tired of debating such minuscule design 
decisions. There are more exciting design problems in this world to tackle. 
I can’t fault Google for this reliance on data. And I can’t exactly point to financial failure 
or a shrinking number of users to prove it has done anything wrong. Billions of 
shareholder dollars are at stake.”3 
It took five years for Google to respond in very tangible terms to Doug’s complaint.  Dan 
Cobley, Google’s UK managing director, in speaking at a DLA Piper event, revealed the 
following insight. 
“And we saw which shades of blue people liked the most, demonstrated by how much 
they clicked on them. As a result we learned that a slightly purpler shade of blue was 
more conducive to clicking than a slightly greener shade of blue, and gee whizz, we made 
a decision.  But the implications of that for us, given the scale of our business, was that 
we made an extra $200m a year in ad revenue.”4 
Two hundred million dollars a year.  Think about that.  A single six digit hex color code 
made Google and extra two hundred million dollars a year.   
 
But what about the rest of us mere mortal working in smaller companies?  For those of 
that don’t have the words “VP at” Google, Facebook, Baidu, Twitter LinkedIn on our 
resumes, do these same rules apply?  And before we even begin to answer that, do the 
words “data-driven” or “data-informed” even make sense?   
 
Data Informed vs Data Driven 
The word “data driven” has, by now, long been part of buzzword-bingo card sets.  It’s 
been heard in the halls of the web analytics conference “eMetrics” for over a decade with 
countless sessions aimed at teaching audience members how to turn their organizations 
into a data-driven one.   
When spoken of in a positive light, the word “data driven” conjures visions of 
organizations with endless streams of silver-bullet reports like the one shown in figure 2.  
 
                                                             
3 http://stopdesign.com/archive/2009/03/20/goodbye-google.html 
4 http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/05/why-google-engineers-designers 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
A Data-Driven Organization with Data-Driven Reports  
 
You know the ones – they’re entitled “This Chart Will Help Us Fix Everything” that 
show how a surprise change can lead to a quadrillion increase in revenue along with 
world peace.  One shade of blue – a 200 million dollar yearly increase in revenues.   
When spoken of in a negative light, the term is thrown around as a descriptor of 
Orwellian organizations with panopticon-level data collection methods; with 
management imprisoned by relentless reporting, leaving no room for real innovation.   
On Being Data Driven 
I think it’s kind of problematic how data-driven so many companies are today, 
as crazy as that sounds.  I see this mentality that I think is common, especially in 
Silicon Valley with engineer-driven start-ups who think they can test their way 
to success. They don’t acknowledge the dip. And with really hard problems, you 
don’t see market success right away. You have to be willing to go through the 
dark forest and believe that there’s something down there worth fighting the 
dragons for, because if you don’t, you’ll never do anything good.” 
Evan Williams, Co-Founder, Blogger & Twitter 
 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
One thing is certain.  Businesses can’t do LinkedIn-level data driven decision making 
with the yearly budget of a half of one of LinkedIn employees’ salary.  As we’ll see later 
on in this chapter, real data-driven decision making isn’t even possible at certain stages in 
the development of a company.  Early-stage companies have, in most cases, far more 
pressing issues than split testing the color of a button.   
One of the best descriptions that we’ve ever seen on the difference between data-driven 
and data-informed comes by way of Andrew Chen.  In a well referenced post entitled 
“Know the difference between data-informed and data-driven” 5, he explains that “[…]the 
difference […] in my mind, is that you weigh the data as one piece of a messy problem 
you’re solving with thousands of constantly changing variables. While data is concrete, it 
is often systematically biased. It’s also not the right tool, because not everything is an 
optimization problem. And delegating your decision-making to only what you can 
measure right now often de-prioritizes more important macro aspects of the problem.” 
The words “not everything is an optimization problem” sum up the philosophy behind 
this book very well.  We also want to broaden the definition of “data” from merely being 
AB test results to representing a wide breadth of information that you can gather from 
many different sources.  We want to acknowledge that the intersection of data and design 
can be so much more than AB testing and to recognize that it can be equal parts art and 
science.    
To be honest, the great debate between “data-driven” vs. “data-informed” can sometimes 
feel like semantics.  It is never as black and white as the blogs might have us believe.  
There are people that call themselves “data-driven” but in practice exercise judgment and 
gut to inform their decisions as much as the data and even if you place yourself in the 
“data-informed” camp, if you aren’t using the data correctly then you may run as much 
risk at doing as much or even more damage than someone who religiously uses data to 
drive every single decision. We generally felt though, that data-informed better 
represented the balance we are trying to strike and  this is why data-driven design wasn’t 
the title we chose for this book  
What Is Data Informed Design? 
Data-informed design is approach to design where decisions are informed by specific, 
objective evidence; data.  And though data comes in many forms, and it is collected in a 
number of different ways, it should be used to give teams a better understanding of what 
customers are doing with a product and how they are reacting to the changes made to it.   
Being smart about data-informed decision making has considerable advantages.  It helps 
managers hire smarter, and helps designers  
Having common success metrics within your company can also help designers and the 
broader product team to align around common goals and to understand what kind of data 
is the most important to track and follow.    
                                                             
5  http://andrewchen.co/2012/05/29/know-the-difference-between-data-informed-and-versus-data-
driven/ 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
So more specifically, for our purposes, data-informed design is a framework that you can 
use as a designer to help you hone your understanding of customer behavior, align you 
and your team to the larger company objectives and business goals.   
Using a data-informed approach can be a core foundational practice and primary 
methodology for how you and your teams can think about design - but as with most 
things in life it’s not “all or nothing”.  There are other things to take into consideration 
when designing as well. 
 
There is a general perception that taking a data-informed approach will limit your ability 
to take large leaps in innovation or that it stifles creativity.  Many raise the concern that 
using a data driven approach limits designers by taking the “art” out of design, reducing it 
to just the “science”.   We believe that it is most important to recognize that solely 
employing a data-driven approach will not be enough.  For us, being data-informed is less 
about being a “yes” or “no” question and it’s much more about being aware that there is a 
spectrum on which you can operate.  Depending on the nature of the project, where you 
are in the development timeline and the product itself - it may make more or less sense to 
rely on data.  Generally speaking, when people talk about the opposite of “data-
informed”, they mean relying on experience, gut or instinct or making decisions in 
absence of having them be vetted by data. 
We believe that relying on your instinct and experience is essential during the early 
stages of a product.  When you find that you are trying to pivot or make a dramatic 
change in your product direction - those initial ideas and product solutions are born from 
your instinct and experience as a designer.   When you are defining principles for your 
brand or product and thinking about how you want to express these beliefs to your 
customers - you again rely more on your core beliefs, instincts and experience as a 
designer.    
A significant part of a product designer’s job is still the “art and craft” of design.  That is 
leveraging training, experience, instinct and gut based on years of perfecting the craft of 
creating great experiences in terms of both visual treatment and user experience (flows, 
information architecture).  If you take two designers, one that is mediocre and one that is 
great, and they both employ a data-driven framework.  You’ll find that the better designer 
will still be able to propose stronger and more impactful solutions compared to the 
mediocre designer.  However, in a data-informed framework you might actually be able 
to measure how significant that difference is.   
 
Now that we’ve outlined our basic philosophy on data-informed design.  It’s important to 
recognize that applying this framework is not “one size fits all”.  A key fundamental 
consideration is finding a baseline before you even start to optimize and tune your 
approach.  The type of business you’re in and the stage that your business is in will 
matter tremendously.    The following section will help you identify what you should be 
watching (before optimizing) based on a few simple rules of thumb.  We’ll end with a 
cherry on top.  Rochelle will close the chapter with a personal, hilarious and face-palm-
worthy anecdote of the process of data-informed design, in practice, at Neftlix.   

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
What kind of business are you in?  
The kind of business you’re in has a huge impact on what you’ll care about on a day to 
day basis.  Said another way, working in any position at a social network startup won’t 
necessarily give you the necessary skills to work in a SaaS company, because the 
considerations of the businesses are very different.   
One of the examples I find that illustrates this well is a short tale of two websites going 
down.  Consider gmail and Twitter.   
In the early days of Twitter, the platform went down very, very often.  The root cause 
came down to scale – too many people trying to use the product at once.  The underlying 
technology couldn’t support it, which lead to many users getting error messages.  And 
that error message was a picture created by Yiying Lu, later dubbed the “Fail Whale” by 
twitter user @qrush (Nick Quaranto)6. 
 
"[Yiying Lu] eventually put the image on iStockPhoto.com, where Stone [co-founder of 
Twitter] spotted it and decided it could serve as an error message that was both cute and 
symbolic. Better than the LOL-cats they were using at the time, anyway (remember, this 
was 2008). “I wanted to find something that was still fun but that wasn’t so jokey,” he 
told NPR. “This idea [is] that it’s a big job but we’re all working together to do it.”" 
 
As a result, when Twitter used to go down, many people seemed to be delighted.  Shouts 
of glee would hit walls on Facebook when Twitter went down.   
                                                             
6 https://twitter.com/qrush/status/822613478 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
Business Insider, The Next Web, BBC News, Times Magazine and Read Write Web are 
all examples of publications that have called the Fail Whale “Iconic” at least once.7  In 
short, people love the fail whale.  
Compare this to what happens when gmail goes down.   
                                                             
7 https://www.google.ca/search?q=fail+whale+iconic&oq=fail+whale+iconic 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
The Culture of  Data 
Over the course of this book, we’ll be covering the fundamentals of setting up a strong 
framework for incorporating data in your day to day decision making process.   We’re 
also going to talk about how the data that you’re interested in may differ depending on 
what kind of business you’re in or what stage of growth your company is in, how to get a 
baseline and then use that data to help inform you as you develop and optimize your 
product.   
 
While having all the mechanics in place to embrace data as part of the decision making 
process is important, it’s equally important that you have a culture that supports it as 
well.  Creating a culture where all of this comes together well really depends on two key 
things:  the process and the people.   It might seem a bit odd to start this book with the 
chapter on culture, and indeed it was originally the last chapter in the book.  But as we 
wrote more and more of the book, we realized that this first section had to be about  
putting all the pieces in place for creating a good foundation that you can build on as you 
learn more about the actual techniques.  
By making you aware now about the cultural implications of being in an environment 
that embraces data as part of the design and product development process, you’ll have 
this in the back of your head as you read through the more practical chapters on how to 
gather, analyze and interpret the data.  This way you can consider what you’ll need to do 
to set yourself up for success when you actually go to implement some of these methods 
yourself.  In the same way that we wanted this book to represent a balanced approach to 
data and design, we also wanted this book to provide you with a 360 degree approach to 
implementing data as a framework  - which means thinking about the culture as well as 
the methods. 
 
In this chapter, we’ll cover two things: 
1) What a data informed culture looks like 
2) Some tactics that you can use to get there  

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
I hope we can show you how everything from the vocabulary that you use to the people 
you hire can help to foster a culture where data informed design can thrive and give you 
some concrete tools that you might consider using as you go about investigating what a 
data informed environment looks like at your company. We’ll talk to a few companies 
where the culture of data and design has flourished, but we’ll also talk to some places 
where it didn’t work out so well and see what we can learn from those places.   In the 
end, company culture is such a unique and precious thing that we would never want to 
dictate what culture you should adopt.  We only hope to provide you with as much 
information as possible, so that you can pick and choose which things make the most 
sense to incorporate into your own situation.  
Why does the culture matter to data? 
You might be reading this book because your company currently takes a data informed 
approach to product development and you want to better equip yourself with the tools 
you need to engage in those conversations.  You may also be reading this book because 
your company currently doesn’t leverage data in it’s product cycle and it’s something that 
you’re thinking of introducing.  Either way, whether something is new for you or new for 
the company it’s really important to recognize that the success or failure of an approach 
or framework is going to be dependent on the environment that you are working in.   
 
With respect to data, there are a handful of things that we’ve seen work really well at 
different companies and that are really important have as part of the company DNA.  
Some of these things apply more at the individual level, and some are ore dependent on 
the group.  If you really want to be effective at integrating any kind of framework into 
your company, you’ll want it in your DNA/Culture.  It’s a hundred times easier to adopt 
something when the culture supports it … and that’s why the success of a data informed 
framework is really going to depend on the culture at your company.  Some key 
components that we’ve seen work in various environments: 
● 
The value and role of data is universally embraced and understood 
● 
A common vocabulary/language when talking about data 
● 
A disciplined and consistent approach to leveraging data 
● 
The organization is encouraged to continually learn and grow their knowledge 
base (and data can play a part in that) 
● 
The hiring process and the people who are hired reflect and supports the above 
 
We’ll walk through each of these points to help you think about which things you want to 
adopt for your organization and which may not make as much sense for you or your 
team.  At the end of the chapter, we’ll suggest some tactics that you might use as you 
build up your own culture of data informed design. 
 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
Universally embraced and understood 
For a data informed approach to be successful in any organization, it must be both 
universally embraced and understood.   By “universal” we mean both in terms of depth  
(that is accepted at all levels, from senior executives to individual contributors) and 
breadth (that it is accepted throughout the company, beyond the product development 
organization as well).  Specifically, this means that people at all levels in the company 
and across a broad set of functions within the company recognize that data is used to 
inform product decisions.  It also means that they have at least a basic understanding of 
what this process looks like and what the pros and cons are of using data are.   This 
means that there is a good “support net” for data informed design to happen – having this 
level of transparency in the process and common understanding can help to keep the 
design and product teams accountable to good practices.   
 
Depth:  Top to bottom 
Because data driven design is by definition about breaking the hierarchical decision 
making structure it must be accepted by all ranks in an organization.  In fact, it may even 
be most important for it to be driven by the top levels of management since their voices 
carry less weight in the day to day decisions when you employ a data informed 
framework.  This is because fundamentally, what you are doing is looking to the “data” 
that you are getting directly from your customers when making your product decisions.  
Just to reiterate something that we talked about in Chapter 1, this data may be collected 
using any number of techniques (survey, usability research, AB testing, etc.) but it’s all 
coming from your customers and much less about having individual executives drive 
those decisions (and recognizing the possibility that those opinions can be subjective).  
An excellent early paper about overall AB testing published in 2007 by Ron Kohavi, 
Randal Henne and Dan Sommerfield titled “Practical Guide to Controlled Expriements 
on the Web:  Listen to Your Customers not to the HIPPO”1 actually calls this 
phenomenon out in the title of the paper.  This paper points out a fairly familiar situation:  
”Many organizations have strong managers who have strong opinions, but lack data, so 
we started to use the term HiPPO, which stands for Highest Paid Person’s Opinion, as a 
way to remind everyone that success really depends on the users’ perceptions.” 
 
If you are trying to shift into a data informed framework, it will be critical to look at the 
way product and design decisions were made previously made.  If these decisions were 
largely in the hands of one or two individuals then it’s worth taking the time to make sure 
that they can understand and recognize the value of bringing in customer data into the 
decision making process because in the end, they may find that their weight is diminished 
(as is the “weight” of any individual opinion).   This is a good point to check with 
yourself as well – are you comfortable and willing to see how depending more on data 
will change the weight of your own opinion within the design and product development 
process?  Is this something that you are comfortable with personally? 
 
                                                             
 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
Breadth:  beyond design and product 
In addition to getting all levels of an organization on board with a data informed 
approach, it can be just as important for teams outside of product and design to have a 
basic understanding of a data informed framework and how it’s being employed.   
Personally, I’ve always appreciated company cultures that embrace transparency.   
 
I’ve found that data informed decision making can be a really great way to bring in 
organizations that are not normally part of the design & product development process and 
make them feel like they have a closer affinity with how the product is shaped.  A data 
informed process is a bit more democratic since it relies mostly on the “voice of the user” 
to vote with their behavior.   If people in organizations beyond product and design feel 
like they can empathize with your users, then they can sometimes feel empowered  as 
part of this process.  In addition, by clearly NOT making decisions only relegated to the 
arena of the HiPPO, it can also remove some of the abstract, black box, mojo that can 
intimidate or make other parts of your company skeptical about the decisions that are 
being made.  In other words, a data informed approach is something that many people 
beyond product and design can understand.  By being more transparent with the rest of 
the company about how product and design decisions are being made (and especially in 
product and design driven companies), I have seen it build broader support within the 
company for the decisions that are being made. 
 
There is another positive side effect of having your data informed approach being broadly 
understood.  It may initially seem like it’s superfluous to have teams like HR, sales, or  
finance fundamentally understand a data driven approach.  However, it is always helpful 
to have any team that you work with in any capacity understand how you do your work.  
In my experience, having HR understand how much we rely on data has helped them 
recruit better candidates for my teams.  They have helped me articulate and recognize the 
profile of candidate that would work best in this environment (more on recruiting later in 
this chapter).   
 
Whenever I’ve done product development related to features like payments or ads, 
having a finance and sales teams that understand the way that you look to data to support 
or disprove various ideas is also incredibly helpful.  They can become even more 
engaged in the idea generation stage and we become better aligned about what factors we 
are looking to when determining what is considered successful or not.  As much as 
HiPPOs can existing within Product and Design organizations, they can also exist in 
other organizations as well.   Imagine the sales executive who feels that they know 
exactly what you need to build into your product but may be overly swayed by a key 
vocal client.   If that sales executive understands that you build product by looking at the 
data, then they realize that they need to start to articulate their arguments into the same 
framework  - and it helps to get you and them aligned with what you are building, why 
you are building it and what impact you think it will have on your overall user base.  
 
There is a huge difference between feeling like using data to make and inform decisions 
is something that just one part of the company uses as a tool and having it be universally 
embraced by the entire organization.  To get this level of understanding throughout the 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
company, using data has to be something that you actively share within all parts of the 
company and has to be something that is shared broadly (e.g. in company all hands 
meetings and other public forums).   
 
<Sidebar: culture & data/> 
Patty McCord – former Chief Talent Officer, Netflix  
 
One of the things that made being data driven so successful at Netflix was that it was 
a well established practice that was universally accepted throughout the company.  It 
may have started at the top with Reed and Neil (Netflix CEO and CPO) driving and 
believing in the data driven approach, but it was also embraced by everyone through 
management to the individual contributors on the team.   
For example, when Reed would engage in product testing and had a strong idea for 
what he wanted to see in the product, he would submit his ideas to the same rigor of 
AB testing as everyone else in the product team.  On rare occasions, Reed might 
dictate the exact way that a product idea would work, but he would do this on “his 
cell”.  This cell would be tested against other cells that were proposed by the 
product team.  If it didn’t win, then it didn’t get launched.  Reed even went so far as 
to have a philosophy that he had a certain number of “bullets” that he could use.  If 
he continued to propose failing test cells, then at some point the product team 
wouldn’t have to indulge him in creating these cells any more. Having the upper 
level management hold themselves accountable to the same process as the individual 
teams definitely reinforced that it was the way we wanted to work.   
Something here about how Reed used to always say “we don’t have a Steve Jobs, so 
we use data” 
In fact, data driven design was so much a part of how we worked in the Netflix 
product organization that the philosophy was actually understood outside of the 
product and technology group.  It wouldn’t be surprising at all to find a finance 
or HR person asking us at an all hands meeting when we launched new product 
what the original hypothesis was and what test cells went into the test.   
 
Common vocabulary/language 
A key part of establishing culture is the language that you use.  Think about the words 
that you most often hear at your company.  What are the words and phrases that are 
unique to your company?  Which acronyms have you created and embraced?  When you 
first joined what were the things that stood out to you as unique?  Now think about how 
those words and phrases help to set a tone for how business is conducted within the 
company and how usage of certain phrases make you feel like you’re part of an “in-
group” or “in the know”.  To make a data informed decision making framework is 
universally embraced, it’s then important to actually have a common vocabulary and way 
of speaking about it.   
 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
You’ll find that a common vocabulary will help in a number of ways, from making 
brainstorms more effective to making debate over product and design decisions even 
more rich because you’ll have a shorthand for the things that are most important to the 
discussion.  Seemingly simple questions that can get asked over and over again, “How 
are we going to measure X?”, “How do you expect the majority of users will react?” or 
“What do you expect to learn about user behavior from this design?”  can quickly help to 
train people and set expectations about the role that data can play in decision making.   
Words and phrase can articulate both positive and negative things – remember the 
“HiPPO”?  What do you think it would feel like if you were called out as succumbing to 
the “HiPPO” on a project? 
 
Remember though, this should be as much about having common definitions as it is 
about having a common vocabulary.  Since a data informed environment requires a 
certain amount of discipline and rigor to the practice, you can’t ensure consistent 
application of this framework if you don’t also have alignment on your definitions as well 
as your vocabulary.  Another pitfall to look out for is that it can be easy to get caught up 
in the words and acronyms (especially around metrics) and that you forget that ultimately 
this is all about your users.  Find ways to actively represent the user in your definitions so 
that everyone recognizes that the data doesn’t become dehumanizing and is instead 
always a reminder of the people that you are building your product for. 
 
Key phrases and vocabulary will be defined throughout this book, however this is a short 
list of some of the key concepts and phrases to look out for.: 
● 
Hypothesis - by stating “my hypothesis is...” it helps to place your idea within 
the context of everyone else’s ideas.  Calling it a “hypothesis” reminds you that it hasn’t 
been proven yet and that it needs to be tested.  Hypothesis also has the added benefit of 
sounding more scientific, in some ways I believe that this makes people less attached to 
their ideas and therefore more open to testing them and being proven wrong. 
● 
Metrics -  We’ll spend a lot of time in this book defining how to find the right 
metrics for your company, and identifying the difference between core, proxy and 
secondary metrics.  For the purpose of this section, “metrics” is a key part of the data 
informed vocabulary because the metrics that you use and measure represents how you 
measure success.  Clear understanding and agreement on how you are defining metrics 
(at the company level and at the project level) will ultimately be an indicator of how 
aligned you are on any given project or discussion and can therefore play a significant 
role in how effective your discussions are.   You might find that you start to use questions 
like “is this change really going to move the metrics?” to ask if you’re really investing 
your time into a project that will have a measurable impact on your users.   Questions like 
“which metrics do you think this will affect?” can help you to make sure you’re looking 
to impact the right level of user behavior. 
● 
Statistically significant - a great shorthand for knowing whether or not you 
should act on the results from your test.  You can always refer back to whether or not the 
results were “statistically significant”. 
In reality, the vocabulary itself may not be as important.it’s really more about consistent 
usage of this vocabulary that helps to reinforce a specific mindset and a way of thinking.  
Like working in any company, the vocabulary can help to shape the culture.  As you read 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
the book, it will be a good exercise for you to think about how you might turn some of 
the above into phrases that will work out for your unique organization.  In the sidebar 
from Leisa Reichelt you’ll see how she instituted a program for everyone to sit in on at 
least 4 hours of user research every 6 weeks and how it became common practice to ask 
people “Have you done your 4 hours?”  What are the words that are already part of your 
company culture that you can adopt to support a data informed approach?   
 
Be disciplined & consistent 
 
 
Later in this chapter, we’ll talk more about how to build up the culture of data informed 
design.  As you begin applying a data informed framework, there’s no way to just turn it 
“on” so you’ll start with selectively.  However, your goal should be to make data 
informed design a consistent part of product development.  To do that, it will require 
discipline and vigilance.  This is probably true of any decision making platform, but if 
you’re going to take a data informed approach to product and design it’s important to not 
apply this framework selectively.   
 
Fundamentally, taking a data informed approach to design is about trying to make 
decisions about your product and for your customers using as much information as 
possible along the way.  It’s about trying to mitigate the subjective aspects of product 
development by incorporating data from your customers into the process.  It’s therefore 
almost inherent to the nature of a data informed design process that you need to apply it 
consistently across all projects for it to work.  I’ve seen that using data inconsistently 
within an organization can often cause confusion or skepticism about the larger process.   
 
One of the critiques that I’ve heard about using data inconsistently is that the data is only 
used when it supports the opinion of the person who’s making the decision.   This can 
definitely happen in organizations and as many of us might know from lab courses in 
college or high school, there are often ways to “fudge” the data or read it in a way that 
makes it support the outcome you’re looking for.  As you’re trying to establish the value 
of data informed design, it’s even more critical that they way you leverage and interpret 
data is such that it reinforces the objective value that it brings.   
 
As you’ll see in later chapters of this book, data informed design really does require a 
balance between subjectivity and objectivity. You will subjectively decide what to test 
and what data to gather when crafting your solutions or making your decisions.   As a 
designer or Product manager working in this environment, you might find that there can 
be a dose of skepticism around which cells are being tested and why.  Therefore, it 
becomes important to treat all projects with the same amount of rigor across the board.  
Crafting solutions and making decisions in absence of data and user feedback should 
become the exception and when you do make those decisions without testing or user 
feedback you’ll want to be able to articulate and defend why that was the case.   
 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
Especially when you are trying to establish the methodology of data informed design, it 
can be important to showing how you consistently  hold yourself accountable to the 
methodology of data informed design, but ask others to hold you accountable as well.  
This goes back to the first two points about having data informed design  be universally 
embraced and having a common vocabulary.  If you have those two things in place, then 
your whole company will be helping to keep you and your team accountable as well. 
Encourage Learning 
I’ve noticed that data informed design environments work best when they are seen as part 
of an overall company culture that encourages learning.  Many companies are focusing 
on creating “learning environments” where there is a focus on building individual skills 
as well as encouraging development.  Data informed design can really lend itself to this 
environment because one of the core attitudes that you need to have about using a data 
informed framework is to recognize that you are constantly trying to build up and add to 
your knowledge about your customer’s behavior.  As we used to say at Netflix, using a 
data informed approach was fundamentally about “honing your consumer instinct”.  This 
is an ongoing activity and every project is an opportunity to get better at developing that 
instinct through learning, information and data. 
 
There are some very practical habits and best practices that can really help to support this 
culture.  Some things that I’ve seen be especially effective are: 
• 
Sharing results and information broadly 
• 
Keeping sharp on both theory and practice 
• 
Self awareness/evaluation 
We’ll outline here a little about what each of those things look like, but give more detail 
on how to practically implement ongoing processes for each of these items in the second 
part of this chapter.  
 
Share broadly 
If you are actively using a data informed design framework, one of the best things that 
you can do for your company is to broadly share the results and to give everyone access 
to the data.  In a data informed environment it becomes even more important that 
designers understand how their designs are being judged and performing. Designers are 
often very engaged with user research (which we also classify or include as part of the 
“data informed” framework because the design is still in progress and user research is 
often more integrated into the design process. However, there are many places where 
once the design is done, the designer disengages from the product development process 
and doesn’t stay as engaged with the results post launch. 
 
When I joined Netflix, one of the first things I did was to begin to ensure that the 
designers got the results from any AB tests that were done on their designs. Many of the 
designers mentioned that getting access to this data was a key shift in their ability to 
become more strategic.  It was also important that they understood (at a high level) how 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
to analyze this data and how to then use that data to make informed decisions about what 
to design (and test) next.  Of course, none of this could have happened were it not for the 
fundamental sharing of results in the first place.  There are many reasons why it’s really 
important to share results. 
 
Habitual sharing/context setting/broad communication, company-wide, of test results - 
reinforces that most decisions are influenced by data.  It also helps folks to build up 
shared knowledge about what works and what doesn’t work.  All this testing doesn’t 
really get you much further if you’re only using it to make decisions on a micro level.  
What should be happening is really taking away learning from these smaller instances 
and then using them to hone your instincts about your users over time.  The best way to 
do this is to vet it with your peers and to subject your testing to debate and discussion. 
Theory and practice 
I’ve found that it’s useful not only to share the results of ongoing work, but to also 
recognize that operating in a data informed environment can be new for a number of 
people.  Sharing results from ongoing work means that you’re sharing knowledge and 
insights which helps people develop a better understanding when it comes to your 
particular product or project, but it can also be helpful to make sure that people who have 
less experience with data informed design have an opportunity to build a good foundation 
about the practice itself.     
 
Discussions and debate around more general topics and “theory” of data informed design 
can be very helpful to make sure that everyone has a common foundation.  Topics might 
include everything from how to pick the right technique for different kinds of projects, 
the pros and cons of different methodologies, or even details on how to pick a statistically 
significant cell size or what a p-value is.  The number and level of discussions that you 
have on these best practices will be determined by how mature the organization is with 
respect to data informed design.   If everyone can have a common baseline of knowledge 
on the theory behind the practice of data informed design you’ll find that your 
discussions on  actual projects will be much richer and much more efficient.  You’ll also 
hopefully avoid some of the pitfalls of not using the data properly (and therefore being 
more likely to subjective or mis-interpretation).    You’ll find plenty of potential topics 
for these “theory” discussions as you read this book because we’ll be covering some of 
those basics in  the upcoming chapters. 
 
Self awareness/evaluation 
As we’ve mentioned before, one of the biggest benefits of a data informed approach to 
design is that it gives you a great tool to use to hone your consumer instinct over time.  If 
part of the culture of data informed design is about transparency and a more objective 
evaluation of your work via the data then as we’ve hinted before accountability to 
holding everyone to a similar standard is important.   It’s really helpful to create an 
environment where you can encourage self evaluation and to not be afraid of making 
mistakes and building out ideas that don’t actually “move the needle”… so long as you 
are keeping track of them and then learning from those experiences.    
 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
We talk in the next section about “keeping track of track records” as a good way to see 
how you’re actually doing.  Being self aware of when your instinct has differed from 
what has been reflected in the data is one of the fastest ways of improving and if you’re 
in a culture where sharing data and results is very common, then you should have a lot of 
tools available for you to evaluate yourself.  It’s important to note that some of the 
pitfalls of being in a data informed environment (as outlined in Chapter 15) are bad habits 
that you can develop if you DON’T hold yourself accountable to your decisions and if 
you don’t do this constant self evaluation.   For example, “over-testing” can actually be a 
side effect of not having a strong enough instinct for what are the right things to test.   
Developing a good instinct for what will give you the best ROI will actually come from 
constant viligence and self evaluation as to how well YOU are operating and how well 
your instincts are validated by data.  Not only should this be applied to the individual, but 
to the organization overall and it’s best if you can explicitly think about fine tuning and 
improving your collective understanding about your customers.   
People matter 
As anyone who has managed a team knows, the people you hire play a huge role in the 
success of your team.  Building a team to work effectively with data informed design 
requires hiring a certain kind of profile.  There are three qualities that I look for when 
building out the design team in a data informed organization:  1)  fundamental design 
skills, 2)  business acumen, 3) affinity for data informed design.  You don’t always need 
to hire people who have actually had experience in doing data informed design, but you 
at least need to find people that seem to have an affinity for working within that 
framework.  If the folks that you hire aren’t fundamentally open to the concept of data 
driven design then it can make it very difficult for them to be successful in the team.  
This of course doesn’t mean that they are “bad” designers, it just means that they would 
probably be more effective (and more appreciated by their peers) in a different 
environment.  As we mention throughout the book, there are many ways to do design and 
to build product.  What fundamentally determines the success of design or product is 
finding the right fit between the individuals, organization and the processes that you use 
to get there.  
I’ve found that the following are a handful of qualities that also seem to correlate to the 
kind of profile that works well in a data informed organization: 
• 
Curiosity about the business - Ideally the people you hire have a passion and 
curiosity about the business you’re in, but I’ve found that within a data-informed 
environment, it becomes even more important for people to have a certain level 
of business acumen and ability to think strategically about the business.  This is 
because it all ties back to being able to create hypotheses that have the intent of 
moving the metrics you use to measure your business by.  If the designers and 
product managers who are tasked with building the business solutions don’t 
have a baseline level of business capability, then they will be handicapped in 
terms of coming up with the right solutions. 
• 
Ego - Let’s be honest, designers are often well known for having egos.  There 
are many kinds of designers that exist in companies and all types of designers 
can be successful in their careers. For some designers, a healthy ego can actually 
be a necessary and positive characteristic as it can sometimes give designers the 
confidence and ability to convince others of their vision and to sell them on that.  
One of my art history professors once pointed out that without ego, no artists 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
would survive because they have to undergo so much rejection in their career.  
Ego is a necessary component for creativity to survive.  In a data informed 
design environment, ego can get in the way of success.  This is because as part 
of a data informed organization you often have to be willing to let the data make 
the decision instead of the individual.  I have seen many designers struggle with 
this and especially when they are coming straight out of design school can be a 
hard thing to accept. 
• 
Humble - Because your ideas and designs are always being held up to 
examination and “proof” in the real world, then it’s important to be comfortable 
with being humbled.  There will be many times when you find that the design or 
thing that you believe in doesn’t actually prove successful and you need to be 
able to accept that and then move on. 
• 
Scientific mind/math skills- it is true that having some basic understanding of 
statistics and analysis can make a big difference in whether or not an individual 
can succeed in a data-driven environment.  You don’t need to be great at it…the 
lowest grades I ever got in college and graduate school were in statistics related 
classes (statistical thermodynamics - C-) .  However,  it’s important to have 
some basic level of math is just so that you can have those conversations with 
the folks that are doing the analysis of your work.  You need to be able to 
question how the success of your work is being measured and you need to have 
an appreciation for it.  Without some fundamental understanding of the theory 
behind many of the techniques in a data informed environment, you won’t be 
able to engage in the more strategic conversations. 
• 
Focus – Especially in the AB testing part of data informed design, it can be easy 
to get distracted with different options and test cells and variations.  By having a 
certain amount of focus and discipline, you will be better equipped to resist the 
urge to fall into the various pitfalls of AB testing around making a decision too 
early or building out too many test cells. 
 
Practicalities: Best practices in setting up a culture for data 
informed design 
Now that we’ve talked a little about what a data informed culture might look like, we 
wanted to make sure that you also had a few tactical best practices that you might 
consider putting into place and adopting for yourself. The key areas we’ll cover in this 
section are: 
• 
Getting everyone on the same page 
• 
Internal and external examples to help establish the practice 
• 
Finding a pilot group or allies within your company 
• 
Ongoing education – what works and doesn’t 
This section is really written for people who don’t currently have a well established 
process of data informed design and are looking to set it up for the first time.   You’ll find 
a lot of tips for “the first time you do X” in here.   

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
Getting everyone on the same page 
It’s probably obvious, but worth mentioning that before you embark on setting up a data 
informed design process at your company, you’ll actually want to make sure that the 
people who are going to be affected by it really do understand what’s involved AND that 
they want it.  In my experience, if a process isn’t already established in a company there 
will always be some level of skepticism around something new or something that wasn’t 
developed organically within the company.   You might find that there are people who 
will say “Yes!  We should definitely start to take a data informed approach to design, but 
we shouldn’t do X, Y and Z” or that what they think it means to be data informed, might 
be something very specific (like only AB testing) and that they aren’t considering the 
bigger picture. 
 
A good practice is to get a lay of the land.  Find out definitively what people really do 
know and don’t know about taking a data informed approach to design.  You might find 
that people really understand user research, but have much less experience with AB 
testing (or vice versa – this was the case at Spotify).  Find out what the biases and 
assumptions are about data informed design and do this at all levels of the organization 
(from CEO to individual designer or product manager).  Having all of this understanding 
up front about what people think and know can really save you a lot of time in the long 
run.  You’ll be able to assess where you might want to focus initially in terms of 
establishing best practices and you’ll also become aware of any challenges you might 
face as you try to get a data informed design process established.  I’ve definitely been in a 
situation where I’ve jumped to the conclusion that someone had the same level of 
knowledge or understanding of data informed design as I did, only to find that we later 
had to back track and redefine some of our fundamental assumptions together.  If we had 
just taken the time up front to establish what our relative approach and philosophy was, 
we could have saved hours of mis-interpretation and backtracking.  
 
Once you’ve established what your baseline is, you might then want to explicitly talk 
about what practices you want to establish and why.  Getting your team and others that 
you work with to  agree to try out some of these things that might be new to them will be 
important if they’re not familiar with some of these tactics.  It’s always good to set 
expectations for what you will do and what you expect to see as a result, so saying “I’d 
like to take an extra few days on this to make sure we have time for user feedback on 
how usable this flow is.”  Makes it clear that the cost will be a little more time to 
introduce something new and what level of results you hope to get from it.  I’ve 
definitely seen situations where teams were hoping to learn something from AB testing 
that actually would have been much better suited for usability research or vice versa.  
They then leave that situation feeling like they didn’t get what they were hoping for and 
are much more reticent to try out that technique again in the future. 
 
Internal and External Examples 
One of the main reasons people consider adopting a data informed design approach is that 
it can save you a lot of time in learning something about your product before you release 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
it.   I’ve found that you can learn a lot from past internal examples as well as by looking 
externally at what other companies are sharing about their learnings.   
 
As data informed design is becoming an established process, I’ve found that an effective 
technique is to take past projects and then retroactively look at the data using a data 
informed framework.  Of course this may not  always be possible, because you may not 
have had all the proper tracking in place but many times the basic metrics will be tracked 
and available.  You can look at old projects and see if there was any way of looking at the 
data ahead of time that might have affected the decisions you made on the project.  Often 
the data is available to but the team just wasn’t considering it.   
 
This might be especially effective on projects where the outcome wasn’t what you were 
expecting.  For example, was there a project where you were hoping to see a big lift in 
acquisition and it didn’t happen?   Going back to the data, was there anything you could 
have looked at prior to making those changes that might have given you a hint as to the 
fact that it wasn’t going to be successful?  How can you build that knowledge into future 
tests?    Or perhaps your users reacted very badly to a new feature you launched but really 
thought was going to make them happy… applying some survey techniques or user 
research in these instances (even though the feature has already been launched) will give 
you insight into what your users might have been able to tell you ahead of time if you had 
done this work pre-launch.  When you can share these kind of insights back to the team 
(even if it does feel “too late”) it makes people that much more enthusiastic to 
incoroporate a data informed approach earlier in the process the next time. 
 
There are also a number of external resources as well where you can see what other 
companies have learned.   People are constantly sharing information about what 
experiments they’ve tried and what they’ve learned from them.   As you are considering 
different design and product decisions, looking to what may already be written or shared 
on the subject can be a great way to pre-inform or to accelerate acceptance for adopting a 
data informed design process in your company.  For example, you might be considering  
creating a side navigation system, but you find this article from the Next Web on side 
drawer navigation costs user engagement. 2   At the time, this was a very common 
navigational style and many companies were doing it.  Sharing this data back to your 
team should give you good reason to consider running a test for your own navigational 
system and evidence that for this particular decision taking a data informed approach to 
the design would be valuable.   
 
One thing to keep in mind is that the results that you see for some companies may not 
always be transferrable to your company.  There might be other factors at play which 
give them the results that they get and so you can expect that blindly applying the same 
approach will give you the same results.  This is why it is important to eventually 
establish your own internal process of data informed design – so that you can ultimately 
                                                             
2 
http://thenextweb.com/dd/2014/04/08/ux-designers-side-drawer-navigation-costing-half-user-
engagement/ 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
build up your own knowledge base of things that work best for your company and your 
product.   
 
Pilot groups and allies 
Whenever I’m looking to try something new at a company, I always try to start small by 
using a “pilot group”.   If your company or organization has never done data informed 
design before, you’re likely to find that there are some folks who are eager to try 
something new and others who will have more resistance to it or not want to be bothered 
with the hassle of adopting a new practice.  Generally, finding a few allies who are 
willing to try something out with you and who are also going to be more forgiving in the 
initial stages when you are likely to make a lot of mistakes can be really helpful.  This 
will give you a chance to work out any kinks in the process with a small group of 
supportive people and then have more confidence as you try to roll it out to other 
designers or teams.   
 
To find a good “pilot” project, there are a couple of characteristics to consider.  Find 
something small so that you can ideally get a “quick win” and share the positive results of 
using data informed design to others.   If the first project you pick to use data informed 
design takes you a few months just to establish what data you’re looking for or to do the 
analysis on the results, it’s very unlikely that you’ll get a lot of enthusiasm from others to 
adopt something new.   Find a project which has well defined success metrics.  This will 
make it easier for you to explain what you’ve learned or not by applying a data informed 
process.   A project that allows you to do a couple of quick iterations can also be good 
because it can demonstrate a data informed process over a couple of cycles.   In the rest 
of this book, you’ll find that we really try to encourage using data to do more than “just 
optimization” but when you’re establishing the practice for the first time – these kinds of 
projects are perfect for warming up the larger organization to the concept of data 
informed design and to build confidence in adopting a new framework for design.  
 
Finally a note on “allies”.  As mentioned above, some people will be naturally drawn to a 
data informed approach and others will not.  I’ve often found that the best allies exist in 
other teams and that having many different voices who can advocate for a data informed 
process can be very powerful.  Some of the best advocates I’ve found have been in the 
analytics team (if you have one) and marketing.  Seeing support from the broader 
organization helps to make this more than “just a design thing” and helps to elevate it to 
the level of a company wide initiative.  This also helps with the “universally accepted” 
aspect of culture which we opened this chapter with as well.  
 
 
Ongoing education and establishing a rhythm around data 
As we’ve mentioned before, creating an environment where it’s clear that ongoing 
learning is supported can be one of the most effective tools to getting traction for a 
framework like data informed design.    I’ve found that this is best done through a series 
of ongoing meetings, forums and occasional talks.    

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
Lectures – this might be more applicable to larger teams - introducing a topic to a broad 
audience (say a mix of tech, product and design) can be an effective way to plant some of 
the seeds of data informed design with that group.  In the past, the kinds of topics that 
I’ve used these lectures for have been: 
• 
Introduction of company wide metrics 
• 
Overview of best practices and introduction to data informed design processes 
• 
Overview of different methods and techniques and when to use them 
However, lectures can’t be the ONLY means you use to introduce a new framework to an 
organization.  You’ll notice that most of the above are at a very superficial overview 
level.   These can be a great introduction, but what’s really needed are follow up 
discussions with active project teams at the right time in their process.   So, while it’s 
good to use an all hands or team meeting to talk about the ways that you might leverage 
early stage user research – it won’t really feel concrete or useful until you can find a team 
that is actually at a stage in their project where they can leverage early stage research and 
speak directly to what techniques make sense for them at that point in time.  This is one 
of the reasons that we’d really like you to look to the later chapters as something that you 
may not read in sequence, but instead can refer back to when appropriate for you.  
 
Project review meetings 
One of the most effective meetings for sharing knowledge is a recurring project review 
meeting.   This might be an ongoing meeting between a broad set of product managers 
and designers to review a number of topics around ongoing work.  The key is when you 
invite people that may not normally work day to day with each other – this way they can 
share what they are learning in each of their areas to the broader organization and it helps 
generally with building up that shared knowledge base of what is working and what 
doesn’t work when it comes to your users.  You might break this meeting into two 
sections: 
1) Ongoing or upcoming work 
2) Results from launched projects 
The meeting should encourage a lot of discussion and debate about the projects that are 
being shared and it should feel more like a working meeting where everyone is vetting 
what is being presented.  The people who presented should leave the room feeling more 
confident about the approach that they are taking and perhaps have some new insights as 
well. To get you started here are some of the kinds of things you might present and 
discuss.  
 
On ongoing or upcoming projects your discussion might include the following: 
• 
Hypothesis 
o 
Is the hypothesis valid? 
o 
Background for what generated the hypothesis and any prior 
work/data/research that influenced it 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
• 
Success metrics  
o 
Are they right ones? 
o 
Will these really measure the validity of the hypothesis? 
o 
What other things might you measure or use to measure success?  
• 
Methodology 
o 
What techniques are you using to collect data for this project?  (e.g. 
user research, AB testing, etc.)  
o 
What do you hope to learn?   
• 
Design  
o 
How effective is the design at reflecting the hypothesis or variations of 
that hypothesis? 
o 
How does the design support what you want to learn from this project? 
o 
Note:  This meeting will be different from a design review where you 
might be looking at consistency within your design language, etc.  and 
giving more pure design feedback.  Those meetings are still useful, but 
probably a separate meeting from this one. 
 
For projects that have launched and where you are reviewing results, discussion might 
revolve around the following: 
• 
Summary of methodology 
o 
What methods were used?   
o 
How effective were they at getting the insights you were looking for? 
• 
Results and analysis 
o 
Was the hypothesis proven?  Why or why not? 
o 
What did the team learn and what can be applied to other work that is 
going on ? 
o 
Did the results support any other larger trends that you might have seen 
before? 
o 
How do these results compare to prior work? 
o 
What are the next steps? 
 
By reviewing work like this on a regular basis, people can actively learn about what 
works and doesn’t work.   I’ve found that it’s always been more engaging and useful for 
folks to learn through case studies and having a meeting like this can encourage people to 
ask questions and discuss, , thereby learning together and actively learning while doing. 
 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
When the organization is newer to data informed design, having a meeting like this is a 
great way for the few who might be more comfortable with the concept to teach many.  
When the organization is actually fairly mature at using data informed methodologies, 
then I find that the discussion can actually be quite stimulating and really great at helping 
to push, uplevel and engage people even further. 
 
Keeping track of track records 
Another best practice which is especially effective with respect to AB testing is to keep 
track of which cells you (and your team) think will “win” and then comparing it to what 
actually happens.  To cast your “vote” ahead of launching a test, ask all the members of 
the team to write down what they think the results will be and why they think those 
results will happen.  When you get the actual results and can compare it with the votes 
that were cast prior to the test being launched then it gives you a chance to see how well 
you and your team were actually able to predict the impact to users.   
 
Over time, it’s always interesting to keep track of who in the team has the “best” product 
instincts.  There’s of course a danger in this tactic in that it can create a competitive 
environment, but the trick is to make it more about learning together and keeping each 
other honest.  This ties back to the section in this chapter where we talked about self 
evaluation and holding yourself accountable.  I’ve actually done presentations where 
we’ve used survey results or results from AB test to ask the audience to raise their hand 
or predict which version was going to win or what consumers might do.  It’s always 
enlightening for people to see just how poor some of their instincts may have been. 
Developing a rhythm around data 
Finally you might find that there are some very easy ways to set up a rhythm around data.  
In this sidebar, Leisa Reichelt talks about how getting executive buy in to come and 
watch 4 hours of user research every 6 weeks became a great way of establishing the 
value of user research to the rest of the organization.   There may be other things that you 
can look to piggy back on to set up an expectation within your team about good habits 
that you can make part of a recurring rhythm.     
 
For example rather than setting up user research as needed, you could set up a monthly 
user research session which either focuses on your baseline experience or that gets filled 
with whatever happens to be going on that week.  You might also consider sending out a 
monthly update with insights from the various projects that you’ve been doing.  By 
starting to set up expectations that data will be collected on a regular basis or looking to 
create dashboards that show how metrics might be changing over time given changes that 
you are making to the product, you can start to establish a working rhythm in your 
organization around data.   
 
 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
 
If you’re interested enough in creating a lasting and deep culture around using a 
data driven framework to make product decisions, you’ll also invest some time in 
building up a culture which can support it with the right processes as well as the right 
people.  In the following chapters, as you learn more about data informed design, look for 
the concepts and ideas that resonate most with you and ask yourself some of the 
following questions along the way: 
• 
What are the things that will be challenges for you as an individual to change?   
• 
What are some of the things which will be challenging for your organization or 
team?    
• 
What existing habits and cultural aspects are already in place that might make a 
good foundation upon which to build a culture of data informed design and 
decision making? 
• 
Who do you already have in your organization that might prove to be really 
helpful for you to pair with as you try to establish these practices? 
 As we mentioned when we started this chapter, culture is really something that is unique 
to every organization and we  would never dictate what the right solution might be for 
you.  You may want to take some of the practical things we’ve suggested and put them in 
place right away, and you’ll find that some of them will work well and last, whereas 
others will just never get any traction.   
 
Perhaps in keeping with the theme of data informed design, I’ve always taken an 
experimental approach to organizational processes as well – trying out many different 
things, and then getting the feedback from my “users” (or team) which things seem to be 
effective or not.  And again, similar to how you approach data driven design, see if you 
can find ways to measure your success.  In the case of culture, it may not be as clear cut 
as “retention” or “acquisition”, but you can find other ways to measure your success.  
How well has your “common vocabulary” taken hold?  Are people actively asking to 
bring data into the design and product development cycle or do you need to push them to 
incorporate it?   How much does data informed design get attributed for the success of 
your product and how much is it referred to by other organizations in your company? 
 
As with other advice you’ll see in this book around AB testing, it’s important to have a 
certain amount of patience as well to see if the fruits of your labor are paying off or not.  
In my experience it can take anywhere from 6 months to 1 year to really see a change in 
the mindset of an organization take effect.  Keep looking for those cultural success 
metrics to take hold, hopefully with some time and tweaking, you’ll find that data 
informed design really does have a positive effect not just on how you build your 
products, but in your culture as well. 
 
 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Why do people create necklaces and earrings of an error page for Twitter8, but talk about 
death and suicide when gmail goes down? 
It’s pretty simple – they’re two totally different kinds of businesses.  Twitter is a user 
generated content site.  When UGC sites go down, people’s livelihood generally don’t 
depend on it (especially for those in early stages), so you normally get a minority of 
people that have legitimate grievances with downtime.   
SaaS products like gmail are products people rely on.  When it goes down, it means 
someone can’t so something that they’ve generally paid (or are getting paid) to do.   
The moral here isn’t that it sucks to work at Gmail and rocks to work at Twitter.  The 
moral is that SaaS companies care about things like performance and user experience.  
Social networks care about completely different things, like sharing, return visits, or 
reducing spam content.   
The kind of business you’re in dictates the kinds of metrics you care about.  We’ll cover 
in detail the 7 kinds of businesses and the 3 stages of a company in Chapter 2+ so that 
you can focus on getting the right kind of data for your situation.    
 
  
                                                             
8 https://www.etsy.com/ca/listing/60239227/hoist-fail-whale-necklace 

THE LEAN SERIES 
ERIC RIES, SERIES EDITOR
Creating Dynamic Brands 
to Generate Conversion
BRANDING
LEAN
Laura Busche

Lean Branding
Creating Dynamic Brands
to Generate Conversion
Laura Busche
Beijing ·  Cambridge ·  Farnham ·  Köln ·  Sebastopol ·  Tokyo

	
v
Foreword. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . vii
Preface. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ix
PART ONE: INTRODUCTION
Chapter 1 
What Is a Brand? . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3
Chapter 2
What a Brand Isn’t . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11
PART TWO: BUILD
Chapter 3
Brand Story. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 25
Chapter 4
Brand Symbols . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 53
Chapter 5
Brand Strategy . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 77
PART THREE: MEASURE
Chapter 6
Brand Traction. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 127
Chapter 7
Brand Resonance. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 175
Chapter 8
Brand Identity. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 195
Contents

vi	
PART FOUR: LEARN
Chapter 9
Brand Rechannel. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 221
Chapter 10
Brand Reposition . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 233
Chapter 11
Brand Redesign. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 245
Chapter 12
Conclusion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 255
Glossary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 257
Credits and References. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 263
Index. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 265

	
C H A P T E R  3
Brand Story
Throughout this chapter, we will look at the six essential parts of a lean 
brand story: positioning, promise, personas, personality, product, and 
pricing.
I’ve never met someone who did not aspire to be something more. Even 
Homer Simpson, with his absolute lack of will and ultimate disregard for 
the future, at times aspired to be a better husband, a fitter couch potato, a 
less miserable son to his old man. I’ve heard 5-year-olds state with absolute 
certainty that they will be president. Someone is sweating his head off 
right now at some ridiculously expensive gym because he aspires to be 
fitter. As you read this, someone is pulling an all-nighter studying to earn 
class valedictorian status—or maybe even reading this book to up her 
brand game (in which case I highly appreciate it!). I’m pretty sure some­
one is daydreaming to the sound of Bruno Mars’s “Billionaire.” Someone 
(perhaps you) aspires to build a successful product that customers open 
their wallets and hearts for. If that is indeed you, please hold on to this 
thought: aspirations.
Behind every great brand is a promise that fulfills its customers’ aspira­
tions. We are in the business of taking customers from A to B, where A 
is who they are today and B is who they want to be tomorrow. Consider 
the products you love—sports attire, note-taking apps, electronic devices, 
chocolate ice cream…this book—and how they’ve made you feel closer to 
whom you want to be.
When most people think about aspirations, they imagine long-term dreams 
or perpetual objectives. But in reality, aspirations come in all sizes, time 

	
PART TWO: BUILD
lengths, and levels of difficulty. After all, an aspiration is nothing more 
than a pursuit—an urge that influences our daily decisions. Whether that 
aim is to become a more organized worker, a more inspired creative, or the 
president of the United States is irrelevant. 
All human aspirations are opportunities for brands to build 
relationships.
Here are some sample aspirations to think about:
• Be independent and perceived as such by others. Become an autono­
mous individual by purchasing products and services that empower 
you to do more and better on your own. 
• Be more relaxed. Live a less stressful lifestyle by purchasing products 
and services that help release different kinds of tension. 
• Be unique and perceived as such by others. Express yourself and your 
worldview by purchasing products and services that let others know 
who you are and reflect your identity to the world. 
• Enact a new role in life. Embody a “new persona” by purchasing prod­
ucts and services that help you attain a new professional or personal 
position. 
• Engage in better relationships. Improve the way you connect with oth­
er human beings by purchasing products and services that strengthen 
your social circle and increase your sense of belonging.
• Be more stable. Avoid danger by purchasing products and services that 
increase your safety. 
• Be well-known. Become accomplished by purchasing products and ser­
vices that help you become more recognized and reputable. 
• Be a genuinely better human being. Grow individually by purchasing 
products and services that boost your professional, spiritual, and emo­
tional development. 
Forget Everything You’ve Heard About Brand Stories
Our mission for this chapter is to understand whom we’re selling to and 
learn the best way to show them who we are, what we offer, how we’re dif­
ferent, and how we promise to help them. The good news is that there’s no 
need to reinvent the wheel. Human beings have been learning via stories 
forever, and there’s simply no better tool to send our brand message across. 

chapter 3: Brand Story 	
For some reason, when they hear about “brand stories,” some people imag­
ine their company’s CEO reading to a potential buyer sitting on his lap, in 
an altruist display of emotion and mutual love. Rewind. Yes, there might 
be some reading. And yes, we need the CEO on board. But, while emotion 
is a part of the whole thing, please remember this:
Your brand story’s “happily ever after” involves open wallets.
Seth Godin has an interesting thought on the matter:
Stories and irrational impulses are what change behavior. Not facts 
or bullet points. 
Some other people hear me say “brand story,” and “storytelling” immedi­
ately comes to mind. I’d like to let you know that “telling” is not what we’re 
doing here. We’re aiming for “story-showing.” Telling isn’t enough. Brand 
communications are not about explain-time, justify-time, defend-time…
blah-time. Please keep the idea of showtime close to heart. This is why 
Chapter 5 is all about “story-showing”—feel free to take a peek if you’re 
curious at this point. 
But before we deal with ways to show our brand story, we need to create 
one. 
I know social media, digital channels, videos, websites, and many other 
tools are appealing at the moment. I know that you think they might help 
your product scale instantaneously (miraculously); that they’re just what 
the doctor ordered. I also need you to understand that you better stay 
away from them unless you have a story to tell.
Otherwise, digital channels just have a way of…well…swallowing you. 
Remember this: 
Digital channels are just tools to show (what should be) a meaning­
ful brand story. 
Having a brand story is not optional. If you don’t start writing it, please 
worry because—mark my words—someone else will write it for you. In my 
experience, only extremely disgusted or extremely pleased customers will 
put any effort into contributing to your brand story, so imagine how that 
would turn out without your attention. Brand storytelling is your unique 
chance to be persuasive and make the case for your product. 
To take full advantage of this opportunity, we will answer five simple ques­
tions for our customers—though, as you’ll see, there’s really one big, profit­
able, underlying question (Why should I buy from you?):

	
PART TWO: BUILD
Brand story part
Customer asks
Customer really thinks
Positioning
“How are you useful to me?”
WHY should I buy from you?
Promise
“What do you promise to do 
for me?”
Why SHOULD I buy from you?
Personas
“What do I need/want from 
you?”
Why should I buy from you?
Personality
“Who are you?”
Why should I buy from YOU?
Product
“What will you offer, over 
time?”
Why should I BUY from you?
Pricing
“How much is this going to 
cost me?”
Why should I BUY from you?
First Things First: What’s Your Name Again?
Someone has to come up with a name for the “fear of naming a new prod­
uct.” I am positive that this is an actual phobia. Side effects include head­
ache, insomnia, anxiety, and utter bipolarity. I also blame this entire situa­
tion on superstitious nonsense. 
Listen: I’d be a terrible marketer if I told you that your name doesn’t matter. 
It does, deeply. What I have an issue with is the amount of time some people 
waste naming something that isn’t really anything yet. Somehow, we’ve 
come to believe that even before the product has some sort of clear function 
(i.e., adds value), we will reach nirvana and come up with a million-dollar 
name. Said “million-dollar name” will then take a mediocre product from 
zero to millions within a day. 
Wake-up call: there is no million-dollar name. There are, if you work hard 
enough, great products that make millions in the marketplace aided by an 
equally great name. Bottom line:
A great product deserves an equally great name that does it justice.
That being said, there are some ways in which a fitting name can make the 
difference for your product. If you already have a name, feel free to jump 
to Part Three, where you’ll learn how to measure its impact. If you are just 
getting started, you’ll find the process much easier if you answer these ques­
tions (and please do):
1.	Look around. What names are your competitors using to brand their 
products? (Write at least 20.)
2.	What word or words encompass the most important thing your prod­
uct is here to change? (Jot down a list of at least 20.)

chapter 3: Brand Story 	
Go literal: write down words commonly used in the industry that 
you’re in, the type of product you’re trying to sell, and the people who 
will buy it.
Sometimes we only think of nouns (i.e., things), but there’s actually 
a vast list of verbs (actions) and adjectives (descriptors) that are great 
sources for names:
–– Dropbox (verb + noun)
–– Pinkberry (adjective + noun)
–– Goodreads (adjective + noun)
–– Instagram (adjective + noun)
–– MySpace (adjective + noun)
Go figurative: use metaphors; find ideas that are related to the 
experience that you are creating.
3.	Which of these words (or combination of words) could best convey 
what your product does? (Narrow it down to 10.)
4.	Which of these options is most original and therefore recognizable in 
the marketplace? 
5.	Which of these options can be trademarked and does not interfere with 
another company’s legal rights? 
Gather Your Brand Ingredients
Remember the recipe we just learned about a few pages ago? That Lean 
Branding recipe included the 25 ingredients that we will be building 
throughout Part Two, and the time has come to find our brand story ingre­
dients: positioning, promise, personas, personality, product, and pricing.
Positioning: How Are You Useful to Me?
We’ve already discussed aspirations: those possible selves that consumers 
are constantly striving for. We saw how brands can provide shortcuts to 
satisfy these aspirations and build relationships that go beyond a simple 
feature set. Our brand adds value when it helps a customer go from A to 
B, where B is whom they want to be. But just how do we go about making 
them understand and remember what we’re here to do?

	
PART TWO: BUILD
That’s where positioning comes around. I know it sounds like a complex 
term, but it really isn’t. If we are going to enter the marketplace to help 
customers go from A to B in their lives, we need to position our brand as an 
aspiration enabler. As a problem solver. As a propeller. Positioning is simply 
finding and taking a space within the marketplace that projects your brand 
as the “aspiration enabler” for a certain customer segment.
BRANDING ON STEROIDS
Naming Resources
Where to find name inspiration: 
• http://www.leandomainsearch.com
• http://www.panabee.com
• https://www.namefind.com
• http://www.namestation.com
• http://www.namemesh.com/
• http://www.domai.nr
Where to figure out brand name availability (US trademark): 
• United States: http://tmsearch.uspto.gov
• European Union: https://oami.europa.eu/eSearch
Where to figure out domain name availability: 
• http://www.godaddy.com
• http://www.namechk.com 
In a nutshell:
Positioning is finding the right parking space inside the consumer’s 
mind and going for it before someone else takes it.
These questions are key to building your brand’s initial positioning:* 
1.	Who is your target customer?
2.	Which of your customer’s aspirations will your brand propel?
*	
It is important to make this distinction because, as you’ve learned before, customers cocreate 
this positioning with you once your brand is out in the marketplace.  

chapter 3: Brand Story 	
3.	What will make your customer be most compelled to buy from you?
4.	Who is your main competitor?
5.	What makes you different from this competitor?
As a first step, consider mapping out who your main competitors are and 
how your brand’s offer compares to theirs. There is a very handy, visual 
tool to simplify this comparison. It is called a positioning map, and it will 
help you understand which brands you are competing with and what makes 
your offer stand out. 
To build this map, select two criteria that your main competing brands and 
your own can be ranked on. For example, a fashion brand could select price 
and apparel formality as its criteria. Then, assign one of the criteria to the 

	
PART TWO: BUILD
horizontal axis and the other one to the vertical axis. Finally, map out the 
brands in your competitive space according to how they rank on both axes. 
It is important to understand that this initial positioning is an ideal space 
that will not match consumer perception perfectly. This positioning map 
will change over time, and it is your job to make sure that continuous 
measurement guides any direction changes. Chapter 7 presents strategies 
to measure whether your positioning is resonating well in the marketplace. 
The positioning statement 
A positioning statement answers three main questions: 
• Which space are you trying to occupy?
• What is the main aspiration that you are trying to satisfy? 
• Who else is there (competing with you)? 
No need to make our lives any more complicated (this is Lean Branding, 
remember?). Geoffrey Moore Consulting created a very effective template 
to create your positioning statement that has been used by companies 
everywhere:
For (target customer) 
Who (statement of the need or opportunity) 
The (product name) is a (product category) 
That (key benefit, compelling reason to buy) 
Unlike (primary competitive alternative) 
Our product (statement of primary differentiation)
Fill it out. Done. Use it, use it, and abuse it. You can’t go wrong.
Promise: What Do You Promise to Do for Me?
Keep it short and sweet. This is basically a fun-sized version of your posi­
tioning statement, emphasizing on your core value offer. It’s the one thing 
you promise that will keep customers coming back, crafted into a memo­
rable, short phrase that they can remember easily. It’s your “Save money, 
live better” (Walmart), your “Remember everything” (Evernote), your “Eat 
fresh” (Subway)…you get the point. 

chapter 3: Brand Story 	
Bob Dorf* has labeled this promise “Bumper Sticker” and has some great 
advice about how to make it shine. Take a look at the following “Get on It” 
sidebar. If you still need more ideas for your brand promise, check out the 
“Inspiration Hack” sidebar on the next page. 
GET ON IT
The Bumper-Sticker Brand Promise
“A bumper sticker can’t be more than a handful of words. Imagine 
a 12pt bumper sticker. Nobody in the car behind you could read 
the words on that bumper sticker unless they crashed into you! 
It’s got to be a few words that summarize hopefully in a catchy, 
memorable, inviting way what it is that this company does that’s 
special. It’s really your brand promise all rolled into one mouthful 
of words.”
—Bob Dorf
Personas: What Do I Need or Want from You?
Every brand story needs characters, and that’s exactly what buyer personas 
are. We are going to create fake people with very real needs and aspirations 
to inspire everything our brand is, does, and communicates. This entire 
book is hanging on the idea that you are aware of who these characters 
are and are willing to constantly monitor how they act. So stay with me on 
these simple ways to find out who your buyer personas are and what they 
want. It’s our only shot at making sure that what they want is you.
Most entrepreneurs will tell you that they “absolutely know the buyer.” 
There are a few harsh truths that must be told at this point:
• Even if you think you know what buyers want or need, this is con­
stantly changing. 
• Even if buyers think they know what they want or need, sometimes 
they won’t say it.
• Sometimes buyers have no idea what they want or need, but you can 
find out by observing.
*	
Bob coauthored The Startup Owner’s Manual (K & S Ranch) with Steve Blank. A serial 
entrepreneur, he has founded seven startups for two home runs, two basehits, and three tax 
losses. He has invested in or advised more than a score of startups and teaches customer 
development at Columbia Business School.

	
PART TWO: BUILD
INSPIRATION HACK
Brand Promises
Get inspired with these 10 brand promises that have endured time 
and our short (and getting shorter) attention spans:
• Office Depot: Taking Care of Business
• MGM: Means Great Movies
• MasterCard: There are some things that money can’t buy. For 
everything else there’s MasterCard.
• Airbnb: Find a Place to Stay
• Foursquare: Find Great Places Near You
• Las Vegas: What happens here, stays here.
• Disneyland: The Happiest Place on Earth
• Crest: Healthy, Beautiful Smiles for Life
• CrazyEgg: Visualize Your Visitors
• Zoho: Work. Online.
Go out and learn cautiously from what your buyers say, and rigorously 
based on what they do. This “going out there” is something anthropolo­
gists, designers, and professionals from many other disciplines know as 
ethnography. 
NOTE
Marketers have been using focus groups and surveys for years, but besides 
not being time- or cost-efficient, they are often performed out of context. 
Meaning: is there a point in asking someone what she thinks by removing 
her from the place where she usually does her thinking and pretending she’ll 
do exactly as she says? I won’t bore you with method wars here, but bear in 
mind that we are looking for the most efficient way to learn about our buy­
ers in order to make decisions that are not only informed, but also timely. 
There are probably a million ways to conduct ethnographic research (i.e., 
going out there and observing people). For the purpose of remaining lean, 
let me introduce you to four that are very time/cost efficient.

chapter 3: Brand Story 	
Secondary research
Look out for data on your buyers from magazines, databases (if you have 
access to any), newspapers, industry white papers, and reputable sources 
that you can trust. This will give you a broad sense of how the market is 
doing and general trends to keep in mind as you observe your buyers. 
In-depth interviews 
Sit down with as many potential buyers as you can and ask them as many 
questions as you need to start discovering patterns among them. There 
are some very specific items we are looking for, and you will find a list of 
sample questions later in the chapter. Some people suggest you should also 
interview existing customers who both love and hate your product. In case 
you are just getting started, and you have no customers to conduct these 
with, arrange for interviews with potential customers. In Chapter 6, we 
will come back to this and apply it with existing customers. 
Interviews were a vital part of the Apps.co entrepreneurship program in 
Colombia. Since teams were expected to go from idea to minimum viable 
product in eight weeks, the program demanded that a number of interviews 
be conducted during the first few weeks. These interviews would guide the 
development of the product and the brand that would project it into the 
world. 
In an outstanding case of customer discovery, a mobile app called Bites 
pivoted from a food delivery intermediary into a tool to improve the on-site 
restaurant experience. After dozens of interviews with potential customers, 
the team realized that their market felt fascinated and moved by authentic 
food photography. They were eager to see pictures taken by other “foodies” 
and were more comfortable trusting their peers for restaurant recommen­
dations. Perhaps repeating this exercise somewhere else on Earth would 
reveal different insights. And that, ladies and gentlemen, is the whole point 
behind conducting interviews while you are building your brand: going 
beyond your own assumptions. 
Fly on the wall
I absolutely love this method. Picture a fly on the wall. That’s pretty much 
what you’ll be. This type of observation consists of becoming a part of 
any given environment for a few hours. You are trying to understand your 
buyers’ context: what threats and opportunities can you spot? If you’re in­
terested in teachers, for example, visit a school for a given number of hours 
and record as many details as you can about the school day.
In 2012, my agency was hired to build a local politician’s online brand 
presence. She had already been elected but was having trouble empathizing 

	
PART TWO: BUILD
with the citizens who hadn’t voted for her. During a brainstorming session, 
we decided to use expressions from citizens themselves to communicate 
her brand message. We would address naysayers and continue appealing to 
sympathizers by using their own terms and language. 
To do so, we followed the politician in every single public event for four 
months. We did not intervene or ask any questions during this time. Our 
team was just present, taking notes and analyzing what came out of citi­
zens’ mouths. Later, we would synthesize these insights and come up with 
messages that reflected the citizens’ own concerns and satisfactions. Our 
social media engagement skyrocketed, and the conversation (which had re­
mained stagnant for months) activated around the topics that citizens were 
actually interested in hearing. 
Shadowing
Here’s a classy term for some serious stalking activity—except you will 
formally approach someone to ask his permission to stick with him for a 
couple of hours. The idea here is to get a sense of what his particular rou­
tine is like, what are some needs and aspirations he might not be willing 
or able to declare verbally but are visible to you, and what channels would 
work best to reach him, among others. You must remain unnoticed and 
avoid disturbing his routine. This is academic stalking.
Take a few minutes to imagine the aspiration that your brand is here to 
facilitate. Are you trying to make it easier for customers with a fast-paced 
lifestyle to share their files? Are you trying to provide a healthy or envi­
ronmentally friendly option in the midst of a toxic marketplace? Are you 
building an app to optimize the way I spend my time? Are you a political 
brand offering to bring prosperity and education? This answer is a vital 
starting point for the observations that you will take note of while shadow­
ing a subject. 
For Procter & Gamble, this answer was once “we are trying to offer a 
better way to clean a floor.”* In 1994, the company hired an innovation 
and design consultancy called Continuum to figure out a way to reinvent 
the act of cleaning floors. To do so, researchers followed individual people 
as they cleaned their own kitchen floors. They found out, among others, 
that “mops worked mostly by the adhesion of dirt to the mop and people 
seemed to spend almost as much time rinsing their mop as they did cleaning 
the floor.” To solve it, they designed a new product that would bring their 
newfound idea of “Fast Clean” to life. The rest is Swiffer history. 
*	
http://continuuminnovation.com/work/swiffer/

chapter 3: Brand Story 	
As you follow your potential or existing customers, take note of the activi­
ties, environment, interactions, objects, and users involved in their routine. 
These five types of observations belong to a framework called AEIOU (af­
ter their initials) that was developed by a group of researchers at the Doblin 
Group in 1991 to make ethnography easier to record.*
Here is what some sample, raw shadowing observations might look like, 
as coded with the AEIOU framework. You can also use this framework to 
record your fly-on-the-wall observations:
Subject: John, potential user for our to-do list app
Started: 03/05/2013 8AM Ended: 03/05/2013 11AM
Type of observation
Notes
Activities
Getting ready for work
Driving to work
Picking up coffee before work
Accomplishing daily tasks
Environment
Home: 2BR apartment, NW side of town. Office space in 
living room. Pinboard next to desk. Monthly calendar pad 
on top of desk. 
Coffee shop: dim lighting, slow jazz music.
Office: personal cubicle, white light, notebooks scattered 
on desk. Monthly calendar on cubicle wall. 
Interactions
Drinking coffee, talking to barista, printing a last-minute 
document, checking email on smartphone, driving com­
pact car to metro station, parking car, taking metro to 
work. Checking email on desktop computer again. Adds 
some dates to wall calendar. Added sticky note to com­
puter screen. Completing yesterday’s pending tasks first. 
Tossing sticky note once task completed.
Objects
Monthly calendar pad on home desk, cappuccino with 
low-fat milk, Metro card, printer, 21.5” iMac computer, col­
ored sticky notes, iOS smartphone, monthly calendar on 
cubicle wall.
Users
Wife, boss, barista
After following John for a couple of hours, you already have an interesting 
set of brand-related questions to continue validating: 
• Should our brand message include a reference to “keeping all your to-
dos in the same place” or “making your to-do list accessible”?
*	
Bruce Hanington and Bella Martin, Universal Methods of Design: 100 Ways to Research Complex 
Problems, Develop Innovative Ideas, and Design Effective Solutions (Beverly, MA: Rockport 
Publishers, 2012).

	
PART TWO: BUILD
• Considering John’s reliance on email, would placing ads on email plat­
forms be an effective communication strategy for our brand?
• Would coffee and a desk generate associations with planning and to-
do list creation, and therefore be effective images to build our brand’s 
visual identity around? 
• Given John’s desire to visualize important deadlines in walls, should 
our brand message focus on screen-paper (online/offline) integration?
The importance of carrying a field guide
Some general guidelines are to make sure that you select the right people, 
prepare your interview questions beforehand (but be sensitive to open up to 
others), fill out a reasonably organized field guide, and keep your eye open 
for behaviors that deviate from the standard. Also, even if you’re research­
ing buyer personas for a very specific product, make sure that you look at 
the whole experience. You never know what new ideas may come up. 
As promised, next is a sample field guide. Miscellaneous questions like “fa­
vorite social media platform,” “car make,” and “hair color” might make 
sense in specific cases (with car or shampoo brands, for example). Take this 
guide with you, be efficiently creative, and feel free to edit or add questions 
as needed.

chapter 3: Brand Story 	
Now that you’ve interviewed and observed a considerable amount of poten­
tial buyers, summarize the patterns you have uncovered in—you guessed 
it—your first buyer personas. The main characters in your story. Also 
known as the people we’re going after. 
Use the following template to summarize your information: 
Personality: Who Are You?
Ever been stuck talking (more like yelling) to a machine when you needed 
support from an actual human being? That’s how customers feel when your 
brand personality isn’t there or isn’t coming through. Try this with me: 
imagine Apple and Microsoft as people. Now think about them going out 
on a date. If you can sustain their dialogue and picture them for over a 
minute, both of these brands have done their homework. When they tell 
you stories, you get “human” rather than “machine”—even though (sorry 
to break your heart) they are essentially machines.
People relate to people, and if your brand feels like “people,” they’ll 
relate to you, too. 

	
PART TWO: BUILD
BRANDING ON STEROIDS
Social Media Research
Give it a try: use your prospective buyer’s name and search for 
her problems using hashtags like #teacherproblems #ceoprob-
lems #momproblems #teenageproblems #athleteproblems. What 
you’ll find is pure gold. We used to pay for that kind of insight. 
Marketers used to (and still do) give people journals where they 
documented any given experience during their day. Forget jour-
nals: this is real-time, real-deal market research. 
These are some of the tools that I use the most:
• Topsy 
• Twitter Advanced Search 
• Quora
• Google Plus
• Instagram
• Flickr
The American Psychological Association has defined personality as the 
“unique psychological qualities of an individual that influence a variety 
of characteristic behavior patterns (both overt and covert) across different 
situations and over time.”* Our personality influences the way we think, 
behave, and feel with regard to everything that surrounds us. Similarly, 
brands must react in a marketplace where conditions are uncertain and 
ever-changing. Creating a flexible, yet strong, brand personality will help 
us adapt quickly to this environment. Lean brands sail out into the world 
to discover their customers and can rarely predict the outcome; however, 
they can always decide how to react to what they find. A brand personality 
guides us in this agile decision-making process.
For the purposes of this book, we will understand “brand personality” 
as the humane psychological qualities associated with our brand that dic­
tate its interactions in the marketplace during different situations and over 
time. By linking your brand with several traits that are traditionally used 
*	
Richard J. Gerrig and Philip G. Zimbardo, Psychology and Life, 16th edition (Boston: Allyn and 
Bacon, 2002). 

chapter 3: Brand Story 	
to describe human personalities, you can build a more relatable story that 
consumers will engage with.  
Having followed dozens of startups as they developed sound brand person­
alities, I have compiled a list of descriptors that can help you create yours. 
In Chapter 7, you will find out how to measure whether this personality 
is resonating well with customers and adapt it accordingly. Feel free to 
include and use other words that apply to your brand. Based on the posi­
tioning, promise, personas, and product you’ve described before, which of 
these qualities fit your brand best?
Good, so what are we supposed to do with this personality now? How does 
it shine through? How does it help us make more money? Why are we doing 
this? These are all great questions. Having a clear brand personality will 
make so many decisions easier that you will regret you hadn’t defined one 
before. For example:
• Wouldn’t it be easier to know whom to partner with once you know 
how your brand feels about life in general?
• Wouldn’t it be that much simpler to choose a social media message 
once you know how your brand is supposed to sound?
Defining our brand personality gives us a better idea of how we should face 
the customer. It elucidates what is the voice telling the story. Keep this idea 
of brand voice close to heart; based on the personality we just described:

	
PART TWO: BUILD
• What would my brand say and how? Along the same lines, how would 
my brand speak to customers during the different stages of their experi­
ence? More on this in the upcoming Product section. 
• What does it hate?
• What does it absolutely love?
• What is its favorite drink or meal? Why?
• (We could go on forever, now that we have a personality.)
Consider the following example of a brand personality and how it trans­
lates into the brand’s voice.
Brand personality
Brand voice
Young, cool, unique, 
intelligent, confident, 
charming, funny, 
down-to-earth
Hates: arrogance, 
lack of originality, bad 
music
Loves: artists, design­
ers, makers, good 
music
Favorite meal: 
chocolate anything
Favorite drink: 
happy-hour mojitos
 
To express 
encouragement
“Have a great Monday everyone! Three 
words about life: it goes on. (Also: Friday 
will come.) This is what XYZ HQ looks like 
this morning.”
To express 
excitement
“We’re thrilled to announce our newest 
feature: XYZ! Check it out and let us know 
what you think.”
To express an 
apology
“Sorry, guys. We’ll be back soon. Good 
things take time! In the meantime, here’s 
a song that’s keeping us going: XYZ.” 
To express 
gratitude
“Huge thanks to everyone who came out 
to our launch party yesterday! It’s good 
to see that everyone survived. Well, al­
most everyone…” 
Coming up next, you will see how this personality comes into play in dif­
ferent stages of interaction with your customer. Time to speak up! 

chapter 3: Brand Story 	
LEAN BRANDING CASE
MailChimp’s Freddie von  
Chimpenheimer IV
Meet Freddie von Chimpenheimer IV. You might recognize him 
as MailChimp’s witty little character. Freddie is a clever chimp 
that becomes your concierge, coach, and friend as you navigate 
MailChimp’s interface. More than serving, he is here to amuse you 
with unexpected jokes and short pep talks. 
He doesn’t sound like a vector cartoon anymore, right? That’s be-
cause Freddie has a defined personality and voice that encapsu-
lates the MailChimp brand story. Visit www.voiceandtone.com, and 
you’ll find an interactive guide to what this story sounds like. 
These are some of the jewels you’ll find:
• “Freddie’s jokes aren’t intended to be useful or educational—
they’re simply a layer of humor. Be funny!”
• “Surprise and delight our users here. Catch them off guard in 
the best way possible.”
• “Pat these users on the back for getting a campaign out the 
door. They’re probably feeling happy and relieved—use casual 
language that encourages those feelings.” 
• “The app is MailChimp’s heart, and tracking is usually the most 
exciting part for users. Our personality should come through 
in this step.”

	
PART TWO: BUILD
Product: What Will You Offer over Time?
Strong brands know that there’s much more to it than “the sell.” The term 
product experience does a better job at capturing what it is that our brand 
is really standing for. We’re used to thinking that products (and services) 
are just a sum of features, but taking a closer look at the customer’s experi­
ence reveals the truth: products are an augmented set of opportunities to 
add value that includes (of course) tangible features, but also service, visual 
identity, support, warranties, delivery, installation…the stuff people pay a 
premium for. The stuff strong brands are made of. 
Products shouldn’t just work well, they must unfold well.
Using Journey Maps to design your product experience
A useful way to visualize your product experience is to use a Customer 
Journey Map. These maps display the complete adventure that customers 
jump on the minute they consume your product. It is important to remem­
ber that consumption involves pre-purchase, purchase, and post-purchase 
stages, and consumers will be looking for you all along. A complete Jour­
ney Map includes these three stages. The main idea here is that customers 
are not just looking for value on the spot. These stages are all brand touch­
points in which you can add value, and it is essential to recognize what and 
where they are and how you’ll respond to consumers during each of them. 
Think about a few stages that your own customer would go through as he 
consumes your product:
Before purchase
Maybe he has to check out a few other options before deciding whether 
to purchase your brand. What will you do during this stage to make 
sure that he learns about you? If this is a corporate purchase, does the 
buyer need someone else’s approval? If it isn’t, will he need his wife’s 
approval?* Once he learns about you, how will you communicate what 
makes you different (and worthy of his decision)? (Chapter 5 will dis­
cuss communication strategies in depth.)
During purchase
The customer actually pays for your product. Is there something you 
can say or do to make this process easier or more rewarding? Is there 
a stimulus that you can provide to make the decision-making process 
simpler? 
*	
These people standing between you and the buyer, affecting the buyer’s decision, are known 
as gatekeepers.

chapter 3: Brand Story 	
After purchase
How does your product interact with the customer after he has pur­
chased it? How does it resolve his initial aspirations? Perhaps your 
product involves an installation process. Even if it doesn’t, consumers 
want to be able to communicate with you after their purchase and re­
affirm that their choice was correct (read the upcoming “Dig Deeper” 
box to learn more). How will you make the customer feel that his pur­
chase decision was right? If this is a corporate purchase, will other 
departments resent your customer’s decision? May coworkers dislike 
the fact that your customer’s purchase changed their workflow? What 
can you say or do to make sure that your product’s integration with the 
customer’s routine is seamless? 
DIG DEEPER
A Word on Cognitive Dissonance and 
Why It Matters
Cognitive dissonance is a term widely used in consumer psychol-
ogy to refer to what we commonly know as “having mixed feel-
ings” about something. According to psychologist Leon Festinger, 
who coined the term in the 1950s, we are all looking for something 
called internal consistency. All this means is that we avoid display-
ing attitudes and opinions that create inconsistency within our-
selves. Whenever our attitudes and opinions do conflict, we expe-
rience what is known as cognitive dissonance.
Now, this idea is essential in designing a pre- and post-purchase 
brand experience because consumers often experience periods 
of doubt, regret, and anxiety after they have acquired a product/
service. As customers, we question whether the price reflected the 
product’s quality, or whether the communicated feature set cor-
responds with the product’s actual functionalities.
Cognitive dissonance can be dangerous, not only for your long-
term relationship with a particular customer, but also for the po-
tential ripple effect that may arise if the dissatisfaction grows. 
Think about aggressive messages in review platforms that may 
scare future customers away. Needless to say, brands need to work 
on preventing and remediating cognitive dissonance. 

	
PART TWO: BUILD
To prevent cognitive dissonance, answer the following questions: 
• Is your brand message honest from the pre-purchase stage? 
• Are you sharing sufficient and objective information about your 
product’s performance before the sale? 
• Are you reassuring your customer after closing the sale (post-pur-
chase stage)? 
Please note that “purchase” may not be a relevant conversion ac-
tion for you. In this case, think about signups, registrations, votes, 
or whichever act does embody conversion in your business model. 
Back in Chapter 1 we discussed the importance of understanding that 
brand and product don’t compete. Brand is product, and everything else 
conforming to the unique story that consumers create when they think of 
you. Therefore, we can now think of your product experience in terms of 
all the brand elements that must come together when someone consumes 
your offer. To make this easier for you, the following Brand Journey Map 
template includes a series of stages and boxes to fill out as you design the 
experience that you are trying to offer. 

chapter 3: Brand Story 	
Mapping the brand journey makes visualizing this process easier. I urge 
you to take a few minutes to draw your own path to identify where and 
how your brand story will be told.
In each step, try to picture what aspect of your brand experience is inter­
acting with your customer. I understand this might be a little abstract, but 
check out the next “Inspiration Hack” sidebar to find a few examples of 
journey steps that would work for a web-based solution.
INSPIRATION HACK
Beginning Your Brand Journey
Here are some ideas for stages that you can include within your 
Brand Journey:
• Signup
• Calls to action
• Tutorial to help the customer get started (also known as 
onboarding)
• Referrals
• Typical product use
• Logging out
• Notifications
• Confirmations
• Receiving a periodic email
• Upgrading to a premium version
• Getting help 

	
PART TWO: BUILD
Pricing: How Much Is Your Solution Worth?
At this point, you’ve created a brand promise and positioning, defined 
buyer personas, and mapped an engaging product journey infused with an 
equally appealing brand personality. Good job! Now it’s time to reap the 
rewards. 
But just how will you go about figuring out what this reward should be? 
How will you fix a price that appeals to your buyers and keeps your com­
pany’s finances healthy? When is it too much and when are you underesti­
mating what your solution is worth to the buyer?
We could spend days discussing pricing strategies from multiple stand­
points. There are at least a dozen different pricing models that you can 
consider putting in place, but we will look at three of the most widely used:
Cost-based pricing
You set a price based on production cost considerations and profit ob­
jectives. Every company gauges these production costs differently, but 
an essential question remains: How much should we charge for this 
product or service if it costs us X to produce and we want to earn Y 
on top of that?

chapter 3: Brand Story 	
Value-based pricing
You set a price based on the customer’s perception. During this pricing 
process, you basically figure out how much value your customer places 
on the product or service that your brand offers. How much is she will­
ing to pay for this product?
Competition-based pricing 
You set a price for your product or service based on your closest com­
petitors’ strategies. When you have little or no competition (in a dis­
ruptive category), you can look at substitute products. How much is 
my closest competitor charging for a similar product or service? Do I 
want my price to be at, above, or below theirs?
More often than not, a brand’s pricing strategy is a combination of two or 
more of the models just presented. For example, a company like Samsung 
may concurrently consider production costs, its target customers’ willing­
ness to pay, and other manufacturers’ strategies when deciding on a price 
for its products. Other widely used pricing strategies include: 
Penetration pricing
Setting a low price to grab a large share of the market when you are 
launching.
Skimming or “creaming” price strategy
Setting up a high price initially to recover what you have invested in 
developing the product.
Freemium 
Offering one version of your product or service for free and a more 
advanced version for a fee.
Premium pricing 
Setting up a deliberately high price because it allows your brand to 
appeal to a specific market segment with a certain purchasing power.
Psychological pricing 
Setting a price having considered how the actual numbers play a role 
in a consumer’s decision-making process. For example, you may vali­
date that charging $4.99 instead of $5.00 helps boost sales. This tactic 
relies on the idea that customers will (involuntarily) round down and 
perceive a lower price, which in turn triggers a purchase. 

	
PART TWO: BUILD
If you decide to use value-based pricing, keep in mind your potential buy­
er’s answer to these questions from our Personas section (earlier in this 
chapter):
Purchase criteria and motivations: What makes him complete the 
purchase of an existing solution, similar to the one your brand pro­
poses? How much is he willing to pay?
In Chapter 7, when we measure our brand story ingredients, you will learn 
about a pricing concept called willingness to pay. This indicator will allow 
us to approximate our buyers’ ideal price point(s) and approach our brand’s 
pricing from a value-based perspective.
Bringing It All Together: Your Brand Storyboard
At this point, you have built a positioning, promise, personas, personality, 
product experience, and pricing for your brand. As we approach the next 
steps in this process, it helps to continuously visualize your entire brand 
story.  
While I worked with tech startup teams from every background imagin­
able, I noticed that storytelling doesn’t come easy for many of us. That’s 
why I designed this simple tool:

chapter 3: Brand Story 	
By completing each of these scenes, you will be answering some of the key 
questions behind powerful brand storytelling. Let’s go over some consider­
ations as you fill out the storyboard:
Once upon a time
In this scene, you will describe the buyer personas introduced earlier 
in this chapter using images or text. Who is the main character in your 
brand story?
He/she always
Define some of the main tasks that your customer is regularly involved 
with. What does she do every day? What are her main responsibilities 
in life and work, as related to the product or service that you offer? 
But always had a problem
State the main issue that your customer faces when trying to complete 
her tasks. What is the unsatisfied need or aspiration in this story?
He/she tried to solve it
If the previous problem is real, your customer is probably already solv­
ing it. What are some alternate solutions to the issue at hand? How is 
your customer managing to partially satisfy this aspiration?
But he/she wished that
Outline the flaws in the solutions your customer is currently using. De­
spite purchasing these other products or services, your customer is still 
unsatisfied. What are existing solutions lacking?
Until one day
Describe how your customer will most probably learn about your 
brand. What happened on the day she first heard about you? 
Unlike his/her solution, this
List some of the aspects related to your product experience that set 
you apart from competitors. How does your offer differ from your 
customer’s current solution?
His/her wish came true, to
Clearly define the aspiration that your brand fulfills. What is your cus­
tomer’s “wish come true”? 
Now that you have filled out each of these scenes, consider some of the 
implications of each of your answers. Why do they matter? How can we 
use them? Why are they important for brand building and conversion? The 
following storyboard provides some thoughts:

	
PART TWO: BUILD
Recap
As you’ll remember from Chapter 1, we are in the business of taking cus­
tomers from A to B, where A is their position today and B is the place they 
want to be tomorrow. Building a dynamic brand story helps drive this mes­
sage home for the consumer. While digital communication channels are 
important, they are just tools to show (what should be) a meaningful brand 
story.
Many different ingredients are involved in creating your brand story. In this 
chapter, we introduced six of them: your positioning, promise, personas, 
personality, product experience, and pricing. A brand’s positioning conveys 
which space you are trying to occupy, the main aspiration that you are 
trying to satisfy, and an idea of who else is competing for that space. Your 
brand promise is basically a fun-sized version of your positioning state­
ment, emphasizing on your core value offer. It should answer the question, 
“What’s in it for me?”
Personas are “fake” people with very real needs or aspirations that inspire 
everything our brand is, does, and communicates. By crafting our brand 
messages around these personas, our story will become more humane. This 
is important because people relate to people, and if your brand feels like 
“people,” they’ll relate to you, too.  
Strong brand stories satisfy consumer aspirations with a well-designed, 
holistic product experience. Products shouldn’t just work well, they must 
unfold well. Finally, defining our brand personality gives us a better idea 
of how we should face the customer. It elucidates the voice telling the story. 


Lean UX
Applying Lean Principles to 
Improve User Experience
Jeff Gothelf
Josh Seiden, editor
Beijing ·  Cambridge ·  Farnham ·  Köln ·  Sebastopol ·  Tokyo

	
VII
Foreword. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . IX
Preface. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  XIII
Section I: Introduction and Principles
Chapter 1
Why Lean UX?. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3
Chapter 2
Principles. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5
Section II: Process
Chapter 3 
Vision, Framing, and Outcomes . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 17
Chapter 4
Collaborative Design. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 33
Chapter 5
MVPs and Experiments. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 55
Chapter 6
Feedback and Research . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 73
Contents

VIII	
Contents
Section III: Making It Work
Chapter 7
Integrating Lean UX and Agile. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 95
Chapter 8
Making Organizational Shifts. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 109
Index . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 125

	
55
All life is an experiment. The more  
experiments you make, the better.
Ralph Waldo Emerson
With the parts of your hypothesis now defined, you’re ready to determine 
which product ideas are valid and which ones you should discard. In this 
chapter, we discuss the Minimum Viable Product (MVP) and what it means 
in Lean UX. In addition, we’ll cover:
• Determining product focus (delivering value or increasing learning?) 
using MVP
• Using prototypes and prototyping tools
• Running experiments without prototypes 
About MVPs and Experiments
Lean UX makes heavy use of the notion of MVP. MVPs help test our 
assumptions—will this tactic achieve the desired outcome?—while min-
imizing the work we put into unproven ideas. The sooner we can find 
which features are worth investing in, the sooner we can focus our limited 
resources on the best solutions to our business problems. This concept is an 
important part of how Lean UX minimizes waste.
C h a p t e r  5
MVPs and Experiments

	
Chapter 5
Your prioritized list of hypotheses has given you several paths to explore. 
To do this exploration, you are going to want to create the smallest thing 
you can to determine the validity of each of these hypothesis statements. 
That is your MVP. You will use your MVP to run experiments. The out-
come of the experiments will tell you whether your hypothesis was cor-
rect and thus whether the direction you are exploring should be pursued, 
refined, or abandoned.
The Focus of an MVP
The phrase MVP has caused a lot of confusion in its short life. The prob-
lem is that it gets used in two different ways. Sometimes teams create an 
MVP primarily to learn something. They’re not concerned with deliver-
ing value to the market; they’re just trying to figure out what the market 
wants. In other cases, teams create a small version of a product or a feature 
because they want to start delivering value to the market as quickly as pos-
sible. In this second case, if you design and deploy the MVP correctly, you 
should also be able to learn from it, even if that’s not the primary focus. See  
Figure 5-1.
Figure 5-1.  You will create MVPs after you’ve defined and prioritized a set of hypotheses.
Let’s take as an example a medium-sized company with which I consulted 
recently. They were exploring new marketing tactics and wanted to launch 
a monthly newsletter. Newsletter creation is no small task. You need to 
prepare a content strategy, editorial calendar, layout and design, as well as 
an ongoing marketing strategy. You need writers and editors to work on it. 
All in all, it’s a big expenditure for the company to undertake. The team 
decided to treat this newsletter idea as a hypothesis. 
The first question they had to answer was whether there enough customer 
demand for a newsletter to justify the effort. The MVP they used to test the 
idea was a signup form on their current website. The signup form promoted 
the newsletter and asked for a customer’s email address. This approach 
wouldn’t deliver any value to the customer—yet. Instead, the focus was on 

 MVPs and Experiments 	
57
helping the team learn enough to make a good decision about whether to 
proceed.
They spent half a day designing and coding the form and were able to 
launch it that same afternoon. The team knew that their site received a sig-
nificant amount of traffic each day: they would be able to learn very quickly 
if there was interest in their newsletter. 
At this point, the team made no effort to design or build the actual news-
letter. That would come later, after the team had gathered enough data to 
make a GO/NO-GO decision. After the team had gathered enough data, 
and if the data showed that their customers wanted the newsletter, the 
team would move on to their next MVP, one that would begin to deliver 
value and learning. They planned to experiment with MVP versions of the 
newsletter itself that would let them test content strategy, design, and other 
newsletter features. 
Creating an MVP
When you start planning your MVP, the first thing you have to do is con-
sider what you’re trying to learn. It’s useful to think about these three basic 
questions:
1.	Is there a need for the solution I’m designing?
2.	Is there value in the solution and features I’m offering?
3.	Is my solution usable?
Although you can build an MVP to help you answer any of these ques-
tions, the first question is probably best answered with traditional design 
research methods. (In the next chapter, we discuss Lean approaches to this 
research.) But for the second and third questions, using an MVP adds a lot 
of value.
If you’re trying to answer question two, you will likely find yourself cre-
ating an MVP that is optimized for learning. If your question is about the 
usability of your solution, you will want to emphasize value delivery in your 
product. This step will allow you to “release” a product into the market 
and “observe” users interacting with it in realistic contexts.
Here are some guidelines to follow if you’re trying to maximize your 
learning:
Be clear and concise
Spend your time distilling your idea to its core value proposition and 
present that to your customers

	
Chapter 5
Prioritize ruthlessly
Ideas, like artifacts, are transient. Let the best ones prove themselves.
Stay agile
Information will come in quickly, so make sure that you’re working in 
a medium that allows you to make updates easily.
Measure behavior
Build MVPs that allow you to observe and measure what people actu-
ally do, not just what people say. In digital product design, behavior 
trumps opinion.
Use a call-to-action
You will know people value your solution when they demonstrate that 
they are using it. A call-to-action is a clear phrase, sometimes comple-
mented by an image, that asks the user to take a specific action: “sign 
up” or “buy now.” Giving people a way to opt in to or sign up for a 
service is a great way to know if they’re interested.
Here are some guidelines to follow if you’re trying to deliver value to your 
customers:
Be functional
Some level of integration with the rest of your application must be in 
place to create a realistic usage scenario.
Integrate with existing analytics
Measuring the performance of your MVP must be done within the 
context of existing product workflows.
Be consistent with the rest of the application
To minimize any biases toward the new functionality, design your 
MVP to fit with your current style guide and brand.
Of course, you’ll find that you’re trying to learn and deliver value at the 
same time. Keeping these guidelines in mind as you plan your MVPs will 
help you navigate the trade-offs and compromises you’re going to have to 
make.
Regardless of your desired outcome, build the smallest MVP possible. 
Remember that it is a tool for learning. You will be iterating. You will be 
modifying it. You may very well be throwing it away entirely. 
And keep one last thing in mind: in many cases, your MVP won’t involve 
any code at all. Instead, you will rely on many of the UX designer’s existing 
tools: sketching, prototyping, copywriting, and visual design. 

 MVPs and Experiments 	
59
Prototyping 
One of the most effective ways to create MVP’s is by prototyping the expe-
rience. A prototype is an approximation of an experience that allows you to 
simulate what it is like to use the product or service in question. It needs to 
be clickable (or tappable). At the same time, your goal should be to expend 
as little effort as possible in order to create the prototype, which makes 
your choice of prototyping tool important.
Choosing which tool to use for your prototype depends on:
• Who will be interacting with it
• What you hope to learn
• How much time you have to create it
It’s critical to specify the intended audience for your prototype. Knowing 
your audience allows you to create the smallest possible prototype that will 
generate meaningful feedback from this audience. For example, if you’re 
using the prototype primarily to demo ideas to software engineers on your 
team, the prototype can largely overlook primary areas of the product that 
aren’t being affected by the prototype, such as the global navigation. Your 
developers know those items are there and that they’re not changing, so you 
don’t need to illustrate those items for them. 
Stakeholders, often less familiar with their own product than they’ll ever 
admit, will likely need a greater level of fidelity in the prototype in order to 
truly grasp the concept. To meet the various needs of these disparate audi-
ences, your prototyping toolkit should be fairly broad. You’ll want a broad 
range of methods to communicate your ideas. Let’s take a look at some 
ways to create prototypes and the pros and cons of each.
Low-Fidelity Prototypes: Paper 
Made of the most accessible components—paper, pens, and tape—paper 
prototypes (Figure 5-2) allow you to simulate experiences in a quick, crafty, 
fun manner. No digital investment is necessary. Using tactics such as flaps 
to show and hide different states on a page or even creating a “window” for 
a slideshow of images to move through gives the team a sense of how the 
product should function. You’ll be able to get an immediate sense of what is 
available in the experience and what is missing. Paper prototyping can give 
you a sense of how the workflow is starting to coalesce around the inter-
face elements you’ve assembled. Paper prototyping is especially helpful with 
touch interfaces that require the user to manipulate elements on a screen.

60	
Chapter 5
Figure 5-2.  Example of paper prototype.
Pros 
• Can be created in an hour
• Easily arranged and rearranged
• Cheap 
• Can be assembled with materials already found in the office
• Fun activity that many people enjoy
Cons 
• Rapid iteration and duplication of the prototype can become time-
consuming and tedious
• The simulation is very artificial, because you’re not using the actual 
input mechanisms (mouse, trackpad, keyboard, touch screen, etc.)
• Feedback is limited to the high-level structure and flow of the product 

 MVPs and Experiments 	
61
Low-Fidelity Prototypes: Clickable Wireframes
Creating an experience with clickable wireframes (Figure 5-3) lets you take 
a prototype to the next level of fidelity. Your investment in pixels provides a 
bit more realistic feel to the workflow. Test participants and team members 
use digital input mechanisms to interact with the prototype, which offers 
better insight and feedback about the way they will interact with the prod-
uct at the level of the click, tap, or gesture. 
Figure 5-3.  Clickable wireframe prototype example.
Pros
• Provides a good sense of the length of workflow 
• Reveals major obstacles to primary task completion
• Allows assessment of findability of core elements 
• Can be used to quickly create “something clickable” to get your team 
learning from your existing assets instead of forcing the creation of 
new ones
Cons
• Most people who will interact with these assets are savvy enough to 
recognize an unfinished product
• More attention than normal is paid to labeling and copy

62	
Chapter 5
Tools for creating low-fidelity clickable wireframes
Here are some of the tools that work well for this type of prototyping:
Balsamiq
An inexpensive wireframing tool that provides “sketchy”-looking 
output. It’s the closest thing to digital sketching of interfaces and has 
a robust community of support. Its limitations are what make it pow-
erful; you can’t spend your time tweaking the finer points of the inter-
face, so you spend more time churning through revisions. The ability 
to link pages together easily makes it a great early prototyping tool.
Microsoft Visio
This program, the granddaddy of wireframing tools, can still be used 
to link its screens together to create something clickable. It’s hard to 
work quickly with Visio, though: the general challenges of using this 
product make it less and less attractive as more modern products, 
both desktop and web-based, enter the market.
OmniGraffle (Mac only)
In many ways, this is the Mac equivalent of Visio, though it is easier 
to use, has more robust features, and provides better-looking artifacts. 
You can use images in your drawings, so you can create good-looking 
artifacts. Still, its core power is in diagramming, not in simulating 
workflows and interaction.
Microsoft PowerPoint
In a pinch, PowerPoint can still be relied on to fake some level of 
interactivity. You can use the native drawing tools to draw wireframes 
and link them together, or you can import mockups, wireframes, or 
screenshots that you’ve created in another tool. By clicking sequen-
tially through your slides or by using linked hotspots, you can pro-
vide a bare minimum level of fake interactivity. On the Mac, Keynote 
can be used in the same way. You can also buy libraries of images 
from Keynotopia that let you assemble realistic-looking mockups. 
Maintaining these prototypes can end up being very time-consuming.
Fluid Designer/Pop Prototype on Paper
These mobile prototypting tools (and others like them, which are 
emerging very rapidly) allow you to quickly build prototypes that run 
on a smartphone. You import images (or photograph sketches) and 
link them quickly using hotspots. You can simulate simple workflows 
very quickly.

 MVPs and Experiments 	
63
Note
I am aware that there are many options on the market for creating wire-
frames and prototypes. The list of tools I mention in this section is in no way 
meant to be comprehensive. In fact, it is highly recommended that you try 
out as many of these tools as you can. See how well they fit the way you and 
your team work together. Most products have a free trial so you can give the 
product a field test before committing.
Mid- and High Fidelity Prototypes
Mid- and high-fidelity prototypes (see Figure 5-4) have significantly more 
detail than wireframe-based prototypes. You’ll use these to demonstrate 
and test designs that are fleshed out with a level of interaction, visual, and /or 
content design that is similar to (or indistinguishable from) the final prod-
uct experience. The level of interactivity that you can create at this level 
varies from tool to tool; however, most tools in this category allow you to 
represent pixel-perfect simulations of the final experience. You will be able 
to create interface elements such as forms, fields, drop-down menus that 
work, and form buttons that simulate submit actions. Some tools allow log-
ical branching and basic data operations. Many allow some types of minor 
animations, transitions, and state changes. Additionally, the cost of creat-
ing this level of fidelity is significantly reduced with the use of these tools.
Figure 5-4.  Example of a mid-fidelity prototype.

64	
Chapter 5
Pros
• Produces high-quality and realistic prototypes
• Visual design and brand elements can be tested 
• Workflow and user interface interactions can be assessed
Cons
• Interactivity is still more limited than fully native prototypes
• Users typically can’t interact with real data, so there is a limit to the 
types of product interactions you can simulate 
• Depending on the tool, it can be time-consuming to create and main-
tain these prototypes; maintaining a high-fidelity prototype and keep-
ing it in sync with the actual product often involves duplicate effort
Tools for creating mid- and high-fidelity clickable wireframes
Here are some of the tools that work well for this type of prototyping 
(again, this is only a very partial list):
Axure RP
This increasingly popular prototyping tool allows you to create real-
istic web pages with screens and forms, and to submit workflows. 
Axure mockups run in any browser and do an excellent job of simu-
lating web pages. Because it imports images well and supports native 
HTML user interface elements, it is a very effective mid-fidelity pro-
totyping tool (though you can use it for both low- and high-fidelity 
prototypes as well). It has good conditional logic, so you can mock 
up a good range of interactions. A growing community of support 
is sprouting up around Axure, and many interaction designers have 
begun using it as their primary tool. Its ability to generate specifica-
tions from the prototype is an added bonus for organizations that still 
make those demands of their teams.
Adobe Fireworks
An old Macromedia acquisition, Fireworks tries to blend the best of 
Adobe Illustrator with the best of Photoshop and mashes it up in a 
stew of pseudo-interactivity that makes it a powerful prototyping tool 
when visual fidelity is important. You can create screens and manage 
varying states of specific elements. You can add working form compo-
nents. You can link elements via simple hotspots. You can create cus-
tom asset libraries that make the reuse of interface elements efficient 
and encourage use of the tool. 

 MVPs and Experiments 	
65
Coded Prototypes
Coded prototypes offer the highest level of fidelity for simulated experi-
ences. For all intents and purposes, people interacting with this type of 
prototype should not be able to distinguish it from the final product unless 
they bump up against the limits of its scope (i.e., they click on a link to a 
page that was not prototyped). Coded prototypes exist in the native envi-
ronment (the browser, the OS, on the device, etc.) and make use of all of the 
expected interactive elements. Buttons, drop-down menus, and form fields 
all function as the user would expect them to. These prototypes take input 
from the mouse, keyboard, and screen. They create as natural an interac-
tion pattern as possible for the prototype’s evaluators. 
Hand-coded and live-data prototypes
There are two levels of fidelity for coded prototypes: hand-coded and live 
data. The hand-coded prototypes look and function like the end product, 
but don’t account for any kind of real-time data input, processing, or out-
put. They are still just simulations. The live-data prototypes will connect 
with real-time data and process user input. These are often deployed to real 
customers and offer a level of analytical insight into customers’ usage of 
the prototype that is not available from hand-coded prototypes. They can 
also be used when A/B testing certain features or changes to the current 
workflow. 
Pros
• Potential to reuse code for production
• The most realistic simulation to create
• Can be generated from existing code assets
Cons
• Team can get bogged down in debating the finer points of the prototype
• Time-consuming to create working code that delivers the desired 
experience
• Tempting to perfect the code before releasing to customers
• Updating and iterating can take a lot of time

66	
Chapter 5
What Should Go Into My Prototype?
You’ve picked the tool to create your MVP and are ready to get started. 
There is no need to prototype the entire product experience. Instead, simu-
late the most important part of the experience for your customer and your 
business. Focus on the core workflows that illustrate your MVP. 
Focusing on the primary workflows of your MVP gives the team a sense 
of temporary tunnel vision (in a good way!), allowing them to focus on a 
specific portion of the experience and assess its validity and efficacy. 
Figure 5-5.  Where prototyping fits in the Lean UX cycle
Demos and Previews
Test your prototyped MVP with your teammates, stakeholders, and mem-
bers of other teams. Take it to the lunch area and share it with colleagues 
who work on different projects. Ensure that people within the company 
are providing the team with insights into how well it works, how they’ll 
use it, and whether it’s worth additional investment. Let stakeholders click 
through it and give you their insights and thoughts. 
Prototypes help show the project’s stakeholders that progress is being 
made. If your team has a demo day (and if it doesn’t, it should), bring the 
prototype there to show progress on the project. The more exposure the 
MVP gets, the more insight you’ll have as to its validity. Next, take your 
prototype to customers and potential customers. Let them click through 
the experience and collect their feedback. 
Putting It All Together: Using a Prototype MVP
Here’s how one team I worked with recently used a prototype MVP. In this 
case study, the team was considering making a significant change to their 
offering. We used a prototype MVP to support the research and decision-
making process.

 MVPs and Experiments 	
67
This established startup was struggling with their current product—an 
exclusive subscription-based community for group collaboration. It had 
been in market for a few years and had gained traction, but adoption had 
reached a plateau—new users were not signing up. Realizing that a radical 
change was in order, especially in light of growing competition, they were 
considering revamping their business model and opening up the product to 
a significantly broader market segment. Their concern was twofold: 
• Would current users accept this change, given that it would alter the 
exclusive nature of the community? 
• Would the new market segment even be interested in this type of 
product? 
The team was worried that they could take a double hit. They feared that 
existing users would abandon the product and that there wouldn’t be 
enough new users coming on board to make up for the shortfall. 
I worked with the team to define our plan as a hypothesis. We laid out the 
new market segment and defined the core set of functionality we wanted to 
provide to that segment. It was only a subset of the ultimate vision, but it 
could be articulated in five wireframes. 
We spent a week creating the wireframes using Balsamiq to ensure that 
our developers, marketers, and executives were on board with the new 
direction. We showed the wireframes to current customers (twice!) over 
the course of these five days and ended up with a clickable prototype—our 
MVP. 
The timing for our experiment was fortuitous: there was a conference full 
of potential customers scheduled for the following week in Texas. The team 
flew down to the conference and walked the halls of the convention center 
with the prototype on our iPads. 
The mockups worked great on the iPads: customers tapped, swiped, and 
chatted with us about the new offering. Three days later, we returned 
to NYC with feedback written on every sticky note and scrap of paper 
available.
We gathered the notes into groups, and some clear themes emerged. Cus-
tomer feedback made us realize that although there was merit to this new 
business plan, we would need further differentiation from existing prod-
ucts in the marketplace if we were going to succeed. 
All told, we spent eight business days developing our hypotheses, creating 
our MVP, and getting market feedback. This work put us in a great posi-
tion to refine the product to fit our market segment more effectively.

68	
Chapter 5
Non-prototype MVPs
For many teams, the default approach to creating an MVP is to create a 
prototype—to immediately begin designing and writing code. It’s easy to 
understand this approach: we are trained to test our designs and our code, 
so when we think about validation, we naturally think about creating a 
product mockup to test. There are many occasions when this step isn’t 
necessary and can even be harmful, though. As valuable as prototyping is, 
it isn’t the only way forward. 
Sometimes it makes sense to create an MVP that doesn’t simulate your 
product and instead lets you test something related to your product. For 
example, when your team is trying to determine the value of a new fea-
ture or product, it often makes sense to use a non-prototype MVP to learn 
whether you’re on the right path.
The mantra to keep in mind when creating non-prototype MVPs is this: 
you can always go leaner. To plan your MVP, ask yourself the following 
questions:
1.	What am I trying to learn?
2.	What are the main signals I need from the market to validate my 
hypothesis? 
3.	Are there any other signals I can test for that will serve as indicators 
for my main signal?
4.	What’s the fastest way for me to find this information?
As an example, let’s answer these questions for a solution that an ecommerce 
company wants to test:
1.	What am I trying to learn? We are trying to learn whether this new 
ecommerce solution will increase purchases.
2.	What are the main signals I need from the market to validate my 
hypothesis? The main signal we’re seeking from the market is an 
increase in completed purchases.
3.	Are there any signals I can test for that will serve as indicators for my 
main signal? Instead of completed purchases, can we test for customer 
intent and use that as a proxy for purchases?
4.	What’s the fastest way for me to find this information? Let’s send out 
an email to a subset of our users offering a few items for sale and count 
click-throughs for that call-to-action. This will help us determine inter-
est and intent to purchase.

 MVPs and Experiments 	
69
Types of Non-Prototype MVPs
Let’s take a quick look at some techniques for creating non-protoype MVPs.
Email
Email is a very powerful tool when it comes to learning about your 
customers. Open rates, click-throughs, and task completion rates for 
recipients all provide insight into whether your idea has value.
Google Ad Words 
A very inexpensive experiment to run is to purchase Google Ad 
Words advertisements that target searches relevant to your business. 
By monitoring what people are searching for, you’ll start to get feed-
back on what kind of language resonates with your audience. By mea-
suring click-throughs, you can see how much interest there is in the 
words and messages you propose. 
Landing Page
A landing page for click-through traffic from Google ads can further 
validate your thinking. A landing page is the online equivalent of a 
Wild West movie studio set. It’s just a facade of your service, built 
with a very specific and obvious call-to-action on it. Whether it’s 
Sign-up, Buy Now, or Share-With-A-Friend, every user who completes 
the task on your landing page counts as validation of your product 
idea. 
The button to nowhere
A feature can be tested on your site by adding a button to the inter-
face that touts the new functionality. That button does nothing more 
than measure the number of times it’s clicked. Each click indicates 
a customer’s desire for that feature. With enough measurable inter-
est, further development of the feature can continue. Of course, you 
should give the user some explanation of why the feature isn’t work-
ing. You can use this further interaction as a chance to capture an 
email address or another bit of feedback.
Hybrids and Creativity 
When I talk to teams and entrepreneurs, I’m often impressed by how cre-
ative they can be in their approach to creating MVPs. Designing tests is a 
creative process, and you should use the methods listed in this chapter as 
inspiration for your creativity. The best approach for you will often be a 
mashup of many approaches.

70	
Chapter 5
Here’s an example of how Cheryl Yeoh launched CityPockets using a hybrid 
approach called a Concierge MVP to find out whether her idea solved a real 
problem and if there was enough demand to justify building it for real.
Cheryl Yeoh started CityPockets from the hypothesis that people had 
trouble managing, keeping track of, and redeeming all the daily deals and 
coupons they purchased online. She interviewed customers to validate that 
indeed there was a need, but she wasn’t sure if her solution—an online 
wallet for all of these coupons—would bring the kind of value these cus-
tomers needed. To validate her hypothesis, she launched an MVP version of 
CityPockets.com that featured only a front end. Building the back-end pro-
cessing and integration she would need was going to be costly; she didn’t 
want to spend her money unless she was sure her customers would find her 
service valuable. 
Instead of building a back end, Cheryl assigned a unique email address to 
each customer who signed up for the service. She instructed her customers 
to forward all of their coupon emails to that address. Behind the scenes, 
Cheryl was manually entering every coupon into a database. She set an 
arbitrary target outcome for herself: 500 emails a day. If customers were 
sending her 500 emails a day, she felt confident concluding there would be 
enough demand for the service to merit further investment. She would be 
ready at that point to build a back end to take over the processing.
This approach—though it involved some design and coding—left out the 
heavy lifting. Instead, it let Cheryl focus her investment on the smallest 
possible set of features she needed to support her learning. At the end of 
the day, this is the essence of the Lean UX approach. Design only what you 
need. Deliver it quickly. Create enough customer contact to get meaningful 
feedback fast. 

 MVPs and Experiments 	
71
Conclusion
In this chapter, we defined the Minimum Viable Product as the smallest 
thing you can make to learn whether your hypothesis is valid. In addition, 
we discussed the various forms an MVP can take, took a closer look at 
prototyping, and discussed tactics for learning that don’t require building 
prototypes.
In Chapter 6, we take a look at various types of research you can use to 
make sure that your designs are hitting the mark. We also take a look 
at how your team can make sense of all the feedback your research will 
generate. 


Beijing · Cambridge · Farnham · Köln · Sebastopol · Tokyo
Designing for Behavior 
Change
Applying Psychology and Behavioral 
Economics
Stephen Wendel

[ Contents ]
Foreword. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . ix
Preface. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xiii
Part I	
UNDERSTANDING THE MIND AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE
Chapter 1	
How the Mind Decides What to Do Next. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
The Deliberative and Intuitive Mind. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Making Sense of the Mind. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Most of the Time, We’re Not Actually “Choosing” What to Do Next. . 6
Even When We “Choose,” Our Minds Save Work. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 15
The Obvious, Simple Stuff Is Really Important. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 19
A Map of the Decision-Making Process. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
On a Napkin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Chapter 2	
Why We Take Certain Actions and Not Others. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 25
A Simple Model of When, and Why, We Act. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
The Create Action Funnel. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
On a Napkin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Chapter 3	
Strategies for Behavior Change . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A Decision or a Reaction: Three Strategies to Change Behavior . .  . . 47
Strategy 1: Cheat! . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Strategy 2: Make or Change Habits. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Strategy 3: Support the Conscious Action. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A Recap of the Three Strategies. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
On a Napkin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69

iv  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
Part II	
DISCOVERING THE RIGHT OUTCOME, ACTION, AND ACTOR 
Chapter 4	
Figuring Out What You Want to Accomplish . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Start with the Product Vision. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Nail Down the Target Outcome. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Identify Additional Constraints. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Generate a List of Possible Actions for Users to Take. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 86
On a Napkin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Chapter 5	
Selecting the Right Target Action. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
Research Your Target Users. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
Select the Ideal Target Action. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Define Success and Failure . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
How to Handle Very Diverse Populations. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
On a Napkin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Part III	
DEVELOPING THE CONCEPTUAL DESIGN 
Chapter 6	
Structuring the Action. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
Start the Behavioral Plan. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
Tailor It. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
Simplify It. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
Make It “Easy” . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
On a Napkin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
Chapter 7	
Constructing the Environment. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Tactics You Can Use . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
Increase Motivation. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Cue the User to Act. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
Generate a Feedback Loop. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
Knock Out the Competition. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
Remove or Avoid Obstacles . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
Update the Behavioral Plan. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
On A Napkin. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139

 CONTENTS   |  v
Chapter 8	
Preparing the User. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
Tactics You Can Use . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
Narrate the Past to Support Future Action . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
Associate with the Positive and the Familiar. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
Educate Your Users. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
How Training Your Users Fits In. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
Update the Behavioral Plan . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
How Behavior Change Techniques Relate to the Thought 
the Behavior Requires. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
On a Napkin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Part IV	
DESIGNING THE INTERFACE AND IMPLEMENTING IT
Chapter 9	
Moving from Conceptual Designs to Interface Designs. .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . 155
Take Stock . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
Extract the Stories or Specs. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
Provide Structure for Magic to Occur. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
On a Napkin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
Chapter 10	
Reviewing and Fleshing Out the Interface Designs. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 171
Look for Big Gaps . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
Look for Tactical Opportunities . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
On a Napkin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
Chapter 11	
Turning the Designs into Code . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
Put the Interface Design in Front of Users . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
Build the Product. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195
Go Lean If Possible . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 196
On a Napkin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 197

vi  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
Part V	
REFINING THE PRODUCT
Chapter 12	
Measuring Impact. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
Why Measure Impact?. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203
Where to Start: Outcomes and Metrics . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
How to Measure Those Metrics. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 208
Determining Impact: Running Experiments. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
Determining Impact: Unique Actions and Outcomes. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . 221
Other Ways to Determine Impact . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
What Happens If the Outcome Isn’t Measurable 
Within the Product? . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
On a Napkin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
Chapter 13	
Identifying Obstacles to Behavior Change . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
Watch Real People Using the Product . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 234
Check Your Data. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235
Figure Out How to Fix the Obstacles . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 242
On a Napkin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 246
Chapter 14	
Learning and Refining the Product. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
Determine What Changes to Implement. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
Measure the Impact of Each Major Change. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
When Is It “Good Enough”? . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
How to (Re-)Design for Behavior Change with an 
Existing Product. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
On a Napkin . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259

 CONTENTS   |  vii
Part VI	
PUTTING IT INTO PRACTICE
Chapter 15	
Common Questions and a Start-to-Finish Example . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 263
An Example of the Approach . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 263
Questions About How and Why We Act. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 270
Questions About the Mechanics of Building 
Behavior Change Products. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 276
Chapter 16	
Conclusion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
Four Lessons. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
Themes . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 295
Looking Ahead . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 296
Appendix A: Glossary of Terms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 297
Appendix B: Resources to Learn More. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
Appendix C: Bibliography . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
Appendix D: Endnotes. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 327
Index. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 347
About the Author. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 355

47
Strategies for Behavior Change
A Decision or a Reaction: Three 
Strategies to Change Behavior 
How can a product help its users pass all the way through the Action 
Funnel and actually take action? There are three big strategies that 
a company can choose from, to change behavior and help users take 
action. Two of them come straight from the research literature and 
from the difference between deliberative and intuitive actions. The 
third is less obvious, but immensely powerful—it’s called cheating. 
The conscious, deliberative route is the one that most of us are familiar 
with already—it entails encouraging people to take action, and them 
consciously deciding to do it. Users have to pass through all five stages 
of the Action Funnel, and often spend considerable time on the con­
scious evaluation stage. 
The intuitive route is a bit more complex. Recall from Chapter 1 that 
our lightning-fast, automatic, and intuitive reactions arise from a mix 
of various elements: associations we’ve learned between things, spe­
cific habits we’ve built up, our current mindset, and a myriad of built-in 
shortcuts (heuristics) that save our minds work but can lead us astray. 
Of these, habits are the most promising route to developing a sustain­
able path to behavior change because there are clear, systematic ways 
to form them.49 And once they are formed, they allow the user to pass 
effortlessly through two of the stages of the Action Funnel—the con­
scious evaluation and the assessment of the right timing for action. 
[ 3 ]

48  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
The third strategy takes a lesson from Chapter 1, that our minds are 
usually on autopilot, to the extreme: it decreases users’ need to act 
altogether, so they simply need to give consent if they wish the target 
action to occur. This strategy—to “cheat”—I’ll argue is the most effec­
tive and desirable of all.
In the following sections, I’ll go into detail about each of these strate­
gies, and when each of them is most appropriate, but in short, here are 
the guidelines:
Cheat
If what you really care about is the action getting done, and it’s 
possible to all but eliminate the work required of the user beyond 
giving consent, then do it. 
Make or change habits
If the user needs to take an action multiple times (like eating bet­
ter or spending less), and you can identify a clear cue, routine, and 
reward, then use the “habits” strategy. Also use this strategy if the 
user is fighting an existing habit—to cleverly undercut it, rather 
than using brute force to stop it directly. 
Support conscious action
If neither of the other two is available, then you must help the 
user consciously undertake the target action. There are ways to 
make this process nicer and easier, but it’s still the hardest path 
to follow.
In each case, the individual makes a conscious choice; what’s different 
is what is being chosen and what happens afterward. In the first strategy, 
the person chooses whether to give consent to the action occurring 
on her behalf. In the second strategy, the person chooses whether to 
set up the conditions for habit formation (or for stopping an existing 
habit), and chooses whether to repeat the behavior until the habit is 
formed (or broken). In the last strategy, the person chooses whether 
or not to take the original target action. If the action is to be repeated, 
so is the choice. There’s no (ethical) way to avoid having the user con­
sciously choose whether or not to act, but products can change the 
nature of that choice by selecting among these three strategies. 

 Strategies for Behavior Change   |  49
How can you help users take better pictures with your camera? Provide a 
manual (“support conscious action”), provide a frequently used and easy 
menu system (“build habits”), or set intelligent defaults (“cheat”).
These behavioral strategies provide high-level direction for how the 
product should be designed: how it accomplishes the process of behav­
ior change. Behavioral tactics (such as comparing users to their peers, 
highlighting the pain of losing an opportunity, or priming them to 
think about particular topics) don’t provide much overall guidance on 
how the product should work. Instead, they can be slotted in at various 
junctions in the product to make each piece of the product more effec­
tive. Throughout this book, we’ll talk about both high-level strategies 
and lower-level tactics. This chapter is all about strategy, though, so 
let’s get started with the first one: cheat.
Strategy 1: Cheat!
While you can make an action rewarding, easy, familiar, socially 
acceptable, or any of the other things we talked about in Chapter 1, the 
activity still involves work for the user. Ideally, the company should find 
ways to shift the user’s burden onto the product, by identifying clever 

50  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
ways to make active participation by the user unnecessary beyond giv­
ing informed consent. That’s what I call cheating—substituting the 
user’s nasty problem with a much simpler one: deciding whether he 
wants the product to take the action for him. As you’ll see, this strategy 
is only available in certain cases, but when it is feasible, it is immensely 
powerful.
Exactly how a company can “cheat” depends on whether the target 
action is undertaken once or infrequently (like buying running shoes) 
or repeatedly (like going running each morning). I’ll talk about each of 
these two situations in turn.
Strategies to Cheat at One-Time Actions
DEFAULT IT
To default an action, the company first finds a way to take the action 
on the user’s behalf. Then, it gives the user a choice about whether the 
product should take the action on his behalf, where the default answer 
is “yes.” The user can say “no” if he so chooses. 
Most defaults are invisible—you don’t even think about them as 
defaults; they just happen. In fact, we’re not used to seeing the defaults 
that are all around us, and so we rarely think of it as a solution. To that 
point, the most common reaction I get to proposing defaults is, “That’s 
great, but there’s no way that will work here. You can’t default this 
behavior.” Well, maybe. Here are some examples to show how default­
ing works in real life: 
Behavior change sought: have users save for the future. 
Two of the greatest success stories in the recent history in helping 
users save money are 401(k) auto-enrollment and auto-escalation.50 
(For non-US readers, 401(k)s are retirement savings plans provided 
by an employer to employees.) Under auto-enrollment, individuals 
who are eligible to participate in their company’s 401(k) plan are 
defaulted into contributing to the plan, but are given the option to 
not contribute if they wish. Similarly, auto-escalation automatically 
increases the contribution rate over time, but the individual can 
opt out at any time.
The initial action that users take is often quite minimal—signing 
their name on a package of new-employee documents—and after­
ward, contributions to the 401(k) plan are automatically deducted 
from their paychecks and placed into their retirement account 

 Strategies for Behavior Change   |  51
on their behalf. Instead of requiring that an individual choose to 
contribute to the retirement plan each month (or choose to find 
the HR representative with the necessary paperwork required 
to enroll in the plan), this process effectively removes the work 
required by the user. 
401(k) auto-enrollment is a powerful example of increasing sav­
ings, but it also can skirt the line between voluntary behavior 
change and trickery. Some employers strive to inform employees 
about their retirement plans and default contributions. In other 
cases, the employees don’t know about their accounts until they 
leave their job and get a check—which they quickly spend on 
non-retirement needs, since they weren’t informed and invested 
in the process in the first place. 
The impact of defaults is significant in this case: defaulted (auto-
enrolled) plans have nearly twice the participation of non-defaulted 
plans (Nessmith et al. 2007).
Behavior change sought: have users take high-quality photos, rather than 
crappy ones.
High-end camera manufactures have a problem: many consum­
ers want lots of features, but those same features make the camera 
sensitive to user mistakes and result in bad pictures.
Good cameras have a simple solution that help people take quality 
pictures, but still provide power options (and a premium price): 
the cameras have default settings that are dirt simple and would 
provide a good picture in most scenarios. In addition, they have all 
of the fancy bells and whistles that make the product more attrac­
tive and expensive than a bargain-basement camera. 
Similar defaults are common in computer software (“Would you 
like the standard install or the scary customized one?”)—the 
options are there, but the software makers have provided intelli­
gent defaults so most people don’t have to worry about them and 
install the software without getting themselves in trouble. 
Impact of the defaults: apparently, cameras still can’t help us take 
interesting pictures. More seriously, though: do any mass mar­
ket cameras exist anymore that don’t have intelligent defaults for 
things like contrast, white balance, and F-stop?

52  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
MAKE IT INCIDENTAL
If the action can’t simply be defaulted away, there’s another clever 
option—have the action come along for the ride with something else 
that users are going to do anyway. In other words, don’t have them 
think about doing the action at all. Make the action happen automat­
ically when the user does something else—something that is inher­
ently more interesting or engaging—but leave the option for the user 
to decline the action if he so chooses.
Here are two examples:
Behavior change sought: improve people’s intake of vital vitamins and 
minerals.
OK, before I go into the solution, what’s the most effective way 
to improve the amount of vitamins and minerals people get? 
Convince them of the benefits? Pay them to eat well? Run a public 
campaign with celebrities endorsing vital minerals? How about 
this: put it in the food people already eat—with their consent, and 
without removing other food options. For example, put iodine in 
salt.
Iodine deficiency is the leading preventable cause of mental retar­
dation (McNeil 2006).51 It causes stunted growth, infant mortality, 
lower IQ, goiter (big lumps in the neck), and more (International 
Council for the Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders 2013). Two 
billion people suffer from insufficient iodine. Iodine costs virtu­
ally nothing to produce and add to salt.
The story of iodized salt also shows that defaulting can’t be 
allowed to turn into coercion, either practically or ethically. At var­
ious times, people around the world have objected to iodine being 
added to their salt without their consent, causing these iodiza­
tion campaigns to fail (and iodine deficiency to continue). When 
there is no way to opt out (non-iodized salt) and no consent, it’s not 
“defaulting”—it’s just an ethically problematic mandate. There 
must be consent among the population first.
Impact of making iodine incidental: in many of the places where 
iodized salt has been used (with consent), the problem of iodine 
deficiency simply ceases to exist; that’s the ideal outcome of any 
behavior change strategy. In the United States, iodine deficiency 
is rarely an issue anymore, except where it hasn’t been made 
incidental. 

 Strategies for Behavior Change   |  53
Behavior change sought: have people (voluntarily) contribute money to 
savings.
One solution in this case is a savings lottery, aka prize-linked sav­
ings accounts. A prize-linked savings account is like a lottery in 
which a person can “buy” multiple tickets.52 Each ticket is a con­
tribution to their savings account. Like any lottery, there’s a jack­
pot—a big pool of money that one (or more) winners get. Unlike 
a normal lottery, the participant doesn’t lose the cost of their 
ticket: it’s just deposited into their savings account (Tufano 2008). 
There’s a significant upside, but little downside, to participating. 
Prize-linked savings makes contributing money to a savings 
account incidental because some users have a strong preference 
for playing lotteries (Filiz-Orzbay et al. 2013); the fact that they 
don’t lose the money they use to play is a nice added bonus, but 
incidental. 
Impact of making it incidental: prized-linked savings programs 
have been highly popular around the world for centuries, start­
ing in Britain (Murphy 2005). They have recently gained traction 
in the United States through the tireless work of Doorways to 
Dreams, a Massachusetts-based NGO.53, 54
And there are many more examples that we rarely think about in our 
daily lives. If you want your toddler to take a pill, you crush the pill up 
and put it in some juice that he likes. The toddler doesn’t care or know 
(and if he doesn’t know, he can’t complain) about the pill; it’s inciden­
tal. The juice is what matters. 
Strategies to Cheat at Repeated Actions
With repeated actions, you can use both of the last two approaches 
(defaulting and making the action incidental). For example, with 
prize-linked savings programs, the savings lottery can be repeated 
each month to encourage sustained savings contributions. Each time 
the person acts, savings is incidental. Similarly, each time the per­
son uses an application, she can encounter the same (configurable) 
defaults. 
In addition to these two approaches, another approach becomes possi­
ble with repeated actions: you can turn the repeated action into a one-
time action by automating the act of repetition. 

54  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
AUTOMATE THE ACT OF REPETITION 
Taking an action repeatedly is inherently more difficult than taking 
that action once, even when the person learns how to do it better over 
time. So, why not turn a repeated action into a one-time action? 
In this scenario, the individual takes a one-time action to set up or 
accept the automated process, and then the rest is handled without her 
intervention by the product itself. The principle is simple, and is very 
similar to defaulting a one-time action: use behind-the-scenes magic 
to shift the work from the user to the product. 
Some great examples of automating repeated behaviors in the health 
space are exercise trackers that people carry with them throughout the 
day. These include devices such as the Nike+ FuelBand, Jawbone Up, 
and Fitbit One; and apps (e.g., RunKeeper) that use GPS or a phone’s 
accelerometer to accomplish this without a separate device (see Figure 
3-1). These apps and devices automatically log and compare exercise 
against a user’s target. They’ve successfully taken something that is 
annoying but beneficial (logging exercise in a journal, comparing it 
to one’s daily goals), and made the work magically disappear. Once 
exercise tracking was automated away, companies could focus on more 
interesting (and user-beneficial) target actions—like helping users 
exercise more.
Another example of automating behavior comes from the personal 
finance space, with software that automatically categorizes transac­
tions and tracks spending—such as HelloWallet (where I work), Mint, 
and numerous bank websites. In the “old” days (i.e., the 1980s), if you 
wanted to know how much you had in your checking account, you 
had to track your spending and balance your checkbook (remember 
checks?). When ATMs become popular in the 1990s, you also had to 
track your cash withdrawals. If you had a credit card, it would send 
you a monthly statement, but before that arrived, you were out of luck. 
With personal finance applications, tracking expenses can happen 
automatically. Each individual transaction is automatically logged, cat­
egorized, and, where relevant, compared against a goal or budget item. 
As with many other forms of automation, once the action is automated 
for the user, the product team is then free to focus on more interesting 
and difficult-to-change behaviors—like helping users stay within their 
budget. But that wouldn’t be feasible for most users if they are wasting 
their time tracking their spending first. 

 Strategies for Behavior Change   |  55
The most powerful combination of all is to combine automation with 
defaulting—automation makes it a one-time action, and defaulting 
makes it little more than an acceptance of that automation. I didn’t 
go into detail about this earlier, but 401(k) auto-enrollment is such an 
example—the savings contributions are automatically deducted, and 
the default is to enroll in the program.
FIGURE 3-1.
RunKeeper, an example 
of automated exercise 
tracking

56  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
But Isn’t Cheating Well, Cheating? 
Before I move on to other behavior change strategies, I’d like to con­
front an implicit assumption that I’ve seen in many do-good prod­
ucts—that doing good requires making our users work hard. If we, 
as people designing for behavior change, want to help people take an 
action, we should be pushing people to tackle that hill! We know it’s 
hard, they know it’s hard, and that’s what makes it worthwhile, right?
Well, no. 
If the goal is to make people healthier, and the action is consistent 
with that goal (say, by making the food that people already eat mag­
ically become healthier but taste and cost the same), and automation 
doesn’t have nasty side effects, does it inherently matter if the user 
doesn’t have to work hard for it? This probably raises all sorts of hack­
les. In the case of magically healthier food, I can hear my own inner 
do-gooder say, “Well, that misses the point—we want people to make 
wise choices, learn about the wonders of nutrition, be grateful for all 
the energy we put in to help them, etc.!” 
That’s why it’s vital to be clear about the end goal of the product. For 
example, educating people about health is a laudable goal. But do we 
really only want to educate people? Or, do we educate in order to help 
people change their eating habits, which then makes them health­
ier in the long term? If we could jump ahead, solve this very particu­
lar problem, and move on to something else, wouldn’t that be a good 
thing? Maybe making food healthier helps with the goal of decreasing 
vitamin deficiencies, but it doesn’t solve the issue of cardiovascular 
disease. Great—once the food solution is in place, then you can devote 
your energies to the next problem: helping people decrease cardiovas­
cular disease.
Any product will have multiple aims. But there should be one clear 
thing that you gauge its success against—a final outcome or goal (that 
one thing can be a composite of multiple smaller things). I’ll talk about 
how to identify and fine-tune the product’s goal in a later chapter, but 
let’s assume you know what it is. When you’re clear about what exactly 
is being sought, go for it. Even if it feels like cheating because it doesn’t 
make people suffer. There are no martyrs in beneficial behavior 
change. The point of making work magically disappear is that you can 
move on and help your users with other, more intractable problems. 

 Strategies for Behavior Change   |  57
There’s good behavioral science behind this point too. In short, our 
self-conceptions are constantly adapting based on our own behavior. 
We often forget or ignore the reasons why we do things and develop a 
story of who we are based on what we observe about our own behavior 
(Wilson 2011).55 For example, if we successfully contribute money to a 
retirement plan, even if we were defaulted into it, we suddenly feel that 
that’s something we can do—we’re savers! The pride that people feel at 
saving money through automatic enrollment is real, and should not be 
discounted. That self-conception as a saver then has knock-on effects 
for other related behaviors—we’re prepped for future action.
A classic study in this field is Freedman and Fraser (1966), in which 
the researchers started by asking homeowners to put a small sticker 
in their window encouraging safe driving. Weeks later, this ran­
domly selected group was far more likely to accept a large lawn sign 
about safe driving than other homeowners; a whopping 76% of them 
accepted the large sign, compared to 17% who hadn’t been asked to 
show the small sticker. In other studies, homeowners were also more 
likely to accept other non-driving related lawn signs. The homeowners 
started to see themselves as people active in their community, which 
had broad effects on their behavior.
There are cases when this doesn’t work, of course. When people don’t 
know the action occurred at all, then the self-conception doesn’t 
change—but in that case it isn’t a voluntary behavior change at all: it’s 
behind-the-scenes trickery. 
Cheating at the Action Funnel
Remember the Create Action Funnel from the last chapter? It’s diffi­
cult for a user to pass all of the way through the funnel from the initial 
cue to a conscious choice to act with sufficient urgency. The cheating 
strategy takes the funnel, and changes its meaning. With a conscious 
choice to take a hard action, “success” occurs when the user passes 
through the funnel. When the product cheats, “success” occurs when 
the user agrees to the action occurring, but doesn’t pass through the 
funnel to stop it from occurring. 

58  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
Strategy 2: Make or Change Habits
Habits are widely used in products that change behavior. For example, 
the Nike+ FuelBand builds the habit of checking progress throughout 
the day with a simple cue (the band itself), routine (checking NikeFuel 
points), and reward (seeing the points increase). That habit of checking 
progress is an essential part of the feedback loop used to encourage 
additional exercise. The mobile phone application Lift builds user-
selected habits by cueing people each day to take their action, and then 
recording it and rewarding them.56 Before talking about how to build 
them, let’s look at the role they play in behavior change.
Habits Simplify Behavior 
Our minds are built to form habits because they are essential—they 
free our conscious minds from handling mundane details, for every­
thing from thinking about how to prepare our breakfast in the morn­
ing to how to properly greet a friend we meet frequently. Without 
habits, our conscious minds would be overloaded with the minutiae 
of daily decisions—it would be like we were always moving to a new 
house, a new job, a new city, and trying to consciously maneuver our 
way around, every single day of our lives. 
Before a habit is formed, however, the user still needs to choose to act. 
Just like with automation and intelligent defaults, using habits doesn’t 
remove the need for the mind to think; it simply shifts the task to a 
simpler problem. With habits, the simpler problem is to help the per­
son “get into the groove”—to start taking the action, so that the mind 
can make it habitual. I’ll talk about how to consciously start taking an 
action in the next strategy; for now, we’ll focus on how to build the 
habit given the user’s initial commitment to act. 
From a behavior change perspective, habits are both a boon and a 
bane. If a product helps the user form a habit, then the person can act 
on autopilot. The product team, and the user, can move on to tackling 
harder problems—just like the “cheating” strategy discussed earlier. 
But “bad” habits work on autopilot just as much as “good” ones. The 
next two sections talk about how to form (hopefully “good” habits) and 
clever ways to attack existing “bad” ones. 

 Strategies for Behavior Change   |  59
How to Build Them
Chapter 1 described the two basic types of habits: habits created out 
of simple repetition (cue-routine, cue-routine, etc.), and habits that 
have the added feature of a reward at the end (cue-routine-reward) that 
drives the person to repeat the behavior. Your product’s users could 
form habits by simple repetition, but then the burden of work and will­
power is all on their side. When designing for behavior change, add a 
reward at the end to help bring people back while the habit is forming.
The cue-routine-reward process is depicted in Figure 3-2. Charles 
Duhigg popularized the process in the Power of Habit (Random House, 
2012), building on an old tradition in applied behavioral analysis.57
To build habits with a product, here is a straightforward recipe: 
1.	 Identify a routine that should be repeated dozens of times, with­
out significant variation or thought each time.
2.	 Identify a reward that is meaningful and valuable for the user.
FIGURE 3-2.
The cue-routine-reward 
process described by 
Duhigg (2012). For 
example, seeing the 
scale in the morning 
triggers the exercise 
routine. The immediate 
reward is a pleasant 
muscle burn.

60  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
3.	Identify a clear, unambiguous, and single-purpose cue in a per­
son’s daily life or in the product itself (an email, an alert, etc.).
4.	 Make sure the user knows about the cue, routine, and especially, 
the reward.58
5.	Make sure the user wants to and can undertake the routine (i.e., 
the user needs to make the conscious choice to act). 
6.	 Deploy the cue.
7.	Either facilitate the routine or, at least, seamlessly and immedi­
ately track whether the routine has actually occurred.
8.	 Have the product immediately reward the user once the routine 
has occurred. That allows dopamine in the brain to reinforce neu­
rons associated with the cue and routine before the memory fades.
9.	 Repeat steps 6–8, tracking completion times and rates, and adapt­
ing the process until it’s right. 
There’s a lot of nuance there, of course. 
First, the cue really needs to be single-purpose and unambiguous (i.e., 
after the habit is formed, the cue is linked to the specific routine and 
nothing else), because you want to avoid the mind having to think 
about what to do when the cue occurs. Fogg and Hreha (2010) argue 
that the triggers (i.e., cues) can be:
• Directly tied to another event (e.g., looking at the bathroom mir­
ror first thing in the morning is connected to picking up your 
toothbrush) 
• At a specific time of day every day or every week
The trigger/cue can be “internal” (boredom or hunger) or “external” 
(seeing the clock first thing in the morning, or getting an angry email). 
Internal triggers are great, since they are inherent in the human con­
dition; however, lots of other things in one’s life compete for the same 
triggers (which makes them not single-purpose and thus ambiguous). 
External triggers can be just as effective, if wisely constructed.
Second, while the routine must be structured so that it can occur effec­
tively without thought, it need not be “stupid” or “simple.” Good driv­
ing, for most people, is a (complex, impressive) habit. Remember how 
hard it was to learn to drive? Remember all of the thought that was 
required just to start the car and get it going? Yet, after learning, we 

 Strategies for Behavior Change   |  61
avoid getting too close to other cars while on the road, we coordinate 
what our eyes see with what our hands do to steer, and so on. The rea­
son is that driving uses a set of hierarchical habits—large, complex 
habits built out of thousands of small, routinized behaviors that are 
cued from the environment and linked to one another in succession. 
Each piece is structured so that it can be consistently executed after 
the cue without conscious thought.
Routines that can be made into a habit often will have a strong and 
clear feedback loop (i.e., after the action is taken, the reward is imme­
diate and unambiguously tied to the success). Habit formation is not a 
conscious event, though we can consciously put ourselves in situations 
where we’ll learn them. 
Third, the reward need not be offered every time, as long as it is still 
clearly tied to the routine. Random rewards are quite powerful in some 
circumstances. In the operant conditioning literature, habits with ran­
dom reinforcement take the longest to form but also take the longest 
time to extinguish once the reward is no longer given. Gambling pro­
vides the ultimate random reward—and once you have the bug, it’s 
difficult as all heck to get rid of. One reason that random reinforce­
ment is so powerful is that our brains don’t really believe in random­
ness. We look for patterns everywhere. So, part of the desire driving 
a random reward is our brains trying to find a pattern (ever talk to a 
gambler who has “a system”?).59
And finally, a key part of using products to build habits is experimen­
tation and fine-tuning. Your product is probably going to get it wrong 
the first time—the cue won’t be clear or won’t grab the user’s atten­
tion, the user may stop caring about the reward, or the context for the 
routine might change, and conscious thought is required.60 
Changing Existing Habits
This book is about helping users take action. Sometimes, though, 
that may require intentionally stopping a habit, instead of just adding 
new behaviors. For example, at some point, improving fitness through 
exercise means not just exercising more, but also sitting less. And that 
means overcoming an existing habit. 

62  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
Unfortunately, it can be extraordinarily difficult to stop habits head-on. 
Brain damage, surgery, even Alzheimer’s disease and dementia some­
times fail to stop habits, even as other cognitive functions are severely 
impaired (Eldridge et al. 2002). BJ Fogg, for example, argues that stop­
ping existing habits is the hardest behavioral change task to undertake 
(2009b). 
Why are habits so difficult to change? First, it’s because habits are auto­
matic and not conscious. Our conscious minds, the part that would 
seek to remove them, are only vaguely aware of their execution (see 
Dean 2013); we often don’t notice them when they occur, and we don’t 
remember doing them afterward. Across dozens of studies on behav­
ior change interventions, researchers have found that the conscious 
mind’s sincere, concerted intention to change behavior has little rela­
tionship to actual change in behavior (Webb and Sheeran 2006). 
Second, it’s because habits never truly go away—once a habit is formed 
(i.e., the brain is rewired to associate the stimulus and response), it 
doesn’t normally un-form. It can remain latent or unused, but under 
the right circumstances, that circuitry in the brain can be activated 
and cause the habitual behavior to reappear.61 
Another way of thinking of habit cessation is this: if stopping bad hab­
its were easy, we wouldn’t need so many darned books on everything 
from stopping smoking to dieting.62 Nevertheless, one can draw les­
sons from the literature on habit formation and change—which can 
save product teams needless pain and suffering. There are five main 
options that product teams can take to handle an existing habit:
1.	 Avoid the cue.
2.	 Replace the routine.
3.	Cleverly use consciousness to interfere.
4.	 Use mindfulness to avoid acting on the cue.
5.	Crowd out the old habit with new behavior.
In each case, the person doesn’t engage in a direct confrontation to 
simply suppress the habit. That takes constant willpower, which is 
finite and unsustainable in most cases. 

 Strategies for Behavior Change   |  63
OPTION 1: HELP THE PERSON AVOID THE CUE
The cue signals the brain to engage in the problematic behavior; one 
way to stop a habit is to avoid the cue (Wood et al. 2005). For exam­
ple, in addiction counseling, counselors advise addicts to change their 
environment so that they don’t encounter the things that remind them 
to act. If you always stop for a drink when you see the bar on the way 
home, then change your route home so you don’t see the bar anymore.63 
Designing a product to help people avoid cues is especially tricky. First 
of all, most cues for bad habits are, by definition, outside of the behav­
ior change product. People use the product in order to change the 
habit—the product didn’t cause the bad habit. So, the product must 
help the person avoid the cues themselves: the product must provide 
guidance and instruction. And the individual must first know what 
the cues are—and be able to successfully avoid them. 
Second, because the routine is outside of the product, the application 
usually won’t know if the person has engaged in the behavior. It’s up 
to the user to report falling off the wagon—which is doubly difficult. 
External monitoring systems are required—like the breathalyzers that 
alcoholics install in their cars to stop them from driving drunk. Much 
more is required in the case of chemical addictions like alcoholism, 
but we can learn from these efforts as we design products to stop less 
intractable habits. 
While this route is clearly challenging, there are products that have 
successfully done it. One example is Covenant Eyes64—software that 
helps people who are struggling with sexual addiction or want to avoid 
the temptation before a habit is formed (see Figure 3-3). It helps users 
avoid cues (by filtering out sites with explicit content) and/or automat­
ically monitors web usage to inform accountability partners of when 
the person does access pornography. 

64  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
OPTION 2: CHANGE THE HABIT INTO SOMETHING ELSE
The other strategy that products can use to change a bad habit is to 
transition an existing cue and reward to a different (more benefi­
cial) behavior. In The Power of Habit (Random House, 2012), Duhigg 
describes two elements that are needed: routine replacement and a 
real belief that the habit can change.
Routine replacement works by hijacking the cue and the reward, and 
inserting a different routine between them. He uses the example of 
taking a snack break when you’re not really hungry. The cue may be 
that you’re having a down moment at work or watching a commercial 
on TV. The reward would be the relief of (momentary) boredom and 
the pleasant crunching sensation of the snack. To hijack this process, 
one needs to: 
1.	 Identify the trigger, and the reward (if appropriate).
2.	 When the trigger occurs, consciously engage in a different rou­
tine that provides a similar reward (like doing a crossword puzzle 
when bored during commercials).
FIGURE 3-3.
Covenant Eyes, an 
application to stop the 
habit of viewing sexual 
material online, via 
filtering and automatic 
monitoring

 Strategies for Behavior Change   |  65
3.	Continue that conscious switching of routines until the new habit 
is instilled.
The process of consciously replacing routines is also known as “com­
peting response training.” It is used in the treatment of people with 
Tourette’s syndrome (involuntary tics), and has shown dramatic results 
in experimental testing (Piacentini et al. 2010; Dean 2013).
For especially difficult habits, like smoking and drinking, swapping in 
a new routine isn’t enough, though. The new reward is never quite like 
the old one. Swapping can handle everyday behavior, but when times 
are tough, people can be immensely tempted to “fall off the wagon.” 
Something else is needed to get through those dark times and back 
to the day-to-day humdrum that they can handle. That something 
else can be faith that the hard times will pass. It can be a religious 
faith, a personal faith in themselves, or a faith in others that pulls 
them through. Either way, it’s an internal narrative that things will 
get better.
How does routine replacement work in practice? One of two ways. 
First, you can ensure that the product itself is present at the moment 
when the cue normally occurs. At that moment, it would remind or 
entice the user to do the new routine instead of the old one. After the 
routine is done, it would reward the user—or encourage him to reward 
himself. 
The other route is trickier and is needed when the product isn’t present 
when the user encounters the cue. As with avoiding the cue (described 
in the previous section), the product must advise and prepare the indi­
vidual for the moment of temptation, and find some way of tracking 
what action the person took. ChangeTech.no has an intensive program 
of support and tracking that accomplishes this, with over 400 points of 
contact with individuals during their smoking cession program. And, 
its method has shown positive results in randomized control trials 
(Brendryen and Kraft 2008).65 
An example of in-the-moment hijacking of habits that we’re all famil­
iar with is shopping in brick and mortar stores with a smartphone:
• Cue. See a camera, computer, or something else you like. 
• Old routine. Pick it up, go to the cash register, buy it.
• New routine. Look it up on the phone, compare price (usually 
lower), and buy it.

66  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
• Reward. Feel great about saving money, imagine yourself using 
the cool camera, receive item, and so on.
This habit hijack is killing brick and mortar stores. It’s not a “benefi­
cial behavior change,” but it’s the same underlying process.
OPTION 3: USE CONSCIOUS INTERFERENCE
Our big brains are really good at blocking our own autopilot; prop­
erly deployed, they can interfere with habits in progress without requir­
ing direct willpower to overcome the action. Thinking = bad, for a habit 
at least. In sports, masters of their game sometimes “choke” because 
they consciously cut into a process that normally runs on autopilot, 
and this happens in any field of mastery (Baumeister 1984; Gallwey 
1997). To interfere with a habit: think about it. Look especially for what 
triggers it. Then closely examine the routine that’s normally auto­
matic—just by thinking about it (consciously), we can interfere with 
its smooth execution.
Products that do this should be present at the time of action and can 
grab the user’s conscious attention to his or her behavior. The Prius is 
well known for functioning this way. The car’s consumption monitor 
provides ongoing, immediate feedback about the car’s gasoline con­
sumption. This in-the-moment feedback can break people out of their 
existing driving habits by making them consciously aware of what’s 
going on, causing them to use less gasoline, aka “the Prius Effect.” 
In order for this approach to work, like all habit intervention (and habit 
formation) approaches, it must be voluntary. If someone doesn’t care 
about mileage or finds the car’s consumption monitor annoying, he 
won’t listen to it. It starts with the conscious choice to act.
OPTION 4: USE MINDFULNESS
Another, subtle way to overcome bad habits is by employing mindful­
ness. Mindfulness is a concept used in Buddhism to refer to awareness 
of the present moment and its experiences, without judging or try­
ing to control them. It’s a mental state of openness and acceptance of 
events and sensations as they occur. Mindfulness-based therapies are 
increasingly popular in the treatment of mental conditions, such as 
acute stress, anxiety, and depression (Hofman et al. 2010). Similar to 
mindfulness meditation in Buddhism, these therapies entail an inten­
tional focus on the present moment without interference or judgment 
(Shapiro et al. 2006). 

 Strategies for Behavior Change   |  67
By bringing the cues that trigger habitual behavior into conscious 
awareness, it’s possible for one to be aware of the trigger without act­
ing on it. For example, mindfulness has been shown to limit unde­
sired, but habitual, binge drinking (Chatzisarantis and Hagger 2007). 
A number of apps, such as Headspace,66 support mindfulness to 
reduce stress or increase focus, though do not target habit change in 
particular.
OPTION 5: CROWDING OUT OLD HABITS
Another way of approaching habit change is to crowd out the old habit 
with new behaviors—a method that combines option 1 and 2 (and 
sometimes 3). In this method, you focus on doing more of what you want 
instead of less of what you don’t want.
For example, think about someone who is in bad shape, spends lots of 
time watching TV, and has bad eating habits. The person starts to go 
to the gym to exercise more (creating a new habit). As the person goes 
to the gym, he meets new people, and enrolls in exercise and cooking 
classes with them. Slowly, the amount of time available to watch TV 
decreases. The person simply isn’t at home as much, which leads him 
to avoid the old cues to watch TV. Also, because of the cooking class, 
and new ways of eating and cooking, there simply isn’t the hunger and 
opportunity to use his old eating habits; they are slowly being replaced. 
Naturally there are multiple forces at work in his life, such as changing 
self-identity, and changing social norms. However, as the structure of 
his daily life changes, the old habits fade away—not through a direct 
assault, but because other things are taking up his time and satisfying 
his hunger pangs. This only works if he gets far enough down the path 
of habit change—and doesn’t quit going to the gym soon after sign­
ing up, as so many other people do. The initial choice to push ahead, 
before the habit is formed, is a conscious one. 
Strategy 3: Support the Conscious Action
You probably noticed that both of the previous two strategies involved 
removing user work and simplifying the problem. But the simplified 
problem still requires a conscious choice to act. That’s unavoidable, 
and it’s even a good thing. The conscious mind must be engaged at 
some point. Ideally, that interaction entails informed consent—and 
the product automates or defaults the rest. Or the conscious choice can 
be to start down the path of habit formation or habit change. 

68  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
The explicit strategy of making a conscious choice over each part of 
the action should generally be avoided because it requires additional 
effort on the part of the user. All else being equal, more effort means 
less chance of acting. But sometimes, a head-on approach is used (or 
required). That means passing through all five stages of the Action 
Funnel (cue-reaction-evaluation-ability-timing), in order to execute the 
action itself. 
The conscious choice to act is a primary focus of this book, and 
Chapters 6–8 cover it in great detail. They describe how to support 
users to take conscious action—whether the action is the original 
behavior that the company sought to address, or a restructured action 
like giving consent to an automatic action taken on their behalf. 
A Recap of the Three Strategies
This chapter discusses the three primary strategies for behavior 
change. In each case, there is a choice that individuals make, but the 
nature and subject of that choice changes. Here’s a quick recap of 
when to use each one, and how they fit into the larger picture of behav­
ior change:
Cheat 
• What it is. Help the user avoid the work of the action altogether 
by making the outcome occur by default when the user interacts 
with the software or when the user takes a different action, or fully 
automating a repeated behavior after consent is given. 
• What is consciously chosen. Whether or not to give consent to the 
action occurring on the user’s behalf.
• Examples. 401(k) auto-enrollment; substituting healthier ingredi­
ents into the food people already eat. 
• Use this strategy. When you can replace a hard action with informed 
consent. This is not appropriate for overcoming ingrained habits, 
nor is it appropriate for cases in which the user needs to person­
alize the action to specific needs—that requires conscious, active 
involvement.

 Strategies for Behavior Change   |  69
Make (or change) habits
• What it is. Help the user avoid conscious effort and thought by 
making the desired action an automatic response to a trigger. Or 
when changing habits, cleverly attack the habit’s structure to hin­
der it from occurring. 
• What is consciously chosen. Whether or not to set up the conditions 
for a habit to form (or be broken).
• Examples. At the supermarket, go down the produce aisle before 
the canned foods aisle; walk once a day. 
• Use this strategy. Whenever the user wants to undertake a behavior 
that is done multiple times, in a consistent context. Also use this 
when trying to overcome existing habits, with the tricks described 
as part of the strategy, rather than using brute force to consciously 
override habits.
Support the conscious action
• What it is. Help the user think about the action, and take the nec­
essary steps (consciously) to make it happen.
• What is consciously chosen. Whether or not to take the target action.
• Examples. Educating people to get a good mortgage; encouraging 
people to sign up for (and attend) a yoga class for the first time.
• Use this strategy. Whenever the first two strategies aren’t feasible, 
especially when the action is complex, novel, and requires the user 
to make numerous small choices that can’t be defaulted.
On a Napkin
• Look for technical solutions to remove user work wherever possi­
ble; it’s often much more effective to engineer a solution than it is 
to change behavior. 
• Three technical solutions are automating the action behind the 
scenes, using intelligent defaults, and making the behavior a side 
effect of something else the user is doing. 
• Habits are immensely powerful ways to lock in repeated behav­
iors. They require an unambiguous cue, unvarying routine, and a 
meaningful, immediate reward. 

70  |   DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
• When possible, avoid trying to stop an existing behavior. The 
product should build new ones instead. 
• If stopping a habit is required, help users avoid cues, replace the 
routine, crowd it out, or draw conscious attention to the trigger 
and routine via mindfulness. 
• No matter what, some type of conscious choice is required for 
voluntary behavior change—the strategies presented here are all 
means to simplify the choice and the work required of the user.


Beijing · Cambridge · Farnham · Köln · Sebastopol · Tokyo
Designing Multi-Device 
Experiences
An Ecosystem Approach to User 
Experiences Across Devices
Michal Levin

 iii
[ contents ]
Preface . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  vii
Multi-Device Design Today. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  vii
Why I Wrote This Book. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  viii
Who Should Read This Book. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . ix
How This Book Is Organized. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . ix
Online Resources. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . xi
Conventions Used in This Book. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xii
Comments and Questions. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xii
Safari® Books Online. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xiii
Acknowledgments. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xiii
Chapter 1	
An Ecosystem of Connected Devices . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
The Concept of an Ecosystem . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
The 3Cs Framework: Consistent, Continuous, 
and Complementary . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4
Single-Device Design Is History (Don’t I Know It!). .  .  .  . 8
It’s an Ecosystem!. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  18
Summary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  19
Chapter 2	
The Consistent Design Approach . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  21
What Is Consistent Design?. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  22
Consistency in Minimalist Interfaces: 
Google Search. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  32
Progressive Disclosure in Consistent Design: Trulia. .  38
Beyond Device Accessibility: Hulu Plus. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  45
Devices Are the Means, Not the End . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  48
Summary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  50

iv  |   CONTENTS
Chapter 3	
The Continuous Design Approach. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .53
What Is Continuous Design?. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  53
Single Activity Flow . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  55
Sequenced Activities Flow. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  67
Summary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  92
Chapter 4	
The Complementary Design Approach. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  95
What Is Complementary Design?. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  95
Collaboration: Must-Have . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  98
Collaboration: Nice to Have. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  109
Control: Nice to Have. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  122
Fascinating Use Cases: What Do They Mean 
for My Work? . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  126
Summary . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  128
A Summary of the 3Cs . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  128
Chapter 5	
Integrated Design Approaches. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  131
3Cs as Building Blocks. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  132
Integrated Approaches: Another Look at 
Our Examples . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  139
Integrated Approaches: A Fresh Look at 
New Examples. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  159
Summary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  164
Chapter 6	
Beyond the Core Devices . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  167
The Internet of Things. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  167
Is the Internet of Things Already Here?. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  169
Expanding the 3Cs . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  170
Summary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  216
Chapter 7	
Multi-Device Analytics. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  219
User Data Is User Feedback. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  219
Multi-Device Analytics . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 228
Additional Analytics Considerations . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  241
Summary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 246

 CONTENTS   |  v
Chapter 8	
Transforming Challenges. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .249
Ecosystem Design and Development Challenges . .  .  .  250
Ecosystems Don’t Happen Overnight. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  257
Ecosystem Adoption Challenges . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  262
One Ecosystem Heart . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  271
A New, Disrupted (Human) World . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 286
Summary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 288
Appendix A: Companies, Products, and Links. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  291
Index. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  295

1
[ 1 ]
An Ecosystem of Connected Devices
What does it mean to design a product in a world where people 
own multiple devices and use them interchangeably? This chap­
ter describes how we got to this multi-device era, and introduces 
a new ecosystem design framework to help us both navigate and 
influence this new reality.
We have entered a world of multi-device experiences. Our lives have 
become a series of interactions with multiple digital devices, enabling 
each of us to learn, buy, compare, search, navigate, connect, and man­
age every aspect of modern life. 
Consider the hours we spend with devices every day—interacting with 
our smartphones, working on our laptops, engaging with our tablets, 
watching shows on television, playing with our video game consoles, and 
tracking steps on our fitness wristbands. For many of us, the following 
are true:
•	 We spend more time interacting with devices than with people. 
•	 We often interact with more than one device at a time.
The number of connected devices has officially exceeded the 7 billion 
mark, outnumbering people (and toothbrushes) on the planet.1 By 
2020, this number is expected to pass 24(!) billion.2 This inconceiv­
able quantity not only attests to the growing role of these devices in 
our digital lives, but also signals an increasing number of devices per 
person. Many individuals now own multiple connected devices—PCs, 
smartphones, tablets, TVs, and more—and they are already using them 
together, switching between them, in order to accomplish their goals. 
Ninety percent of consumers use multiple devices to complete a task 
over time—for example, shopping for an item might entail (1) search­
ing and exploring options at home on the PC, (2) checking product 
information and comparing prices in-store using your smartphone, 

2  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
and (3) writing product reviews on a tablet.3 Eighty-six percent of con­
sumers use their smartphones while engaging with other devices and 
during other media consumption activities, as shown in Figure 1-1.
FIGURE 1-1
Multitasking view—activities take place and other devices are used 
simultaneously with the smartphone.4
While each device plays an important role in many of our daily activi­
ties, their real power exists in how they are used together with other devices. 
This multi-device usage sets the foundation of a product ecosystem.
The Concept of an Ecosystem 
Biologists use the term ecosystem to describe interconnections within 
our natural world—a community of living organisms (plants, animals, 
and microbes) in conjunction with the nonliving components of their 
environment (elements like air, water, and mineral soil), interacting 
as a system. An ecosystem essentially describes a network of inter­
actions—among organisms, and between those organisms and their 
environment—which together create an ecology that is greater than the 
sum of its parts. 

 An Ecosystem of Connected Devices   |  3
In looking at the world of online apps and electronics today, we can see 
a type of ecosystem emerging. In this system—this climate of multi­
ple devices—we see smartphones, tablets, laptops, TVs, and other con­
nected devices all interacting with one another and wirelessly sharing 
data. These interactions are shaped by the different ways in which indi­
viduals use the content and services that flow between devices, in dif­
ferent contexts, en route to their goals (Figure 1-2).
The growing number of connected devices, especially mobile ones, 
is progressively changing the way people perceive, experience, and 
interact with products and each other. Our mission as designers 
and product creators is to understand the different relationships 
between connected devices, as well as how individuals relate to them, 
in order to create natural, fluid multi-device experiences that allow 
these dynamic changes. These experiences should focus on how the 
(increasing) set of connected devices can best serve users’ needs as 
they move between activities and contexts throughout the day. 
You can choose to build your product as an isolated cell on each device, 
replicating the same basic experience, and thus offering independent 
access to everything, everywhere, anytime. Or you can foster an ecosys­
tem approach that captures the dynamically changing needs and con­
texts that accompany shifting devices, putting the emphasis on deliver­
ing the right thing at the right place at the right time. 
The latter—the context-driven approach—is where I believe we’ll find 
our biggest opportunities.
FIGURE 1-2
An ecosystem of 
connected devices, 
including those that are 
already available today 
and a few that will join 
soon.

4  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
The 3Cs Framework: Consistent, Continuous, 
and Complementary 
In this era of proliferating connected devices, one goal is becoming 
clear: clients want to see their products on as many screens as possible. 
At the very least, we’ll need to get a product up and running across the 
basic, core set of screens already deeply embedded in our daily lives: the 
smartphone, tablet, PC, and TV. 
How do we handle this design complexity, given the myriad devices 
on the market already (and those that are on the way)? How should we 
approach a multi-device experience design without overwhelming our 
users, and being overwhelmed ourselves? 
When I was struggling with these questions a while back, I was 
inspired by the multi-screen patterns work done by Precious in 2011.5 
The company’s pioneering work established a conceptual model for 
approaching the emerging multi-device world. However, as I deepened 
my work in this space, I noticed several challenges that arise when we 
try to make clear distinctions between the different patterns; this is 
due in part to particular pattern overlaps and semantic blurs across 
them. To cut through the confusion, I adopted a framework, or set of 
building blocks, that has proven to be durable and immensely relevant 
for approaching ecosystem design. I call the framework 3Cs: consistent, 
continuous, and complementary.
In consistent design, the same basic experience is replicated between 
devices, keeping the content, flow, structure, and core feature set con­
sistent across the ecosystem. Some adjustments are made to accom­
modate device-specific attributes (mainly screen size and interaction 
model), but overall the experience can be fully consumed, in an inde­
pendent manner, on any device.
Spotify is a good example of consistent design. It enables users to dis­
cover and listen to their favorite music from everywhere—their comput­
ers, their mobile phones, their tablets, and their home entertainment 
systems. 
While consistent design provides access to everything, anywhere, 
anytime—a first important step in bringing value to users through 
multi-device use—it often doesn’t capture the full potential of an eco­
system. Consistency overlooks several significant factors involved in the 
user’s experience: context (delivering the right thing at the right time), 

 An Ecosystem of Connected Devices   |  5
multi-device relationships (ways devices can supplement and support 
one another), determining the best device for the task, and scaling the 
experience to a fully connected world (that goes beyond smartphones, 
tablets, PCs, and TVs). 
To accommodate these needs, we need two additional design building 
blocks—continuous and complementary design.
The hallmark of continuous design is that the experience is passed on 
from one device to another, either continuing the same activity (watch­
ing a movie, reading a book) or progressing through a sequence of dif­
ferent activities, taking place in different contexts but all channeled 
toward achieving the same end goal (like getting ready to go to work in 
the morning). 
The hallmark of complementary design is that devices complement one 
another (with relevant info/functionality), creating a new experience as 
a connected group. This experience can encompass two forms of device 
relationship: collaboration and control.
Google Chromecast, which turns a smartphone or tablet into a remote 
control for the TV, is one example of such experience design. These 
devices can then be used to browse the content on TV, control playback, 
and adjust volume. 
The 3Cs provide a framework for thinking about how users accom­
plish a single goal using multiple devices. Rather than providing a 
technology-focused framework—stemming from device form factor, 
size, and resolution—the 3Cs focus on people, looking at the relation­
ships between individuals and their devices, and how the latter can 
support them along their task flow en route to their goal. 
Using an analogy from the music world, let’s imagine that devices can 
be used in any of the following ways to elevate a user’s experience:
•	 As a solo instrument, where each performs the entire piece from 
start to end (consistent)
•	 As a step in a sequence, by splitting the music into pieces and play­
ing them with other instruments, one after the other (continuous)
•	 As part of an ensemble, where instruments play together in a coordi­
nated manner to create a harmonized music piece (complementary)

6  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
In this musical group, you are the conductor…and sometimes even 
the composer. You decide which devices take part in the multi-device 
composition, what role each one plays, and how they all orchestrate the 
complete ecosystem experience. How? 
In the following chapters, we will review many different multi-device 
experience examples through the lens of the 3Cs, demonstrating dif­
ferent relationships between devices, and how they can serve individ­
uals in their tasks. As you will see, the 3Cs help you decide what flows 
and functionality should be featured when, and how the experience 
elements should be distributed across devices. 
Bear in mind that each design approach is useful for addressing cer­
tain user contexts and use cases. For that reason, no single approach is 
useful in all situations, and quite often the best design employs several 
approaches (more on that in Chapter 5). 
By mapping the variety of contexts across an experience, and then 
framing the roles each device plays in the overall ecosystem, we can 
create a clear narrative and mental model for that multi-device expe­
rience. Once we have this clear understanding in mind, we can trans­
late it to design decisions for each device and for interaction points 
between devices. In doing so, we can help users navigate (and make 
sense of) the increasing complexity involved in having more and more 
devices, guiding them toward a more effective, productive, and delight­
ful multi-device usage. 

 An Ecosystem of Connected Devices   |  7
A Glance at the Past: Portable Computer Ads from 
the 1980s 
Figures 1-3 and 1-4 are two portable computer newspaper ads that illustrate 
well how far technology has come in less than 30 years.
FIGURE 1-3
Hewlett-Packard, 1984 ad for The Portable computer—a nine-pound computer, 
with 656 KB memory; by comparison, smartphones today weigh on average 130 
grams (0.286 pounds) and offer 1–2 GB RAM and 16–32 GB internal memory.

8  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
FIGURE 1-4
IBM 1984 portable personal computer ad (“The first IBM PC you can pick 
up and take with you”). This computer weighed 30 pounds, and was the 
approximate size of stationary computers today.
But how did we arrive at this multi-device era? Why are its opportuni­
ties so unique? 
Single-Device Design Is History (Don’t I Know It!)
As a UX designer, I can remember how not that long ago we all labored 
over the personal computer (PC) when designing a mass-market prod­
uct. Our parameters were bounded: a single device, stationary, in land­
scape format, with relatively high resolution, and based on mouse and 
keyboard interaction.
Life was definitely simpler in many ways, but even back then, we 
had our share of design challenges for these shifting environments: 
ever-changing screen resolutions; multiple browsers with no common 
standard; and various technical limitations in terms of interaction 
design, latency, and implementation.
While those challenges represented the growing pains of a technology 
evolution, our current era is a technology revolution. 

 An Ecosystem of Connected Devices   |  9
By multi-device revolution, I’m referring to the fast-growing number 
and diversity of connected devices—from smartphones, tablets, PCs, 
and TVs, through smartwatches, smartglasses, wristband activity 
trackers, smartfridges, and connected toothbrushes, to (soon enough) 
any physical object that can be connected to the Internet via sensors 
(what is known as the Internet of Things, which we’ll discuss in Chapter 
6). However, this revolution is not characterized just by new screen 
sizes, input methods, form factors, or increasing processing power. It 
also introduces new ways these multiple devices enable us to connect, 
operate, interact, work, and affect our surroundings—ways we didn’t 
have before.
If we look back, we can see that three processes in particular were 
supremely influential in changing the multi-device landscape from a 
UX perspective: smartphones as a commodity, burgeoning application 
stores, and the emergence of tablets on the market. These processes 
signify the critical transformation from a single-device–focused design 
to the need to adopt an ecosystem approach to multi-device design. 
HELLO SMARTPHONES
In June 2007, Apple launched its first iPhone device, a game-changing 
move in the mobile industry. A brand new, shiny device replaced the 
old tactile phone. It came with a slick, touch-based interaction, a rich 
feature set, a better graphical display, and processing power exceeding 
that of Apollo 11 when it first went to the moon.6 A year later, the App 
Store launch truly brought this device to life, with thousands of apps for 
entertainment, content, media, and other services (as discussed in the 
next section). As a side effect, iPhone owners consumed significantly 
more data than traditional cell phone users, which in turn encouraged 
mobile providers to offer subsidies on the device, given their compen­
sating revenue from the increased data rates from these customers. All 
these factors contributed to accelerated adoption of the device.
The Android platform, introduced officially in October 2008, signifi­
cantly reinforced smartphone adoption, with new kinds of devices from 
various manufacturers being offered at a lower cost. Soon enough, the 
face of mobile devices changed completely.

10  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
This change sparked (among other transformations) a sharp UX para­
digm shift from the dominant design practices of the time, due to the 
move from tactile-based devices with a full physical keypad to touch-
based displays where the entire interaction takes place on the screen 
itself. 
Table 1-1 outlines the main differences in key user experience design 
aspects, in terms of both industrial design and interaction design.
TABLE 1-1. Comparison between the prevalent mobile device design before 
the iPhone was launched (left) and after (right)
BEFORE 
AFTER 
Industrial design 
and form factor
(sample of 
devices)
Interaction model
Tactile
Touch
Interface 
manipulation
Indirect manipulation
Users interact with physical 
keys below (and next to) the 
screen, through which they 
control the elements on the 
screen.
Directly on screen
Users interact right with the ele­
ments on-screen.
Physical keys
Full physical keypad (usually 
21-key–based, including naviga­
tion and action keys) and addi­
tional side buttons (like power 
on/off, volume up/down).
One home button on iPhone, 
three keys in Android, and addi­
tional side buttons (like power 
on/off, volume up/down).
Touchpoints
Supports a single keypress at 
a time
Supports touching multi­
ple points on the screen 
simultaneously
Gestures
Supports only keypresses (no 
gestures)
Supports both button taps 
on-screen and gesture-based 
interactions (like swipe, pinch, 
rotate, and spread)
Orientation
Portrait only
Portrait and landscape
Focus and selec­
tion states
Two separate states (can have 
different visual treatments, and 
trigger different events)
Both merged into selection 
state (have a single visual 
effect, and can trigger only one 
event for selection)
Short and long 
press
Supports both
Supports both

 An Ecosystem of Connected Devices   |  11
These changes required everyone involved in product development 
and/or consumption to alter the way they approached mobile devices, 
and to establish new mental models, use habits, and best practices 
around the new mobile experience. 
But the changes didn’t stop there.
HELLO APP STORES 
In July 2008, Apple launched its App Store for iPhone, and the mobile 
space was open for business. This move gave third-party developers the 
long-awaited freedom to build powerful mobile applications for every­
one: no longer was the device strictly governed by mobile operators or 
handset manufacturers, but rather applications were developed by the 
people, for the people. Everyone could potentially build a mobile appli­
cation, or develop a mobile version for an existing desktop product. The 
smartphone was finally recast from being a fancy, high-priced enter­
prise device (mostly used for calling, texting, and some browsing) into 
a multi-functional device offering a rich, dynamic world of content, 
features, and services. 
In the first weekend after the App Store was launched, 10 million appli­
cations were downloaded. In less than a year, 1.4 billion apps had been 
downloaded, and more than 200,000 apps were available in the App 
Store.
Soon after Apple’s App Store opened, many competitors followed suit, 
further enhancing smartphone adoption. In October 2008, Google 
introduced its Android Market. By August 2010, 1 billion apps had 
been downloaded from the Android market; in 2009 BlackBerry 
App World, Nokia Ovi Store, and Palm App Catalog opened; in 2010 
Microsoft joined the party with Windows 7 Phone marketplace, and so 
did Samsung with its apps marketplace. Today, even the Nintendo DSi 
and Sony PlayStation Portable have application stores.
“There’s an app for that” has quickly become the new catchphrase, 
serving as yet another signal of the profound effect (depicted in Figure 
1-5) application stores have had on mobile development and design.

12  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
FIGURE 1-5. 
Infographic comparing key mobile stats between 2008 and 2012. Can you 
believe this all happened in less than five years?7
In less than five years, mobile phones have practically become an exten­
sion of ourselves. Users love their smartphones, and use them every­
where—at home, work, the family dinner table, a restaurant, a store, a 
coffee shop, the doctor’s office, the airport, the movie theater, the bath­
room, on public transport, on a date, and even at church. If that’s not 
enough, a recent study showed that 15% of iPhone owners said they 
would rather give up sex than go for a weekend without their iPhones.8 

 An Ecosystem of Connected Devices   |  13
Four percent actually reported using their phones during sex (probably 
a topic for yet another book), and 65% reported they couldn’t live with­
out their devices. (If that’s not love, I wonder what is.) 
With the rapid success of the smartphone, its wide adoption, and its 
deep assimilation into our daily activities, it was just a matter of time 
until new devices joined the party. And they did.
Discussion: On Native Apps, Web Apps, and 
Everything in Between
For a few years now, whenever someone has considered building a mobile 
app, one of the debates that has immediately come up is which develop-
ment path to choose. Native app? Web app? Or maybe a hybrid app?
Before going into the pros and cons of each approach, let’s first understand 
what each of these app types means:
Native apps
These apps live on the device itself. Accordingly, they are specific to the 
device platform on which they reside (e.g., iOS or Android), and require 
separate development per platform. These apps need to be downloaded 
and installed through an application store, and can then be accessed via 
a dedicated icon on the home screen. Native apps can access and use all 
the device’s sensor data (GPS, accelerometer, camera, etc.), as well as 
benefiting from native platform components like UI elements (buttons, 
sliders, tabs, and other controls), interaction patterns (gestures, transi-
tions), and core features (contact list, call log). These apps can also run 
in the background, work offline, and integrate into the central notifica-
tion system. Most of the mobile apps today are native.
Web apps
Also commonly referred to as HTML5 apps, these apps run in the web 
browser. These “apps” are effectively websites (typically written in 
HTML5) that users access just like any other website—through a URL 
entered in the device’s browser. Upon first connecting to the website, 
users can install the app—an action that puts the app icon on the home 
screen (providing similar access to native apps). The difference is that 
in this case, the icon is a shortcut to the designated URL.
As web apps are run by the browser, they do not require a separate 
code base per platform; a single instance can be used across platforms. 

14  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
Visually, web apps can look very much like native apps, and they can 
incorporate gestures and transitions (as supported by HTML5). At the 
same time, HTML5 apps do not (yet) match native apps’ quality of 
experience (in terms of performance, smoothness, gesture slickness, 
etc.), and certain native OS features are (still) unavailable from the 
browser, such as the central notification system, some sensor data, and 
advanced gestures. 
Hybrid apps
As the name implies, hybrid apps are a combination of native apps and 
web apps (see Figure 1-6). They are essentially HTML5 apps wrapped 
inside a native container. They live on the device itself and run inside a 
native wrapper, which uses the device’s browser engine to render the 
HTML5 code. Just like native apps, they are installed through the appli-
cation store.
This hybrid structure aims to take advantage of the best of both worlds: 
keeping a single code base for all platforms (like web apps), and having 
access to extended device capabilities such as the accelerometer, GPS, 
camera, and device storage (like native apps). 
Development frameworks such as Sencha, PhoneGap, Titanium, and 
others provide tools to build hybrid apps that can work on iOS and 
Android, as well as BlackBerry, Windows Phone, and more.
FIGURE 1-6
Untappd (created by PhoneGap) is an example of a hybrid mobile app. It is 
shown here (left to right) on Android, iOS, and Windows Phone, respectively. 
Untappd has a native app look and feel, and it even follows each platform’s 
specific UI principles (e.g., the tabs location), strengthening platform affinity.

 An Ecosystem of Connected Devices   |  15
Deciding which development path you should take depends on multiple 
factors related to your company, your product, your users, and your prod-
uct timeline. To help you with the task, Table 1-2 lists nine questions that will 
guide you through selecting the approach that best fits your needs.
TABLE 1-2. Comparison of native, web, and hybrid apps—the green bar 
indicates an advantage for that development path, while red highlights a 
disadvantage
NATIVE APP 
WEB APP
HYBRID APP
Need for 
speed
Faster graphics 
and performance
Slower
Slower
Need for 
device sensors 
(GPS, camera, 
etc.)?
Native apps pro-
vide access to 
all the device’s 
features
Access to device 
is limited from 
the browser
A web-to-native 
abstraction layer 
allows extended 
access to the 
device’s sensors
Limited 
development 
resources?
Requires sepa-
rate, specialized 
development per 
platform
Single HTML5 
code base across 
platforms
Single HTML5 
code base across 
platforms
Crunched for 
time?
Slower implemen-
tation due to the 
need to develop 
multiple app 
variants and get 
them approved in 
the app stores
Fastest imple-
mentation and 
deployment
Faster imple-
mentation and 
deployment
Prioritizes pre-
mium design? 
Complex UX 
design?
Provides slicker, 
higher-quality, 
and more per-
sonalized UX. 
Allows use of 
device-specific 
gestures.
HTML5 is still 
more limited in 
UX capabilities. 
Might have a very 
similar look and 
feel, but inferior 
interaction.
HTML5 is still more 
limited in UX capa-
bilities. Might have 
a very similar look 
and feel, but infe-
rior interaction.
Large 
amounts of 
data transfer?
Faster data 
transfer
(Still) slower due 
to reliance on 
network speed
(Still) slower due 
to reliance on net-
work speed
Expecting 
frequent 
updates?
Requires main-
taining multi-
ple specialized 
mobile variants 
and distribut-
ing the updates 
through the app 
stores
App can be 
changed and 
pushed out 
instantly to the 
entire user base
Requires chang-
ing only a single 
code base, but the 
distribution is still 
through the app 
stores

16  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
NATIVE APP 
WEB APP
HYBRID APP
Need the 
app to work 
offline?
Supports offline 
use
Cannot work 
without 
connectivity
Supports offline 
use
Plan to mone-
tize content?
Much better 
in-app purchasing 
system also tied 
to other users’ 
purchases on the 
platform
No structured 
support. Can 
offer a shop-
ping cart on the 
website, but still 
doesn’t compare 
to the native app.
No structured 
support. Can 
offer a shop-
ping cart on the 
website, but still 
doesn’t compare 
to the native app.
Note that the assessments in Table 1-2 are based on the current state of 
technology and may change with time, narrowing down some of the gaps 
that exist today and possibly expanding others.
In any case, remember that users don’t really care if the app is native, web, 
or hybrid. What they do care about is being able to find the app they need, 
and that app offering a fast, slick, effective, and delightful user experience 
that helps them in their activities. 
HELLO TABLETS
In April 2010, Apple expanded its family and introduced the iPad to 
the world. On the first day alone, 300,000 iPads were sold, and sales 
reached 14.8 million during the first year. As with its ancestor, the 
iPhone, it was really the App Store that made the iPad truly magical, 
and sales continued to skyrocket, with cumulative totals reaching 67 
million units in just two years.9
In parallel, Google stirred up the tablet market even more, releasing 
Android OS for tablets in 2011 and gaining 39% market share within 
less than a year.10 In less than three years, tablets reached 10% market 
penetration, becoming the fastest-growing device in the history of con­
sumer electronics.11
The tablet, similarly to the smartphone, not only created new use 
modes and behavior patterns around it, but also changed the ways we 
use existing devices in what I call the interaction effect: the usage pat­
terns of one device change depending on the availability of another 
device. This change can manifest in using the devices more, using 
the devices less, or using them differently—in conjunction with one 
another, for example.

 An Ecosystem of Connected Devices   |  17
In the case of tablets, their increasing use led to a decline in other media 
and device usage; for instance, 20% of tablet owners are using print 
magazines less, 25% are using fewer print books, and 27% are using 
print newspapers less often. Furthermore, desktop computers, laptop 
computers, ereaders, and portable media players are also used less.12
But there was another interaction effect created by tablets, one that 
demonstrates the strength of (and need for) multi-device experiences. 
According to a 2011 Neilsen Company survey, 70% of tablet owners 
used their tablets while watching TV—a use scenario that constituted 
the largest share of their total time with the tablet (30%), as Figure 1-7 
illustrates. 
FIGURE 1-7.
Time distribution of tablet usage in the US market.13
This made the TV the device most used in conjunction with the tab­
let, pulling it into the ecosystem as one of its core devices (as well as 
granting tablets the title of “TV buddies”). Not only that, but this joint 
usage involved users engaging with the tablet for TV-specific activi­
ties during a show: looking up information related to the TV program 
they’re watching (29%), searching product information for an ad (19%), 
and looking up coupons or deals related to a commercial (16%).14 These 
behaviors emerged organically, through users searching for informa­
tion using a web browser, before there were any specialized apps for 
that purpose. Can you imagine the UX opportunities embodied in 
building multi-device experiences that are specifically tailored to this 
use case? Apps that offer users relevant, real-time information and 

18  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
activities while they’re watching TV? Today, we already have an abun­
dance of such apps (also referred to as second-screen experiences), and we 
will further analyze some of them in the next chapters. 
At a higher level, this strong tie between the TV and the tablet, as well 
as other interaction effects taking place between the ecosystem devices, 
is a highly important data point when we’re considering multi-device 
experiences.15 These interaction effects provide insights into users’ 
evolving habits, use patterns, and mental models. As a result, they can 
(and should) help drive product and design decisions regarding key 
questions like which devices should take part in the experience, how 
the experience should be distributed across devices, what the integra­
tion points between devices should be, and where (if at all) offering a 
collaborative device interaction is beneficial to users. 
It’s an Ecosystem!
The three processes just described—smartphones becoming a com­
modity, application stores gaining speed, and tablets joining the 
party—all contributed to the emergence of an ecosystem, with four 
devices at its core: the smartphone, tablet, PC, and TV.
In this ecosystem, a few important principles emerge that will accom­
pany us throughout the book:
•	 We are in the midst of an important behavioral shift to a multi-device 
model; product design is no longer just about the desktop platform 
because there’s a prosperous ecosystem of connected devices that 
complements it, and that continues to grow. 
•	 These connected devices can form a multi-device experience as a 
connected group (rather than just a set of silo devices). In other 
words, the ecosystem experience can employ any of the three 
design approaches—consistent, continuous, and complemen­
tary—or a combination of them.
•	 The ecosystem is not bound to the four core devices. These devices 
are currently the most commonly used, and thus serve as the basis; 
however, as more connected devices are introduced, they can join 
the ecosystem, further expanding the contexts of use and device 
relationships it accommodates.

 An Ecosystem of Connected Devices   |  19
•	 The more we embrace the potential of an ecosystem by adapt­
ing the experience per device and building the required bridges 
between them (acknowledging the different use cases in varying 
contexts), the more we can simplify the experience on each device, 
and provide an overall holistic experience that is greater than its 
parts. 
Bear in mind that the multi-device era is still in its early stages. Thus, 
use patterns across devices are just starting to take shape, and even the 
ones that seem to stabilize will probably change soon enough, as more 
devices join the ecosystem and introduce new, disruptive ways to con­
nect and interact with the environment and one another. 
At this point in time, the most important goal we should focus on is 
learning. We should explore and experiment with building multi-device 
experiences that can continuously drive us to create better products, that 
are more intimately tailored to individual users’ changing needs. In 
this process, we need to encourage the open mind, inquisitive spirit, 
and broad thinking that are instrumental in taking the leap from a 
single-device approach to an ecosystem one. As you will see through­
out the book, this new multi-device world opens up many new opportu­
nities to innovate—not only by looking into future needs and use cases 
that will naturally arise, but also through rethinking some of our exist­
ing design approaches to current challenges. The latter is where much 
of the power lies: disrupting widespread perceptions and assumptions 
regarding what is possible in light of the new ecosystem possibilities 
we have. 
Summary
•	 Particular conditions brought about the multi-device era and the 
unique factors that differentiate it from anything we’ve seen before.
•	 The multi-device era introduces an ecosystem, similar to that of the 
natural world. In the multi-device ecosystem, a variety of devices 
interact with one another as an ecology, and their interactions are 
shaped by how individuals use the devices in a variety of contexts 
en route to completing their information and entertainment goals. 

20  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
•	 The three key processes that signify the critical transformation 
from a single-device model to an ecosystem approach were the 
entry of smartphones as a commodity, the burgeoning application 
market, and the success of tablets. 
•	 The 3Cs framework consists of three principal approaches—con­
sistent, continuous, and complementary—for handling the design 
complexity introduced by the numerous devices on the market 
(and those yet to be invented). 
NOTES
1.	 Cisco.com, “Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Media Data Traffic Forecast Update: 
2012–2017,” February 6, 2013, http://bit.ly/1c0HYnW.
2.	 “GSMA Announces That the Proliferation of Connected Devices Will Create a US$1.2 
Trillion Revenue Opportunity for Mobile Operators by 2020,” PR Newswire, October 10, 
2011, http://prn.to/19cuKWx.
3.	 Google, “The New Multi-Screen World: Understanding Cross-Platform Consumer 
Behavior,” August 2012, http://bit.ly/1gVzizF.
4.	 Google/Ipsos OTX MediaCT, US, “Our Mobile Planet: United States,” May 2012, http://bit.
ly/1bQ26bo.
5.	 Christophe Stoll, “Multiscreen Patterns,” May 26, 2011, http://bit.ly/1fmA87Y.
6.	 Richard Stengel, “Making Sense of Our Wireless World,” Time Magazine, August 27, 2012, 
http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,2122243,00.html.
7.	 “Number of Smartphones Sold to End Users Worldwide from 2007 to 2012 (in Million 
Units),” Statista, February 2013, http://bit.ly/Jx8aM9; “Strategy Analytics: Worldwide 
Smartphone Population Tops 1 Billion in Q3 2012,” Business Wire, October 17, 2012, 
http://bit.ly/1kSjiPn; Rob Thurner, “The Latest App Download Statistics,” Smart Insights, 
March 29, 2012, http://bit.ly/1hZhib8; Jeff Sonderman, “Mobile App Revenue Exceeds 
Ad Revenue,” December 4, 2012, http://bit.ly/1jf2w1o; Chris Quick, “With Smartphone 
Adoption on the Rise, Opportunity for Marketers Is Calling,” Nielsen, September 15, 
2009, http://bit.ly/1jf2AhI; “A History of App Stores: Apple, Google, and Everyone Else” 
(infographic), WebpageFX, August 15, 2011, http://bit.ly/1bNWZIC.
8.	 Sam Liard, “Are You Addicted to Your Smartphone?” Mashable, September 5, 2012, http://
mashable.com/2012/09/05/addicted-smartphone/.
9.	 Sam Costello, “What Are iPad Sales All Time?” About.com (based on Apple Quarterly 
Finance Report), October 23, 2013, http://abt.cm/1dmA32t.
10.	 Robin Wauters, “Android Reaches 39% Tablet OS Market Share 2012,” TechCrunch (based 
on research by Strategy Analytics), January 26, 2012, http://tcrn.ch/19Swgrc.
11.	 Michael DeGusta, “Are Smart Phones Spreading Faster Than Any Technology in Human 
History?” MIT Technology Review, May 9, 2012, http://bit.ly/1fEBvj0.
12.	“In the U.S., Tablets Are TV Buddies While e-Readers Make Great Bedfellows,” Nielsen, 
May 19, 2011, http://bit.ly/1khyS9G.
13.	“Double Vision—Global Trends in Tablet and Smartphone Use While Watching TV,” 
Nielsen, April 5, 2012, http://bit.ly/1cAsIuu.
14.	“State of the Media: U.S. Digital Consumer Report, Q3–Q4 2011,” Nielsen, 2012, http://bit.
ly/J5amtF.
15.	Chapter 7 focuses on multi-device data analytics.

53
[ 3 ]
The Continuous Design Approach
With continuous design, the second approach in our 3Cs frame­
work, the multi-device experience flows from one device to the 
next. It is the experience that accompanies the user in his set of 
activities, within different contexts, en route to his information 
or entertainment goal. In the following set of examples, we’ll 
look at the principles of this approach, as well as its use cases, 
design lessons, and main benefits to users.
What Is Continuous Design?
Continuous design addresses a user flow that runs along a set of con­
texts, during which devices “pass the baton” to one another until the 
user reaches her information goal or completes the desired activity (see 
Figure 3-1). 
FIGURE 3-1
A continuous approach provides an end-to-end user experience that is 
distributed across multiple devices. With this “passing of the baton” approach, 
each device picks up where the previous one left off.

54  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
There are two chief experience types that continuous design addresses: 
Single activity flow
A single activity—reading a book, watching a movie, or writing a 
document—typically requires a significant period of time to com­
plete. These kinds of activities, therefore, tend to progress through 
several contexts (e.g., a laundromat, the airport, or a coffee shop 
line). And they include the opportunity for a user to use different 
devices (e.g., an iPad at the laundromat, laptop at the airport, and 
iPhone in the coffee shop line) and have each pick up the experi­
ence where the previous device left off. So, for example, you might 
start reading Moby Dick at home on a Sunday on your tablet and 
read the next chapter on your smartphone while waiting at the doc­
tor’s office. 
Sequenced activities flow
Some task flows are composed of sequences of different activities 
that users need to complete in order to reach the end goal. One 
good example is cooking. This task is made up of several steps: (1) 
searching for recipes and deciding on the desired ones, (2) buy­
ing the groceries, and (3) cooking. Each step is typically done in a 
different location, at a different time, with different devices being 
available and/or most convenient for each activity. Still, all these 
steps progress the user toward the same end goal. Travel rentals 
(like with Airbnb) are another good example. They involve pre-
trip activities like (1) deciding where to stay, (2) looking for a place, 
and (3) booking. Then there are multiple activities during the trip 
itself, such as (1) getting to the apartment, (2) settling down, (3) 
finding places in the area, and (4) keeping in touch with the prop­
erty owner. Finally, the flow could also involve post-trip activities, 
such as (1) leaving a review and (2) possibly listing one’s own prop­
erty for rental. Each activity within this broader end-to-end flow 
differs from the others in type, location, context, duration, and 
best (available) device for the task, but they all clearly contribute to 
accomplishing the overarching task. 
It’s important to note that activity duration is a key factor in determin­
ing the continuity flow across devices. Here are three ways in which it 
does so: 

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  55
Multiple sessions
The lengthier the activity, the more likely it is that it won’t be 
completed in a single engagement. Instead, users will complete a 
lengthy activity in multiple passes (planning a trip, for example). 
In many cases, this involves the user switching between different 
devices depending upon the context.
Shifting contexts
The lengthier the activity is, the more likely it is that the contextual 
environment will change. This happens when users terminate a 
session and pick it up later (the taxi ride is over, so they close down 
the website they were browsing), even if they hadn’t planned to, 
either on the same device or a different device more suitable to the 
new context (e.g., revisiting the website later at the hotel).
Subtasks
The lengthier the activity is, the more likely it is that it can be bro­
ken down into a set of granular subtasks. For example, with travel­
ing there’s the planning, booking, and the trip itself, and the latter 
can also be split to subtasks—flying, picking up the rental car, get­
ting to the hotel, visiting attractions, and so on. These subtasks, 
which can be very different from one another, may take place in 
different contexts (location, time, social setting, and more), and 
thus be best served by different devices. 
Let’s look at some examples to clarify these two forms of continuity 
using the core user screens: smartphone, tablet, PC/laptop, and TV.
Single Activity Flow
Three good examples of the single activity flow are Apple AirPlay, the 
Amazon Kindle, and Google Drive, discussed next. They demonstrate 
how this continuous experience type works well for both consumption 
and creation of content.
STREAMLINING THE VIEWING EXPERIENCE: APPLE AIRPLAY 
With Apple AirPlay and Apple TV, users can wirelessly stream mov­
ies, music, and photos from any iOS device—iPhone, iPad, iPod, or 
MacBook—right to the big screens of their televisions (see Figure 3-2). 

56  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
In other words, they can “hand off” any content they began consum­
ing on their mobile devices to their TVs, and experience higher-quality 
images and audio than on a smaller device. 
FIGURE 3-2
Apple AirPlay technology enables a continuous watching experience across 
devices to accommodate changing contexts. Users can begin watching a 
movie on their iPhones or iPads and continue on the big-screen TV right 
where they left off.

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  57
How is the AirPlay/Apple TV compatibility useful? In many ways: 
•	 A user can start watching her favorite blockbuster on her iPhone 
during the train commute after work, and continue the movie from 
the exact point she left off on the big HDTV at home, in a smooth, 
seamless way.
•	 Teenagers can start watching a TV show on an iPad in their room 
while their parents watch the evening news on the living room 
TV. When the news broadcast is over, the kids can finish watch­
ing their show on the TV, taking advantage of the bigger-picture 
viewing experience. They can hang on to the iPad (or grab their 
iPhones) and use one of those devices for research while watching 
TV. (We’ll look at this experience flow more closely in Chapter 4, 
on complementary design.) 
•	 Morning-music people can listen to their playlists on their 
MacBooks as they wake up and start their morning routines. After 
getting showered and dressed, they can continue listening to their 
music over breakfast by “passing” the music to the TV downstairs, 
with better sound.  
Question to the Reader
Can you think of other use cases for which being able to start consuming 
media (movie, music, photos) on one device and continue on another 
streamlines the experience flow?
Try approaching this question from the following pain points and contexts:
•	 Not enough devices. What if there’s one TV in the house, and each 
family member wants to watch a different show? 
•	 Not enough time. What if you have just an hour, but the movie you 
want to watch runs two hours? 
•	 Being on the move. What if you have a busy schedule that requires 
you to frequently move from one place to the next, like organizing the 
kids and dropping them off at school, having breakfast with a friend 
downtown, running a series of work meetings (at the office and out-
side), and going on an evening run at the gym?

58  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
The continuous design approach—in all the aforementioned scenarios, 
as well as the examples we will see next—improves, streamlines, and 
facilitates an existing set of behavior patterns and needs people already 
have. In other words, the strength of continuous design is tied to the 
variety of new smart devices entering the market, which are available 
in increasingly more contexts, and it should be used to better support 
users in their activities. 
Watching a movie from start to end, even when changing locations, isn’t 
a new need. The fact is that until technology allowed it, people accom­
modated the need to finish a movie with suboptimal solutions like:
•	 Watching the entire movie on the same device, even if there was a 
better device available at some point during the activity
•	 Waiting until they got home/until the news broadcast was over to 
watch the entire movie on their HDTVs
•	 Starting to watch a movie on DVD on their laptops, and then con­
tinuing at home using their DVD players, after manually setting 
the movie to the point where they left off
The new smart devices that people increasingly have within reach give 
designers the opportunity to rethink existing user flows and use cases, 
and improve the activity flow among different contexts. We need to start 
asking ourselves how these new connected devices, especially mobile 
ones (tablets and smartphones today, and watches, glasses, bracelets, 
shoes, and many more tomorrow), can be used to help people accom­
plish their tasks. How can these devices optimize quality, speed, ease 
of use, and user delight?
Offering the entire or an identical UI on each and every device (i.e., 
consistent design) is not only suboptimal, but also becoming practi­
cally impossible as devices diversify in size (specifically, getting smaller 
and smaller—up to not having a screen at all), form factor (like wear­
ables), ergonomics, and technological capabilities. The need to define 
the roles of different devices along the user flow, understand the use 
patterns around multiple devices, and identify the contexts, actions, 
and use cases where certain devices are more suitable or convenient 
than others is now a necessity as we design for multi-device experi­
ences. Remember that down the road, when the Internet of Things 
disseminates with connected walls, ceilings, desks, bus stations, and 
whatnot—we will need to consider (again) the following questions:

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  59
1.	 How will these developments impact people’s behaviors?
2.	 How will these new capabilities change the definition of “best 
available device (or display)” per context?
3.	How can we further optimize users’ experience along varying con­
texts using the connected devices?
SEAMLESS CONTENT CONSUMPTION EXPERIENCE: 
AMAZON KINDLE
The Amazon Kindle ecosystem (Figure 3-3) is another example of a 
continuous single activity flow. It takes this concept one step further, 
though, with its Audible.com integration. 
FIGURE 3-3
The Amazon Kindle product ecosystem, which enables a continuous reading 
experience across a variety of devices.
At its core, the Kindle ecosystem allows users a seamless reading experi­
ence across multiple Kindles and Kindle apps by way of its Whispersync 
technology. It automatically syncs books across apps (including book­
marks and annotations), so users can begin reading on one device and 
pick up where they left off on another device.
This is great for a user sitting at a café waiting for a friend without hav­
ing the Kindle device at hand—the user can simply pull out her smart­
phone and continue reading a novel from where she left off while she 
waits. 
But, as I said, the Kindle ecosystem takes things a step further. 
By partnering with Audible.com, Amazon expanded the range of 
contexts that make up the Kindle’s continuous experience. Audible’s 
Whispersync for Voice integration allows users to switch between 

60  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
reading and listening seamlessly, so that there’s no need to put the 
book down even when on the move (running, cooking), or lying in 
bed at night with the lights turned off. This example shows that a 
single activity flow doesn’t necessarily need to be limited to the same 
exact continuous action (reading), but it can include additional related 
actions (like listening) that are all part of the underlying user’s activity 
goal—consuming content. Not only that, but extending the set of con­
texts in which the product can be used, as demonstrated through the 
Kindle/Audible integration, enables greater, more frequent use of the 
product by users, which in turn enhances habit formation. 
The Kindle ecosystem exemplifies two important principles:
•	 Rethink what’s possible. The constant technological progress 
continuously affects people’s behaviors, forming new needs and 
habits. Over time, these changes flex the contexts and ways peo­
ple already use (or can use) your product. Keeping a finger on the 
pulse and stepping back to reassess the product landscape are 
instrumental in tapping into these trends and extending the prod­
uct’s use. In this example, the Kindle was able to break out of the 
(still) ingrained perception of “books = reading,” broadening the 
scope to content consumption. Framing it this way immediately 
surfaced new opportunities—like audio—that support a richer, 
more “sticky” product ecosystem.
•	 Together, everyone achieves more. We designers and product cre­
ators don’t necessarily need to build the entire ecosystem on our 
own. Powerful multi-device experiences can be the result of inte­
grated solutions, which usually benefit both product owners and 
consumers. (More about this topic in Chapter 8.)
CONTENT CREATION AND EDITING FLOW: GOOGLE DRIVE 
So far we’ve seen examples of content consumption flows. However, 
the single-activity continuous experience can also be applied in content 
creation and editing flows. Google Drive (Figure 3-4) is a helpful model 
for this functionality. It provides free online storage for a variety of file 
types—documents, photos, and videos—and enables users to access 
them from any device. 

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  61
FIGURE 3-4
Google Drive design on three main devices: desktop (top), tablet (bottom-
left), and smartphone (bottom-right). All users’ files are accessible across all 
devices, enabling a continuous content creation process between them.
In addition to being able to access content across devices, users can 
create and edit content across their devices as well. A user can begin 
writing a document on his home computer, for example, and continue 
editing it on a tablet right where he left off during his train ride to work. 
Cloud computing and real-time synchronization between devices are 
the key enablers of continuous flow of content creation.
THE LINK BETWEEN CONTINUOUS AND CONSISTENT 
EXPERIENCES
If you look carefully at the three examples just discussed, you’ll notice 
that across the devices, the user can consume the entire span of content 
on any device. 

62  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
This should sound familiar, as it follows the consistent design approach 
discussed in Chapter 2.
The difference between those consistent experiences and the continu­
ous experiences discussed in this chapter is that the latter incorporate 
an additional layer—a context-sensitive one—that adds continuity to the 
experience. By saving the “last visited” point for content items, users 
can resume their activity from the point at which they left off (on multi­
ple devices). This can take place automatically upon the user’s entering 
the app (jumping the user right to the last visited spot), or be triggered 
manually by user action; this is a design decision that depends on the 
use case at hand. 
This consistency/continuity combination in the single activity flow 
highlights two important fundamentals of the 3Cs framework: 
•	 The 3Cs are design approaches that should be treated as experience 
building blocks. You can have an experience that is based solely on 
one of them, or you can integrate several approaches within the 
same ecosystem experience. In fact, most multi-device experiences 
follow the latter line, as we will discuss in more depth in Chapter 5.
•	 The 3Cs framework is focused on the way people relate to the task 
flow and how the different devices support them in achieving their 
goals—meaning you could argue that the single activity flow is 
actually a consistent experience. The UI design is practically the 
same across all devices, with one functional difference in the behav­
ior of content items visited before. You might ask, couldn’t that be 
regarded as merely a consistency adjustment between devices? 
While they might seem similar on the surface, from the user’s per­
spective there is actually a world of difference between the consis­
tent experience flow and the single activity one. In the consistent 
experience, design adjustments aim to accommodate device charac­
teristics (mainly screen size and input method). In the continuous 
experience, the difference in behavior has nothing to do with the 
form factor. It’s a flow change that accommodates people’s needs, 
supporting them in a continuous activity. The fact that it ends up 
manifesting in a similar way in the UI layer doesn’t mean it stems 
from the same root—just like a computer failing to load can be the 
result of hardware malfunction, a software configuration problem, 
or a virus, for example. This distinction is important, as it affects 

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  63
the way you approach the situation to begin with. So, while the 
single activity flow relies on consistent design at its core, it’s still a 
distinct experience that provides a continuous flow for users.
Discussion: The Importance of Sign-in 
Knowing your users is the most valuable asset you can have for designing 
powerful, engaging, easy-to-use products. The more you learn about what 
they do, want, and need—what matters to them and what doesn’t; what 
their preferences, interests, habits, and behavior patterns are; and how all 
these are affected across different contexts—the better, more personalized 
experiences you can deliver. 
When you’re designing multi-device experiences, this need to know your 
users skyrockets, especially given the dynamic nature of these experiences 
and the key role context plays. In this ever-more-complex connected world, 
there are many unknowns and hardly any proven best practices, and use 
patterns among devices are still in early formation stages. Both designers 
and users are still figuring out their way through all these connected devices, 
and there’s a whole lot of learning to do in order to create meaningful expe-
riences that advance people to their goals in an optimal way.
Until we get to the stage where we can easily identify the individuals using 
devices through implicit signals that don’t require user action (like indi-
vidual use patterns, physical/biometric signals, proximity, and leveraging 
multi-device connections and leveraging multi-device connections—like 
SlickLogin and Knock), getting them to sign in is an extremely important 
step in building knowledge around who they are and their usage profile 
across devices. 
The sign-in process (let alone registration) is still a significant conversion 
roadblock. Users abandon products when they are confronted with a sign-in 
prompt—whether because they’ve forgotten their usernames or passwords 
(or both), they’ve gotten stuck trying to recover those components, or 
they’re just reluctant to identify themselves due to privacy or security con-
cerns. Add to that enhanced security measures (like two-factor authentica-
tion), and getting over the sign-in hurdle becomes even more challenging. 
Having users do that multiple times across several devices makes the task 
much, much harder.

64  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
And yet, given the critical value of the sign-in step in product flow, sign-in 
design is one area of the experience design pillars you shouldn’t overlook. 
Here are a few good things to start thinking about sign-in design:
Consider single sign-on (SSO) 
This simplifies the sign-in process by using a single account (e.g., 
Facebook, Google+, or Twitter) to access many different applications 
(see Figure 3-5). SSO offers several advantages:
•	 Shortens the sign-up process by requiring fewer details and 
clicks
•	 Reduces the number of usernames and passwords people 
need to maintain
•	 Gives you access as a product developer to information about 
users, their friends, and their activity on that service. They will 
need to approve this access, of course, and in some cases the 
information might be basic (e.g., name, age, and profile pic-
ture), but it’s still valuable data that you won’t need to collect 
yourself.1 
An important design consideration to keep in mind is that with every 
account login option you add to the form, you complicate your design 
in terms of decision junctions and visual load. 
Furthermore, the more login options are offered, the harder it is for 
users to remember which of the accounts they used to log in to your 
service. 
FIGURE 3-5
Foursquare sign-up form promoting SSO with two services, Facebook and 
Google+. Users can still choose to sign up using their email.

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  65
Use simple, engaging forms 
Whether you offer SSO and/or your own sign-up process, simplify the 
form as much as possible:
•	 Ask for the minimum necessary information (usually email/
username and password). Even if you really want to get users’ 
birthdays or genders, wait and ask for that later, after they get 
a better grasp of the value you’re giving them. Users will be 
more inclined to share information with you at that point. 
•	 Don’t make users re-enter information (password, email, or 
any other field).
•	 Include a “Stay logged in” option, and have it checked by 
default.
•	 Offer a “Forgot?” gateway if people can’t remember their 
usernames/passwords.
•	 Provide useful, actionable feedback. For example:
o	 If a username is taken, offer similar available usernames for people 
to choose from.
o	 Don’t overcomplicate the password restrictions, and explain them 
clearly from the beginning. If people get it wrong, specify the 
exact error. If all goes well, indicate that as well and make them a 
little bit happier. 
o	 Give clear, focused error messages rather than generic ones. 
•	 Be clear about privacy and other conditions.
•	 Pay attention to tone of voice and copywriting; they matter. The 
text you supply can provide useful assistance throughout the 
process, as well as making the experience more fun and light-
weight (see Figure 3-6). If you’re contemplating several alterna-
tives, try running A/B testing to see which performs best.
FIGURE 3-6
The Polar mobile app 
sign-up form, which 
uses a clear and 
conversational tone of 
voice.

66  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
Incorporate gradual engagement 
An effective strategy to encourage people to take action in your prod-
uct is to let them get a feel for its benefits before asking them to invest 
effort (or provide personal data)—similar to how movie producers 
release trailers to attract viewers to “invest the effort” (and money) 
and come to the theater. Giving a little teaser to users can help get 
them on board more easily (see Figure 3-7). I find this approach very 
useful as a general UX principle, and it definitely applies to sign-in 
specifically. Luke Wroblewski calls this sign-in flow approach gradual 
engagement—get people to engage with a product and try out its core 
features before asking them to sign up. This way, people see the bene-
fits of the product through hands-on interaction, following which they 
are more willing to join in and provide personal information. The activ-
ity and information recorded during this interaction can be added to 
the user’s account later, once she signs in. 
FIGURE 3-7
Sugru lets you look at the most recent issue of its newsletter before you 
actually join (via stepoffthis-utlingmachine, littlebigdetails.com).
The challenge with giving away something while asking users to sign 
in is finding the sweet spots in the product flow to trigger the sign-in 
request. These spots vary depending on your product type.
For example, in the Polar app (shown in Figure 3-6), you can vote 
on polls without signing up, but to access your activity log, create a 
poll, or see your profile, you must be signed in. On many ecommerce 
sites, users are asked to provide sign-in details during checkout (after 
they’ve browsed the site and found items of interest). For utility tools, 
such as design software, asking users to sign in when they’re trying to 
save the work is usually a good practice. 
In any case, gradual engagement can—and should—be combined with 
the previous guidelines as part of your sign-in design strategy. They 
handle different aspects of the flow, and together can make for a bet-
ter, more streamlined experience. 

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  67
Promote the advantages of being signed in in a clear, concise, and 
attractive manner
Make sure to incorporate the multi-device experience in your message 
so that people get educated about the broader ecosystem value early 
on (more on ecosystem education below). You can do this as part of an 
introductory experience: a marketing page, a warm welcome tour, or 
some other introduction method. Another approach is to integrate the 
advantages of sign-in as part of the in-product experience flow, high-
lighting contextually the benefits of signing in when certain features 
are used (like “signed-in users enjoy…and can do…”). Another method 
is to display an “incomplete” UI: greyed-out elements or other visual 
distinctions in certain areas to encourage people to sign in and “fix it.” 
As a last note, you’ve probably noticed there’s diverse terminology around 
the call-to-action label: Sign in, Login, Log in, Sign up, Register, Join, and 
others. While all these terms are valid, you should avoid using “Sign up” 
and “Sign in” together in the same product, as the similarity between these 
terms can be confusing to many users. If you go for “Sign up,” combine it 
with “Log in,” for example; and if you prefer “Sign in,” then use “Register” 
or “Join” for the complementary action.
Sequenced Activities Flow
The continuous design approach can be used not only for supporting 
the continutation of a single action, but also to encompass a variety of 
user activities—all within a single experience. 
In a sequenced activities flow, the experience design addresses broader 
user needs and goals that involve a series of activities and contexts, and 
aims to optimize these flows with the help of the multiple connected 
devices people now have within reach.
As part of the design process, the overarching experience (for example, 
going out to dinner with friends) is broken down to the user steps that 
it comprises (like looking for a restaurant, coordinating with friends, 
booking a table, arriving at the restaurant, etc.). Each step is then ana­
lyzed in terms of activity flow, contextual landscape, and the device(s) 
that can best advance people through that activity on to the next ones 
and finally to successful completion. 
The following examples involve a series of activities that users perform 
across different contexts in order to accomplish a certain task or goal. 

68  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
ADAPTING THE EXPERIENCE TO DEVICES’ STRENGTHS: 
ALLRECIPES 
Allrecipes (Figure 3-8) is a good example of exploiting the continuous 
approach by encompassing a broader, multi-step use case like cooking. 
It demonstrates how multiple devices can support the user every step 
of the way in a tailored, contextual fashion.
FIGURE 3-8
Allrecipes apps for iPad (Your Kitchen Inspiration) and iPhone (Dinner 
Spinner), demonstrating a continuous cooking flow made up of sequential 
activities taking place on different devices: (1) looking for recipes, (2) getting 
the groceries, and (3) cooking.

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  69
Under the hood: Examine the user’s workflow
First, let’s look at the “cooking” workflow and break it down into the 
discrete steps that it comprises. For each step, we’ll identify the contex­
tual elements involved and see how certain devices are more suitable 
aids for different portions of the experience. The steps are: 
1.	 Decide what to cook.
Often, the story begins with a user’s basic need to cook dinner for 
friends. The first step is for the user to decide what to cook. This is 
where he takes the time to explore recipes—what is usually called 
the “research” or “seeking information” phase. This research is 
often done in front of bigger-screen devices like a PC or a tablet, 
which allow for better content consumption and information scan­
ning while the user engages with the device in a relaxed way.
For this, Allrecipes provides a desktop interface as well as an iPad 
app where the user can conveniently look for recipes. What’s con­
venient about it? The bigger layout, easy navigation, search func­
tionality, and easy-to-read recipe display provide all the details he 
needs: ingredients, dish type, time and ease of preparation, and 
ratings. 
2.	 Shop for groceries.
Once a user finds the recipes he’d like to make, he can add them to 
a “recipe box.” This fires up the continuous experience torch: add­
ing recipes to the recipe box automatically extracts the ingredients 
from all the recipes, syncs the list with his iPhone, and creates a 
nicely designed shopping list already grouped by dairy, produce, 
and so on (aligned with most grocery store aisles).
This activity automatically shifts the experience to the smartphone, 
which is the device the user is probably going to have on him at the 
grocery store. There’s no need for him to write down all the ingre­
dients or worry about forgetting anything once he’s at the store, as 
the experience seamlessly flows between the relevant devices, with 
all the content he needs. 

70  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
3.	Cook the meal.
The user has done his shopping and returned home. When it’s 
time to start the actual cooking, he’ll switch from his smartphone 
to, very likely, a tablet (tablets have become popular as a cooking 
aid in the kitchen).2
The Allrecipes iPad app provides a very comfortable UI for that—a 
nice, clear layout with the list of ingredients, the directions to fol­
low (including highlighting the current step the user’s on), and 
even a built-in timer to use during the cooking process. All that’s 
left is for him to follow the instructions and not burn anything! 
Design lesson: Rethink user flows
Allrecipes introduced a new way to approach the flow of cooking, tak­
ing into consideration the various steps involved and customizing 
the experience by leveraging the particular strengths and use modes 
of each device—from searching on the PC or tablet, to shopping for 
required ingredients with the smartphone, to the actual cooking using 
the tablet.
Throughout the last several years that I’ve been researching and work­
ing in this multi-device space, I have found that the Allrecipes example 
is the strongest generator of “aha!” moments from people to whom I’m 
explaining the continuous design approach. Its emphasis on a fluid, 
innovative user experience (supported by a strong active community) 
has paid off. In November 2011, Allrecipes surpassed the 10 million 
downloads mark. Its two apps—Dinner Spinner (for smartphone) and 
Your Kitchen Inspiration (for tablet)—continue to be the world’s most 
downloaded recipe apps.3
Design lesson: Break down the continuous experience 
steps even more
When I came across the pioneering work Allrecipes had done with the 
cooking use case, it got me thinking about additional possibilities for 
how this product ecosystem can grow further in the near future. Here 
are a few examples for additional use cases at each of the different cook­
ing steps, which can benefit from dedicated multi-device attention: 

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  71
I want to be a master chef! 
Cooking fans don’t just browse the Internet for hot new recipes: 
they also get inspired by cooking shows on TV. Recently, some of 
the most popular ones have been reality shows like MasterChef, 
Top Chef, and Hell’s Kitchen. What if Allrecipes could integrate 
with such shows, so that while watching MasterChef on TV, users 
could save the full recipe for a dish they really want to make? With 
one tap in the Allrecipes app on a smartphone, they could send 
the full recipe details automatically to the recipe list on Allrecipes. 
This could fulfill that immediate gratification desire and allow 
people to act on the spot, while they’re engaged and excited about 
a delicious-looking pie. 
Remember the milk
As we saw, Allrecipes generates a shopping list containing all the 
ingredients needed for the selected recipes. That’s great. However, 
what it doesn’t take into account are the ingredients users already 
have at home. Thus, one might not need to buy all the things on the 
list, or at least not the entire quantity appearing in the recipe. What 
if the fridge and kitchen cabinets could be equipped with sensors 
and network capability (a scenario that is not so far-fetched, as we’ll 
discuss in Chapter 6),4 so they could inform the Allrecipes shop­
ping list what users already have? The list could adjust itself accord­
ingly and truly represent what users need to buy at the grocery 
store. And hey, if it could also connect to the grocery store systems, 
we could inject some more continuity here by having the shopping 
list ordered and delivered to people’s homes or available for them 
to pick up at the store.
Show me the money
Another enhancement Allrecipes could add to its smartphone app 
is support for in-store product comparison. We already see today 
that smartphone owners rely on their devices in-store to make 
the most of their shopping choices: 73.9% compare prices among 
retailers, 61% research the items, 39% claim mobile coupons, and 
80% want more mobile product information in stores.5 Wouldn’t 
it be nice if people had a one-stop shop for that? They would just 
need to fire up the Allrecipes app on their phones to get access to 
all the price-comparison information they need. 

72  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
Who moved my cheese?
If we break down the actual cooking process to more granular 
steps, we get the following cycle of actions: 
a.	Read the current step’s instructions. 
b.	 Get the required ingredients for it. 
c.	Complete the step’s instructions. 
d.	 Move to the next step. 
Expanding on the notion of connected devices like refrigerators 
and cabinets, wouldn’t it be useful if those compartments could 
communicate with a tablet, learn which cooking step a user is on, 
and shuffle around the items they contain so that the ones the user 
needs at any given moment are most accessible? Imagine yourself 
in the following user scenario: you’re baking a cake and you get to 
step 4, where you need to whip the cream. You open the fridge door 
and—ta-da!—the cream is just in front of you, top shelf, within 
reach. This interaction could actually change people’s behavior 
because they would no longer need to first take out all the ingredi­
ents involved in the baking in order to avoid the stressful moments 
of “where did that bag of cacao disappear to?” 
Once we start playing with the idea of all these devices being able to 
talk to and inform one another, the resolution of user flow steps we can 
optimize gets finer and finer. This enables us to rethink behaviors and 
flows we might have taken for granted, dissect them to their most basic 
components, and really make the best, most tailored user experience 
for each. 
ADAPTING THE EXPERIENCE TO CHANGING NEEDS: 
EVENTBRITE 
Eventbrite (Figure 3-9) is another good example of contextual think­
ing through a continuous use case. This product, focused on organiz­
ing and attending events, shifts the experience across devices as users 
progress through time. Put more accurately, the user’s contextual needs 
change through the sequence of an event.

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  73
FIGURE 3-9
Eventbrite’s example event page—at left on the desktop (before the user signs 
up to an event), and at right on the mobile app (after sign-up).
Eventbrite actually offers two sets of continuous experience flows—one 
for event organizers and one for event attendees. As most people more 
often belong to the second group, we’ll examine that particular flow.
Under the hood: Examining the user’s workflow
Let’s follow the same process as we did for Allrecipes, and break down 
the broad events use case to the different steps that compose it:
1.	 Register for an event.
The event flow is often triggered from an event invite over email, or 
casual browsing (through social networks, the Eventbrite website, 
blogs, etc.) that surfaces events of interest. At that point, the “research” 
or “information seeking” stage starts (similarly to Allrecipes), where 

74  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
the user reads more on the event, checks the agenda and attendees, 
and possibly browses through other events while she’s at it. This 
activity is more suitable for bigger-screen devices like the tablet or 
desktop, which can accommodate more information in a convenient 
layout. The desktop is also likely to be where the user acts upon the 
invite (especially if the event is professional), as she does most of 
her email activity on this device during the week.6
The need for a comfortable display for browsing event details inten­
sifies as the event increases in length.7 For example, a conference 
that spans a few days—offering multiple sessions per day with 
many taking place in parallel—requires much more exploration 
and research time. People need to review many more sessions, pick 
the ones they would like to attend (especially when sessions are 
scheduled simultaneously), and go over a longer list of attendees, 
identifying people they would like to connect with. In the case of 
a professional conference, the latter is of special importance since 
networking plays a very important role in going to the event. In 
fact, for many people, the opportunity to meet and get a conversa­
tion going with key people relevant to their work is the main goal of 
attending an event—a point I’ll talk more about later. 
2.	 Attend the event.
Sign-up is complete, and the day of the event has finally arrived: 
the user is all set, ready to go on her way, and the device she most 
likely carries is her mobile phone. Understanding this context of 
use, Eventbrite offers a mobile app that picks up the flow of events:
a.	Getting to the event. The mobile app provides quick access to 
the event the user has signed up for, including the event infor­
mation along with the location of the event. She can imme­
diately pull up directions on her phone, and have the GPS 
navigate every step of the way.
b.	 Checking in. When arriving at an event venue, users often 
need to register at the entrance. For that, Eventbrite offers a 
barcode that is easily scanned for check-in to the event. The 
user doesn’t need to go through the hassle of printing the 
event invitation beforehand and remembering to bring it 
along—she just uses her phone, which is already there with 
her, and smoothly slides into the flow of it all.

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  75
Eventbrite is another example of a multi-step activity that ranges across 
different contexts. Across these contexts, peoples’ needs change and 
the devices they use change, so designing an experience that admits 
these variations and adapts to them can provide much higher value. 
Design exercise: Expanding the continuous flow 
I’ve talked in this chapter about how the continuous design approach 
provides designers with the opportunity to rethink user flows, dissect 
them to component steps, and explore new ways to help people achieve 
their goals—all by leveraging the set of connected user devices. Now, 
I’d like to use our Eventbrite example to do a deep dive into rethinking 
process. Let’s now explore the ways multi-device experiences can bet­
ter meet user needs. Taking this deep dive doesn’t mean all the ideas 
we generate are implementation-worthy (that would require more data, 
research, and assessments). Yet this is still an important design exer­
cise that will help us to redefine the product landscape, identify areas 
for innovation, and prepare early for what’s ahead. 
We will do this exercise on two key types of events: conferences and 
concerts. Despite the different nature of these event types, there’s still 
a unified theme between them: the social- and people-centered experi­
ence at their core. With conferences, for example, the events are aimed 
at bringing people with shared interests together, facilitating conversa­
tions among them, and hopefully taking some of these conversations 
beyond the geography of the conference venue. There is a lot of potential 
in addressing ways we can promote this social scene at events—and the 
multi-device ecosystem can play an important role in enhancing that. 
Conferences. Let’s look first at the conference event type and break 
it down into the main set of contexts involved. For each, we’ll try to 
categorize user needs based on the following dimensions (see Table 3-1):
Agenda-centered
What are the users’ needs in terms of event logistics, facilities, and 
schedule?
People-centered
What are the users’ needs in terms of social interactions and 
networking?
Multi-device focus
What are the dominant devices for this context?

76  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
TABLE 3-1. Analyzing the conference experience flow across shifting contexts 
and multiple devices along the agenda-centered and people-centered 
dimensions
AGENDA-CENTERED
PEOPLE-CENTERED
Pre-event
Big screens (mostly desktops)
• Finding events
• Exploring event info
• Registering for an event
• Choosing sessions (if 
relevant)
• Sharing event with peers/friends 
and encouraging them to join 
•	Reviewing attendee list
•	Getting a sense of the crowd 
and noting people to meet 
(possibly even contacting 
them in advance to set up a 
chat during the event)
Arriving at 
the venue on 
day 1
Mobile devices (mostly smartphones)
• Checking the event schedule
• Getting to the event on time 
(transportation, directions, 
traffic, parking)
• Checking in
• Getting coffee to start the day
• Determining who’s here
• Anyone I already know?
• Any of the people I noted?
During 
event8
Mixed devices (stationary = laptop/tablet; on the go = mobile)
• Checking the event schedule
• Exploring events info
• Attending sessions:
•	When, where, and how to 
get there
•	Session and speaker info
•	Taking session notes
• Taking breaks:
•	Options (cafeterias, 
exhibitions)
•	Time left until 
breaks/“break about to 
end” alerts
• Attending social events:
•	What, when, and where 
•	How to get there
• Making new connections (many 
contexts):
•	Meeting new people, espe­
cially those I want to talk with
•	Catching up with people I 
already know
•	Exchanging business cards
•	Taking quick notes about peo­
ple I spoke with for later use
• Attending sessions/social events:
•	Who’s going?
•	Who’s here? (Can impact seat 
choice.)
•	Basic professional info 
•	Conversation starters (e.g., 
common interests, back­
ground, recent articles pub­
lished, recent updates)

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  77
Post-event
All devices as a starting point (data analytics can help determine 
which devices are needed)9
• Organizing event materials 
(slides, videos, books)
• Posting photos/videos from 
the event (best moments, 
the event at a glance)
• Researching related events
• Following up with people
Table 3-1 demonstrates how, by stepping back and taking a fresh look at 
end-to-end user journeys through the lens of multi-device experiences, 
you can identify important themes about your experience flows and 
rates and functions along the following scale: 
•	 Well supported
•	 Supported, but can be improved
•	 Not supported at all
For example, two prominent design themes that arise in Eventbrite’s 
conference experience are:
•	 It mostly focuses on the pre-event and event-day parts of the flow. 
Some features are well supported, while others could possibly be 
further optimized.
•	 It mainly supports the agenda-centered activities along the flow. 
The social needs receiving attention are only the pre-event needs 
(ability to see attendees list and share the event on social networks).
Identifying these gaps and opportunities is an important first step in 
setting the product’s direction going forward. This doesn’t necessarily 
mean that Eventbrite needs to deepen its design efforts in the social 
scene, or add other features just highlighted. However, it is important 
to make these decisions when you have all the information in front of 
you, after reassessing the product landscape given the new technologi­
cal developments, and specifically the new multi-device opportunities. 
Next, we’ll look at concerts.

78  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
Concerts. At a very basic level, concerts are similar to conferences in 
the sense that they involve both “logistical” needs and social needs that 
accompany the main set of contexts involved. However, concerts have 
an additional emotional layer to the event experience: individuals listen 
to songs performed right in front of them by the artist, while absorbing 
the energy of the crowd around them, dancing, singing along, taking 
photos, and more. It’s a powerful experience. Capturing that emotional 
connection, and finding ways to allow people to extend that just a little 
bit longer, can be very impactful. Let’s break down the concert experi­
ence as we did the conferences (Table 3-2).
TABLE 3-2. Analyzing the concert experience flow across shifting contexts 
and multiple devices along the agenda-centered and people-centered 
dimensions
AGENDA-CENTERED
PEOPLE-CENTERED
Pre-
event
Big screens (mostly desktops)
• Finding concerts
• Exploring concert info
• Buying tickets
• Determining which of 
my friends are going
• Organizing a group to 
go together
• Sharing concert with 
peers/friends, encour­
aging them to join, 
showing off
Event 
day—
we’re 
on our 
way!
Mobile devices (mostly smartphones)
• Getting directions 
• Parking:
•	Help finding a spot is cool.
•	Finding a cheap one is even cooler.
•	Saving my location to take me back there 
later is legendary.

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  79
Arriving 
at the 
venue 
and 
during 
the 
event
Mobile devices (mostly smartphones)
• While in line:
•	How much longer will I be in line? (Will I 
miss the beginning of the concert?)
•	I’m bored and somewhat anxious, but try­
ing to keep my energy up. (How about a 
second-screen experience while waiting—
fun facts, artist videos, stuff to keep that 
energy pumped up?)
• Getting through the ticket check
• Showing me a detailed concert lineup
• Setting a five-minute alert before artists go 
on stage
• Inside the venue:
•	Help me find my seat
•	Food (what, how much, and where?)
•	Restroom location
•	Merchandise (what and how much?)
•	I already have my phone up to take pic­
tures/videos during the song; wouldn’t it 
be cool to see the song lyrics too so I can 
sing along confidently?
• Determining whether 
my friends are here 
(even if our seats are 
far apart, we could at 
least meet later for a 
beer and a hot dog)
• Tweeting and check­
ing tweets about the 
concert
• Adding people I meet 
to my social networks
Post-
event
All devices as a starting point (data analytics can help determine which 
devices are needed)
• Posting photos/videos taken during the 
event (best moments, concert at a glance)
• Receiving a special thank-you note from the 
artist, along with a video from the concert
• Leveraging post-concert excitement to pro­
mote the artist’s CDs, merchandise, and 
online presence
• Sharing recommendations for related 
events
• Contacting new people 
I’ve met
• Creating shared mem­
ories with my friends10
As with the conference analysis, in a concert there are clearly experi­
ence areas that can benefit from a more granular multi-device treat­
ment, mainly in the social space, but also in some agenda-centered 
aspects. For example, providing a second-screen experience while 
people are waiting in line can be a very interesting avenue to explore. 
The smartphone has already become a time filler for people standing 
in line, so why not leverage this behavior pattern to get them even 
more excited about and engaged with the concert that’s about to start? 

80  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
Not only that, but second-screen experiences can (and already often do) 
incorporate a social layer to encourage group engagements. In the case 
of concerts, an app can be used to enhance connections between peo­
ple standing in line together, who are already sharing a real-life experi­
ence—even if just for a few hours. 
There is always room for pushing continuity a step further, reinforc­
ing the idea that if we step back and expand our design lens to encom­
pass the end-to-end user flow and acknowledge the range of connected 
devices people use, we can find new ways to optimize their experiences. 
This kind of optimization can stem from dissecting the existing flow 
into smaller pieces, or expanding its boundaries to include more activ­
ities that couldn’t have been supported as well before all these devices 
came into users’ lives. 
Discussion: Educating for Continuity
Multi-device continuous experiences introduce new types and granularity 
of flows and use patterns. Most people are not yet familiar with them; their 
mental models are still anchored in consistent experiences that focus on 
access anywhere rather than contextual continuity, and they might not even 
have clear use cases in mind for these device relay races.
To tap into the potential of the new connected world, as designers we need 
to help people make the cognitive leap and expand—or even break—the 
existing mental models around multi-device experiences. Our responsibility 
is not only to build awesome, innovative ecosystems for our users, but also 
so they equip them with the tools and guidance to engage with these expe-
riences, to feel empowered and in control. 
This is where product education plays an important role. In researching for 
this book, I found myself doing a lot of active work to identify continuous 
product examples out in the market. Current ecosystem experiences do not 
offer descriptions in the app markets, multi-device tutorials, or in-product 
guidance; people are left to decipher the multi-device experience layers on 
their own. 
To get our users onto the multi-device–experience bandwagon, we need to 
first make them aware of it, and—better yet—help them understand and get 
excited about the value it provides. How do we get them on board?

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  81
SEEDING THE ECOSYSTEM NOTION: FIRST-TIME EXPERIENCE,  
APP MARKETS, AND PROMOTIONS
A good opportunity to make people aware of the multi-device ecosystem 
and its very basic flow is the first-time experience. Whether you implement 
it through a marketing landing page, an introductory splash page, or a quick 
welcome tour, you can use the first to introduce people to the idea of your 
multi-device structure. A few important principles to remember:
•	 Users have a lot of experience using other products and services. 
So even when they start using yours, they have more experience 
with all the others. Their expectations about the experience you 
offer will be shaped by that. 
•	 At the point of entry, users know very little about your product 
(if anything). They probably haven’t used it yet and don’t have a 
feel for the use cases and the value it offers, and thus there’s a lot 
they can absorb and internalize at this initial stage.
•	 Users skip copy and instead scan for meaningful headings, high-
lighted words, bullet lists, and short paragraphs.11
Given these facts, it’s important to keep your ecosystem messages short, 
simple, and concise. Incorporating meaningful visuals (e.g., a visual flow of 
devices with their roles as headings, or just a group of devices as part of a big-
ger message) can help you convey the message (see Figures 3-10 and 3-11). 
FIGURE 3-10
TripIt website landing page, incorporating devices in a prominent manner. 
This visual introduces (part of) the ecosystem, demonstrates the value of the 
continuous experience, and shows a glimpse of the role each device plays.

82  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
FIGURE 3-11
Evernote website landing page, incorporating a multi-device image as part of 
a broader product message. The image, along with the accompanying text, 
clearly indicates that this product spans multiple devices.
Taking a step back in the setup flow, you can already utilize the app markets 
(subject to their specific terms) as part of the user education process. In all 
the continuous products I came across, however, there was no indication in 
the app description about other devices taking part in the experience.
For example, Allrecipes simply released two separate apps to the market 
(Dinner Spinner and Your Kitchen Inspiration) without any messaging about 
their relationship to each other. It missed an opportunity to wrap users’ 
minds around the ecosystem flow and continuity value before they down-
load the products. Not only could this encourage people to get the apps, but 
it could also frame their product perception beyond just a specific device. 
Explaining the cross-device relationships from the very beginning (in each 
of the device pages, along with a link to the corresponding device) can help 
establish expectations and use patterns around multi-device experiences.
You can also seed the ecosystem concept through occasional promotional 
messages that bring product features to the surface. For example, you can 
display a promotional modal dialog at a certain frequency when the user 
enters the app (or accesses some other activity-related trigger). These 
can be integrated alongside the product content, such as in the notifica-
tions area or content stream. You can also use common gestures—such as 
shake—to trigger product education messages, as Google Maps does (see 
Figure 3-12). Make sure you select a gesture that is not too complex (undis-
coverable) or too easy (triggered unintentionally too often). 

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  83
INGRAINING THE MULTI-DEVICE VALUE: IN-PRODUCT FLOW
After the first-time experience, which seeds the idea of device continuity, 
the next (and more important) part is integrating continuity cues within the 
product flows.
In many ways, the challenge here is similar to that of gradual engagement in 
your sign-in strategy (discussed earlier in this chapter): it’s all about finding 
those sweet spots during the flow where it makes sense to notify the user 
about “passing the baton” to the next device. When it’s done contextually, 
after the user has just completed a certain relevant action that reflects a clear 
intent or state of mind, it is much easier for the user to understand the value 
of the cross-device continuity, as he’s already engaged with the experience.
For example, if we go back to the Allrecipes cooking use case, the first time 
the user adds recipes to his recipe box on a desktop or tablet, we could 
show a modal dialog notifying him about the option of (and benefits to) 
automatically creating a shopping list on his phone. This dialog can ask for 
missing user details needed to complete the operation (gradual engage-
ment). Also, incorporating an option to send a text message or email with a 
direct link to download the app to his phone would shorten the path to con-
version even more. Finally, offering a checkbox to “Always create shopping 
list on my phone” could help streamline the flow for future cases, prevent-
ing recurring pop-ups from breaking the user flow.
FIGURE 3-12
“Shake to send 
feedback” message 
triggered in Google 
Maps when the user 
shakes the phone.

84  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
In other cases, like with TripIt (shown in Figure 3-10), delivering a pop-up 
message following a trip booking might not be the optimal timing. When 
it comes to traveling, there might be a significant time gap between when 
the user books her trip via her tablet, and when she actually departs for the 
trip (with her phone). In this case, alerting the user one to two days before 
the trip about the mobile phone app and its advantages would better suit 
her state of mind. Also, on the trip day itself (assuming she has the app), 
triggering a phone notification a few hours before her flight with its details 
and status would be useful. As the trip progresses and different needs arise 
(hotel, car, attractions, etc.), it would be useful to balance phone alerts (for 
the highest-priority issues) with in-app UI notifications (which can wait until 
the next time the user logs in to the app). 
A relevant example for contextual in-app notifications comes from Pocket. 
After copying a URL and opening the Pocket app, the user will automatically 
be prompted to save the content (see Figure 3-13). 
FIGURE 3-13
Pocket mobile app 
notification after a user 
copies a URL (via Myles 
Tan, littlebigdetails.
com).

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  85
Contextual triggering can also take place based on additional signals, like 
location and time. For example, in the Allrecipes case, when the user fin-
ishes shopping at the grocery store using the mobile app (app usage + time 
+ location) and returns home (location), the phone app can trigger a notifi-
cation recommending that he switches to the tablet app for cooking. Given 
that tablets are not yet as widespread as mobile phones, it might be useful 
to offer an option of “Thanks, but I don’t have a tablet,” so that users are not 
annoyed with repeated tablet-related messages. 
The important takeaway here is that we must think carefully about how to 
approach users while they’re engaging with a task-related activity (cooking) 
in order to increase the value of helping them very tangibly with the next 
step in that task flow (grocery shopping). The benefit is not only educating 
users about the continuity flow as they go, but also encouraging them to 
engage with additional devices (possibilities they might not be aware of) 
and thereby advancing them toward their goals.
BRIDGING PHYSICAL AND DIGITAL: POP
POP (Prototyping on Paper) offers designers an ecosystem experience 
that aims to simplify and accelerate app prototyping in order to make 
the overall design process quicker and more effective. It enables users 
to more easily make the leap from wireframes on paper to a live proto­
type on the actual mobile device, providing a better feel for the interac­
tions and overall flow across the app. 
POP’s continuous experience introduces a flow that differs from what 
we’ve seen so far. While this chapter’s previous examples relied solely 
on wireless connections to generate the ecosystem flow, this product is 
different: it uses the smartphone camera as a key player in driving the 
sequence of activities forward. 
The sequence starts with paper sketching and then moves into the dig­
ital space, where the dynamic prototyping is applied (see Figure 3-14). 

86  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
FIGURE 3-14
POP app continuous flow: from pen and paper to the mobile device, 
connected through the camera.
Under the hood: Examining the user’s workflow
As with the previous examples, we will break down the experience flow 
into the user steps that compose it:
1.	 Design on paper.
The first step of the process doesn’t involve any ecosystem device or 
special technology: it’s all about the designer following his regular 
workflow, starting off with creating the initial wireframes using 
pen and paper—a much faster process than using a software tool. 
2.	 Create a prototype.
The second step is to create a live prototype out of the sketches, 
composed of a full storyboard that shows the interaction and flow. 
To do that, the POP app lets you import the paper sketches into 
your phone by taking a picture of each of them. The app automati­
cally adjusts the brightness and contrast to improve the sketch leg­
ibility and ensure the clarity of the simulation. 
Once the sketches are on the phone, you can easily create a story­
board by linking the sketches together through “hot spots” defini­
tion. When all the sketches are properly linked and ready to go, you 
can hit Play and simulate the UI flow from start to end. 

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  87
3.	Share for feedback.
The last part in the process is sharing the prototype with friends or 
colleagues to collect feedback early on in the process and discuss 
it collaboratively. This capability is also incorporated into the app, 
which provides a built-in sharing mechanism that supports col­
laborative review across the three core devices: iPhone, iPad, and 
desktop (through the web browser). 
This entire process can then repeat itself iteratively—based on 
feedback received, you can create new paper sketches, get them on 
the device, link them together, and share new prototypes with your 
reviewers. 
Once the experience is ready for the next step, you can use more 
advanced software design tools like Photoshop, Fireworks, or 
Illustrator to build detailed, polished experience screens. 
Design lesson: Continuous experience can start offline
What I like so much about the POP app—beyond the fluid continuous 
experience—is that it admits to the power of the oldest tools around, 
pen and paper. Instead of trying to come up with ways to beat them, 
it joins them. POP acknowledges that sophisticated technology is not 
always needed every step of the way; at times it’s better to just stick to 
what we already do well offline (like sketching on paper), and leverage 
that. This allows us to really focus on the parts of the process that don’t 
work as well (such as the difficulty involved in setting up a live proto­
type), and mitigate the effort and resources involved in getting those 
tasks done. 
Note that in the case of transferring the experience from the physical 
world to the digital one, an explicit user action is required (in this case, 
taking a photo) to clearly connect the experience flow between the dif­
ferent touchpoints. Thus, the continuity between devices, embedded 
in the usage flow and done on the spot, doesn’t require additional user 
education in this respect. 
In the following chapters, we will see more examples of contextual 
experiences (continuous and complementary) where the multi-device 
design combines and helps to bridge the physical and digital spheres. 

88  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
EXPANDING CONTINUITY WITH AN OPEN PLATFORM: POCKET 
Pocket (formerly Read It Later) is another interesting example of a con­
tinuous experience that addresses a more focused, iterative flow of 
sequenced activities (see Figure 3-15). It demonstrates a close atten­
tion to the varying contexts in which people consume content across 
different devices, and shows that this kind of attention can really mat­
ter when you’re creating a seamless, fluid experience tailored to user 
behavior patterns. 
FIGURE 3-15
Pocket product ecosystem—desktop, tablet, and smartphone—across iOS and 
Android.
The basic premise of Pocket is to help people save interesting arti­
cles, videos, and more from the Web for later enjoyment. When Pocket 
users come across interesting content (articles, videos, or web pages) 
but don’t have time to read or watch it at that moment, they can save the 
URL. Pocket makes clever use of continuity by tailoring the UI across 
the different devices, splitting the content discovery and content con­
sumption roles between them. Let’s take a closer look at the flow.
Under the hood: Examining the user’s workflow
Pocket’s experience flow can be broken down to two main steps:
1.	 Find interesting content.

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  89
During the course of a day, people use their computers for long peri­
ods of time—doing work, reading emails, checking favorite news 
sites, visiting their social networks, and searching content.  As part 
of these activities, they often come across interesting content they 
would like to take a deeper look at, but cannot at the moment for 
one reason or another (e.g., they’re at the office, running from one 
meeting to the other; they are at a break between classes at school; 
or they simply don’t have the peace and quiet required to sit back 
and focus on the article or video from start to end). 
A similar scenario can take place on the smartphone as well. While 
doing some quick phone browsing in the lunch line, a user might 
spot an interesting article that has been retweeted; she can’t read 
it right then and there, so she adds the article to her list on Pocket. 
Pocket’s solution is to help users save content for later—with a sin­
gle click. They do this using an online “pocket” icon integrated 
into the browser toolbar (Figure 3-16). 
FIGURE 3-16
The “Save to Pocket” button integrated into the desktop browser.
Also, Pocket is integrated into many content apps such as Twitter, 
Flipboard, Zite, and gReader, and this allows for an easy save from 
many contexts (Figure 3-17).

90  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
FIGURE 3-17
“Save to Pocket” buttons integrated into popular content-based mobile 
apps.
In the background, all the saved content items are synced across all 
devices that have the Pocket app installed.
2.	 Read the saved content.
Whenever users have some quiet time to catch up on all the stuff 
they didn’t have time for during the day—at the end of the work­
day, during the train ride home, or maybe as bedtime reading—
the tablet or smartphone takes over the experience, continuing the 
flow started during the day. 
Pocket’s app design for both devices is tailored to the context of 
content consumption (see Figure 3-18). With a digital magazine 
design, composed of all the content items saved previously, Pocket 
offers users an easy way to catch up on the content collected during 
the day and consume it comfortably when it’s convenient for them.

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  91
FIGURE 3-18
Pocket’s mobile apps (for smartphone and tablet) are designed in a digital 
magazine format presenting the content saved during the day. This design 
acknowledges the strong role mobile devices (especially tablets) play as 
content consumption devices.
Design lesson: Divide and conquer
Pocket makes a very clear separation in its UI treatment between the 
context in which a user saves URL information (mostly the desktop 
browser, along with specific app integrations on other devices) and 
the one he uses to consume it (which is comprehensively handled in 
Pocket’s own native app). The first merely offers a button to save the 
content the user runs into, and the latter is a fully designed, personal­
ized, magazine-like experience made up of the personal saved content. 
This workflow—aligned with the contextual behavioral patterns of 
Pocket’s target audience—establishes a fluid, almost transparent expe­
rience. People don’t really think about the different UIs; they just use 
them contextually, and it works.

92  |   DESIGNING MULTI-DEVICE EXPERIENCES
Design lesson: The power of openness
Pocket has an open API that allows developers to create their own 
Pocket applications, integrate them into their existing apps, and share 
them with other Pocket users.
This capability has a couple of important advantages:
Increased distribution channels
The open API provides a more scalable solution for getting Pocket 
into many more entry points (or “saving” points) for users to access. 
Pocket is already integrated into over 500 applications, across many 
platforms people already use. 
More channels feeding into the continuous experience
Users can trigger the experience from a growing number of chan­
nels, hassle-free, after installing the app once. While in many other 
ecosystem experiences, the continuous experience is limited to the 
specific product’s website/native apps (Allrecipes and Eventbrite 
are two examples), in Pocket’s case, any of the integrated apps is a 
starting point that can feed the continuous Pocket experience. 
Open platforms carry many advantages in a multi-device world, as we’ll 
see in Chapter 8.
Summary
•	 With a continuous approach, the multi-device experience flows 
from one device to the next, within different contexts, supporting 
users every step of the way through their task flow in two forms: 
o	 Single activity flow, where the same activity flows between 
devices, like watching a movie (Apple AirPlay), reading a book 
(Amazon Kindle), or composing a document (Google Drive).
o	 Sequenced activities flow, which handles broader use cases com­
posed of a sequence of different activities that all lead to the 
end goal—for example, cooking (Allrecipes), events manage­
ment (Eventbrite), prototyping (POP), and content manage­
ment (Pocket). 
•	 Having users sign in to the product across all devices is signifi­
cant in multi-device experiences—especially continuous ones. The 
increased complexity involved in these experiences, along with the 
constantly shifting contexts, requires building a robust knowledge 

 The Continuous Design Approach   |  93
base of the users completing these activities so that their experi­
ences can be personalized and improved over time. Sign-in is still 
the most prevalent way to identify the people using the product. 
When building your authentication strategy, you should consider:
o	 Offering SSO
o	 Simplifying registration/sign-in flow and forms
o	 Incorporating gradual engagement
o	 Promoting the ecosystem benefits when users are signed in
•	 Continuous design, supported by multiple connected devices, 
enables us to rethink user flows we might have taken for granted, 
break them down into smaller steps, and then reconstruct them to 
create better, richer, more tailored user experiences.
NOTES
1.	 Facebook login (http://bit.ly/1eon4SU); Twitter sign-in (http://bit.ly/1eon8lS); Google+ sign-in 
(https://developers.google.com/+/).
2.	 Hendrik Muller, Jennifer L. Gove, and John S. Webb, “Understanding Tablet Use: A Multi-
Method Exploration,” Proceedings of the 14th Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with 
Mobile Devices and Services (Mobile HCI 2012), ACM, http://bit.ly/1eop0Lp.
3.	 “Allrecipes’ Mobile Apps on Fire—Surpassing 10 Million Downloads,” Fresh Bites blog, 
November 17, 2011, http://freshbitesblog.com/2011/11/allrecipes-mobile-apps-on.html.
4.	 Samsung has already launched a fridge with a built-in Android tablet and aWiFi-enabled 
washing machine (http://bit.ly/1cQWnTS).
5.	 Bill Siwicki, “Smartphone Owners Want More Mobile Information in Stores,” Internet 
Retailer, December 31, 2012, http://bit.ly/1ji1IJc; “Mobile Devices Empower Today’s 
Shoppers In-Store and Online,” Nielsen, December 4, 2012, http://bit.ly/JBNdQ5.
6.	 “Email in Motion: Mobile Is Leading the Email Revolution” (infographic), http://bit.
ly/18ReaWu.
7.	 Most of the events currently offered on Eventbrite are still primarily on the small, local, 
one-day scale. Still, if we’re touching the events space, we might as well talk about it 
broadly, especially since Eventbrite has already started supporting more complex events—
from classes to concerts and festivals, where it provides ticketing solutions for 20,000–
80,000 attendees.
8.	 This is a significant change in context compared to the pre-event phase. Laptops or tablets 
are useful for stationary contexts (lokike taking notes during sessions), and smartphones 
are best for on-the-go situations (during breaks between sessions). The event UI on these 
devices can change accordingly.
9.	 A conference is often perceived as somewhere between business and pleasure; thus, 
participants can engage in post-event activities either during working hours (usually in 
front of the PC), or after (where the mobile devices are more prominent). Tracking your 
device usage with data analytics—discussed in Chapter 8—can help you determine how the 
different devices serve post-event needs.
10.	 Flayvr (http://www.flayvr.com) is a great example of an app that generates such an 
emotional experience.
11.	 “Myth #1: People read on the web,” UX Myths, http://bit.ly/1i6NkSX.


Beijing · Cambridge · Farnham · Köln · Sebastopol · Tokyo
Designing for Emerging 
Technologies
UX for Genomics, Robotics, and the 
Internet of Things
Edited by Jonathan Follett

 vii
[ Contents ]
Foreword . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
Preface . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xv
Chapter 1	
Designing for Emerging Technologies . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
by Jonathan Follett
A Call to Arms. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
Design for Disruption. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3
Eight Design Tenets for Emerging Technology. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8
Changing Design and Designing Change. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  26
Chapter 2	
Intelligent Materials: Designing Material Behavior . .  .  27
by Brook Kennedy
Bits and Atoms . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  27
Emerging Frontiers in Additive Manufacturing. .  .  .  .  .  .  32
Micro Manufacturing . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  33
Dynamic Structures and Programmable Matter. .  .  .  .  .  34
Connecting the Dots: What Does Intelligent 
Matter Mean for Designers?. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  37
Conclusion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  41
Chapter 3	
Taking Control of Gesture Interaction. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  43
by Gershom Kutliroff and Yaron Yanai
Reinventing the User Experience. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  43
Analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .46
Prototyping. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  47
A Case Study: Gesture Control. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  50
Trade-offs. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  61
Looking Ahead . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  62

viii  |   CONTENTS
Chapter 4	
Fashion with Function: Designing for Wearables. . . . . .65
by Michal Levin
The Next Big Wave in Technology. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  65
The Wearables Market Segments. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  66
Wearables Are Not Alone. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  71
UX (and Human) Factors to Consider. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  73
Summary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  113
Chapter 5	
Learning and Thinking with Things . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  115
by Stephen P. Anderson
Tangible Interfaces. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  115
(Near) Future Technology . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  125
Timeless Design Principles?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .130
Farther Out, a Malleable Future. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  136
Nothing New Under the Sun. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  137
Closing . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  138
Chapter 6	
Designing for Collaborative Robotics. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  139
by Jeff Faneuff
Introduction. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  139
Designing Safety Systems for Robots. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  143
Humanlike Robots . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  154
Human-Robot Collaboration . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  158
Testing Designs by Using Robotics Platforms. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  165
Future Challenges for Robots Helping People . .  .  .  .  .  .  172
Conclusion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  174
Robotics Resources. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  175
Chapter 7	
Design Takes on New Dimensions:
Evolving Visualization Approaches for 
Neuroscience and Cosmology . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  177
by Hunter Whitney
The Brain Is Wider Than the Sky . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  177
Section 1: An Expanding Palette for Visualization . .  .  179
Section 2: Visualizing Scientific Models (Some 
Assembly Required). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  188

 CONTENTS   |  ix
Section 3: Evolving Tools, Processes, 
and Interactions. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  194
Conclusion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 202
Chapter 8	
Embeddables: The Next Evolution of 
Wearable Tech. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  205
by Andy Goodman
Technology That Gets Under Your Skin. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 205
Permeable Beings: The History of Body 
Modification. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 208
Decoration, Meaning, and Communication. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 209
Optimization and Repair. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  213
The Extended Human. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  216
Just Science Fiction, Right?. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  224
Key Questions to Consider . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  224
Chapter 9	
Prototyping Interactive Objects. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 225
by Scott Sullivan
Misconceptions Surrounding Designers 
Learning to Code. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 226
Chapter 10	
Emerging Technology and Toy Design . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  237
by Barry Kudrowitz
The Challenge of Toy Design. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  237
Toys and the S-Curve. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  239
Toys and Intellectual Property. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  241
Emerging Technologies in Toy Design. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  242
Inherently Playful Technology. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  247
Sensors and Toy Design. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 248
Emerging Technology in Production and 
Manufacturing . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  250
Summary. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  253
Chapter 11	
Musical Instrument Design . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  255
by Camille Goudeseune
Experience Design and Musical Instruments. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  255
The Evolution of the Musician. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  258
Conclusion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  272

x  |   CONTENTS
Chapter 12	
Design for Life. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 273
by Juhan Sonin
Bloodletting to Bloodless. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  273
The Surveillance Invasion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  278
Life First—Health a Distant Second. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  281
Stage Zero Detection. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 284
From Protein to Pixel to Policy. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 286
Final Thoughts . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 287
Chapter 13	
Architecture as Interface: Advocating a Hybrid 
Design Approach for Interconnected 
Environments . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  289
by Erin Rae Hoffer
The Blur of Interconnected Environments. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 289
Theorizing Digital Culture: New Models of 
Convergence. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  292
Hybrid Design Practice. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  295
Changing Definitions of Space. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 300
A Framework for Interconnected Environments . .  .  .  .  301
Spheres of Inquiry. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  303
An Exercise in Hybrid Design Practice. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 305
Architecture as Interface. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  307
Conclusion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 309
References. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  310
Chapter 14	
Design for the Networked World: A Practice for 
the Twenty-First Century. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  313
by Matt Nish-Lapidus
The Future of Design. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  313
New Environment, New Materials. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  316
New Tools for a New Craft. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  325

 CONTENTS   |  xi
Chapter 15	
New Responsibilities of the Design Discipline: 
A Critical Counterweight to the Coming 
Technologies?. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  331
by Martin Charlier
Critiquing Emerging Technology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .331
Emerging Technologies . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  333
New Responsibilities of the Design Discipline. .  .  .  .  .  .  343
Bibliography. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  345
Chapter 16	
Designing Human-Robot Relationships. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  347
by Bill Hartman
Me Man, You Robot: Designers Creating 
Powerful Tools. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 348
Me Man, You Robot? Developing Emotional 
Relationships with Robots. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  354
Me Robot? On Becoming Robotic. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  358
Into the Future . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 360
Your Robot: Consider Nielsen, Maslow, and 
Aristotle . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  361
Conclusion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 364
Chapter 17	
Tales from the Crick: Experiences and Services 
When Design Fiction Meets Synthetic Biology. .  .  .  .  .  .  365
by Marco Righetto and Andy Goodman
Design Fictions as a Speculative Tool to Widen 
the Understanding of Technology. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  365
The Building Bricks of the Debate . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 366
Healthcare Narratives: From Scenarios to 
Societal Debates. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  373
Living Objects: Symbiotic Indispensable 
Companions. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  376
Chapter 18	
Beyond 3D Printing: The New Dimensions of 
Additive Fabrication . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  379
by Steven Keating
MIT and the Mediated Matter Group: Previous 
and Current Additive Fabrication Research . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  379
The Dimensions of Additive Fabrication. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 380
Conclusion. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 402

xii  |   CONTENTS
Chapter 19	
Become an Expert at Becoming an Expert. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 407
by Lisa Caldwell
Into the Fire . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 408
Eating the Elephant. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  410
Onward. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  425
Chapter 20	
The Changing Role of Design. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  427
by Dirk Knemeyer
On the Impact of Emerging Technologies. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  427
Design Complexity and Emerging Technologies. .  .  .  .  431
Design Trends for Emerging Technologies. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  433
User Experience: Finding Its Level. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  436
The Future for Me, the Future for You . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  437
Appendix A: Companies, Products, and Links . .  .  .  .  . . . . . 439
Index. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 445

1
[ 1 ]
Designing for Emerging 
Technologies
JONATHAN FOLLETT
A Call to Arms
Since the dawn of technology, humanity has lived with both its ben­
efits and burdens. The fire that cooks our food also burns our hands; 
the mills and factories that produce our clothes often pollute our water 
and air; the computers that process our data sometimes crash and send 
our mission-critical records into oblivion. From the Agricultural to the 
Industrial to the Information Revolution, humanity has enjoyed great 
advantages from technology, but we have suffered the consequences 
of flawed thinking regarding its use, resulting in wasteful consump­
tion of our world’s resources, problems for our environment, and social 
disruption. Humanity enters the new millennium struggling with the 
challenges we’ve created for ourselves in areas from energy to infra­
structure, transportation to healthcare, and manufacturing to agricul­
ture. To address these challenges, we will no doubt turn once again 
to technology: in the coming century, we’ll be able to hack our DNA, 
embed computers in our bodies, and print replacement organs. The 
question is, what will we do when we find ourselves with the capability 
to do just about anything we can dream of?
To explore that question—at least from a design perspective—let’s con­
sider the implications of four significant emerging technologies whose 
growth, maturation, and widespread commercial adoption has the 
potential to disrupt the current economic order:

2  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
• A networked, intelligent world connected by the Internet of Things 
(IoT) 
• More efficient and effective manufacturing, healthcare, and disas­
ter relief aided by advanced robotics
• Custom, just-in-time manufacturing, driven by additive fabrica­
tion/3D printing 
• Medicine, food, and fuel created by altering the code of life itself, 
through genomics and synthetic biology
Through the lens of these disruptive technologies, we’ll look at what 
designing products, services, and experiences for people might require 
and examine some of the high-level user experience (UX) tenets prac­
titioners might consider when approaching the design for such new 
fields.
Today, we’re on the cusp of a significant technological period, not 
unlike the Second Industrial Revolution that occurred in America from 
the end of the Civil War until World War I, when major discoveries 
and inventions completely transformed the economic, social, and polit­
ical fabric of the United States. During this particularly prolific era, 
inventors, innovators, and scientists such as Alexander Graham Bell, 
Thomas Edison, Henry Ford, and Nikola Tesla introduced the world to 
technologies that would define modern life in the twentieth century. 
These included the light bulb, the telephone, and the mass-produced 
automobile, among many others. The light bulb and basic electrical ser­
vice provided the cornerstones of the electric age, while the telephone 
started a communication revolution, and the automobile began an era 
of personal transportation that would alter the landscape of America 
itself. Historically, this period provides a powerful example of the sys­
temic disruption that occurs when multiple technological innovations 
emerge, mature, and reach popular adoption along roughly the same 
timeline. Just as the inventions of the Second Industrial Revolution 
transformed the United States on almost every level, robotics, additive 
fabrication, the IoT, and synthetic biology similarly have the potential 
to define and shape our next era.

 1. Designing for Emerging Technologies   |  3
As these technologies evolve, they will influence humanity’s progress 
as a species, making the tumult of our current Information Revolution 
look like a minor blip by comparison. Although the miracles of our age 
are many, computers, the Internet, and mobile devices primarily serve 
to accelerate human communication, collaboration, and commerce. 
Without dismissing their importance, we observe that many existing 
models of interaction have been enhanced, rather than transformed, 
by moving from the physical to the digital realm—becoming cheaper, 
faster and, perhaps, better in the process. Email is an accelerated ver­
sion of the postal service, e-commerce, a more convenient and efficient 
version of the brick-and-mortar store, and so on. Conversely, in tech­
nologies such as synthetic biology and additive fabrication, we can see 
the potential to remake our current order in substantial fashion, with 
the formation of entirely new industries and the birth of new markets.
A May 2013 McKinsey Global Institute report titled “Disruptive technol­
ogies: Advances that will transform life, business, and the global econ­
omy,” identifies the global markets ready for disruption and describes 
the potential economic value of this transformation. Genomics has 
the potential to alter the $6.5 trillion healthcare and $1.1 trillion agri­
culture industries through products such as personalized medicines 
and genetically modified foods. Additive fabrication/3D printing and 
advanced robotics will upend the global manufacturing industry—
affecting the $6 trillion in labor expenditures and $11 trillion in global 
manufacturing GDP, respectively. And, the IoT will disrupt the manu­
facturing, healthcare, and mining industries to the tune of $36 trillion.1
Design for Disruption
Let’s look briefly at the disruptive potential of each of these emerging 
technologies—the IoT, advanced robotics, 3D printing, and synthetic 
biology—and the need for design thinking in their formation.
1	 James Manyika, Michael Chui, Jacques Bughin, Richard Dobbs, Peter Bisson, and Alex 
Marrs. “Disruptive technologies: Advances that will transform life, business, and the global 
economy.” May 2013; McKinsey Global Institute Report (http://bit.ly/1CJ2q8v).

4  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
THE IOT, CONNECTED ENVIRONMENTS, 
AND WEARABLE TECHNOLOGY
The IoT is a popular shorthand that describes the many objects that 
are outfitted with sensors and communicating machine-to-machine. 
These objects make up our brave, new connected world. The types and 
numbers of these devices are growing by the day, to a possible 50 billion 
objects by 2020, according to the Cisco report, “The Internet of Things: 
How the Next Evolution of the Internet Is Changing Everything.”2 
Inexpensive sensors providing waves of data can help us gain new 
insight into the places in which we live, work, and play, as well as the 
capabilities to influence our surroundings—passively and actively—
and have our surroundings influence us. We can imagine the possi­
bilities of a hyper-connected world in which hospitals, factories, roads, 
airways, offices, retail stores, and public buildings are tied together by 
a web of data.
In a similar fashion, when we wear these sensors on our bodies, they 
can become our tools for self-monitoring. Combine this capability with 
information delivery via Bluetooth or other communication methods 
and display it via flexible screens, and we have the cornerstones of a 
wearable technology revolution that is the natural partner and possible 
inheritor of our current smartphone obsession. If we consider that the 
systems, software, and even the objects themselves will require design 
input on multiple levels, we can begin to see the tremendous opportu­
nity resident in the IoT and wearables.
ROBOTICS
In 2013, Google’s purchase of eight robotics companies (which are to 
be consolidated into a new division led by Andy Rubin, the former head 
of its successful Android operating system) was publicly heralded as an 
inflection point for the robotics industry. Not coincidentally, the stocks 
of competitors such as iRobot rose dramatically.3
2	 Dave Evans. “The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet Is Changing 
Everything.” April 2011; Cisco White Paper (http://bit.ly/1CJ2sNE).
3	 John Markoff. “Google Puts Money on Robots, Using the Man Behind Android.” December 
4, 2013; The New York Times (http://nyti.ms/1CJ2tkR).

 1. Designing for Emerging Technologies   |  5
More so than any other emerging technology, robotics has captured 
the imagination of American popular culture, especially that of the 
Hollywood sci-fi blockbuster. We’re entertained, enthralled, and 
maybe (but only slightly) alarmed by the legacy of Blade Runner, The 
Terminator, The Matrix and any number of lesser dystopian robotic cel­
luloid futures. It remains to be seen if robot labor generates the kind of 
societal, economic, and political change depicted in the more pessimis­
tic musings of our culture’s science fiction. Ensuring that it does not is 
a design challenge of the highest order.
In the near term, robots are ideal for taking care of jobs that are repet­
itive, physically demanding, and potentially hazardous to humans. As 
such, immediate opportunities for advanced robotics lie in areas where 
human labor is still intensive, such as manufacturing and logistics.
3D PRINTING
Additive manufacturing—more popularly known as 3D printing—is 
a process of creating a three-dimensional object by printing one min­
iscule layer at a time, based on a computer model. This flexible tech­
nology can use a wide variety of substrates including plastic, metal, 
glass, and even biological material. Custom production using additive 
manufacturing techniques promises to disrupt many industries, from 
construction to food to medicine. Possibilities for this technology range 
from immediately practical applications such as printing new parts 
just-in-time to fix a broken appliance; to controversial, uncomfortable 
realities, including generating guns on demand; to hopeful and futur­
istic methods, perhaps the ability to create not just viable human tissue, 
but complete, working organs, which could be used in transplants or 
for the testing of new drugs and vaccines.
Today, additive manufacturing is already changing architecture and 
construction. In April 2014, WinSun, a Chinese engineering company, 
reported that it can construct 10 single-story homes in a day by using a 
specialized 3D printing technology that creates the main structure and 
walls using an inexpensive combination of concrete and construction 
waste materials.4
4	 “China: Firm 3D prints 10 full-sized houses in a day.” April, 25 2014; BBC News (http://
bbc.in/1CJ2rJE).

6  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
In the field of health, the work of roboticist Easton LaChapelle rep­
resents the change made possible by additive fabrication in medical-de­
vice prototyping and production processes. The 17-year-old wunder­
kind has created an ultra-light, fully functioning prosthetic arm whose 
parts can be 3D-printed for about $500. Traditionally manufactured 
prosthetic arms that are currently available can cost upward of $80,000. 
LaChapelle’s prosthetic arm is controlled using an EEG headset, which 
measures brainwaves and communicates with the arm wirelessly via 
Bluetooth.
At the Business Innovation Factory BIF9 conference in Providence, 
Rhode Island, held in September 2013, LaChapelle demonstrated 
his invention and discussed his amazing progression through the 
design and prototyping phases. The first generation of the product 
LaChappelle created was a robotic hand, made of Lego bricks, surgical 
tubing, and five servo motors. He created the second-generation robotic 
arm by using 3D-printed parts and a Nintendo Power Glove. Now in its 
third generation, the arm is made almost entirely of 3D-printed parts, 
and most dramatic of all, it has human strength. While LaChapelle has 
not made the leap from prototype to a manufacture-ready device, it’s 
easy to imagine the potential for disruption in the market it represents.
From a process standpoint, LaChappelle’s methods in designing and 
engineering the prosthetic demonstrate the speed at which ideas can 
move from a designer’s imagination to becoming something real and 
testable. Even though prototyping has always been a part of the design­
er’s toolkit, additive fabrication makes it possible to apply the same 
rapid and flexible process of ideation, creation, testing, validation, and 
iteration to physical products that used to be reserved for the realm of 
digital development.
GENOMICS AND SYNTHETIC BIOLOGY
In April 2003, the publicly funded Human Genome Project completed 
the sequencing of the entirety of our human DNA, providing the blue­
print for building a person at a price of $3 billion. At the time, this sci­
entific achievement was heralded as one of the greatest in history, with 
far-reaching implications for health and medicine. Then-President Bill 

 1. Designing for Emerging Technologies   |  7
Clinton, in announcing the working draft sequence of the Human 
Genome in 2000, said “Without a doubt, this is the most important, 
most wondrous map ever produced by human kind.”5
Fast forward just slightly more a decade, and the cost of sequencing a 
human genome has dropped to roughly $1,000—an exponential reduc­
tion in price far exceeding what Moore’s Law would predict. A host of 
companies are racing to introduce technology to make even more rapid 
and inexpensive sequencing possible. With the widespread affordabil­
ity of this sophisticated test quickly becoming reality, genomics can 
provide the map for a new wave of personalized therapies: highly tar­
geted drugs for fighting cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and 
other hereditary illnesses.
As with genomic sequencing, the price of DNA synthesis continues 
to drop. It now approaches 25 cents per base pair via services such as 
GenScript, DNA 2.0, and others. Writing the code of life is the corner­
stone of the science of synthetic biology; the intentional design and 
engineering of biological systems will make incredible things possible. 
In his book Regenesis, George Church, geneticist, Harvard professor, 
and perhaps the most well-known scientist in this field, outlines some 
of the inventive solutions offered by this future potential, including bio­
fuels, targeted gene therapies, and even virus-resistant human beings. 
In Church’s expansive vision, we see a future in which humans have 
the capability to design nature itself, changing the fabric of biology and 
human evolution.6
If advanced robotics, additive fabrication, synthetic biology, and other 
emerging technologies extend humanity’s grasp, making it possible for 
us to achieve our goals in manufacturing, health, energy, and other 
industries rapidly and efficiently, they also will place their own set of 
demands upon us. The fields of graphic design, industrial design, and 
software UX design have all evolved in response to the unique demands 
of new technologies. It’s a classic human characteristic to relate to 
and interact with our latest tools. Graphic design makes information 
5	 “Breaking News—President Clinton, British Prime Minister Tony Blair Deliver Remarks 
on Human Genome Milestone.” June 26, 2000; CNN.com Transcripts (http://bit.
ly/1CJ2xky).
6	 George Church and Edward Regis. Regenesis: How Synthetic Biology Will Reinvent Nature 
and Ourselves. 2012; Basic Books.

8  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
depicted in printed media clear, understandable, and beautiful; indus­
trial design makes products elegant, usable, and humane; and UX 
design makes the interaction with our digital products and services 
efficient and even pleasurable.
Historically, bridging this gap between man and disruptive technol­
ogy has not been an easy task. In addition to the positive outcomes of 
the Industrial Revolution, the political, societal, and economic change 
across the globe also engendered negative responses by people whose 
lives and livelihoods were displaced. Most famously, the Luddites in 
England sabotaged machines in the factories, preferring to destroy 
the technology they felt would ruin man’s existence, rather than pro­
ceed forward in concert with it. Mass production similarly had its ten­
sions with traditional craftsman—from woodworkers to painters to 
architects—who responded by creating the influential Arts and Crafts 
movement in the late 1800s. And, in the literature of the time, indus­
trialization faced one of its most enduring critiques in Mary Shelley’s 
Frankenstein, which articulated most eloquently the idea that science 
left unchecked and pursued for its own sake was not to be trusted. 
We, too, can expect that the road to adopting the emerging technolo­
gies of our time will be subject to societal tensions and negative reac­
tions, critiques, and counter-movements, which is all the more reason 
for designers to involve themselves early.
Eight Design Tenets for Emerging Technology
As we face a future in which the definition of what it is to be human 
might be inexorably changed, we will need design to help frame our 
interactions with technologies, from skin-top embeddable computers 
to bioprinted organs to swarming robots, which often seem to be rac­
ing ahead of our ability to process and manage on an emotional, eth­
ical, and societal level. Designers have an opportunity to help define 
the parameters of and sculpt the interactions between man and tech­
nology, whether we’re struggling with fear and loathing in reaction to 
genetically altered foods, the moral issues of changing a child’s traits 
to suit a parent’s preferences, the ethics guiding battlefield robots, or 
the societal implications of a 150-year extended lifetime. At its best, not 
only can design provide the frame for how technology works and how 
it’s used, it can also situate it within a broader context: incorporating 
system thinking, planning for a complete technological lifecycle, and 
evaluating the possibility of unintended consequences.

 1. Designing for Emerging Technologies   |  9
Our field of practice will be transformed, as well, and we must prepare 
for it by moving from design as facilitation, shaping the interface and 
workflow, to design as the arbiter, driving the creation of the technol­
ogy itself and applying our understanding of interaction, form, infor­
mation, and artistry to new areas. To balance those asking, “How can 
this be done?” we should ask, “Why should we do this, to what end, and 
for whose benefit?” We must move from being passive receptors of new 
technology to active participants in its formation. As design thinkers 
and practitioners we’re called to be explorers. And, although it’s true 
that not every designer will want or be able to follow this path, those 
who do will have an opportunity to contribute in significant fashion.
Today, design work is changing at an unprecedented pace, and we are 
all too aware of the need to constantly evolve our skills to match the 
demands of the marketplace. With this uncertainty comes opportunity: 
the design positions of the future are not yet defined. Just as there was 
no industrial, graphic, or interaction designer at one time, so too the 
designer of emerging technologies has, at least for now, a broad canvas 
to explore. How we bring our current skills to bear on new problems, 
how we determine new subjects to learn, and how we integrate with 
burgeoning new industries will all play a part in the way our emerging 
design practices form.
What competencies will be most important for the designer in these 
new areas? What approaches will be most effective for managing the 
disruptive power of emerging technologies? What thinking processes 
will help the designer negotiate the technical, social, and ethical com­
plexities that emerging technology will inevitably present? As a first 
attempt at answering these questions, the tenets that follow articulate 
some high-level guidelines for creative thinking and process develop­
ment, drawing broad-based inspiration from related professional fields, 
including architecture, art, ethnography, engineering, and most of all, 
user experience. Although these tenets are certainly also applicable to 
knowledge work in a general sense—for the scientist, technologist, 
or entrepreneur—we will consider them in the context of design for 
emerging technology.

10  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
1. IDENTIFY THE PROBLEMS CORRECTLY
The gap between the problems we face as a species and the seemingly 
unlimited potential of technologies ripe for implementation begs for 
considered but agile design thinking and practice. Designers should be 
problem identifiers, not just problem solvers searching for a solution to 
a pre-established set of parameters. We must seek to guide our technol­
ogy, rather than just allow it to guide us.
On the cover of the November/December 2012 issue of MIT Technology 
Review, the shortcomings of the past decade’s technological achieve­
ments are expressed in the damning headline dramatically super­
imposed in white type over the bemused portrait of astronaut Buzz 
Aldrin: “You Promised Me Mars Colonies. Instead I Got Facebook.” 
The subhead elaborates tellingly: “We’ve stopped solving big problems. 
Meet the technologists who refuse to give up.” The accompanying arti­
cle “Why We Can’t Solve Big Problems”7 details some of the current 
limitations in American culture, finance, and politics that, since the 
Apollo moonshot, have relegated big thinking and technical aspira­
tions to the sidelines. The author, however, concludes the following:
7	 Jason Pontin. “Why We Can’t Solve Big Problems.” MIT Technology Review, October 24, 
2012 (http://bit.ly/1CJ2zJ9).

 1. Designing for Emerging Technologies   |  11
It’s not true that we can’t solve big problems through technology; we 
can. We must. But all these elements must be present: political lead­
ers and the public must care to solve a problem, our institutions must 
support its solution, it must really be a technological problem, and we 
must understand it.
We are on the cusp of a new technological age, saddled with the prob­
lems of the previous one, demanding that as we step forward we do not 
make the same mistakes. To do this, we must identify the right chal­
lenges to take on: the significant and valuable ones. Chief among our 
concerns must be the environment, not only in reducing the carbon we 
release as a result of consumption and seeking new sources of energy, 
but also in understanding the effects of a growing global population, 
against the backdrop of limited resources. We must also improve human 
health and consider the ramifications as humans live longer lives. And, 
we must find new ways to manufacture goods and produce food and 
clean water for a planet currently with 7.2 billion inhabitants—a popu­
lation that is projected to explode in the next 35 years by an additional 
2.4 billion, reaching 9.6 billion by 2050, according to the UN report, 
“World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision.”8 Recognizing these 
major challenges for humanity in the twenty-first century and seeking 
proactive solutions, even in significant areas such as the environment, 
energy, health, manufacturing, agriculture, and water usage, will not 
be an obvious or easy task. 
We can see an example of this in the tragic events of the Fukushima 
meltdown. On March 11, 2011, a 9.0 magnitude earthquake and sub­
sequent tsunami damaged the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactors in 
Japan. Over the course of 24 hours, crews tried desperately to fix the 
reactors. However, as, one by one, the backup safety measures failed, 
the fuel rods in the nuclear reactor overheated, releasing dangerous 
amounts of radiation into the surrounding area. As radiation levels 
became far too high for humans, emergency teams at the plant were 
unable to enter key areas to complete the tasks required for recovery. 
Three hundred thousand people had to be evacuated from their homes, 
some of whom have yet to return.
8	 United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2013). 
World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision (http://esa.un.org/wpp/).

12  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
The current state of the art in robotics is not capable of surviving the 
hostile, high-radiation environment of a nuclear power plant meltdown 
and dealing with the complex tasks required to assist a recovery effort. 
In the aftermath of Fukushima, the Japanese government did not 
immediately have access to hardened, radiation-resistant robots. A few 
robots from American companies—tested on the modern battlefields 
of Afghanistan and Iraq—including iRobot’s 710 Warrior and PackBot 
were able to survey the plant.9 The potential for recovery-related tasks 
that can and should be handled by advanced robotics is far greater than 
this. However, for many reasons, spanning political, cultural, and sys­
temic, before the Fukushima event, an investment in robotic research 
was never seriously considered. The meltdown was an unthinkable 
catastrophe, one that Japanese officials thought could never happen, 
and as such, it was not even acknowledged as a possible scenario for 
which planning was needed.
The Fukushima catastrophe inspired the United States Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) to create the Robotics 
Challenge, the purpose of which is to accelerate technological devel­
opment for robotics in the area of disaster recovery. Acknowledging 
the fragility of our human systems and finding resilient solutions 
to catastrophes—whether it’s the next super storm, earthquake, or 
nuclear meltdown—is a problem on which designers, engineers, and 
technologists should focus.
In the DARPA competition mission statement, we can see the framing 
of the challenge in human terms.
History has repeatedly demonstrated that humans are vulnerable to 
natural and man-made disasters, and there are often limitations to 
what we can do to help remedy these situations when they occur. 
Robots have the potential to be useful assistants in situations in which 
humans cannot safely operate, but despite the imaginings of science 
fiction, the actual robots of today are not yet robust enough to func­
tion in many disaster zones nor capable enough to perform the most 
basic tasks required to help mitigate a crisis situation. The goal of 
the DRC is to generate groundbreaking research and development 
9	 Marina Koren. “3 Robots That Braved Fukushima.” Popular Mechanics (http://bit.
ly/1CJ2DZu).

 1. Designing for Emerging Technologies   |  13
in hardware and software that will enable future robots, in tandem 
with human counterparts, to perform the most hazardous activities in 
disaster zones, thus reducing casualties and saving lives.10
The competition, so far, has been successful in its mission to encour­
age innovation in advanced robotics. In the competition trials held in 
December 2013, robots from MIT, Carnegie Mellon, and the Google-
owned Japanese firm, Schaft, Inc., competed at a variety of tasks related 
to disaster recovery, which included driving cars, traversing difficult 
terrain, climbing ladders, opening doors, moving debris, cutting holes 
in walls, closing valves, and unreeling hoses.
2. LEARN CONSTANTLY
Designers will need to understand the implications of science and tech­
nology for people. To do this effectively, we must be able to immerse 
ourselves in new technical domains and learn them quickly. Just as 
our understanding of and empathy for people allows us to successfully 
10	 “DARPA Robotics Challenge.” DRC. http://www.theroboticschallenge.org/ (accessed June 
10, 2014)

14  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
design with a user’s viewpoint in mind, understanding our materi­
als, whether they be pixels or proteins, sensors or servos, enables us 
to bring a design into the world. To achieve this, designers need to be 
early adopters of technology, learning constantly.
The ability to quickly learn new materials and techniques has always 
been one of the most important of a designer’s core competencies. 
However, the speed at which this is expected and at which technolog­
ical change occurs is the critical difference today. How we learn will 
soon become as important a consideration as what we learn. To pre­
pare designers for the new roles that emerging technology will bring, 
schools will need to develop curricula that emphasize continuous learn­
ing as a core competency and provide tools and methods to enable it.
AIGA, the professional association for design, and Adobe Systems, Inc., 
the design software giant, released research, “Defining the Designer of 
2015,” based on the input of 2,500 designers and a variety of experts 
and focused on the future of the field.11
In order to fulfill the expectations placed upon designers in the future, 
they will need to employ a set of skills that include some beyond 
today’s typical scope. No single designer is likely to have all the skills 
required, yet this research revealed the range of competencies that a 
studio or design department, among its full complement of staff, will 
need in order to meet the demands of the future.
Although the AIGA/Adobe survey results focus largely on communi­
cation-related design, it acknowledges that among the competencies 
needed by the designer of 2015, the need for “understanding of and 
ability to utilize tools and technology” and the “ability to be flexible, 
nimble and dynamic in practice.” Ultimately, designers will need to be 
lifetime learners.
11	 “Defining the Designer of 2015.” AIGA. http://www.aiga.org/designer-of-2015/ (accessed 
June 10, 2014)

 1. Designing for Emerging Technologies   |  15
3. THINK SYSTEMICALLY
Increasingly, designers will also need to be system thinkers. As we 
consider the fields of advanced robotics, synthetic biology, or wearable 
technology, the design of the ecosystem will be just as important as the 
design of the product or service itself.
A good example of such a product is Mimo, a next-generation baby-mon­
itoring service that goes far beyond the usual audio and video capabili­
ties in soothing the anxieties of new parents. A startup company led by 
a group of MIT engineering grads called Rest Devices has created an 
ingenious baby “onesie.” It’s a connected product that delivers a stream 
of data including temperature, body position, and respiration informa­
tion, ensuring that mom and dad are fully versed in the minutiae of 
their offspring. What at first glance might seem like the enablement of 
over-parenting paranoia, could, in fact, also provide valuable scientific 
data, particularly given that crib death or SIDS (Sudden Infant Death 
Syndrome) is a phenomenon that is still not fully understood.

16  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
From a design perspective, a company such as Rest Devices has a range 
of needs typical of those startups in the budding wearable technolo­
gies industry. The onesie itself must be designed for both functional 
and aesthetic elements—a mixture of industrial design for the “turtle” 
on-body device that houses the sensor and the fashion design of the 
garment itself. The mobile software application that provides the data 
interface requires interaction design and visual design—not to men­
tion the UX design of the total system, which must be optimized for 
setup and navigation by nervous parents. Whether one person or many 
provide these different design skills for Rest Devices, it’s clear that at 
every point at which people touch the technology, there is ample oppor­
tunity for the interaction to be carefully examined and optimized in 
relation to the entire ecosystem. In this way the Mimo is a good exam­
ple of the first wave of wearable technology. Like the Nike FuelBand, 
the Fitbit, and even the Recon heads-up ski display, these wearables 
represent technology embedded into the infrastructure of our lives in 
a way never before seen. But the magic of the consumer experience of 
these products is only possible through the design of a complete, and 
hopefully seamless, ecosystem.
4. WORK AT A VARIETY OF SCALES
Designers should be able work at a variety of scales, from the aforemen­
tioned overall system view, to the nitty-gritty details. Moving between 
these levels will be important, too, as each one informs the other—the 
macro view informs the micro, and vice versa.

 1. Designing for Emerging Technologies   |  17
At the highest level, designers can work proactively with politicians and 
policy makers to effectively regulate new technology. As one example 
of this, in September 2013, the FDA released final guidance on mobile 
medical apps, which was crafted with input from industry experts. 
From bioethics to industrial regulations governing the use of robotics, 
designers will want and need to have input into the realm of policy. Just 
as free markets cannot exist without effective and enforceable contract 
law, so, too, technological advancement cannot exist without sensible, 
effective, and enforceable regulation with a long-term view. Designers 
will need a seat, not just at the computer or the lab bench, but at the 
policy-making table, as well.
At Involution Studios, an experience design firm, we’ve worked with 
healthcare industry clients on emerging technology projects such as 
genomics research software and connected medical devices. As one 
depiction of how design thinking can be utilized at the organizational 
level, one engagement we recently completed for the Personal Genome 
Project (PGP) at Harvard University exemplifies how design research 
tools and techniques can help cutting-edge organizations focus on 
human-centered problems.
Founded in 2005 by George Church, the mission of the Personal 
Genome Project (PGP) is to sequence and publicize the genomes of 
100,000 volunteers for use by the scientific community in the improve­
ment and management of human health and disease. When Involution 
first engaged with the PGP, however, everyone on the team saw the 
organization functioning slightly differently, with different objectives.
It was clear that the volunteer members—those who were donating 
their genome and medical histories—were the type of people who were 
willing to take on great risk to help advance scientific discovery. The 
PGP had done a good job of educating their members on the possible 
perils that could come with publishing their genomic data for the world 
to see. However, the members received little to no feedback on whether 
their information was being used by the scientific community, how it 
was being used, or the potential impact of their contributions. Because 
members could reclaim their contributions at any time, the PGP 
needed to find a way to better nurture these relationships so that the 
project could continue striving toward its goal of 100,000 participants.

18  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Involution and the PGP collaboratively mapped the organization’s eco­
system to better visualize how it was functioning. “It was time for us to 
step back and talk about what that overarching goal was, and we did that 
through this workshop. It was very helpful,” said Jason Bobe, executive 
director of the PGP, who believes the workshop gave his team members 
a forum to tease out their big ideas as well as their roles within the orga­
nization. As a result of sketching, brainstorming, and mapping exer­
cises, the PGP team members were able to see the risks and benefits 
of their organizational model through the lens of the many different 
users they were serving. “We had a team where we had a bunch of ideas 
about what we were doing, but we didn’t have a cohesive, shared under­
standing of how we were going to do everything we wanted to do,” said 
Bobe. With Involution’s help, the team was able to uncover multiple 
challenges that were holding the PGP back. The result from the work­
shop was significant: a complete reimagining of the PGP’s organiza­
tional model, separating member recruitment efforts from data col­
lection and sequencing, and truly focusing on member relationships.
5. CONNECT PEOPLE AND TECHNOLOGY

 1. Designing for Emerging Technologies   |  19
Design should provide the connective tissue between people and tech­
nology. The seamless integration of a technology into our lives is almost 
always an act of great design, coupled with smart engineering; it’s the 
“why” that makes the “what” meaningful. It is through this humane 
expression of technology that the designer ensures a product or service 
is not just a functional experience, but one that is also worthwhile. We 
must consider the outputs of these technologies—what people need 
and want. The designer should ask: “Why are we doing these things? 
How is humanity represented against what’s possible with technol­
ogy?” It is the designer’s duty to be a skeptic for the human side of the 
equation.
For instance, as robots take a greater role in the fields such as manu­
facturing by automating repetitive and dangerous tasks, as well as aug­
menting human abilities, we can see that even though there are many 
benefits, there remains a question as to how such robotic optimization 
can coexist with meaningful work for people in the long term. At first 
glance, the combination of collaborative robotics and agile manufactur­
ing seems to be one potential answer to this problem. Rethink Robotics’ 
Baxter, Yaskawa Motoman’s Dexter Bot, and Universal Robotics’ UR 
are examples of collaborative robots designed with human-like char­
acteristics, flexibility regarding the tasks they can execute, and ease 
of programming, opening up new possibilities for working in tandem 
with human workers on the factory floor. In this model, human labor is 
augmented by, not replaced with, the robotic technologies.
Advanced collaborative robotics could readily provide the flexible sys­
tems required to meet the demands of agile manufacturing. A key 
advantage to robotic manufacturing is its adaptability: robotic produc­
tion lines can be easily modified to accommodate shorter-run, custom­
ized products. We could soon see robots replace expensive dedicated 
industrial machinery made for specific production processes, which 
can be extremely difficult to repurpose when changes to a process are 
required. As a part of this agile manufacturing paradigm, robots with 
the ability to work in collaboration with human beings—in factories, 
warehouses, and other industrial settings—will be a critical compo­
nent. Human workers will be responsible for programming, monitor­
ing, supervising, and otherwise interacting with a robotic workforce 
that is repurposed regularly to handle the creation of custom, short-run 
production.

20  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
6. PROVOKE AND FACILITATE CHANGE
It is not only the designer’s responsibility to smooth transitions and 
find the best way to work things out between people and the technol­
ogy in their lives; it is also the designer’s duty to recognize when things 
are not working, and, rather than smooth over problems, to provoke 
wholesale change. Technological change is difficult and disruptive. 
Even today, there are countless examples of technologies outpacing the 
frameworks for controlling them, resulting in a sense of unease in peo­
ple about the seemingly unprecedented and unchecked advances, from 
digital surveillance encroaching on our privacy to genetically modified 
foods filling our grocery stores. Designers can start the discussion and 
help lead the process of transformation.
As one illustration of this, despite the seemingly unlimited poten­
tial of genomics, or perhaps because of it, the tension between those 
who wish to move the science forward and those cautioning restraint 
is palpable. Take the example of 23andMe, a company that provides 
inexpensive personal DNA sequencing. In November 2013, the United 
States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) shut down the service for 

 1. Designing for Emerging Technologies   |  21
supplying medical interpretation of the DNA data in the reports the 
company issued to its customers.12 Here’s the notice that appeared on 
the 23andMe website:
At this time, we have suspended our health-related genetic tests to 
comply with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s directive to dis­
continue new consumer access during our regulatory review process. 
We are continuing to provide you with both ancestry-related genetic 
tests and raw genetic data, without 23andMe’s interpretation. … We 
remain firmly committed to fulfilling our long-term mission to help 
people everywhere have access to their own genetic data and have the 
ability to use that information to improve their lives.
The FDA’s action brings into question the future regulatory environ­
ment that scientists, entrepreneurs, designers, and engineers could 
encounter in the realm of personalized medicine. The regulator’s 
dilemma for emerging tech is that the rules governing familiar indus­
tries might not apply to technology likely to be disruptive to those indus­
tries. In the case of 23andMe, regulators must balance the benefits of 
customers learning about diseases they carry or are at risk for with 
the dangers of false positives, misuse, or misinterpretation of the data. 
23andMe is disruptive because it provides personal genomic testing 
at a low price point. It also ventures into territory never before seen by 
an industry familiar with expensive testing regimes typically adminis­
tered in a reactive, rather than proactive, manner.
In December 2013, the Presidential Commission for the Study of 
Bioethical Issues released its report, “Anticipate and Communicate: 
Ethical Management of Incidental and Secondary Findings in the 
Clinical, Research, and Direct-to-Consumer Contexts.” This document 
provides guidance on how to manage the issues of incidental and sec­
ondary findings.
How clinicians, researchers and direct-to-consumer companies man­
age incidental and secondary findings will likely touch all of us who 
seek medical care, participate in research, or send a cheek swab to a 
company for a peek at our own genetic make-up,” said Amy Gutmann, 
12	 Chris Welch. “FDA orders 23andMe to halt sales of DNA test kit.” The Verge. http://bit.
ly/1CJ2GEt (accessed June 10, 2014)

22  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Ph.D., Commission Chair. “The reality is that we might find out more 
than we bargained for. Yet practitioners are getting conflicting advice 
about how to manage such findings across contexts and modalities 
such as genetics, imaging, and biological specimen testing. We all 
need to know how to better manage health information we did not 
expect.13
As designers, we need to be engaged in proactive, society-wide conver­
sations such as this so that we can help define safe boundaries and peo­
ple-centric policies ahead of time, rather than trying to figure things 
out—and spend time defending our industries’ very existence—after 
the horse has left the gate.
7. WORK EFFECTIVELY ON CROSS-DISCIPLINARY TEAMS
The challenges inherent in much of emerging technology are far too 
great for an individual to encompass the requisite cross-domain knowl­
edge. For this kind of work, then, the team becomes paramount. It is a 
multidisciplinary mix of scientists, engineers, and designers who are 
best positioned to understand and take advantage of these technolo­
gies. And, it is crucial that these creative disciplines evolve together. 
13	 “Bioethics Commission on Incidental Findings: Anticipate and Communicate.” December 
12, 2013; Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues (http://bioethics.gov/
node/3186)‑

 1. Designing for Emerging Technologies   |  23
From such collaborations new roles will be created: perhaps we will 
soon see a great need for the synthetic biological systems engineer or 
the human-robot interaction designer. This cross-pollination of sci­
ence, design, and engineering is already happening at organizations 
such as the Wyss Institute at Harvard, whose mission is to develop 
materials and devices inspired by nature and biology. Wyss structures 
itself around multidisciplinary teams. Forward-thinking design firms 
such as IDEO have also added synthetic biology to their established 
practices of industrial and digital design.
As an example of this cross-pollination, in a presentation, “Life is 
what you make it,” given at a Friday Evening Discourse at The Royal 
Institution of Great Britain in London, esteemed scientist and Imperial 
College professor Paul Freemont described how biological design could 
take its cues from computer software engineering, using an abstrac­
tion hierarchy for biological design.14 In the design of complex systems, 
an abstraction hierarchy makes it possible for engineers to focus on 
solving the problems at hand because they don’t necessarily need to 
understand the complexity of the lower levels of the hierarchy. In soft­
ware development, for example, engineers can code in Java or C++ and 
not need to understand the machine-level code that ultimately executes 
the program. In the coming revolution in biological design, such an 
abstraction hierarchy will offer bioengineers the capability to operate 
similarly.
Although programming might be an apt analogy for that manipula­
tion of nature, there are fundamental differences between the writing 
of computer code and genetic code. Even if we know the outcome of 
the genetic code we write, the environment into which it is released is 
far more complex than the controlled operating system of a computer 
or mobile device. There is so much unknown about biological sys­
tems that prototyping and testing will be critical steps for responsible 
innovation. Even though designers won’t necessarily need to become 
genetic engineers to contribute to the field of synthetic biology, they’ll 
need to understand the materials just as deeply.
14	 Paul Freemont. “Life is what you make it.” November 29, 2013; The Royal Institution, 
Friday Evening Discourse. (http://bit.ly/1CJ2Mfj).

24  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
At Boston University, the Cross-Disciplinary Integration of Design 
Automation Research (CIDAR) lab is creating bioCAD tools such as 
Clotho, an open source software framework for engineering synthetic 
biological systems. The larger goal for Clotho—named for the Greek 
goddess of Fate who was responsible for spinning the thread of human 
life—is to create standardized data, algorithms, and methodologies for 
synthetic biology. Other software tools such as Genome Compiler and 
Gene Designer aim to improve the process of genome creation from 
design to quality assurance to fabrication. At the intersection of soft­
ware design and genome design, these tools for automating aspects of 
the synth bio process are cross-disciplinary efforts.
8. TAKE RISKS, RESPONSIBLY

 1. Designing for Emerging Technologies   |  25
To find our way forward as designers, we must be willing to take 
risks—relying upon a combination of our education, experience, and 
intuition—which can be crucial to innovation. We must always keep in 
mind both the benefits and consequences for people using these new 
technologies, and be prepared for mixed results.
The Glowing Plant Kickstarter project is a good example of such 
inspired risk taking in action. There is perhaps no technology more 
fraught with perceived peril than genomics and synthetic biology. 
Seeing the opportunity to both inspire and educate the public, a team 
of biochemists started a project to generate a bioluminescent plant, 
which they touted as “the first step in creating sustainable natural light­
ing.” Financed on the crowd-funding website Kickstarter, the Glowing 
Plant project generated so much grassroots excitement that it raised 
$484,013 from 8,433 backers, far exceeding its initial goal of $65,000.
However, soon after the Glowing Plant project finished its campaign, 
Kickstarter, without any explanation, changed its terms for project cre­
ators, banning genetically modified organisms (GMOs) as rewards for 
online backers.15 Glowing Plant, with its project financing already in 
place, might be the last example of crowd-funded synthetic biology for 
a while. Although this incident, in and of itself, might seem minor, 
it’s worth remembering that Kickstarter is the primary resource for 
crowd-funding in the United States. Removing this financial option for 
synthetic biology startups, in a seemingly arbitrary decision, will have 
a chilling effect on future innovators.
The results of the Glowing Plant crowd-funding project illustrate the 
promise and perils of designing for such a disruptive technology as 
synthetic biology. How do we evaluate the risk and reward, in this 
case, knowing the outcome? Even though the team initially received 
immense grassroots enthusiasm and financial backing, they also 
caused the Kickstarter ban, as an established corporate entity reacted 
with fear. During this transition time between fear and acceptance, 
designers of genetically modified organisms, like the team behind the 
Glowing Plant project, will continue to push the envelope of what com­
panies, regulators, and the government find acceptable. It’s safe to say 
15	 Duncan Geere. “Kickstarter bans project creators from giving away genetically-modified 
organisms.” August 2, 2013 (http://bit.ly/1CJ2QvH).

26  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
that until synthetic biology is better understood, policy decisions such 
as this ban will continue to happen. It might be that a willingness to 
push forward and to take risks will be important to making the transi­
tion, to reach public acceptance and ultimately help move the technol­
ogy forward.
Changing Design and Designing Change
People are less interested in the science and engineering, the mech­
anisms that make emerging technologies such as advanced robotics, 
synthetic biology, and the IoT possible, but they are deeply concerned 
with the outcomes. As these technologies emerge, grow, and mature 
over the coming years, designers will have the opportunity to bridge 
human needs and the miraculous technological possibilities.
It will be a great and even intimidating challenge to involve design early 
in the process of defining new products and services, but it will be crit­
ical as we establish the practices of the twenty-first century—from the 
design of technology policy, to systems, to tactical interaction frame­
works and techniques. Policy design will involve advising regulators 
and politicians on the possibilities and perils of emerging tech; system 
design will demand clear understanding of the broader interactions 
and implications that surround the immediate details of a product; and 
framework design will benefit our day-to-day tactical work, providing a 
foundation for designers and design practice to come. What all of these 
technologies will create, as they evolve together, remains to be seen. 
But, the most interesting discoveries will be at the intersections.
Understanding new technologies, their potential usage, and how they 
will impact people in the short and long term will require education 
and collaboration, resulting in new design specializations, many of 
which we have not yet even considered. In the coming years, as the 
boundaries between design and engineering for software, hardware, 
and biotechnology continue to blur, those who began their professional 
lives as industrial designers, computer engineers, UX practitioners, 
and scientists will find that the trajectory of their careers takes them 
into uncharted territory. Like the farmers who moved to the cities to 
participate in the birth of the Industrial Revolution, we can’t imagine 
all of the outcomes of our work. However, if history is any indicator, 
the convergence of these technologies will be greater than the sum of 
its parts. If we are prepared to take on such challenges, we only have to 
ask: “What stands in the way?”

27
[ 2 ]
Intelligent Materials: Designing 
Material Behavior
BROOK KENNEDY
Bits and Atoms
Will bits eventually control atoms? It is certainly tempting to think so—
digital tools mediate ever-increasing parts of our physical environment. 
Walk down any urban street these days and you will see droves of peo­
ple glued to their devices—checking their messages, posting photos, 
even turning their heat down at home, all digitally—while being com­
pletely oblivious to the world of atoms around them. And, this is only 
the beginning. Sure, the physical design of our gadgets might earn our 
admiration and devotion, but isn’t it what happens on the screen that 
really commands our attention? Just as the iPhone represents iconic 
industrial design now, it could just as easily be remembered one day 
as a milestone in the inevitable shift to bits from atoms. After all, who 
needs a wallet, a clock, a map or even a flashlight when “there’s an app 
for that”?
Science fiction films such as Minority Report present future visions of 
digital experiences integrated into our lives to such an extent that the 
physical object disappears altogether—from hardware-free interfaces 
that we control by waving our hands through the air to Google Glass. 
Pervasive computing of this kind will certainly continue to expand into 
all of the activities around us in the home, at the office and in the public 
domain. But what would happen if digital technology were to reenter 
the physical world at the most basic material level? What if changing 
the wallpaper on the walls of your home were just as easy as chang­
ing the wallpaper on your computer desktop? Could the materials of 
products and environments themselves actually “behave” more like the 

28  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
dynamic screens with which we interact? At some point in the not-so-
distant future, the answer will be yes. Converging knowledge at the 
intersection of biology, additive manufacturing, and computing are 
driving new research frontiers such as adaptive materials and program­
mable matter that might bring about this future. For the purpose of this 
chapter, we will call these new fields Intelligent Materials—when com­
bined, the outcome of these emerging research areas will have a huge 
impact on physical design.
In traditional physical design disciplines such as architecture and 
industrial design, understanding materials has always been an import­
ant foundation in learning the craft. Materials have unique proper­
ties that are employed to construct buildings or mass-manufacture 
the products we have traditionally relied on in our daily lives. Stone, 
wood, metals, plastics, and composites are harvested, quarried, forged, 
and synthesized in a chemical facility, or a combination thereof. When 
delivered, physical designers will then shape, mill, mold, and manipu­
late these materials into an assembly of other parts to create a finished 
product. Materials are selected for their inherent properties whether 
those properties are appearance, strength, elasticity, translucency, or 
any other combination of desired qualities that are suitable for the 
intended use case of a designed object. Materials frequently perform 
a specialized function by means of their chemical properties but often 
with an undesirable trade-off of toxicity or recyclability. The resound­
ing pattern here is that materials are basically static and designers have 
to accept their properties and limitations and compromise accordingly.
In coming decades, we will see a fundamental evolution in the mean­
ing of the word material. Materials will be able to be optimized to a 
particular purpose by fine-tuning the microscopic physical surface 
structure rather than by altering their chemistry. More to the point, 
we will also see the introduction of more materials that can change 
on demand through devices or computer control to fit our needs. Just 
as screen technologies such as LCD and E-Ink can change quickly to 
display moving images, physical material properties like color, translu­
cency, the ability to repel or attract water, and even the ability to change 
shape will be controllable by the user, mediated by embedded sensors 
and computers. These new advances are beginning to be brought about 
by accomplishments in the sciences and engineering that would not 
be possible without their deep interdisciplinary collaboration. The 
outcome of this work will have considerable implications on what the 

 2. Intelligent Materials: Designing Material Behavior   |  29
world looks like in the coming decades. At that time, physical designers 
will have a greater ability to design the materials themselves, not just 
the physical artifacts that the materials are used to make.
We will also see fields of design continue to evolve beyond their tradi­
tional silos. Just as physical designers have crossed the boundary into 
digital experiences from atoms to bits to create broader, richer user 
experiences (UX), digital and interaction designers will similarly be 
able to design the UX of changeable physical materials and products. 
Bits will control atoms.
INSPIRED BY NATURE AT A SMALL SCALE: MATERIAL 
PROPERTIES FROM MICROTEXTURES
In recent decades, life scientists around the world have made aston­
ishing discoveries about how nature endures in the most challenging 
environments by evolving high-performance physical “technologies” 
that operate on a microscopic and even molecular level—and all with­
out damaging the environment. As recently as the past decade some 
researchers have uncovered how these microtextures on the skins and 
bodies of living organisms in the plant and animal kingdoms can be 
adapted or applied to human problems. Let me give you a few examples.
Sharklet Technologies, a startup company based in Aurora, Colorado, 
has discovered that shark skin is often composed of microundulating 
scale structures called denticles that perform two remarkable functions 
at once: they prevent bacterial colonization and improve hydrodynamic 
performance. At the outset of Sharklet’s breakthrough research for the 
United States Navy, founder Dr. Anthony Brennan of the University of 
Florida was exploring alternative solutions for cleaning algae from the 
hulls of warships.1 This was a huge concern because buildup of algae 
impacts cruising-speed performance and is costly and time consum­
ing to remove in dry dock. Additionally, toxic biocidal chemical treat­
ments are frequently used to remove the algae, which the Navy was 
under increasing pressure to abandon. Dr. Brennan discovered that 
shark skin has a microtexture that bacteria and other microorganisms 
could not stick to, and as a result, bacterial colonies could not form. 
This helps reduce drag and increase swimming performance, which 
give sharks an advantage over their prey while also helping them to 
1	 Sharklet (http://www.sharklet.com)

30  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
dodge predators. When this phenomenon was translated into a proto­
type of a new type of material, it not only met the Navy’s goals, but it 
also offered the promise of an additional, more significant application: 
antifouling of this sort could be useful in hospitals where infectious 
diseases are frequently spread. Sharklet Safe Touch was born, proving 
advantageous over chemical spray solutions that had been traditionally 
used in healthcare environments by preventing bacterial colonization 
rather than killing it after the fact. Killing bacteria with germicides 
has the distinct disadvantage of creating resistant super bugs such as 
MRSA and others.
Lotusan paint, developed by STO in Germany, is another example of 
a product for which microscopic texture yields a specific benefit based 
on a biological model. As the name suggests, Lotusan was inspired 
by the intricate surface texture of Lotus leaves, which have long been 
known for their ability to shed water and dirt. Reproducing the small, 
imperceptible hydrophobic texture drove the design and development 
of a paint, which naturally repels dirt from surfaces, an attribute that 
is very useful in public spaces that need to be cleaned and maintained, 
usually with toxic chemical detergents and monkey grease. Lotusan 
also reduces the amount of water and energy exerted to maintain sur­
faces, which is a welcome quality for cash-strapped municipalities.
Unfortunately, the production of Lotusan paint is also complex and 
expensive due to the scale of the physical features required to enable 
the hydrophobic effect.2 At Harvard’s Wyss Institute for Biologically 
Inspired Engineering, a team of researchers led by Dr. Joanna 
Aizenberg has developed a potential improvement in a material called 
SLIPS (Slippery Liquid-Infused Porous Surfaces), which is able to do 
many of the things Lotusan can and more.3 In addition to water, SLIPS 
can repel oils and other liquids. It is modeled after the surfaces of a 
Nepenthes Pitcher Plant flower, which captures insect prey (and eats 
them!) by causing them to slip and fall into a chamber where they are 
unable to escape. Just as with Lotusan, when used on fabrics, proto­
types of coatings that use a microscaled porous, textured solid—in this 
case infused with lubricating film—have demonstrated the ability to 
repel wine, blood, and every other imaginable liquid that could stain or 
2	 Lotusan (http://www.lotusan.com)
3	 Wyss Institute of Biologically Inspired Engineering (http://wyss.harvard.edu)

 2. Intelligent Materials: Designing Material Behavior   |  31
congregate on a surface. Imagine children’s clothing that would never 
stain! Another advantage of SLIPS, according to Aizenberg, is that the 
effect can be created by using existing materials and continues to func­
tion even after being scratched or abused.
In contrast, other examples of microtextures and features have been 
found that promote “dry adhesion” or stickiness without a chemi­
cal substrate. Biologist Robert Full of the University of California, 
Berkeley studied how geckos can climb flat walls without falling as 
humans would. At the core of this superhuman ability are nanome­
ter scale keratin hairs (setae) on their toes that adhere to surfaces by 
means of intermolecular forces. To substantiate this hypothesis, Dr. 
Full asked Stanford engineering professor Mark Cutkowsky to develop 
a robot and subsequently a human climbing suit based on the princi­
ples of gecko toes. The demonstrations of this remarkable technology 
(which you can see on YouTube) have inspired other research teams to 
investigate other superhuman animal qualities for their potential com­
mercial application. However, later follow-up articles about the gecko 
technology have suggested that the robots only work on clean surfaces 
and would require greater finesse to work on more uneven or textured 
surfaces. Smaller hairs like those actually on the gecko’s feet would 
help, but again the tiny scale and reliability of these hairs are difficult 
to reproduce and maintain. In the meantime, the technology is being 
translated into a potential reusable dry adhesive.
Maintenance is certainly a concern with microscopic-scale features that 
are delicate and potentially broken. Whereas complex natural organisms 
have the biological means to regrow fine hairs on a gecko toe, regen­
erative materials are an entirely new level of complexity to challenge 
human ingenuity. Notwithstanding, successful experiments have been 
made to create regenerative materials such as self-healing concrete that 
is able to fill its own small cracks with resin to prevent fractures from 
becoming bigger problems requiring costly maintenance.
These are only a few of a growing library of examples of biologi­
cally inspired microtextures and features that could spur on innova­
tive materials and design in exciting and impactful ways. But before 
this can happen, in many cases economical manufacturing capability 
needs to catch up with the discoveries being made. Biological func­
tion frequently operates at a smaller (microscopic), more intricate scale, 
which is difficult to reproduce reliably in large quantity using current 

32  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
methods of manufacturing. Traditional production methods—plas­
tic injection molding, casting, milling, and machining—are limited 
to a certain level of scale, detail, and resolution, but the technology is 
changing quickly. With recent rapid advancements in the scale and res­
olution of additive manufacturing, the potential to emulate these bio­
logical properties will likely soon be feasible.
Emerging Frontiers in Additive Manufacturing
Popular media coverage about additive manufacturing—or as it’s more 
commonly known, 3D printing—has produced tremendous excitement 
and speculation about what it will mean in the future when everyone 
has access to it. The current reality is that consumer 3D printing is just 
in its infancy with limited capabilities. Complex shapes can be created, 
but only out of a few solid and elastomeric-based materials at a time and 
at a low resolution. This might help you custom design and print a plas­
tic smartphone case but it is far from being able to print a smartphone 
itself, with a display, battery, printed circuit board, and other materials 
layered and assembled together. But, what if 3D printers could use a 
wide assortment of different materials, from plastics and electronics 
to living cells and semiconductors, mixing and matching the materials 
with microscopic precision? The ability to print all of these materials 
is currently being explored in labs across the world, and the abilities of 
the technology are changing with increasing rapidity.
Materials scientists, such as Dr. Jennifer Lewis at Harvard’s Wyss 
Institute, are developing the chemistry and machines to make this kind 
of multimaterial 3D printing possible. She prints intricately shaped 
objects from “the ground up,” precisely adding materials that are useful 
for their mechanical properties, electrical conductivity, or optical traits. 
This means 3D printing technology could make objects that sense and 
respond to their environment. As Lewis says, “Integrating form and 
function is the next big thing that needs to happen in 3D printing.”4
Others are taking a different approach by trying to use the process of 
additive manufacturing itself to create a variety of performance prop­
erties from one material through the arrangement, topography, and 
structure of a single material. Neri Oxman, a veritable Renaissance 
4	 Jennifer Lewis, Wyss Institute (http://wyss.harvard.edu/viewpage/412)

 2. Intelligent Materials: Designing Material Behavior   |  33
woman at MIT with degrees spanning Architecture and Computational 
Design, has been exploring the synergy of biological approaches to cre­
ating structure and 3D printing. Rather than relying only on different 
material chemistries to produce desired properties, some of her work is 
placing the onus on surface topography to produce the desired material 
properties. Carpal Skin, an experimental carpal tunnel therapy glove, 
is 3D printed for a patient according to the “pain map” that individual is 
experiencing. The pain map then corresponds to the surface geometry 
of the glove, offering flex and support tailored to the user’s condition.5
Also at MIT, Dr. Markus Buehler has been investigating how different 
material properties can be encoded at a molecular scale by using basic 
chemical building blocks. In his words:
Proteins are the main building blocks of life—universally composed of 
merely about 20 distinct amino acids—realize a diversity of material 
properties that provide structural support, locomotion, energy and 
material transport, to ultimately yield multifunctional and mutable 
materials. Despite this functional complexity, the makeup of biological 
materials is often simple and has developed under extreme evolution­
ary pressures to facilitate a species’ survival in adverse environments. 
As a result, materials in biology are efficiently created with low energy 
consumption, under simple processing conditions, and are exquisite 
as they often form from a few distinct, however abundantly available, 
repeating material constituents.6
The significance of Dr. Buehler’s work here lies in understanding how 
material properties could eventually be designed through their molec­
ular arrangement and then fabricated to meet a desired human appli­
cation. Being able to create materials in this manner from chemically 
benign building blocks could revolutionize material science.
Micro Manufacturing
So far, we have shown how science has advanced considerably in under­
standing how materials can deliver remarkable performance proper­
ties, but this is only half of what will lead to creating new materials. 
5	 Neri Oxman, Mediated Matter Group (http://www.media.mit.edu/research/groups/
mediated-matter)
6	 http://web.mit.edu/mbuehler/www/

34  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Additive manufacturing at a nano scale is still very experimental, so 
the kinds of material construction that Dr. Buehler’s work suggests is 
still far from being feasible to produce in any mass volume. But, the 
ability to manufacture at a smaller scale continues to develop. Newer 
additive manufacturing techniques such as Micro Laser Sintering 
(MLS) are pushing the boundaries of small-scale production to the 
level of micrometers and smaller. These have been used to produce 
insect-sized flying robots and microfluidic medical devices, but they 
also have been used to experiment with microtexturing and self-assem­
bled structures. Going back to the example of shark skin, researchers 
under Dr. George Lauder at Harvard’s Wyss Institute have just recently 
managed to scan and recreate the shark skin’s denticles for the purpose 
of hydrodynamic performance. Different from Sharklet, the goal was 
to re-create an array of the denticles’ geometry at actual scale to see if 
it would perform. Using a state-of-the-art 3D printer that is capable of 
printing multiple materials simultaneously at a tiny scale, Dr. Lauder’s 
team succeeded in achieving a 6 percent efficiency increase with their 
prototype when compared against a control model without the texture.
Dynamic Structures and Programmable Matter
On an architectural scale, designers have been keenly interested in the 
ability to change the shape or properties of a building in some man­
ner to respond to environmental conditions. Sun load in particular is a 
large source of interior heat generation and is usually counteracted with 
mechanical air conditioning systems, at enormous energy cost. This 
inspired architects such as Achim Menges (University of Stuttgart)7 
and Doris Sung (University of Southern California)8 to explore pas­
sive dynamic facades that open and close in response to humidity and 
heat load, respectively, to allow (or prohibit) water and air from passing 
through. Yet there have not been widely successful efforts yet to con­
trol external façade systems like these with automated intelligent sys­
tems—although many are trying.9 One example developed by kinetic 
7	 Achim Menges, Center for Design Computation, University of Stuttgart (http://icd.uni-
stuttgart.de/?cat=6)
8	 Doris Sung, USC (http://arch.usc.edu/faculty/dsung)
9	 French architect Jean Nouvel’s celebrated Arab Institute in Paris (1988) employed a façade 
system composed of an array of electronically controlled oculi, like camera lenses, to 
control the heat gain in the building from daily sunlight (http://www.imarabe.org).

 2. Intelligent Materials: Designing Material Behavior   |  35
sculptor Chuck Hoberman’s Adaptive Building Initiative called adap­
tive fritting hints at least at the possibilities of this kind of dynamic 
intelligent control.10 Many more projects like these are undoubtedly in 
the works and are bound to become more prevalent with the accessibil­
ity of electronic prototyping tools such as Arduinos and Raspberry Pis.
It is especially exciting to think about the possibilities of creating 
dynamic computer control of physical materials at the micrometer 
scale. Again, biology has provided some of the vision of what these 
kinds of complex dynamic materials could do. Biologists have been fas­
cinated by the changeable behaviors of certain organism’s bodies and 
skin. Bioluminescent organisms from the deepest parts of the ocean 
are able to control their luminescence on demand for communication 
and protection. Similarly, several organisms, including the octopus, 
have the ability to change the appearance of their skin entirely for the 
purpose of camouflage. Roger Hanlon and David Gallo, scientists at 
the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, along with other research­
ers, have begun to learn how these underwater creatures are able to 
achieve this effect.11 It is a complicated system, but one that the United 
States Defense Department and fashion designers alike would be inter­
ested in emulating: the ability to change the color, texture, and shape of 
your clothing to match your environment or to change your appearance 
to fit any occasion.
Similar to the processes of an octopus, technology giant Qualcomm 
developed a digital screen technology called Mirasol based on the con­
trollable light reflectance behaviors of butterfly wings. Unlike energy 
intensive LCDs, Qualcomm explored how reflecting light using micro­
mirrors could produce color. In this case, electric charge is used to con­
trol the angles of these “mirrors.” After several years of development, 
Qualcomm made the decision to shelve the technology for a famil­
iar reason: the challenges involved in production made the cost too 
high and unreliable. But, just as we saw in the examples earlier, rapid 
advancements in additive manufacturing scale and resolution com­
bined with programmability will reduce the barriers to producing such 
a technology.
10	 Chuck Hoberman, Adaptive Building Initiative (http://www.adaptivebuildings.com)
11	 Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (http://www.whoi.edu)

36  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
At present, there are numerous experimental frontiers in program­
mable matter, which we will begin to see realized and manufactured. 
Research teams at MIT, Carnegie Mellon University, Cornell, and other 
universities have been pushing the boundaries in this field. Part sci­
ence fiction (think of the T-1000 model android in Terminator 2) but 
also a tangible reality, these efforts endeavor to build structures from 
the micro scale and up that can fold, shape-shift, and otherwise recon­
figure their form from the bottom up to fit any number of applications. 
There are many new efforts in this area: at Carnegie Mellon, a pro­
grammable matter proposal called “Claytronics” (http://www.cs.cmu.
edu/%7Eclaytronics/movies/carDesign_12_vo_H264.mov) is being 
explored for collaborative design visualization applications. In this wild 
concept, physical objects themselves would be able to transform into 
different shapes according to human or environmental input.12 Teams 
working in product development could use this tool to collaborate in 
the refinement of a physical design. One possible near-term application 
for this kind of technology is so called “morphing wings,” which are 
being researched by NASA. This technology explores the flight control 
potential of airplane wings that respond to flight conditions by trans­
forming fluidly from one airfoil form to another. Rather than pivoting 
like a swept wing, morphing wings could optimize their form in lim­
itless ways.
In a similar defense-related contract, but with a more tangible result, 
an interdisciplinary team of researchers from MIT and Harvard, work­
ing in conjunction with the United States Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA) have been developing folding origami struc­
tures that self-fold and assemble into different physical configurations 
under computer control. The significance of projects like these sug­
gests a future wherein human-made structures could dynamically fold 
and change shape—imagine a dynamic building façade with embed­
ded solar panels that can simultaneously track the sun while changing 
shade levels to control heat gain. This is the future of intelligent matter.
12	 Claytronics, Carnegie Mellon University (http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~claytronics/)

 2. Intelligent Materials: Designing Material Behavior   |  37
Connecting the Dots: What Does 
Intelligent Matter Mean for Designers?
As we have just seen, many of these developments between biology, 
manufacturing, and computing lead toward a new era and new defi­
nition of what it could mean to be a designer of “physical things.” Just 
as societies have progressed through ages based on mastery of materi­
als—the Stone Age, Bronze Age, and more recently, the Plastic Age—
perhaps we are seeing even more evidence that we stand at the dawn 
of a new age. Instead of being defined and constrained by a material, 
in the decades to come we stand to define the materials that will be all 
around us. Could this be the dawn of the Intelligent Materials Age? If 
this is so, where does the designer fit into this new age, especially the 
designer of physical artifacts? Let’s consider some possible scenarios 
about how the designer might approach their field.
DESIGNING MATERIAL BEHAVIORS
Imagine buildings with dynamic structures and programmable, func­
tional material properties such as the aformentioned Lotusan or SLIPS 
being applied throughout the structure’s environment at every scale. 
Let’s examine a couple of potential applications.
Rainwater management in civic spaces and building exteriors
What if every expansive surface on a building could be optimized to 
control how water behaves? Depending on how much it has rained or 
snowed, buildings might want to adapt dynamically to how they react 
to water. If rain has been sporadic, perhaps a building would want to 
capture the water and store it for internal use. Maybe the roof and gut­
ters could mechanically expand or unfurl, similar to a morphing wing, 
to collect more water. On the other hand, if it has been raining nor­
mally or perhaps excessively, roof materials would be designed to shed 
the water quickly by increasing the hydrophobicity to minimize leaks. 
Wall surfaces could repel water and dirt and never need cleaning; sub­
way stations and underpasses could be lower maintenance and (mostly) 
graffiti-free. Indoors, some of the most reviled rooms could also be 
lower maintenance or even maintenance free, such as the bathroom.

38  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Building interior spaces and water management
Imagine maintenance-free bathroom surfaces for showers, tubs, sinks, 
and even toilets! By maintenance-free, I mean surfaces that would not 
need to be scrubbed: vertical surfaces or tiles would be manufactured 
with hydrophobic microtextures to deter water minerals, soap, and other 
residue from collecting. Other banes such as tile grout mildew would 
have a harder time growing if these surfaces would dry more easily 
on their own. Toilets and sinks could maintain their clean appearance 
with less water use to clean them. Think about what it would mean for 
our health and watershed if we could drastically cut down on the harsh 
chemistry and water required to clean a bathroom.
Shower floors would present a slightly different challenge. A shower 
floor would need simultaneous or changeable properties—the ability to 
shed water on one hand, but also provide grip for safety. By rearranging 
the microtexture of the floor, grip level might be something that could 
“turn on” the same way you turn on the hot water or the lights. Perhaps 
the floor’s “grip mode” would activate when a sensor detected a person 
in the shower space.
Because these textures are so small and invisible, how would a designer 
communicate the presence of these attributes? Although advanced 
additive manufacturing will be able to custom texture materials to con­
trol these performance qualities, the designer’s task in this case would 
be to communicate that grip is “on” or “off.” Rather than using an obvi­
ous indicator like a red light to communicate that a floor is slippery, 
how could a programmable material communicate physically that it is 
slippery even if you cannot “see” slipperiness?
Similar programmable intelligent materials with on-off modes could 
find practical applications in the kitchen. Consider, for example, 
the design of dishware, flatware, and cookware that is often cleaned 
in dishwashers. Many types of plastic, metal, and ceramics (such as 
ceramic tile in the shower) retain residual water on their surfaces. After 
a dishwasher cycle is complete these products sometimes need to be 
hand dried, which could be a time-consuming extra step. Commercial 
chemical rinse agents such as Jet-Dry solve this issue but have not been 
tested conclusively for toxicity. In the age of intelligent matter, this vari­
able of hydrophobicity or water dispersal might be able to be tuned in 
or turned on, and design decisions will have to be made to balance or 
find the right places to do this. If placed on the outside of a bowl, water 

 2. Intelligent Materials: Designing Material Behavior   |  39
could disperse, but the designer might not want to coat the inside of 
the bowl in order to avoid liquid foods such as soup or cereal sloshing 
out and making a mess. Perhaps a dishwasher might be able to activate 
a hydrophobic texture in a wash cycle using a magnetic field, which 
would allow residue to disperse in the washer without interfering with 
the eating experience during mealtime.
DESIGNING MODES FOR PHYSICAL PRODUCTS
Beyond water management, physical products of all kinds will have the 
opportunity to adopt dynamic behavior. More than the bimodal scenar­
ios discussed in the last section, products could have multiple, if not 
limitless, states and modes. Like the shape-shifting ability of the octo­
pus, what if our shoes could “adapt” to different weather conditions, 
seasonal activities, and social occasions, freeing us to own fewer pairs? 
If it were raining heavily outside, perhaps your shoes could adapt to be 
impermeable to water like a rubber boot or perhaps be hydrophobic to 
drive water away. If it were hot out, the shoe could become structur­
ally more porous to allow your feet to breathe better. Perhaps the color 
and texture could also change to reflect the context and formality of 
the social environment. If it were to snow, the sole of your shoes could 
change texture to provide traction on slick surfaces.
DESIGNING PHYSICAL BEHAVIORS IN PHYSICAL PRODUCTS
Thomas Heatherwick, principle of Heatherwick Studio, has a dis­
tinct body of work along with some other pioneering firms that have 
begun to explore the unique considerations involved in designing phys­
ical design behavior. One of his iconic commissions, Rolling Bridge 
(2004), a pedestrian drawbridge in London, is unremarkable in its open 
and closed states, but when it moves, it all changes. Watching the lob­
ster-shell design roll up or unroll is both surprising and remarkable to 
behold. As design and architecture become more expressively dynamic 
such as this bridge, designers will need to consider how a structure 
like this opens, not just that it opens, and how it needs to look or be 
constructed. You can make a bridge appear friendly and trustworthy 
in form and materials, but how can the motion of its unfurling build 
confidence in a user? How can you make the nuances of motion appear 
friendly or inviting? Could the bridge make you laugh? Could it slowly 
accelerate, or speed up and then decelerate to a gentle stop?

40  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
In the same way that interaction designers create digital experiences 
that behave in context or brand-appropriate ways (think of the slow, 
“breathing” pulse of an Apple power indicator light when a computer 
is sleeping), product designers will also be faced with the opportunity 
to bring these dynamic behaviors to the physical world. This is where 
the act of being a physical designer will surely evolve. In designing the 
personality with which a transition is made between modes, physical 
designers will have to think more like animators, choreographers, or 
any other design field involving motion.
One area in which motion plays a critical role today is in the behav­
ioral design of safety lighting, such as that on trains, planes, and emer­
gency vehicles. In the 1950s, the average police car had a single, slowly 
revolving light indicating engagement in a pursuit—hardly urgent in 
its behavior and not terribly good at attracting attention. Today, police 
cars and ambulances use fast moving, abrupt, pulsating LEDs and 
sound bursts to capture your attention. Beyond the bright lights and 
loud sounds, it is the motion and transition of these cues that define a 
behavior suitable for emergencies.
In a recent industrial design studio, I challenged my students to create 
a piece of safety equipment for bicyclists to help promote better visibil­
ity on the road. Of the many different approaches the students took, one 
concept emerged that I believe forecasts considerations designers will 
face in the near future. Called the “puffer jackets,” the student envi­
sioned a vest that would emulate the behavior of a puffer fish, which 
uses physical parts of its body to startle and repel predators. The design 
proposed electronically controlled mechanics as used in experimental 
fashion design by Studio XO and Hussein Chalayan. The design would 
inflate an area of the jacket on command with reflectors, thereby mak­
ing the cyclist look bigger and more noticeable (this was a short con­
ceptual user experience project). In the ensuing development of this 
idea, the class reached a significant conclusion: what really mattered in 
the design was less the visual quality of the vest and more the motion 
behavior transitioning from a normal state to the attention-grabbing 
mode. In a future of dynamic intelligent matter, these kinds of consid­
erations will only continue to grow in importance.

 2. Intelligent Materials: Designing Material Behavior   |  41
Conclusion
Much of what I’ve been discussing has focused on technical possibility 
and, to a lesser extent, ecological implications of the future of materials 
and what it means for design. Of course, no design should proceed just 
because it is simply novel and feasible—design should always be con­
cerned with what should be done. Is it desirable? Does it fulfill a need? 
Is the world going to be better off with it? That said, altogether the 
implications ahead of these technologies are huge. In an age of intelli­
gent matter, physical design will no longer be three-dimensional and 
static. The fourth dimension, time, and behavior will come to the phys­
ical tactile world just as it has existed in the digital realm to date, and 
designers will need to think about the possibilities and opportunities 
to create meaningful user experiences driven by these new parameters.

