Jim Courtney
TECHNOLOGY IN ACTION™
Experience 
Skype to 
the Max
The Essential Guide to the 
World’s Leading Internet 
Communications Platform
SECOND EDITION

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For your convenience Apress has placed some of the front 
matter material after the index. Please use the Bookmarks 
and Contents at a Glance links to access them. 
 
 
 
 
 

vii
Contents at a 
Glance
About the Author............................................................................. xv
About the Technical Reviewer....................................................... xvii
Acknowledgments.......................................................................... xix
Introduction.................................................................................... xxi
Chapter 1: People Like to Talk!
■
■
....................................................... 1
Chapter 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
■
■
.................. 17
Chapter 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
■
■
.......................... 41
Chapter 4: Using Skype in Business—Use Cases
■
■
......................... 55
Chapter 5: Using Skype on the Desktop
■
■
....................................... 63
Chapter 6: Using Skype on Mobile Devices
■
■
................................ 117
Chapter 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and  
■
■
Mobile Phones............................................................................ 129
Chapter 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
■
■
....................... 145
Chapter 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
■
■
...... 159

Contents at a Glance
viii
Chapter 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles,  
■
■
and Peripherals.......................................................................... 173
Chapter 11: Building Geographically Dispersed  
■
■
Teams Over Skype...................................................................... 189
Chapter 12: Skype on Office 365, Outlook.com and Lync
■
■
........... 205
Chapter 13: The Way Ahead
■
■
........................................................ 217
Appendix A: Glossary
■
■
................................................................. 225
Index.............................................................................................. 231

xxi
Introduction
As a child growing up we lived in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, thousands of 
miles away from our family in Toronto, Ontario. On my father’s $2,000/year 
salary we rarely made calls back to Toronto. Probably on Christmas Day 
and only for five minutes at $2 or $3 per minute; each spoken word was 
valuable but costly. Operators had to place the call. Our phone number had 
at most five digits. Toward the end of our time there the phone companies 
built a microwave tower network across the country with towers every  
50 to 75 miles. The microwave tower network also brought live broadcasting 
across the country; we could actually watch the last two periods of NHL 
games on Saturday night from thousands of miles away.
Fast forward eight years later and we moved to London, Ontario where  
I attended high school. Phone numbers would have two letters and four 
digits such as GL-2522. And to make saying them easier they would actually 
be the starting letters of a longer name such as GLadstone. Within five years 
came the addition of area codes—we lived in 519—and the introduction of 
Direct Distance Dialing, eliminating the need for an operator. Calls were still 
expensive at $1 to $5 per minute, depending on distance. Rotary dials were 
still the standard phone hardware, but they transitioned the phone numbers 
to seven digits—all numbers—such as 451-2522. 
When I moved to the University of Toronto for my Engineering Science 
studies our residence had one rotary dial phone to be shared amongst 
all the members of our residence. Gosh, some of the guys would talk to 
their girlfriends for hours; it was a tension creator. In 1965 (black and white) 
satellite television allowed us to watch live telecasts from Europe in 40 minute 
segments as geostationary orbits were not used yet. So we would get 
segments of Winston Churchill’s funeral interrupted by documentaries about 
his life—and still in black and white only. Overseas long distance calls were 
prohibitively expensive.

Introduction
xxii
Moving on to Graduate School, where I obtained Master and Ph.D. degrees 
in Physics, we saw the advent of color television in Canada. And some 
graduate students would have their own phones in their residence rooms, at 
some exorbitant cost. The university had installed a central switch. Labs and 
offices were assigned four digit “extension” numbers that could be dialed 
for internal calls and you had to dial 9 to start an outbound call. We still had 
a rotary phone in our apartment and one tended to minimize long distance 
calling as it was still relatively expensive. My Ph.D. supervisor let us know 
whenever he saw a long-distance charge against his research grant.
During my time at the University of Toronto I had my first digital computer 
experience. One night a week I ran the University’s IBM 7090 and later  
7094 mainframes with nine tape drives and a huge keyboard. I spent a 
summer at Imperial Oil running linear programming software that determined 
the fracking output requirements of refineries. You booted the machine using 
a 36-key switchboard and entered each of about 30 instructions manually 
(and hoped you didn’t make a mistake). Punch cards were read onto tapes 
via a punch card to tape reader; output was printed on separate chain 
link printers, which were both huge and clunky and located in a separate 
room. Calculations related to my thesis were performed on a HP desktop 
calculator that took up a one foot square footprint.
Having completed graduate school we moved to West Germany where  
I worked for a scientific instrumentation company. All communications with 
North America were made using a Telex service; punch out a paper tape 
and then run it through the machine to send the message that was typed 
out at the other end. During our 18 months there we made one call back to 
Canada, using my employer’s phone, to tell our parents about the birth of 
our son. Because it took 18 months to get phone service installed, we never 
had one. We had to go to a phone booth down the street, put in some coins, 
and then be abruptly cut off when the coins ran out. And you paid for both 
local and long distance calls by the minute. Deutsche Telecom was placing 
the seeds for the rapid adoption of Skype 30 years later.
On moving back to Canada and settling into a townhouse we had to be 
amongst the first to install a touch-tone phone, for which we paid an extra 
couple of dollars per month for the privilege of not blistering your finger using 
a rotary dial. For business it was good etiquette to have a long-distance 
calling card and not use your customer’s phones. Well, with one exception—
when I visited a lab in Ottawa my customer would let me use his phone to 
make calls across the country at no expense over government trunk lines. 
Most of my calls were to federal research grant recipients, so at least they 
were to recipients of government money. But it gave me my first taste of the 
“free” long-distance calling experience.

Introduction
xxiii
Over the next 20 years I traveled not only across Canada and the U.S. 
selling computerized instrumentation and computer peripherals, but also 
to Hong Kong and Australia where I started to get a feel for the overseas 
calling experience, including figuring out country codes and time zone 
differences. While in Sydney we found that the country manager needed to 
be replaced; that involved several “discrete” calls back to my manager in 
California. Hotels would have significant charges for making long-distance 
calls; in fact, they counted on long-distance calling for a significant portion 
of their revenues to pay for maintaining the hotel switch and then some. 
When I completed my Executive MBA in 1985 my new employer set me 
up with one of the first cell phones. It was—a large brick-size device that 
I could only use in my car and involved significant wiring within the car as 
there was also a power supply installed in the trunk. You would not make 
calls when driving because it was too distracting an experience.
During this time I was involved in selling equipment that either used 
embedded mini-computers or embedded processors. One of the items, a 
real-time audio spectrum analyzer gave me lots of experience with audio 
spectrum—that made it easy to understand why telephone calls had such 
bad audio. I sold the last core memory computer sold in Canada for which 
a 4KB memory module cost $2,500. And a 15-inch disc platter would hold 
4MB of data; the disc drive would be a $5,000 expense. Toward the end of 
my time in the scientific instrumentation business I bought an Apple ][  
in order to use spreadsheets for budgeting. While completing my MBA I 
also bought my first Personal Computer—an IBM PC-AT with a 20MB hard 
disk (about a 6˝ cube) and 1MB of RAM; one of my employers actually sold 
memory expansion cards. That also was my first exposure to multi-tasking, 
selling a multi-tasking environment for DOS-PCs, which had 386 or later 
processors that ran each application on internal “virtual machines.”
From 1990 to 1994 I ran the Canadian operation of Quarterdeck Office 
Systems who published the top selling utility for DOS-PCs as well as the 
DESQview multi-tasking environment. I spent the next two years at their 
Santa Monica headquarters where we attempted to enter into the Internet 
software publishing game, including the development of a web browser,  
having bought a license from the University of Illinois. Windows 95 killed  
off our business for those two utilities; some other utilities persisted for  
a couple of years. However the web browser experience taught me a lot  
about the Internet and its potential. In fact, Quarterdeck even brought  
out one of the first Internet calling applications, using Voice over Internet  
Protocol (VoIP) technology (more on that in Chapter 13). However, the Internet  
infrastructure and PC processor technology were not quite ready for mass 
adoption. As for the browser, Microsoft introduced Internet Explorer as one 
component of the Windows 95 operating system, saying the browser was 
a feature, not an independent application. End of our browser business, 

Introduction
xxiv
even though it contained features, such as tabs, that did not appear in IE or 
Firefox for another seven or eight years.
On returning to Canada while remnants of Quarterdeck were being sold 
to Symantec I went into the business plan consulting business, having 
been exposed to the start-up environment while in California. I would bill 
customers anywhere from $100 to $500 per month for long-distance calls 
involved in their activities. And a conference call with five people could run 
up a $100 to $300 bill in minutes (or maybe an hour or so). 
Personal computers continued to advance in processing power; the Internet 
was evolving from dialup connections to broadband (cable and DSL) 
services. You could stay constantly connected to the Internet without tying 
up a phone line. And the first Instant Messaging applications appeared; 
it frustrated my wife to no end that I was exchanging information with my 
daughter at a university residence using ICQ and she was not privy to the 
conversation. But it was my first exposure to the value of ongoing, real-time 
chat conversations.
I had tended to follow developments in VoIP-based calling; in fact, one of 
my clients included it with a screen sharing program they offered. But within 
a year after the launch of Skype in summer 2003 I found myself increasingly 
using Skype from both my home office and during travels. When I once had 
to call a client visiting Norway from a customer’s office in Santa Barbara, 
CA without needing to involve the customer’s staff and phone system, a 
key value of Skype hit me. No cost, no worrying about running up a bill, no 
disruption of the customer’s office activities or having to use a calling card, 
and quite clear voice quality—just needed an Ethernet connection to my 
laptop. In fact, the staff did not even know I had made an overseas call from 
their office.
In 2006 I started publishing posts on Skype Journal; we followed the 
evolution of improved audio quality as well as video calling from a postage 
stamp size 320 × 240 image to high quality 640 × 480 video at 30 frames 
per second. We witnessed the expansion of Skype’s platform support to 
Mac PCs and later to mobile smartphones, initially on the early iPhones. And 
new features evolved; they are discussed in this book. 
During this time I also was involved in consulting engagements that involved 
not only, say, call centers, but also Skype audio and video hardware 
peripherals and its evolution. I also did testing of HD video cameras using 
Skype before they were launched and was involved in the testing of Skype 
for BlackBerry 10. (Yes, I am still a BlackBerry fan but have had lots of 
exposure to not only their devices, past and present, but also iOS and 
Android smartphones and tablets.)

Introduction
xxv
So we come to today where we have hand-held smartphones that have 
significantly more power than those early IBM mainframes - and we can 
carry them in our pockets without the need for air conditioning (but probably 
longer battery life). If connected to a car audio, it used a hands-free wireless 
Bluetooth connection. One of the biggest challenges of using smartphones 
is to get users to realize they can do a lot more than make voice calls and 
exchange text messages. To a large degree, smartphones and tablets 
replace the need to carry a briefcase.
We’ve gone from text command line entry on typewriter-size keyboards to 
graphical touch screens and keyboards. 64GB SD memory cards the size of 
a fingernail, costing $30, have evolved from those $200 15-inch, 4MB disc 
platters. Internal memory has gone from 16KB of clunky core memory on 
the mini-computer based instruments to 16GB or more on today’s PCs and 
mobile devices. 
With Skype we have seen the end of expensive conference calling, the need 
to bill clients for long distance charges, and more importantly the ability to 
build businesses with worldwide human resource and customer bases at 
nominal cost. Hotels can no longer make money for long distance calls over 
landlines; at best they can charge fees for an Internet connection. Telephone 
booths have become museum pieces.
Phone numbers are masked behind names in calling directories. We are 
seeing the decline of landline calling but can now have free Group video 
calls around the world. One-to-one HD video calls on a large desktop 
screen make the other party look as if s/he is across the table; it’s called 
telepresence. Fiber optic transmission lines allow us to watch television and 
videos from around the world—at no cost yet with excellent HD resolution. 
And almost every day I make overseas Skype calls but never see a bill.
So much for the history and my bio (you can find a more formal one on 
LinkedIn), it’s time to get into the book and learn the complete story about 
using Skype and all its enriched communications features.

 
1
Chapter 1
People Like to Talk!
Whether you’re a road warrior building business relationships, a 
parent catching up with the family’s day, a grandparent watching your 
grandchildren grow, or whether you’re simply keeping in touch with business 
colleagues and family members spread around the world, talk builds 
relationships and understanding through conversations. The challenge has 
always been the cost of bringing people together for a conversation when 
geographically separated.
In late August 2003, Skype™, a software application for making voice calls 
over the Internet, was launched. It was evolutionary in that it “just worked” 
for users who had a PC and Internet connection, yet it did not require a 
significant investment in capital equipment by Skype’s founders. It was 
revolutionary in that making voice calls to anyone worldwide using this 
software was “free.” Over the past 11 years “Skype” has evolved into a 
widely recognized brand, and a verb, describing how two or more parties 
communicate over the Internet.
From its beginnings offering voice calling and instant messaging, Skype 
11 years later delivers over 36% of the world’s international calling minutes, 
has brought video calling to the consumer and business masses, and has 
over 300 million monthly active users in over 180 countries. Its Group Chat 
facilitates ad hoc communications across business teams, special interest 
groups, and families. According to Skype, at least 40% of its users employ 
Skype for their business communications activities.
And Skype is everywhere. Its availability has spread from the PC to 
smartphones (such as the iPhone, Android phones, BlackBerry 10, and 
Windows Phone 8), tablets (such as iPad, Samsung Galaxy, and Surface 
Pro), TVs, and a range of other devices that offer real time voice, video, and/
or text communications as a feature.

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
2
Most importantly it has opened up the world to low-cost or free 
conversations across a continent and over oceans. Multi-party calls allow 
families to have virtual reunions and businesses to take advantage of the 
best resources for a task without regard to location. While the informal 
grandparents call has been the biggest consumer application of video 
calling, Skype goes beyond the basic voice or video call to provide a rich 
conversation platform that builds and supports geographically dispersed 
collaborative business teams.
Why Skype?
There have been several applications available that provide chat, voice 
communications, and auxiliary features over the Internet. But with the 
rich combination of number of users worldwide, supported devices, three 
conversation modes, and high-quality and multi-party video, Skype’s unique 
voice and video technology and low tariffs to call the telephone network 
worldwide have not been duplicated by any other offering.
Google supports real-time conversations but communications is not 
their primary focus; Apple FaceTime is limited to conversations between 
FaceTime-enabled Macs and other Apple devices; BBM offers excellent 
voice and video quality but can only be installed on one mobile device while 
mirrored to PCs and tablets; other offerings simply do not have the complete 
feature set of Skype.
Here’s what makes Skype unique:
The network effect
 
1
Skype has as many as 40 to 86 million users online 
 
worldwide concurrently every day.
During June 2013 Skype reported that 299 million 
 
users had participated in at least one Skype 
conversation.
In 2013 Skype-to-Skype calls represented 36%
 
2 
of all international calling minutes according to 
Telegeography’s annual survey.
1http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_effect
2http://www.telegeography.com/products/commsupdate/articles/2011/01/06/
international-long-distance-slumps-while-skype-soars/

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
3
Skype supports, in a user friendly way, three modes of 
 
conversations: voice, chat, and video
Skype everywhere: Placing and receiving Skype calls 
 
are supported on PCs, smartphones, tablets, Skype-
enabled TVs, and gaming devices such as Xbox One. 
Calls can be made between any of these platforms.
Skype is officially supported in 27 languages and  
 
15 currencies.
Skype provides support for calls to and from the legacy 
 
phone network at low tariffs worldwide.
Figure 1-1.  Comparison of international phone and Skype traffic growth since 2005 (in minutes) 
(Source: Telegeography, http://www.telegeography.com/)
In 2013, Skype international calling minutes  
 
grew 36%3, while traditional carrier calling grew ~7%.  
(See Figure 1-1).   
3http://www.telegeography.com/press/press-releases/2012/01/09/ 
international-call-traffic-growth-slows-as-skypes-volumes-soar/index. 
html

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
4
Skype provides cost effective subscriptions for 
 
effectively unlimited calling to as many as 61 countries.
Skype provides support for multi-party voice 
 
conversations with up to 25 participants. Group chats 
can support up to 300 participants.
Skype introduced its multi-party Group Video Calling in 
 
early 2011, supporting multi-party video calls with up to 
ten participants. In early 2014, Skype announced that 
Group Video Calling would become a free service.
Skype for TV supports select Internet-enabled LG, 
 
Panasonic, Philips, Samsung, Sharp, Sony, Toshiba, and 
Vizio TVs, as well as select Panasonic and Sony Blu-ray 
players and the TelyHD Skype for TV webcam as end 
point terminals for originating and receiving Skype calls.
Skype provides a contact directory and enriches 
 
conversations through presence information, file 
transfer, SMS messaging, call forwarding, multi-party 
conversations, PC desktop sharing, voice mail, video 
messaging, and basic text conversation archiving. 
About 40% of all active Skype users sign in to Skype daily. Obviously free 
Skype-to-Skype voice and video calling dominates usage. While no real 
statistics exist, probably 90% of those minutes involve calls that simply 
would not be made (or last as long) if there were charges associated with 
the calls. And it confirms that video calling has become a major feature 
encouraging Skype adoption and usage.
In summary, Skype has become a universal brand name, and even a verb, 
associated with making free or low cost calls over the Internet. It’s a name 
that does not even require translation in many languages.
Most important is the wide range of Skype user experiences. Skype 
overcomes geographical barriers while enhancing business productivity. 
Building collaborative business teams, carrying out job interviews, enhancing 
customer support operations and supporting remote training and education 
all contribute to the business case for using Skype. On the personal side 
Skype facilitates romances, helps in natural disasters, keeps family members 
in touch, supports learning a new language and, due to its crystal clear audio, 
is used for teaching music. Skype video calling resulted in the mass adoption 
of the video calling concept first demonstrated in AT&T’s picture phone exhibit 
at the 1964 World’s Fair4; today video is used in over 40% of Skype calls.
4http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Videophone#AT.26T_Picturephone

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
5
WHY DID SKYPE TAKE OFF IN 2003?
While many attempts had been made to launch Internet-based voice calling applications in 
the late 1990s and early 2000s none had really been adopted due to issues with the Internet 
infrastructure, including service speeds, security, and the lack of a file sharing architecture 
called peer-to-peer sharing. The processing power of PCs had been too slow to effectively 
handle voice calling as one application amongst several running concurrently.
As a result at Skype’s launch time (late August 2003) the underlying market conditions and 
technology foundation had converged to set the stage for rapid acceptance and adoption of 
Skype in the fall of 2003.
From a presentation by Skype at eComm 2008:
IP-based audio technology that could support real time conversations 
• 
had matured.
Multimedia PCs became the standard, incorporating higher speed 
• 
processors and the requisite audio hardware—microphones and 
speakers.
Broadband (cable and DSL) Internet services had become widely 
• 
available worldwide.
Technology for dealing with firewalls associated with consumer routers 
• 
had been developed.
Instant Messaging networks had become widely accepted.
• 
A robust and scalable peer-to-peer file sharing infrastructure had been 
• 
developed and widely adopted for other applications (especially in 
Skype’s founders’ previous ventures). 
So the stage had been set; over 99% of the solution for a robust, reliable, secure, and high-
quality real time communications platform was in place.
Skype launched the appropriate software application with the right formula. Its ease of 
installation, along with the abilities to place “free” voice calls with one click, build a contact 
directory, and complement voice with instant messaging combined to make Skype calls 
a winning user experience. Within the first month after launch, Skype had over 500,000 
downloads. At the time of writing this book over 800 million Skype accounts have been 
created, with over 300 million monthly active users.
The rest, as they say, is history.

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
6
What Is Skype?
Skype is a software program that is very easy to install, and it’s easy to 
set up an account, find contacts, and start calling. Skype is one of the 
more robust software applications on Windows and Mac platforms. Skype 
has matured to the point where it can readily seek out and identify the 
hardware it needs to support a conversation: a microphone, speakers and, 
for video calls, a webcam. The path to making that first Skype call is almost 
frictionless.
Skype calls can also be made to or from many mobile phones. A carrier-
agnostic Skype client is available for phones and tablets supported by iOS 
(iPhone, iPad, and iPod Touch), Android, BlackBerry 10 phones and, most 
recently, Windows Phone 8 and Amazon Fire.
Skype is also available on certain models of LG, Panasonic, Philips, 
Samsung, Sharp, Sony, Toshiba and Vizio TVs, as well as Panasonic and 
Sony Blu-ray players. Skype is also available for making and receiving 
Skype calls on any HDTV using the intelligent TelyHD webcam.
Beyond free Skype-to-Skype voice and video calls and chat, Skype 
supports low cost voice calls to conventional landlines and mobile phones 
worldwide (PSTN) as well as SMS messaging. Skype also offers online 
numbers that allow calls from the PSTN to be made to a user’s Skype on a 
PC, smartphone, or TV. Skype To Go is a service, available in 24 countries, 
that lets you make calls to any landline worldwide (and mobiles in Canada/
U.S. and six other countries) at Skype rates by calling local numbers.
In many ways, think of Skype as a worldwide uberplatform for conversation 
that allows you to make calls worldwide independently from the legacy 
phone companies.
A major key to Skype’s wide adoption and acceptance is its Skype 
Everywhere initiative (see Figure 1-2). Skype calls can be made between 
any Skype-enabled devices, such as from a mobile smartphone to a TV, 
from a Mac to a Windows PC, between an iPhone and an Android phone, or 
between an iPhone and a Windows PC.

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
7
In September, 2011 Skype released upgrades to all its PC and mobile clients 
which introduced advertising on free Skype-to-Skype calls. However, if you 
have Skype credit or a Skype Calling Plan subscription, you will not see the 
advertising.
In November 2014 Microsoft announced that its enterprise grade 
communications platform, Microsoft Lync, would be rebranded in 2015. 
In fact Skype for Business will adopt many of the user interface features 
discussed in this book. Microsoft Lync, as it exists in late 2014 with instant 
messaging and voice connectivity to Skype, will be discussed in Chapter 12.
However, the original Skype, covered in this book, will continue to be 
available as a low cost alternative that can continue to provide cost and 
productivity benefits to business users who want to build a worldwide 
business ecosystem.
Where and When Do You Use Skype?
With Skype available on so many platforms, it is worth spending a few 
minutes looking at why Skype is used on each of the various platforms with 
a focus on PCs, smartphones, tablets, and TVs.
Mobile
Tablets
Windows OS
Mac OS
TV
Skype
EVERYWHERE
Figure 1-2.  Skype is platform agnostic

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
8
Skype on PCs 
Skype for Windows desktop continues to have the most complete feature 
set for enriching Skype conversations; Skype for Mac has become fairly 
ubiquitous with the increasing popularity of MacBooks and iMacs. These 
versions of Skype can be used anywhere that one has a Windows PC or Mac, 
whether at home, in the office or while traveling with a laptop. Figure 1-3 
gives an overview of the features available when using Skype on a PC.
PRESENCE
VOICE
VIDEO
CHAT
SINGLE PARTY
MULTI PARTY
FILE TRANSFER
SCREEN SHARING
VIDEO MESSAGING
Skype on Windows desktop and Mac OS X
Figure 1-3.  Feature set of Skype on Windows desktop or Mac OS X
In November 2011 Skype released, concurrently, versions of Skype for 
Windows and Skype for Mac that for the first time supported the same 
major feature set on both clients although the user interface experience 
continued to be somewhat different.
In the fall of 2012 Skype introduced Skype for Windows 8 or ‘modern 
Windows’, a second version available for use with Windows 8.x PCs 
and tablets. While it can be accessed on desktop and laptop PCs using 
Windows 8.1, this version is designed also to work with touch screen 
Windows tablets, such as Microsoft's Surface Pro and various OEM vendors 
of Windows 8 tablets. Its feature set has gradually been enhanced to include 
many of the features of Skype for Windows desktop; however, there is no 
long term archiving and search capability.

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
9
Beyond one-to-one conversations, on PCs you can:
Host group chats as well as voice and video multi-party 
 
calls.
Administer group chat sessions for collaboration: 
 
business teams and special interest groups make heavy 
use of Skype’s persistent group chat feature.
Maintain in the chat session pane not only an ongoing 
 
ad hoc dialogue, but also meeting agendas and notes, 
shared URLs, file transfer information, and ad hoc 
“water fountain” discussions.
Log all voice and video conversation activity, including 
 
what is known in the communications business as call 
detail records with the time and length of individual calls.
Log all activity in the session that occurs on any mobile 
 
device following the same chat session.
Archive chat discussions for later recall; the author has 
 
two group chat sessions that have run continuously for 
over seven years.
Search the archives for key words or phrases going 
 
back to the beginning of the group chat session.
Participate in multiple (Group) Chat sessions on a single 
 
screen; one company has over 20 concurrent group 
chats for various purposes.
Connect to Facebook to follow Facebook news feeds 
 
in the Skype client's Home View and also participate in 
Facebook Messenger chat sessions.
While Skype for Windows desktop has the most complete Skype feature 
set, Skype for Mac supports most of those features. However, there are 
significant differences in how the two Skype clients operate and access 
those features as discussed in Chapter 5. On Windows 8 PCs with two 
versions available, Skype for Windows desktop remains the preferred 
version for business use due to its support of archiving and search and more 
intuitive user interface. 

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
10
Skype on Smartphones and Tablets
The dream Skype experience, especially with the launch of the iPhone in 
2008, includes the ability to make and receive calls worldwide at no cost 
from mobile smartphones and tablets. Now supported on iOS, Android, 
BlackBerry 10, Windows Phone 8, Windows 8 tablets, and Amazon Fire 
tablets—including video calling and video messaging—Skype conversations 
over mobile are becoming a significant portion of Skype traffic. This has 
added significantly to the possible use cases for Skype. Figure 1-4 gives an 
overview of the features available when using Skype on a mobile device.
PRESENCE
VOICE
VIDEO
CHAT
SINGLE PARTY
FILE TRANSFER
VIDEO MESSAGING
Skype on Android, iOS, Blackberry 10 and Windows Phone 8
Figure 1-4.  Feature set of Skype on smartphones
With Skype apps on smartphones and tablets, you can take your 
conversation with you. While not at the point where calls can be 
automatically switched between a PC and smartphone, you can continue 
to follow chat sessions, including group chats, while away from your PC, 
participate in group calls, place and receive Skype-to-Skype calls, place 
calls to landlines and mobile phones and receive calls at a Skype Online 
number. It complements your PC-based calling when away from the home 
or office. 
In September 2014 Skype started rolling out the ability to host multi-party 
voice calls on a smartphone or tablet. Initially available on the iPhone 5  
or later for calls with up to four participants, this feature will probably 
migrate to other smartphones and tablets over the next few months. In the 
meantime, a smartphone or tablet user can participate in a multi-party voice 
or video call.

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
11
But there are some issues with this:
The biggest one is battery drain; the combination of 
 
using a Wi-Fi access point and Skype on a mobile 
smartphone accelerates battery drain. Skype has 
recently made significant improvements to reduce 
battery drain, but it still places an additional load on the 
battery.
Skype calls involving iPhone, Android, BlackBerry 10,  
 
or Windows Phone 8, whether Skype-to-Skype or 
outbound calling to the phone network, use a wireless 
carrier’s data plans when using 3G/LTE services. Ensure 
you have a multi-gigabyte monthly data plan if you plan 
on doing a lot of calling over your home carrier. 
You will want to limit your Skype calling on smartphones 
 
to Wi-Fi connections only while roaming on foreign 
carriers. Roaming charges for data services at  
10-20 MB per 10 minutes of calling could drain your 
bank account. Precautionary measures to consider 
when roaming are discussed in Chapter 6. When 
nothing else is available, Skype Wi-Fi can provide a 
connection at about $0.25 per minute.
Skype on a mobile device only archives activity going 
 
back 30 days; also there is no archive Search capability.
Skype for TV
At CES 2010 Skype announced Skype for TV where Skype software is 
embedded into Internet-enabled TV sets from Samsung and Panasonic. 
Today Skype for TV is available on LG, Panasonic, Philips, Samsung, Sharp, 
Sony, Toshiba, and Vizio as well as Panasonic and Sony Blu-ray players. At 
CES 2012 TelyLabs introduced TelyHD, the first device designed to bring 
Skype calling to any HDTV.
Initially available on high-end HDTVs, Skype is now being supported on 
many lower cost “smart” HDTV models.
However, Skype for TV sessions cannot be participants in group voice or 
video calls. Later in the book I talk about using Skype on a TV panel in a 
conference room. 

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
12
Skype as a Business and Productivity Tool
Beyond making free voice calls, Skype enhances calls with its features 
that provide tools for sharing documents, facilitating group collaboration, 
keeping conversation notes, leaving messages, and holding virtual 
meetings. In summary, Skype is a productivity tool that facilitates business 
processes across geographies, minimizes friction, and reduces both 
communications and travel costs. It allows a business to operate more 
effectively and efficiently.
So which Skype client do I use in a business setting? The key questions to 
ask include:
How many of the unique features, such as persistent 
 
conversation log archiving, on desktop and laptop PCs 
would be used?
How much physical desktop footprint is desired?
 
Will video calling, including group video calling, be 
 
used?
What is required for the road warrior or when outside 
 
the home office?
Is it necessary to follow Skype activity both at the home 
 
office and on the road?
Using Skype In the Office
When in the office, you can use Skype as the primary business desktop 
phone, placing and receiving calls over Skype or the legacy phone network. 
On any PC or mobile device the Skype application can receive calls from the 
legacy phone network using a Skype Online number. As a result there are 
cases where office workers only can be contacted on Skype. On the other 
hand a feature called SIP Connect, discussed later, allows a Skype user to 
effectively become an extension of a business PBX.
A desktop or laptop PC has the advantage of allowing you to use a regular 
PC keyboard for chat sessions, which is especially useful if you are typing 
long messages. The desktop or laptop screen size also allows flexibility over 
how Skype is displayed such that one can, say, follow multiple chat sessions 
in separate windows or, in a board room setting, allow (group) video calls to 
be followed on a large screen display, such as a TV monitor.
Skype for iPad, or larger Android tablets, however, provides some unique 
opportunities in the office where it can become a “default” video phone. In 
this role, a tablet can replace the legacy desktop phone while maintaining 

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
13
a small footprint and its independence from a PC. Its screen size makes it 
ideal for following a video call without placing demand on the resources of 
a PC; it can also serve as a speaker phone in a small office. With its much 
higher capacity battery, battery drain is not a significant issue.
Using Skype On the Road
While travelling, you have the choice of three platforms: laptops with the 
complete Skype feature set, smartphones with a small display, or tablets 
with a larger display. The latter two support basic chat, voice, and video 
conversations, usually via a touch display and keyboard, but are limited with 
respect to group calling and archiving conversation activity.
A Skype account can be open concurrently on multiple platforms; each 
device will mirror activity to the other PCs and devices logged in to the same 
account. At the most basic level, these mobile devices allow the user to 
walk out of her home office and continue to participate in conversations.
On the other hand, smartphones and tablets:
Provide a lightweight and small profile platform for 
 
following Skype.
Require Internet access via a carrier or Wi-Fi; more 
 
details will be discussed in Chapter 2.
Should be recharged at least daily to ensure availability 
 
throughout the day.
Since the Microsoft acquisition of Skype in late 2011, significant effort 
has been made to improve both the feature set and robustness of Skype 
on mobile devices. A major example is the increase in video resolution 
supported from a grainy 160x120 image to a very clear HD-quality 
resolution. Features added include video messaging, file transfer (photos 
only on iOS devices), and a common user interface across all devices.
On all mobile devices, Skype can be available in the background and 
provide notifications of new activity. Skype on iPhone and BlackBerry 10 
support Bluetooth connection to an automobile’s audio system. Bluetooth 
connectivity is not supported on Android and Windows Phone devices due 
to the multiple hardware platforms supported.

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
14
Where Does This Book Take You?
This book is intended to be a guide and tutorial on using Skype in a 
business setting. Going forward:
Chapter 2 covers getting started with Skype and making 
 
connections to the Internet.
Chapter 3 provides a more detailed discussion of 
 
how Skype can enrich conversations through sharing 
activities, logging, and archiving.
Chapter 4 talks about some use cases where Skype 
 
has helped a business grow, both internally across 
geographically dispersed business teams and externally 
into expanded market opportunities worldwide.
Chapter 5 goes into details about using Skype on PCs 
 
(Windows desktop and Mac OS X).
Chapter 6 covers how Skype works on mobile 
 
smartphones and tablets.
Chapter 7 provides information on making and receiving 
 
calls to and from landlines and mobile phones.
Chapter 8 goes into why chat can become an ongoing 
 
relationship and team building tool for a business team.
Chapter 9 reviews how to manage your Skype account 
 
and make payments for PSTN-connected calls.
Chapter 10 summarizes the hardware considerations for 
 
using Skype.
Chapter 11 talks about using Skype as a team 
 
collaboration tool.
Caution  iPhone and BlackBerry 10 support the Bluetooth audio 
connection to car audio in a “hands-free” manner. However, to launch 
a call or do any text chat pull over to the side of the road to carry out 
activities that require using the device’s touch screen or hardware 
keyboard. Many jurisdictions now have “distracted driving” legislation 
with stiff penalties. Even more importantly, statistics show that distracted 
driving now accounts for as many accidents and fatalities as driving under 
the influence of alcohol and/or drugs.

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
15
Chapter 12 discusses how Skype has been integrated 
 
into other Microsoft products such as Outlook, Outlook.
com, and Microsoft Lync.
Chapter 13 takes a look at what we can expect from  
 
IP-based (i.e. Internet) communications going forward. 
Appendix A provides a glossary describing terminology 
 
and protocols, such as VoIP and PSTN, associated with 
using Skype and other IP-based communication tools.
Summary 
The bottom line is that your Skype activity can be personalized to your mix 
of business and personal communications activities, whether in the home 
office or on the road. You have options to remain connected either in real 
time or, for chat, asynchronously. With its presence and notification options 
you can set priorities for which calls require immediate attention, which 
are call forwarded to another Skype account or phone number, and which 
should be sent to voice/video messaging.
Key Points
Skype is a universal communications application that 
 
facilitates worldwide communications and overcomes 
geographical barriers.
Skype has the most complete feature set of over-the-
 
top Internet-based communications offerings.
Skype is virtually platform agnostic, available on all PCs, 
 
smartphones, and tablets commonly used in business 
or at home.
Skype enriches voice and video communications 
 
through features such as file transfer, screen sharing, 
video messaging, and conversation archiving and 
search.
Skype supports business team collaboration beyond 
 
one-to-one conversations through its multi-party group 
chat, voice, and video features.

CHAPTER 1: People Like to Talk!
16
Skype continues to be the fastest growing 
 
communications service provider worldwide.
With its support of video calling, Skype is ideal for 
 
business presentations, negotiations and virtual 
meetings (especially international calls) as well as the 
“friends and family” calls.
And, as your primary business phone, it goes with you 
 
when you leave the office but have Skype available on 
a laptop PC, iPhone, iPad, Android, BlackBerry 10, or 
Windows Phone 8.

17
Chapter 2
Connecting to Skype at 
Home and Abroad
Besides a robust Internet connection, you will need to install a Skype client 
or app and create a Skype account (with an associated Skype profile).
A key feature of Skype is that it provides direct (or peer-to-peer) voice 
and video connections between Skype call participants over the Internet, 
bypassing the legacy phone communications networks. Skype converts 
your audio into digital packets assigned a unique identifier; these packets 
are then transmitted over the Internet to the other party (or participants) on 
the call. At the other party’s end, these packets are then converted back into 
a crystal clear audio signal that can be heard on a headset or speakers. And 
it’s only because the processors on PCs and mobile devices have become 
so powerful that all this conversion activity can happen in real time.
However, also critical to using Skype is the availability of a robust Internet 
connection, whether via wired Ethernet connected to a PC or wirelessly over 
Wi-Fi or a wireless carrier’s data plan. The key parameters related to Skype 
use are download speed and, for video, upload speed, especially as video 
resolution and the number of participants in a group video call increases. 
Minimum and recommended speeds increase as you goes from chat to 
voice to standard resolution video to HD video. Hosting group voice and, 
especially, group video also require increasingly faster connections for the 
host connection only.
When connecting to Skype at home or abroad, it is often important to 
know that your communications are private and that your connection is 
secure, especially if you are discussing sensitive business information, 

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
18
so this is the final topic covered in this chapter. First, let’s talk about 
establishing a Skype account, incorporating a Skype profile, connecting 
to the Internet, and then we’ll cover building a Contact directory.
Opening a Skype Account
Prior to making calls you must create and open a Skype account. The Skype 
software is downloaded for installation as follows:
For PCs, go to 
 
www.skype.com in any browser and 
select Downloads; the default Skype client for 
your particular Windows PC or Mac is offered for 
download.
For mobile devices, go to the relevant app store (Apple 
 
App Store, Google Play, BlackBerry World, Windows 
Store, or Amazon Appstore) and install the Skype 
application.
Opening the application brings up a login screen (Figure 2-1) with options 
for creating a Skype account using a unique Skype name or your Microsoft 
account if you have one (this option also applies to non-Windows devices). 
On Windows PCs and Macs you may also create an account using your 
Facebook login email and password.
Figure 2-1.  Skype for Mac sign in screen

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
19
Another option is to go to the Skype website (www.skype.com), select Sign 
In, and there will be an opportunity to create a Skype account and provide 
Profile information.
When creating a Skype account there are two required items:
Skype Name: When you install Skype and register 
 
as a Skype user you create a unique Skype Name 
or SkypeID. Think carefully about your selection as 
it can never be changed (and becomes your unique, 
permanently assigned identification as a Skype user).
Email address: At registration you must enter at least 
 
one email address to associate with your Skype 
Name. Later you can add two more email addresses to 
associate with the same Skype Name. You can always 
change the associated email address(es).
From your Skype account manager on the Skype website you can also 
associate (or merge) your Skype Account with your Microsoft account 
and log in via either. This is important for Windows 8 users, especially on 
Windows 8.1 tablets, as the login to Windows 8 automatically logs you in to 
the Skype app on the modern Windows interface.
Note   Your initial account is a Personal Skype account, owned and 
managed by you as an individual. Skype Manager, discussed later in this 
book, allows a business administrator to establish and manage Business 
Skype accounts. These accounts are owned by a business for use by 
individual employees, as well as for multi-user devices such as PBXs that 
incorporate Skype connections.
If you plan to make your Skype account accessible with Microsoft Lync, 
which is an enterprise grade communications Microsoft platform discussed in 
Chapter 12, you must log in to your Skype account using your Microsoft login.
The Home Screen
On logging in to Skype, the Home Screen appears. Common to all devices 
are the terms Recent, Favorites, and People. On mobile devices and Skype 
for modern Windows this appears as shown in Figure 2-2.

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
20
On Windows Desktop and Mac OS X the term Contacts remains in use while 
Recent and Favorites appear with Contacts in the left pane (see Figure 2-3).
Figure 2-3.  The Skype for Windows Recent, Favorites, Contacts (People) configuration
Figure 2-2.  The Skype Home screen header
Building a Skype Profile
When registering an account, Skype creates a Skype Profile containing as 
little or as much information about yourself and how to contact you as you 
choose (Figure 2-4).

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
21
There are three ways to access your Skype Profile:
In the Windows or Mac client, click your own name in 
 
the top-left corner.
For mobile, tap on your Skype Profile image in the upper 
 
right of the Home screen, tap on the Account image to 
change the image, and select My Account | Profile or 
View Profile to add/change other profile information.
Log into your Skype account at 
 
www.skype.com.
Figure 2-4.  A Skype Profile on Android/BlackBerry 10

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
22
After creating an account you will want to build your Skype Profile, which 
can include:
 Your Profile picture: This can be a photograph (with 
an option to take a picture with a webcam or mobile 
device camera) or a graphics file. This is probably the 
most significant personal branding associated with your 
Skype activity.
 Email address: One is required; up to two more 
optional.
 Landline and mobile phone numbers (optional): 
Office, home, and mobile
 Your “home base” location: Optional as to the level of 
detail. You can enter city, state/province, country.
 A website URL: Useful for promoting a blog or 
business.
 Birthdate: Optional, but you will get lots of birthday 
greetings if you enter this.
 Language: Skype supports over 25 languages.
 Time: (with an option to use the PC’s clock or mobile 
device’s clock). Important if you do a lot of calling 
across time zones. This lets your contacts see what 
your local time is.
 About me: Here you can enter any information you 
choose. For instance, you might specify your criteria for 
acceptance of others as one of your Contacts. Other uses 
include identifying your activities—either personal or work.
Profile Considerations
The Profile Picture can be either a stored image or from your webcam. This 
image, which brands your Skype activity, is displayed:
In your own Profile (where you can change it, if desired)
 
In your Contacts’ People/Contact lists
 
On call screens during a call (if not using video)
 
—including 
multi-party calls

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
23
In View Profile windows when selected by your Contacts 
 
in their Skype clients
Optionally, in Skype 7 for Windows/Mac, conversation 
 
screens beside every message you enter
Your Profile Picture also shows up in the “as Pictures” View of Skype for Mac.
Entering a mobile phone number is important for two reasons:
You can receive SMS messages sent from other Skype 
 
contacts’ Skype chat windows on your mobile phone. 
(More details on sending SMS messages are in Chapter 6.)
This can serve as your Skype CallerID for outbound 
 
calls to landlines and mobile phones.
An important consideration is that your time zone is set correctly and 
displays to your accepted contacts (Figure 2-5). When working across time 
zones, it’s often helpful to know the contact’s local time prior to making a 
voice or video call. Synchronizing with your local PC’s time (My computer’s 
setting) ensures your time is correct when traveling.
Figure 2-5.  Time zone examples
The settings that you establish in the Profile screen (Figure 2-6) are carried 
across to any Skype client you may open on another PC (Windows or Mac) 
and Skype for iPhone/Android/iPad/BlackBerry/Windows Phone. If you 
make changes on the other devices, they will change the profile settings 
seen on this screen.

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
24
Now let’s turn to the various ways to connect with Skype over the Internet.
Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
Having a Skype account established, including a Profile, the other major 
requirement is a suitable Internet connection. While in the early days, wired 
connections were the norm at home or the home office, today wireless 
connections, whether over Wi-Fi at home, on the road, or via a wireless 
carrier have become the predominant Internet access connection.
Home Office
Skype requires a standard business or residence Internet service plan. 
These usually incorporate a cable modem/router that provides both wired 
Ethernet and Wi-Fi connectivity.
Fortunately, business and residence services have made significant 
Internet speed increases. Most high-speed services under user-controlled 
subscriptions (>10Mbps download and >2Mbps upload) are sufficient for 
Skype activity. This is especially true for services using fiber or cable (which 
in practice may be a hybrid fiber/cable connection).
Figure 2-6.  Skype Profile as viewed by contacts

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
25
Note  To test Internet download/upload speeds use a service such as 
Speedtest.net. An example speed test is shown in Figure 2-7.
Figure 2-7.  Speed test on a 60Mpbs/download, 10MBps upload hybrid cable service
Note   Another consideration is the home or office local area network 
router along with firewalls. One reason for Skype’s widespread adoption is 
that it transparently addresses most of the issues related to passing through 
a router and firewalls available as a component of the most popular security 
software. However, Skype does have a support page for rare instances 
where issues such as proxy servers and firewalls must be considered  
(see https://support.skype.com/en/search?q=firewalls).
A table of minimum and recommended Internet bandwidth speeds for chat, 
voice, and video is in the Glossary of this book.
Accessing the Internet wirelessly, especially when away from the home 
office or home where the user must use a wireless carrier’s data plan or a 
publicly accessible Wi-Fi connection, can be a challenge for a variety of 
reasons.

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
26
Public Wi-Fi
Publicly accessible Wi-Fi connections are becoming more readily available 
in airports, restaurants, coffee shops, hotels, hospitals and medical centers, 
conference centers, highway service centers, cruise ships, and other 
locations. However, the speed and quality of service may vary considerably.
Wi-Fi in locations where there is the potential to be a 
 
large number of users may be compromised if too many 
hotel guests or conference attendees are attempting to 
use the same core Internet connection at the same time 
at the hosting location. Indications are slow download 
speeds, intermittent access, or even an inability to 
access the service.
Some locations offer free services (that can tend to have 
 
lower capacity and speeds) while others charge for a 
service, either for basic access or, especially at hotels, 
for a premium service offering higher speeds.
Security can be an issue, especially when offered by 
 
generic names, such as free or simply don’t require 
a login or Wi-Fi password. On the other hand many 
“brand name” locations provide appropriate levels of 
security to minimize the opportunity for a compromised 
connection.
SKYPE WIFI
Normally Skype connections are made through wired and wireless connections available 
at various remote locations. In particular, Wi-Fi connections depend on the availability of a 
readily available Wi-Fi Internet service and/or subscription, such as Boingo, or a free service, 
such as is available at Starbucks in U.S. and Canada. Some hotels and airports, especially 
outside the U.S. and Canada, have high hourly or daily Internet charges.
However, for the occasions when there is no alternative, Skype provides Skype WiFi1, 
working with Wi-Fi service providers worldwide2 to provision over 2 million access points.
If you end up in a location supported by Skype WiFi, your Skype client on a Wi-Fi−enabled 
Windows or Mac PC, or the Skype WiFi application for mobile devices, will recognize its 
availability through a pop-up window. It then offers the opportunity to use Skype WiFi.
1http://www.skype.com/intl/en-us/features/allfeatures/skype-access/
2http://about.skype.com/press/2011/02/wifi.html

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
27
Payment is through Skype credit. The Skype WiFi price per minute varies by provider and is 
displayed when you connect to a compatible Wi-Fi hotspot.
Per minute rates of 15 cents to 50 cents per minute (or more or less depending on the 
access point service) are not exactly the lowest but Skype WiFi is a service of convenience 
not intended for long term use (as you might do at a free Wi-Fi coffee shop).
Skype-to-Skype calls via Skype WiFi are still at no additional charge; SkypeOut calls require 
either a Skype Calling Plan subscription or Skype credit in addition to the Skype WiFi charge.
Of course, with a Skype WiFi Internet connection, you can also check email, Twitter and 
Facebook, browse the web, and run all your other Internet-enabled applications.
Wireless Carriers
Using Skype on a smartphone or tablet over a wireless carrier requires 
a data plan; on your home carrier a multi-GB data plan subscription is 
recommended. It is wise to check your usage frequently; also be aware of 
overage charges for going over your carrier’s plan limits.
However roaming charges on “foreign” wireless carriers can drain your 
wallet very quickly. Four solutions to this are
Place the phone in Airplane (iPhone, iPad, BlackBerry 10) 
 
or Flight (Android) mode, while leaving Wi-Fi on  
(Figure 2-8). As discussed earlier in this chapter, Wi-Fi 
access points are becoming more and more prevalent to 
the point where they are becoming the Stealth carrier3.
Figure 2-8.  Airplane mode
3http://voiceontheweb.biz/2010/02/reprise-is-wifi-becoming-the-
unregulated-stealth-carrier-of-the-future/

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
28
Most smartphones also have a setting to automatically 
 
turn off data when roaming.
On iPhone go to Settings 
 
➤ Cellular ➤ Data Roaming.
On BlackBerry 10 go to Settings 
 
➤ Mobile Network ➤ Data 
Services.
On Android go to Settings 
 
➤ More Settings ➤ Flight Mode 
or ➤ Airplane Mode (hardware dependent)
Purchase roaming packages from the home carrier; 
 
while still relatively expensive they tend not to be as 
expensive as pay-as-you-go roaming.
Use a multi-country SIM, such as Truphone’s with 
 
a World Plan that provides voice, SMS, and data 
connections in up to 66 countries under a single  
multi-country plan
Making Skype voice calls on a carrier requires at least a 3G connection. In 
many cases, especially in rural areas, there may be only a 2G/EDGE or even 
no carrier connection. Ensure you have at least a 3G connection for voice; 
having a HSPA or LTE connection will enhance the quality of video calls. 
The carrier connection status usually shows up in the top bar of the home 
screen of a smartphone. A typical example is shown in Figure 2-9.
Figure 2-9.  Carrier and Wi-Fi connection indicators: In this case an LTE connection is shown (what 
we recognize as the standard Wi-Fi symbol) but it could show 3, H, 2 or E for 3G, HSPA, 2G or EDGE

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
29
Managing Contacts: Whom Are You Going  
to Call?
The key parameter for any communications offering is the number of users; this, 
in turn, determines how many contacts you can accumulate. Today with over 
300 million monthly active Skype users, the chances of a business colleague, 
friend, or family member having an active Skype account is very high.
Contacts can be divided into
Skype contacts, with whom you can hold Skype- 
 
to-Skype chat, voice, and video conversations.
Phone contacts with whom you can hold voice 
 
conversations only.
While you must initially establish a “contact relationship” with Skype 
contacts (described in the next section), phone contacts come from several 
sources, including:
A Skype contact’s Skype profile, which can include up 
 
to three phone numbers (Home, Work, Mobile)
From Windows PCs and devices, Outlook’s People 
 
contacts containing phone numbers.
On mobile devices and Macs, the native Contacts 
 
directory
Facebook friends whose About information includes 
 
phone numbers
Manual entry using the dial pad
 

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
30
A COMMENT ABOUT EMAIL ADDRESSES REGISTERED WITH SKYPE
While you must associate your Skype account with at least one email address (and, 
optionally, up to three), Skype does not make email addresses publicly available, including 
disclosure in any Skype User Profile that can be viewed publicly. Skype uses email 
addresses to:
Allow a response to a user’s search for a Skype contact, provided 
• 
the user knows your email address through other sources, such as 
through private communications or via a search of a user’s address 
book(s) in Outlook or Facebook. This is available via Skype for 
Windows Import Contacts feature.
Send emails confirming your purchase of Skype Credit or a Skype 
• 
subscription, or of Skype Manager activity.
Send emails related to compensation for outages or other service 
• 
disruptions when Skype, at its sole discretion, decides to offer 
compensation.
Skype will never send emails requesting your login information (password) or credit card 
information or emails creating a false sense of urgency.
Skype Contacts
Upon creating an account, the first activity is to build up a Skype People (or 
Contacts) directory for the account. You can search for contacts (Figure 2-10) 
using one of the following: a full name, an email address, a Skype name or, in 
the case of Android or BlackBerry 10, a phone number (including country code).

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
31
Note   While traditionally called Contacts in Skype, Microsoft has decided 
to change the name for all their contact directories (including Outlook 2013) 
to “People”. This term appears in Skype for mobile devices and Skype for 
Windows 8 Modern.
Figure 2-10.  Skype for Windows contact search
Preferred are searches for an email address or a Skype name as these 
tend to be unique to a single person. A user may include up to three email 
addresses on his/her Skype profile. The phone number search requires that 
a user has included one or more phone numbers in his/her Skype profile. 
Unless a user has included home location information, searching for a full 
name can bring up many users with similar names for selection—at this point 
location information helps narrow the choices.

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
32
When you select a prospective contact, Skype sends a chat message to 
the contact requesting permission to establish an ongoing Skype Contact 
relationship (Figure 2-11).
Figure 2-11.  Requesting contact relationship
Note   Once a Skype Contact relationship has been established, that 
person (and his/her public profile information) will be available under 
People (or Contacts) on Skype on any PC or mobile device logged in to the 
same Skype account.
But there are some very important caveats in order to protect your privacy 
and prevent spamming:
You need to know a Contact’s email address or Skype 
 
name from other sources. Skype does not display email 
addresses when viewing a Contact’s Skype Profile or 
make any suggestions when entering an email address 
into the Add a Contact form. Once entered into a Search 
box, Skype simply indicates its validity as an email 
address that has been registered with a Skype account.
Initially you are sending out an invitation to become a 
 
contact. The recipient of the invitation needs to respond 
to your request via an Allow button that appears on their 
Skype client; he or she also has an option to Reject an 
invitation or Block a Contact from trying again.

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
33
If an invitation is blocked, there is also an option to report 
 
the inviting contact for abuse. If Skype receives several 
abuse reports associated with a contact, it will investigate 
and, where appropriate, close down the account.
Selecting Favorites
As you build up contacts under People, you will find that there are some 
contacts with whom you have frequent conversations—business colleagues, 
customers, and suppliers along with family members and friends (Figure 2-12). 
Skype includes a Favorites feature to provide ready access to those contacts. 
Simply find the contact under People (Contacts) and designate it as a Favorite:
 On Windows Desktop PCs and Macs: Find the 
contact, right-click and select Add to Favorites or drag 
the Contact up to the Favorites section of the directory.
Figure 2-12.  Skype for Windows Favorites

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
34
 On mobile devices: Locate the contact under People, 
tap the contact name to bring up the chat conversation 
screen and then tap the three dot menu in the lower or 
upper right, and select Add to Favorites (Figure 2-13).
Figure 2-13.  Manage contacts on mobile
 On Android and BlackBerry (alternate): Locate the 
contact under People, tap and hold the contact name 
until a menu appears, and select Add to Favorites.
While Skype user profiles and the associated information appear in People 
or Contacts whenever you log in to an account on any device, Favorites are 
currently local device specific. In other words, you must create a separate 
set of Favorites for each device where an account is logged in.
When viewing People, the contacts can be filtered via a drop-down 
menu (Figure 2-14) to view All, Skype, Online/Available, or Facebook 
(Windows PCs and Macs only). Skype includes all Skype Contacts while 
Online/Available includes only those Contacts who are currently logged 
into Skype. On Skype for Windows Desktop simply go to Contacts ➤ 
Contact Lists; on Skype for Mac OS X the filtering options appear at the 
top of the Contacts screen.

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
35
Within Skype for Windows Desktop and Skype for Mac OS X there is also a 
search box that supports a search for an individual contact. Effectively Favorites 
is a proxy for searching out frequently called Contacts on mobile devices.
Contact Status
One of the significant benefits of Skype is the ability to display Contact 
Status. To display this status on PC’s, click the indicator in the lower-right 
corner of your Skype Profile image in the name pane to select a drop-down 
menu and select a status (Figure 2-15). On mobile devices, from the Home 
Page, tap on your Skype Profile image to see/select your status.
Figure 2-14.  Contact filters
Figure 2-15.  Skype Status Options

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
36
Online is the automatic default when you launch Skype on a PC; however, 
after several (designated) minutes of inactivity on your PC your status 
changes to Away. Other options for more privacy include Do Not Disturb, 
Invisible (not seen by other Contacts), and Offline (usually when either you 
are not logged in to Skype or you have lost the Internet connection).
With the exception of iPhone/iPad, Skype on mobile devices and modern 
Windows often only provide two status options: Available and Invisible 
(incorporating Do Not Disturb, Offline, and Away).
Note   In Skype for Windows Desktop, if you hover over a Contact’s name 
in either Contacts or Recent you will see a small dialog box that provides 
not only the Contact’s name but also when they were last active on Skype 
(whether Online or Offline).
In the next section, we discuss Skype’s security provisions and the options 
available for managing your privacy.
Skype Security and Privacy
Since launch, Skype voice and chat conversations are highly encrypted, 
providing a significant degree of confidentiality for your Skype 
conversations. In fact, security agencies are frustrated due to the level of 
security as they cannot readily “wiretap” into Skype-to-Skype calls.
Skype’s security and privacy policies (http://www.skype.com/intl/en-us/
security/online-safety/) and their execution address not only issues 
related to the content of conversations but also identity theft, phishing, and 
other online safety issues. Within Skype’s options you can also limit who can 
contact you and launch conversations with you to, say, people whom you 
have accepted as contacts.
Skype Privacy Settings
In Skype for Windows, Tools | Options | Privacy allows you to set who 
you want to receive calls from, who is to know you have video capability, 
and other settings related to your overall privacy (see Figure 2-16). It is 
recommended you review these settings when initially setting up Skype.

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
37
In Skype for Mac, similar settings are available at Skype | Preferences | 
Privacy (see Figure 2-17).
Figure 2-16.  Skype’s privacy settings on Windows
Figure 2-17.  Skype for Mac privacy settings

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
38
For example, consider whether you want your picture to be visible to anyone 
who searches Skype’s contact directory or only to your contacts. Do you 
want old friends and ex-colleagues to be able to identify you easily? How 
about potential business connections? People are usually more likely to reach 
out if they can put a face to the name and be sure they have the right person.
Security and Safety of Skype Communications
As for identity and safety, check out Skype’s Online Safety page at http://
www.skype.com/intl/en-us/security/online-safety/ to ensure you are up-
to-date with the latest issues that can affect both the security and privacy 
surrounding your use of Skype. Important points include:
Keep your password to yourself and update it about 
 
twice a year.
If on a Windows PC, install appropriate security 
 
software, such as available from Symantec, McAfee, 
Zone Alarm, Trend Micro, Panda, and other security 
software offerings.
Always set Windows and Mac OSX to do regular 
 
operating system updates. Microsoft always releases a 
monthly update on the second Tuesday of the month; if 
there are urgent updates required, they will deliver them 
when necessary.
Avoid downloading email attachments from unknown 
 
senders.
Never respond to an email requesting your account 
 
login information (this applies to any service of which 
you are a member, such as eBay, Facebook, Twitter, 
YouTube, etc.); that’s phishing.
Only enter into your Skype profile information you are 
 
comfortable with making public. For instance, you may 
decide you are comfortable with entering your country, 
province/state, work and mobile phone numbers, but 
not your city or home phone number.
Set Skype privacy settings you are comfortable with: 
 
Tools | Options | Privacy in Skype for Windows; Skype | 
Preferences | Privacy in Mac OSX.
Block contacts who request access with no known 
 
reason; there is an option when blocking to “Report 
for Abuse.” Skype monitors these reports and closes 
persistently abusive accounts.

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
39
From its initial launch, strong encryption technologies have been 
incorporated into Skype to prevent unauthorized access to your 
conversation content. As a result, other than a one-time blunder involving 
chat conversations in building a special Skype client only for use in China, 
there have been no reported cases of intrusion into Skype conversations.
There has been much controversy about Skype access by law enforcement 
agencies; however, Microsoft states that they will only provide access when 
required by law—which requires a warrant. At the time of writing the author 
has not seen any verified incidents of access over the nine years of following 
Skype. However, while Microsoft and other Internet publishers would like to 
disclose information about any access by government agencies, they are 
not permitted to do so by security law. And what they could provide would 
only be call detail records providing names of connected parties along with 
time and duration of calls (otherwise called metadata).
Calls to the legacy phone networks’ landlines and mobile phones can be 
wiretapped once they pass outside to these networks; however, that is not 
an issue that Skype or Microsoft can control.
Keep in mind that tracking billions of minutes of calls would require a 
phenomenal amount of resources; as a result, unless you are involved in 
some potentially illicit activity Skype’s inherent encryption addresses privacy 
issues with respect to your calling activity. But on the other hand, ensure 
you follow the guidelines mentioned earlier to maintain the integrity of your 
Skype account and your conversations.
Summary
Getting started with Skype involves installing the Skype software or app, 
creating a Skype account, incorporating your Skype Profile, and building  
a contacts directory.
Connecting to the Internet is also a basic requirement for using Skype. 
How you connect depends on whether your connection is made in a home 
office or while on the road.
This chapter covered the considerations for establishing a Skype account 
and maintaining not only the connection at a home office but also when 
making a connection at a remote road warrior location.

CHAPTER 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
40
Key Points
At a minimum a Skype account requires a unique 
 
Skype ID and an associated email address. But you can 
optionally add personal information such as time zone, 
location, birthday and legacy phone numbers.
At a home office, connections can be made by either 
 
a wired Ethernet or Wi-Fi connection to an Internet 
modem/router.
While on the road, wired connections may be available 
 
in some hotels; otherwise wireless connection over 
a Wi-Fi access point or a wireless carrier data plan is 
necessary.
With Wi-Fi connections you need to understand why 
 
some connections may be robust enough for chat and 
voice calls but not for video calls.
With carrier connections you need a multi-GB data plan 
 
subscription from your home carrier or, when roaming 
on a foreign carrier, a lower-cost alternative to simply 
making an ad hoc data connection to that carrier.
Building a Skype Contacts (People) directory allows you 
 
to readily initiate conversations, whether as a Skype 
contact or a phone number.
Only with Skype Contacts can a user take full advantage 
 
of all Skype’s features.
Status provides information on your availability for 
 
participating in a conversation.
Favorites provide a way to easily access Contacts with 
 
whom a user has frequent conversations, especially on 
Skype for mobile devices.
Skype allows you to customize your privacy options, 
 
so you can control who you receive calls and instant 
messages from, who can see your profile photo, and 
more. It is a good idea to review these settings when 
you first start using Skype.
Skype voice and chat conversations are highly 
 
encrypted, but you must still take care with measures 
such as keeping your password secure and keeping 
your hardware and software up to date.

41
Chapter 3
Enriching Conversations 
with Skype
Having established a Skype account, built a Contact directory and made 
an Internet connection, it’s time to take a look at how Skype can enrich 
conversations using its unique mix of features that support archiving, 
sharing, and collaboration—whether on a PC or a mobile device.
Enhancing and Moving Beyond the Voice 
Conversation
In the past, making a voice call over a telephone was simple. With legacy 
telephone calls you would simply dial a number and hope someone, whose 
status was unknown, would answer—if not, maybe it would go to voice mail. 
At the other end the phone would ring; the recipient, if present at the phone, 
could decide whether to answer or, if provisioned, let it go to voice mail. In 
any case, the recipient’s activities when called would usually be interrupted; 
the incoming call took priority, regardless of who was calling or what the 
recipient was doing at the time. And once there was engagement it was only 
a voice conversation.
As users became familiar with Skype that random access process and 
in-conversation activity changed. From new etiquette for engagement to 
supporting the conversation using Skype’s complementary features, a Skype 

CHAPTER 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
42
conversation in a business setting not only overcomes the geographical 
barriers to a voice conversation or conference room meeting, but also 
transforms physical office activities into a virtual office setting:
 Is anybody there? Presence information tells you a 
contact’s status, whether they are available or away, are 
offline, or not wanting to be disturbed.
 Knock on the door, asking permission to enter: With 
Skype it is considered good etiquette to use Skype 
chat to see whether the other party is available and only 
call at an agreed on time—whether immediately, in five 
minutes, or five hours.
 Water fountain conversations: Sustainable group chat 
sessions become virtual water fountain conversations in 
which participants make contributions and comments 
on an ad hoc basis and these conversations also can be 
archived and searched on a PC.
 The virtual notebook: During a voice or video 
conversation, the chat session remains available to 
make notes of ideas, comments, goals, follow up, and 
so on, related to the conversation. The bonus with 
Skype chat is that these notes become archived on a 
PC and searchable for later recall.
 Leaving paperwork and photographs on a 
colleague’s desk: File transfer delivers documents, 
drawings, and even books to a chat participant. Or 
deliver these items through a cloud storage service 
URL, such as Dropbox or Microsoft OneDrive. In fact, in 
a single step, these can be delivered to multiple parties 
on a group chat.
 Face-to-face encounters: One consequence of 
Skype video is that participants can see others’ facial 
expressions. When on the larger screen of a PC or 
even the iPad, it’s almost like having the other party 
across the table. Skype’s crystal clear audio and echo 
cancellation features make it sound like the other party 
is in the room with you.

CHAPTER 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
43
 Whiteboarding: Chat becomes a medium for taking 
notes and sharing “spelling-specific” information, such 
as email addresses, contact information, and URLs. 
Screen sharing plays a significant role here also with 
its contribution to support or reinforce the conversation 
dialogue through virtual illustration of an issue.
 Demonstrations: Video allows a participant to support 
both internal and external conversations through screen 
sharing or a demonstration of a new physical product 
or, in a support scenario, show a customer how to 
physically fix, say, a hardware issue.
For road warriors Skype also complements their business use:
Calling home from hotel rooms and other remote 
 
locations to enhance and support family relationships.
Video calls in which parents can view their children’s 
 
accomplishments of the day and assist them with, say, 
homework exercises.
Family multi-party calls, bringing in relatives.
 
Special interest group multi-party calls, such as golfing 
 
buddies, sports organizations/teams, and hobbies.
But that’s only the start; what follows provides an overview on how a  
Skype-to-Skype conversation can evolve from an initial chat to a fully 
enriched business conversation.
Skype’s Full Feature Set
The original and most comprehensive platform on which to experience 
Skype is Windows desktop. This experience is now matched by more recent 
versions of Skype on Mac OS X. On these platforms, Skype generates and 
supports conversations through:
Voice calling (Skype-to-Skype, Skype-to/from landlines 
 
and mobile phones)
Video calling (Skype-to-Skype)
 
Hosting, and/or participating in, multi-party voice and 
 
video calls
Presence or status
 
Text messaging (chat, SMS)
 
Group chat
 

CHAPTER 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
44
Conversation archiving (unlimited)
 
Contact directory
 
Multiple calling features including:
 
Voice mail
 
Video messaging
 
Call forwarding
 
File transfer
 
Screen sharing
 
You can access any of these features by selecting a Contact and using a 
menu associated with the Contact. See Figure 3-1 for what a right-click on a 
Contact in Skype for Windows Desktop shows.
Figure 3-1.  Skype’s core features

CHAPTER 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
45
Note   Chapter 5 shows how to carry out these Skype functions on 
Windows desktop and Mac OS X. The functions available on mobile devices 
are generally more limited and these are covered in more detail in Chapter 6.
Figure 3-2.  Finding a contact using search
All the Skype features listed here are free, with the following exceptions:
Calls to landlines and mobile phones (including 
 
participants on a multi-party call)
SMS messaging
 
Call forwarding to a landline or wireless number. Call 
 
forwarding to another Skype user is free.
More details and costs are discussed in Chapter 7.
SKYPE AND EMERGENCY CALLS
Skype is not a replacement for your mobile or fixed-line telephone. In particular, apart from 
in very limited circumstances (Australia, Denmark, Finland, and UK), the software does 
not allow you to make emergency calls to emergency services. You must make alternative 
communication arrangements to ensure you can make emergency calls if necessary.
Conversation Flow
Conversations can easily escalate from chat to voice to video as the context 
of the conversation evolves. It is now considered good etiquette to at least 
ask, via a chat message, if the party is available to take a call.
Having agreed to at least chat it’s helpful to follow how a typical 
conversation sequence can evolve, in context, from chat to voice to video 
(and optionally to screen sharing).
To start, select a contact from People/Contacts (using Contact search if 
appropriate). In Figure 3-2 I’m searching for my contact Voice On The Web.

CHAPTER 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
46
To check whether a contact is available, start a chat conversation in the 
Conversation pane (for PC see Figure 3-3) or screen (mobile).
Figure 3-3.  Using chat to see whether a contact is free
Figure 3-4.  Voice calling options on a PC
When ready, it’s time to switch to a voice or video call. Figure 3-4 shows 
the options available for voice calling from a PC. The default is a call to a 
contact’s Skype account.

CHAPTER 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
47
If your call starts with voice only, you can choose to escalate to video at a 
later point using the video button (the left of four options in Figure 3-6), or you 
can tap or click on the + button to open the share menu seen in Figure 3-7.
Figure 3-5.  Voice calling options on a mobile device
Figure 3-6.  A voice call in progress
Figure 3-5 shows the same options as they might appear on a mobile device.

CHAPTER 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
48
This gives you the option to share files or photos, add more people to the 
conversation, or share screens.
Figure 3-7.  More options for enriching your conversation via the share menu
Figure 3-8.  Call management bar (Skype 7 for Windows)
Note   You can also use this menu to show the dial pad, which might be 
useful for example if you’re calling into a conference bridge and need to 
enter a passcode.
The call management bar shown in Figure 3-6 and in more detail in Figure 3-8 
is common to all Skype voice and video conversations. This is your route to 
the various options for enriching your Skype conversations.

CHAPTER 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
49
What is meant by enrichment? A conversation can be enriched using:
File and/or photo/image transfer
 
Screen sharing (from a participant on a PC)
 
Add People for a multi-party call
 
Chat to enter notes, URLs, email addresses, and other 
 
text-based information
Share Skype contacts
 
With all its features, a Skype conversation can be very ad hoc in terms of 
what the next step is; at each stage there are several options for enhancing 
the conversation in context.
Skype’s Unique Technology: Innovation  
for the Masses
As Skype evolved from free voice calling and instant messaging (presence 
and chat), it introduced new technologies that established the baseline 
for voice and video quality. Echo cancellation, crystal clear audio, and HD 
video are all now standard requirements for any Internet-based conversation 
service; however, Skype was the pioneer who introduced these qualities to 
the calling experience.
Emulating Face-to-Face Conversation Voice Quality
Since its launch in 2003, Skype has developed several technologies that 
establish its voice and video calling performance as benchmarks for overall 
audio and video quality.
Let’s start by talking about the voice benchmarks in terms of benefits to  
the user.
 Echo cancellation1 makes it possible to use the 
native microphone and speakers on a notebook (or 
suitably equipped desktop) without the echo that would 
otherwise occur when a call participant’s microphone 
picks up and echoes the audio from the speakers.
1http://voiceontheweb.biz/2007/03/skype-32-sets-new-standard-for-sound-
quality/

CHAPTER 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
50
 Skype’s SILK technology2 ensures that Skype-to-
Skype calls deliver crystal clear and distortion-free 
voice. The resulting “superwideband” audio quality 
is superior to what you hear on a call involving the 
conventional phone network, whether landline or 
mobile.
If you’re using a modern stereo headset, it’s SILK that makes remote parties 
on a call sound as if they are in-your-head. It significantly reduces the 
“could you repeat that” issues that can result from different accents or other 
distractive effects that could distort the remote party’s speech.
Skype’s SILK technology also self-adapts to underlying network conditions 
and provides optimum audio quality for connections to devices that support 
lower-quality (wideband or narrowband) audio.
Note   As one unique application of Skype’s SILK technology, musicians 
can give music lessons3 or “private concerts”4 online using Skype. 
Basically SILK captures and transmits all the harmonics of the musician’s 
voice or instrument. This only applies for Skype-to-Skype calls.
Skype also has network connection monitoring routines that manage 
network issues in real time as network conditions change during a call to 
ensure your call connection is continuously optimized. The most recent 
version of Skype for Windows Desktop even attempts to automatically 
restore a connection if lost for some reason.
Beyond echo cancellation and SILK technology, one outstanding 
issue affecting the calling environment has been the background noise 
environment you’re in when making or receiving a call—an airport, train 
station, shopping mall, or rock concert. However, taking advantage of 
phones with multiple microphones, such as more recent Microsoft Lumia 
phones and BlackBerry Passport, Skype has introduced audio processing 
technology. In these situations, signals from all the microphones are 
combined using the phone’s inherent smart signal processing technology to 
zoom in to your voice and cancel everything else.
2http://voiceontheweb.biz/2009/02/silk-skypes-new-audio-codec-sets-new-
performance-standards-for-voice-conversations/
3http://mukilteobeacon.villagesoup.com/news/story/skype-helps-local-
musician-share-lessons-with-the-online-world/226100/
4http://mashable.com/2012/03/14/denison-witmer-skype-concerts/

CHAPTER 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
51
Evolving to HD Video
Skype has also played a key role in the evolution of image quality in video 
calls. Today, the video image quality is excellent on both PCs and mobile 
devices, provided there is enough Internet bandwidth. There are two 
different levels of video:
 Skype High Quality Video: Skype pioneered High 
Quality Video with its launch in the fall of 2007,5 
including these three key features:
640 x 480 (VGA) resolution at 30 frames per second
 
Kept the minimum user Internet connection upload 
 
speed to a level offered by most broadband Internet 
services (512 Kbps)
Takes advantage of Logitech webcams or the 
 
webcams incorporated into more recent PC and 
laptop display panels
 Skype HD Video: In late 2010 Skype introduced 
support for HD Video (720p),6 including these three 
features:
720p resolution at 22 frames per second (30 fps on 
 
Logitech webcams)
Kept the minimum user Internet connection upload 
 
speed to the 1.2 Mbps offered by most broadband 
Internet services as an option
Required a Skype-certified HD video webcam from 
 
Logitech or other vendors or the webcam on Macs 
offered in June 2011 or later.
When High Quality and HD video were first introduced, Skype certified 
certain vendors’ webcams for optimum video call performance. However, by 
2013 the hardware technology had evolved to the point where most third-
party webcams and embedded webcams provided as standard on notebook 
PCs and PC displays support HD video, often at 1080p resolution.
5http://voiceontheweb.biz/tag/high-quality-video-launch/
6http://voiceontheweb.biz/2010/12/skype-for-windows-5-0-upgrade-the-
return-of-hd-video-calling/

CHAPTER 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
52
Smartphones and tablets introduced since 2013 also support HD video, 
with not only 720p but also 1080p resolutions. In 2014 Skype introduced 
upgrades to their mobile and tablet applications to support either HD video 
resolutions or “quarter-HD” video (960 x 540).
Rich Conversation in Action: Skype as a 
Support Tool
There are many scenarios in which Skype's features can add value to a 
conversation. One example I often encounter is Skype's usefulness as a 
support tool. I often receive queries about PC usage, involving not only 
Skype but also other applications. When feasible I suggest using Skype to 
help resolve the other party’s issue. For example, you can:
Use chat to discuss an issue, either in real time, or as 
 
and when you have time available. Chat has become my 
primary conversation mode; when it comes to support 
it remains so, especially given that messages can be 
left to be picked up when the other user comes online 
or accesses his Skype account from any device. Chat 
is ideal during a voice or video call to record notes and 
exchange links that complement the conversation.
Use screen sharing to have the user demonstrate the 
 
issue she is encountering. Screen sharing opens up 
a real-time window into the other user’s desktop to 
either see what they are doing or to provide monitored 
guidance complementing the conversation.
Use SnagIt screen captures with file transfer to 
 
demonstrate how an item should appear or to have the 
other user highlight a particular point. Screen capture 
to image transfer only requires four clicks: Share | Send 
to Skype | Select Contact | Send. This works only for 
transfer to a single contact; sending to a Group Chat 
requires the more cumbersome process of saving a 
screen capture and then using file transfer to send the 
saved file.
Enter a URL in the chat window to provide instant 
 
access to a resource that may address the issue. 
Click the link to browse a website supporting the 
conversation or to send an email that complements the 
conversation.

CHAPTER 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
53
While most support calls require only a voice connection, there are times—in 
context of the discussion—when a video call can expedite resolution. Facial 
expressions contribute to comprehension; of course video can also be used 
to demonstrate hardware or how to fix an item.
Support activity is best suited to Skype on a Mac or a PC with its complete 
feature set (including screen sharing).
Summary
Skype is more than simply making voice calls; it takes everyday physical 
office activities and transforms them into a virtual office that allows a 
business to overcome geographical barriers and build businesses worldwide 
without all the travel expense. Three use cases outlining how Skype has 
contributed to a business’s growth are covered in Chapter 4.
While users can make voice calls to legacy landline and mobile phone 
numbers, establishing Skype Contact relationships is critical to taking 
advantage of Skype’s many conversation enrichment features.
Having covered Skype’s full feature set and conversation flow, it’s time 
to move on to talking about how these features are used in practice 
to create rich Skype conversations within both business and personal 
communications activities.
Key Points
Skype’s features allow business teams to enrich conversations through 
sharing desktops, exchanging documents and graphics through file transfer, 
adding contacts to create multi-party calls, as well as logging and archiving 
all conversation activity for later recall.
Skype also supports personal relationships on the road through family calls, 
video calls, or catching up with special interest groups.
A Skype call can start as a simple voice call, and then seamlessly evolve 
in to video. It’s also easy to add people to a conversation on the fly, share 
screens, and send files or photos during the call.
Skype’s audio and video technologies deliver crystal clear voice and  
high-quality HD video across all platforms. Amongst other benefits, crystal 
clear voice reduces “can you repeat that” requests and permits music 
education over Skype.

55
Chapter 4
Using Skype in  
Business—Use Cases
According to statistics issued in the past 35%−40% of Skype activity 
involves business use. As mentioned earlier Skype has helped many 
startups and small businesses grow their operations worldwide and take 
geography out of the barriers to growth. Businesses can hire the best 
personnel from a worldwide pool of talent; they can find the best suppliers 
for a project or building hardware and, most importantly, they can market 
their offerings worldwide.
For this book, three companies have offered to tell their story about how 
they use Skype and how it makes their operations more productive and 
more profitable, especially through reduced communications and overhead 
costs (such as travel).
zenPeak—Recruiting Executives with a 
Social Algorithm
zenPeak is a combination of an executive search firm, alongside a 
tech development arm deploying location-based technology on mobile 
smartphones. Operating out of Toronto, Canada zenPeak has a local staff 
of home-based recruiters filling positions at businesses in southern Ontario 
managed by CEO Frank Abrams. The HR services are complemented by 
a smartphone application built by developers in India, created for resale to 
HR departments. With a customer base primarily in southern Ontario and 
employees working from home offices, Skype has become a valuable tool 
for ongoing virtual water fountain conversations using Skype Group Chat. 

CHAPTER 4: Using Skype in Business—Use Cases 
56
On the other hand Frank manages a team of developers in India who are 
several time zones away. Aside from using chat, there are frequent one-to-one  
voice calls and occasional group voice or video calls, especially when 
launching a new project.
Frank reflected on their use of Skype with the following comments:
Skype is platform agnostic and empowers employees to 
 
decide on their PC and/or mobile devices.
Employees and developers can follow and 
 
participate in conversations whether on PCs or 
mobile devices.
When they leave their home office, conversations 
 
continue to flow on their mobile device.
It’s available 24/7; comments can be made at any time 
 
in various chat sessions. Frank receives calls from India 
at any time, often when it’s overnight at the home base. 
From India he frequently gets calls simply to clarify an 
issue.
When launching a new product development phase, 
 
Frank often needs 60 to 90 minutes to explain the goals 
and details of the work via a group voice call to the 
developer team in India. Basically, Skype becomes a 
virtual conference room for these presentations.
The developers often use screen sharing to reinforce a 
 
discussion.
They make frequent use of file transfer to send a screen 
 
capture related to the product under development (using 
MW Snap but could also use SnagIt).
To quote Frank:
Skype has become critical to zenPeak’s operations, not 
simply because most services are free but because it goes 
beyond voice connections. Skype’s enriched communications 
features facilitate zenPeak’s business processes and make our 
operations more productive.

CHAPTER 4: Using Skype in Business—Use Cases 
57
Bicymple—Innovative Bicycle Re-Engineering 
Bicymple LLC. is a small business located in Bellingham, WA, USA that 
sells the innovative and unique bicycle, “the bicymple.” The bicymple is 
stylish, fun, and unlike any other bike on the market thanks to its direct-drive 
system and symmetrical front and rear steering. The bicymple was brought 
to market via crowdfunding and the company makes extensive use of the 
available digital tools to get business done.
Josh Bechtel and Gabe Starbuck have created a successful manufacturing 
startup out of thin air, built around an innovative redesign of one of the 
world’s most ubiquitous pieces of equipment. More details on their unique 
design can be found on the Bicymple website (http://www.bicymple.com/).
Skype facilitates building relationships with suppliers, distributors, 
designers, and fabricators—both across town and across the planet. 
Deploying Skype on Windows, Mac, and Android phones and tablets they 
benefit from:
Skype-to-Skype voice and video calls, including  
 
Group calls
Group chats
 
Individual chat
 
Screen sharing
 
Skype provides the underlying communications platform for virtual water 
fountain conversations, customer sales activities, document sharing, 
demonstrations, PowerPoint presentations, team meetings, and individual 
one-to-one chat conversations.
Skype helps with:
Sourcing parts from other experts in Washington State, 
 
California, and The United Kingdom while collaborating 
with a 150-year-old unicycle hub manufacturer in 
Switzerland.
Getting in touch with an audience of bike enthusiasts 
 
and consumers around the world. Proud new owners of 
Bicymples can be found from Germany to The United 
Arab Emirates to Australia.
Reducing travel and startup costs associated with 
 
building up production facilities.

CHAPTER 4: Using Skype in Business—Use Cases 
58
To quote Josh:
It’s really cool to use Skype1 to connect with other designers 
to make sure the product is exactly what we need it to be. We 
can see changes real-time, kind of looking over their shoulder 
digitally and see what they’re working on.
The bottom line is that by employing Skype’s many features beyond the 
voice call, Skype has contributed to their “lean startup” approach to 
manufacturing.
Advansys—Software Solutions Building 
Business Productivity 
Advansys, established in 1989, is an Australian software development 
company specializing in innovative business solutions. Advansys’ solutions 
have included council document automation, mobile device synchronization 
software, email client extension and developer tools, user and administrator 
managed archiving, and data conversion solutions.
Advansys is a mature, dynamic organization with the partnerships and 
commercial and technical experience to assist organizations to maximize 
their collaboration investment. Advansys has been using Skype since 2004.
Quoting Advansys Managing Director Greg Bell from an updated version of 
a post originally appearing in the Skype Big Blog:2
“When Skype came along it was a fantastic opportunity for our small 
business to cut costs,” Bell says. International calls from Australia came with 
a high price tag, and Bell’s staff often spoke with customers at length.
Fast forward 12 years, and Bell relies on Skype Manager3, Instant Messaging, 
Calling Plan subscriptions, online numbers4, and call forwarding5 to maintain 
1http://www.skype.com/en/?intcmp=blogs-_-generic-click-_-bicycle-
startup-gears-up-with-group-video-calling
2http://blogs.skype.com/2012/08/02/advansys-employees-find-work-l/
3http://www.skype.com/intl/en-us/business/skype-manager/?intcmp=blogs-_-
generic-click-_-advansys-employees-find-work-l
4http://www.skype.com/intl/en-us/features/allfeatures/online-
number/?intcmp=blogs-_-generic-click-_-advansys-employees-find-work-l
5http://www.skype.com/intl/en-us/features/allfeatures/call-forwarding/? 
intcmp=blogs-_-generic-click-_-advansys-employees-find-work-l

CHAPTER 4: Using Skype in Business—Use Cases 
59
constant communication with employees, partners, and customers. Video 
calling6 and screen sharing7 enhance dealings with external partners. He and 
his staff also are devotees of ongoing group chats.
6http://www.skype.com/intl/en-us/features/allfeatures/video-
call/?intcmp=blogs-_-generic-click-_-advansys-employees-find-work-l
7http://www.skype.com/intl/en-us/features/allfeatures/screen-
sharing/?intcmp=blogs-_-generic-click-_-advansys-employees-find-work-l
8http://www.skype.com/intl/en/features/allfeatures/skype-
wifi/?intcmp=blogs-_-generic-click-_-advansys-employees-find-work-l
Tip  To make it easier to find valuable information within Skype chat 
conversations later, Advansys employees use hashtags such as #todo or 
#idea in ongoing chats.
“Skype is the central nervous system of our business,” says Bell. “We’re fully 
virtualized—all our staffers work from home.”
Years ago, Bell experienced the frustrations of downtime and traffic when he 
traveled the area as a computer engineer for HP. His four core staff members 
are spread throughout the suburbs of Sydney, a city of more than 4.6 million 
people. When Advansys went virtual, one employee gained back nearly  
20 hours each week.
“They appreciate having the extra time to spend with their families or to do 
whatever they enjoy,” Bell says. “It’s a major improvement in quality of life. 
It’s not only time and productivity—I think you live longer if you can avoid the 
traffic!”
But Skype’s not all business for Bell. At one point he traveled frequently 
abroad, meaning less time to spend with his wife and three children. He 
recalls sitting in the waiting lounge of the airport in Frankfurt, Germany, 
taking advantage of Skype and free Wi-Fi8 to talk to his small son while 
playing a building simulation game together online.
“It was amazing. I could hear him clearly and be playing with him in a virtual 
environment,” says Bell. “It made us feel so close to each other and yet we 
were half a world apart.”
At one point, Bell’s teenage daughter fell ill and ended up in the hospital. 
Bell stayed close by as she recovered, using Skype from the waiting room to 
keep his business running.

CHAPTER 4: Using Skype in Business—Use Cases 
60
“Being online and being available is essential, particularly in our fast-moving 
business,” Bell says.
What’s next for Advansys? Not only does the company count on Skype for 
business collaboration and family ties, it has built a product to be used in 
conjunction with Skype. RecollX, the company’s first Skype-related product, 
allows users to archive their full written chat history, search it with what 
Bell calls an “industrial strength search engine,” and then export to the 
application of their choice.
And today Advansys continues to use Skype.
Their employees communicate with their customers and sales partners 
using Skype on Windows PCs, iPhones, iPad, Android phones, and 
Windows 8 Phones (see Chapters 5 and 6 for details of how to use Skype 
on these platforms).
They use all the features of Skype, including group chat, voice, and video to 
support:
Virtual water fountain conversations (via Group chat)
 
Customer sales activities
 
Customer service support
 
Customer tech support
 
Screen sharing for document sharing, demonstrations 
 
and PowerPoint presentations
File/photo sharing (or screen capture sharing via SnagIt)
 
Team meetings
 
Individual one-to-one chat
 
Team or staff training
 
Advansys Managing Director Greg Bell stated that:
We use Skype chat very heavily for documenting discussions, 
decisions during meetings, and documenting core elements of 
our product development process. As a result, Skype history 
is a critical resource and we, through necessity, developed 
RecollX to handle archiving and research of large volumes of 
Skype history.

CHAPTER 4: Using Skype in Business—Use Cases 
61
Summary
These three businesses are representative of how Skype has become a 
critical tool not only for low cost communications but also building business 
relationships worldwide. Leveraging a small employee base they are able 
to maintain sustainable contact across time zones and create a productive 
business environment.
Enrichment of Skype conversations using file transfer and screen sharing has 
been discussed in Chapter 3. The remainder of this book provides guidance 
on how to use the various Skype features mentioned in this chapter:
Details on using Skype on PCs and mobile devices are 
 
covered in Chapters 5 and 6.
Chat, the most used feature of Skype, is covered in 
 
Chapter 8.
How business teams can build synergy and success 
 
with Skype’s collaboration features such as screen 
sharing, group calling, and group chat are discussed in 
Chapter 11.
Using Skype with landlines and mobile phones is 
 
discussed in Chapter 7. This is complemented by the 
associated discussion on payments, subscriptions, and 
managing your Skype account in Chapter 9.

63
Chapter 5
Using Skype on the 
Desktop 
So far the discussion has covered how Skype can contribute to more 
effective business processes, how to set up an account, and how to build 
a Skype Contact directory. Now let’s turn to using Skype on its many 
supported PC, smartphone, and tablet platforms.
Skype is fundamentally a software application that supports various  
modes of conversation. Since its launch as a Windows application in late 
August 2003 versions have become available for Mac OS X and Linux PCs; 
new features ranging from calling landlines and mobile phones to video 
calling have been introduced over its first decade. This chapter covers using 
Skype on Windows PCs and Macs.
In April 2009 Skype introduced its first application for mobile smartphones—
Skype for iPhone—with a very limited feature set. Today Skype is available  
on all iOS (iPhone, iPad, iPod Touch), Android, BlackBerry 10, Windows 
Phone 8, and Amazon Fire devices with an almost complete feature set, 
including support for HD video resolutions. Using Skype on mobile devices 
is covered in Chapter 6.
With Microsoft’s acquisition of Skype in late 2011, Skype access has 
become integrated into Outlook 2010 and 2013, and Outlook.com 
(Microsoft’s web mail replacement for Hotmail). In addition, Skype has been 
hooked up with Microsoft Lync, Microsoft’s enterprise communications 
application. In early 2015, Microsoft will also make Skype available for 
making and receiving calls within a web browser and introduce Skype for 

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
64
Office Online, which provides Skype chat while collaborating on a Word or 
PowerPoint document. More details on these integrations are provided in 
Chapter 12.
Consistent with Microsoft’s policy of providing automatic updates for 
Windows and Office, Skype updates are now automatic on all platforms; 
this is becoming more important for both maintaining compatibility across 
devices as Skype’s backend infrastructure is modified and upgraded and 
addressing any security issues.
Once you have a Skype account, have established a few contacts, and have 
an Internet connection in place, you can start making (and receiving) calls 
using your Skype client or application. The basic process for placing a call is
Select a Contact
 
Find the Phone or Webcam icon and click on the icon to 
 
launch a voice or video call, respectively
Within the context of the call, share files, add 
 
participants, and exchange text-based information in 
the Chat pane.
The details differ by platform; in this chapter we’ll cover the details behind 
making a call on Windows and Mac OS X desktops.
THE FACEBOOK CONNECTION
For the past few years, Skype has included an option to Connect to Facebook on both the 
Windows and Mac client’s home page. This connection provides:
Incorporation of your Facebook news feed summaries into the home 
• 
page display.
Addition of your Facebook Contacts into your Contacts directory, 
• 
including any landline or mobile phone numbers in their Facebook 
profiles. Contacts can optionally be displayed using the Contacts  
drop-down menu.
Features relating to the Facebook connection and Facebook Contacts appear throughout  
this chapter.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
65
Skype for Windows Desktop
Skype for Windows was the original Skype software launched in August 2003. 
It has been continuously updated over the years to incorporate calling to 
landlines and mobile phones (originally called SkypeOut), SMS messaging, 
echo cancellation1, the SILK codec2 for crystal-clear audio quality on Skype-
to-Skype calls, High Quality (VGA) Video3, HD Video4, optional Facebook 
integration5 and, most recently, video messaging.
Skype for Windows continues to be the most feature-rich version and can 
be used to manage all your Skype calling activity in terms of managing 
Contacts, hosting multi-party calls, building groups, sharing files, checking 
your audio and video hardware, and archiving your Skype conversation 
activity. It’s all done using the Skype for Windows Desktop client shown in 
Figure 5-1.
1http://voiceontheweb.biz/2007/03/skype-32-sets-new-standard-for-sound-
quality/
2http://voiceontheweb.biz/2009/02/silk-skypes-new-audio-codec-sets-new-
performance-standards-for-voice-conversations/
3http://voiceontheweb.biz/tag/high-quality-video-launch/
4http://voiceontheweb.biz/2010/12/skype-for-windows-5-0-upgrade-the-
return-of-hd-video-calling/
5http://voiceontheweb.biz/2011/06/skype-for-windows-5-5-beta-first-
impressions-with-facebook-integration/

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
66
As mentioned earlier, Skype upgrades Skype for Windows every two or 
three months. While often introducing new features, they may also include 
modifications of existing features—with the intention of improving the user 
experience. Concurrently Skype is upgrading the “back office” infrastructure 
to both add more features and make the calling experience more reliable 
and robust. While there are manual upgrade methods available via the 
Skype Garage blog, once an upgrade version is shown to be stable for a few 
days, Skype automatically offers to upgrade your installation.
The discussion in this section reflects the user interface when using Skype 7 
for Windows Desktop, which introduced several incremental changes6 that 
modified and enhanced the user experience.
Figure 5-1.  Skype 7.0 for Windows Desktop client
6http://voiceontheweb.biz/skype-world/skype-software/skype-5-10-windows-
revised-contacts-management/

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
67
Tip  Follow Voice On The Web7 for information on changes as new 
versions come out.
The Skype for Windows client has three main elements:
A Personal pane that provides access to your Skype 
 
Profile (click on your own name at the top), as well 
as an icon menu with access to a Skype Home Page 
incorporating your Facebook News feed and/or contacts’ 
Skype mood messages, a dial pad (Call Phones), group 
creation, and new contacts search.
A Contacts pane on the left side, below the Personal 
 
pane, where you can build your Contacts directory and 
launch your calling activity via the Contacts tab and the 
Recent activity tab showing the Contacts or Groups 
with whom you have communicated recently.
A Conversation pane on the right side that contains 
 
not only your chat messages with a selected Contact 
(or Group) but also a log of all your other Skype activity 
with the selected Contact such as calls made and files 
transferred. Internet URLs, including website and email 
addresses, are automatically converted into actionable 
links.
The Conversation pane content is archived on your local PC and is searchable 
(Ctrl-F) to recover information going back to when chat communication with 
the Contact commenced. It is most useful for recovering URLs exchanged, 
discussion records, and other chat information. A more detailed discussion of 
using the Conversation pane is covered in Chapter 8.
7http://voiceontheweb.biz/tag/skype-for-windows/

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
68
Note  There are two ways to use Skype on Windows 8 and 8.1: by using 
Skype for Windows Desktop as discussed in this chapter, or by using the 
Windows 8 Skype app. The second option is covered in Chapter 6 because 
it follows the same user experience as Skype on mobile devices. This option 
is available on any device with any version of Windows 8 or 8.1 installed, 
including Microsoft’s Surface and other vendors’ Windows 8 tablets, whereas 
desktop Skype is only available on devices with a full version of Windows 8 or 
8.1, such as Surface Pro models and any desktop or laptop PC.
The Personal Pane
The Personal pane, shown in Figure 5-2, provides access to your Skype 
Profile (click on your name at the top) as well as a Skype Home page, a dial 
pad, and contact search.
Figure 5-2.  Skype for Windows Desktop Personal pane
The Skype home page (see Figure 5-3) summarizes recent activity in the 
form of a text box for changing your Skype Mood Message and content 
selected from any of your Facebook News Feed (if you have elected to log 
into Facebook), your Skype Contacts’ Mood Messages, Alerts Messages 
from Skype, or all three. It’s really a personal choice as to which you follow 
and can easily be changed.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
69
Mousing over the webcam image beside a Facebook Friend’s name opens 
a menu to call them on Skype or call them at their home, mobile, or work 
phone via calling to landline or mobile numbers in their Facebook profile.
Selecting Call Phones opens up a dial pad, see Figure 5-4, in the 
Conversation pane. Depending on the width of your Skype client (simply 
widen or narrow the Skype window) you will see:
Facebook LogIn/Out
Launch call to
Skype Contact
Enter your Mood Message
Select Content
Figure 5-3.  Skype for Windows Desktop home page
Figure 5-4.  Skype for Windows Desktop dial pad
You can either enter a phone number directly or start to enter a Contact’s 
name and a dialog frame opens in which phone number options appear, if 
phone numbers have been entered into a Contact’s profile.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
70
The Contacts Pane
Think of the Contacts pane (see Figure 5-5) as a combination of your 
personal phonebook, call-by-name “dialer” and archived conversation 
selector. Select a Contact from the Contacts or Recent tabs and, in the 
Conversation pane, you can:
Enter a text message to that Contact
 
Launch a voice or video call with the Contact
 
Send an SMS message, if the Contact has identified a 
 
mobile phone number in his/her Skype Profile
Send files, photos, or a video message
 
Send a Skype Contact profile
 
View previous messages and conversation history
 
Search the Contact’s conversation history for past 
 
messages, call detail records, web URLs, and file 
transfers.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
71
Figure 5-5.  Skype 7.0 for Windows Desktop Contact pane

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
72
When using the Contact pane there are several other tips that can help your 
overall use of Skype:
Contacts have the option to enter their Work/Mobile/
 
Home phone numbers; they are available via View 
Profile in a Contact’s right-click menu. When they do not 
enter them into their public profile you can now enter 
them into a Contact’s information on your local PC (see 
Figure 5-6):
a.	 Select a Contact.
b.	 Right-click and select View Profile.
c.	 Select Add Number.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
73
d.	 Select Mobile, Home, Office, or Other.
e.	 Select a country.
f.	
Enter the contact’s phone number.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
74
g.	 Click the check mark on the right to complete entry 
of the phone number into the Profile seen on the 
local PC; (note also that it is editable).
h.	 Either click the number in the Profile or the Call icon 
in the Conversation pane header to initiate a call to 
the number.
You can rename a Contact to make it more readily 
 
identifiable. Right-click the Contact’s name in the 
Contacts or Recent tab, and select Rename. This is 
useful when a Contact fails to enter their full name or 
only has a SkypeID showing. (How many of your friends 
are named John or Mary?) Note that Rename only 
appears on your local PC. You must make this change 
on each device where your account is logged in.
To search for a Contact, enter a name in the Contacts 
 
Search bar and the Contact tab will filter down the 
Contacts list to those names containing the text you 
have entered.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
75
With Skype 7 for Windows there is also an option to show Contact names 
in either a Contact Sidebar View with no profile images (View | Contact 
Sidebar View) or a default view that includes profile images. A List  
(or Category) is simply a subset of your Contacts in Skype for Windows; 
here are some details.
There is some confusion between Lists and Groups. 
 
A List is an identified subset of all your Contacts. 
You may identify them as Work colleagues, a special 
interest group name, or any other subset that you 
feel appropriate. A Group is a set of your Contacts 
participating in a Group conversation.
To set up a List, in the main Skype menu , go to 
 
Contacts | Contact Lists | Create a New List (see 
Figure 5-7) or, alternatively, right-click any Contact name 
and select Add to List, then select Create New List.
Figure 5-7.  Contact Lists
Add Contacts to a List simply using Add to List on 
 
the right-click menu for any Contact and selecting the 
desired List.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
76
To filter your displayed Contacts by Lists there are two options:
Go to the drop-down menu immediately below your 
 
Favorites and select a List; note there are four priority 
Categories: All, Skype, Online, and Facebook.
From the main Skype menu select Contacts | Contact 
 
Lists and a similar menu appears. Note that towards the 
end of this menu there is also an option to create a List.
In Skype for Windows as mentioned elsewhere, a Group is created solely for 
the establishment of a multi-party Group conversation, whether Chat, Voice, 
or Video. Groups are created via the Create a Group icon in the Personal 
pane and are maintained in your Contacts tab for later recall. Groups also 
show up in the Recent tab if they have been recently active. If you add 
People during a call (via the + menu in the Call Management bar), a Group is 
created that appears under the Recent tab after ending the call.
If you have logged into Facebook, your Facebook friends will appear on the 
Facebook List or in All.
The Conversation Pane
The Conversation Pane, on the right side of the Skype window, builds a 
persistent archive of all your Skype activity with each individual Contact and 
Group. On selection of a Contact in the Contacts pane the Conversation pane:
Stores and recalls conversation history by Contact or 
 
Group going back in time to the “Beginning” (when you 
first exchanged a message with the Contact or Group).
Includes a pane at the bottom for text entry (along with 
 
emoticons).
Allows you to share a file/photo, send a video message, 
 
or exchange a Contact profile by clicking the paperclip 
icon to the left of the text pane.
Records voice and video call details: time of call, duration 
 
of call (also known as a call detail record or CDR).
Records file sharing activity with an active link to both 
 
the file and the folder in which it was stored.
Converts any website URLs and email addresses 
 
entered to active links.
Permits editing or removal of a message for up to an 
 
hour after it has been posted.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
77
Messages and other information are recorded with the most recent item at 
the bottom of the window. Note there is a time associated with each entry;  
if you scroll up you will also find date dividers. More details on Chat and  
its archiving activities are covered in Chapter 8.
Figure 5-8.  Compact view—individual chat windows for each Contact or Group
Tip  A Skype account can be open on multiple PCs and mobile devices 
concurrently. Skype’s infrastructure supports bringing up message history 
for an account when logging in to Skype on a different device.
If you want to ensure that you always have a long-term, searchable history 
of your Skype conversations, always leave Skype for Windows or Skype 
for Mac open while traveling away from the home office and using Skype 
on a mobile device.
The Conversation pane can be optionally split off as a separate window 
using the View | Split Window View menu selection (see Figure 5-8). This 
way you can have a separate window for each Contact’s chat session or 
each Group Chat activity.
When you are in this mode, double-click a Contact’s name in the Contact 
pane (now a separate window) and a new window opens up with that 
Contact’s conversation log. It is probably best to do this when you have a 
second display on which you can display only those chat sessions.
Return to the single window view via View | Default View.
For further discussion of Skype Chat, the conversation pane, and archiving 
your Skype conversation activity see Chapter 8.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
78
Facebook Chat
If you have connected a Skype client with your Facebook account, a 
completely independent set of Contacts will show up in your Contacts pane, 
accessed through the Facebook tab. If you select to have a Facebook chat 
session, the Contact’s name at the top of the conversation pane will have 
“Facebook” below the name (see Figure 5-9). Facebook messages are 
mirrored in Facebook Messenger apps on smartphones and tablets and on 
your Facebook page in a browser.
Figure 5-10.  Conversation pane header
Figure 5-9.  Facebook contact differentiation
The Conversation Pane Header
A significant feature of the Conversation pane is the set of Call icons in the 
Conversation Pane header for an individual Contact (see Figure 5-10).
To launch a call, select Video Call (camera icon) or Call (phone icon) as 
shown in Figure 5-10; with the latter you may also have to select how you 
want to call the Contact: Skype, Mobile, Office, Home.
The Add people icon brings up a list of all your Contacts from which you  
can select one or more to create a multi-party conversation session  
(see Figure 5-11). When you do this, the Call button changes to a Call  
Group button.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
79
Using the Webcam icon you can also launch a Group Video call  
(see Figure 5-12).
Figure 5-11.  Add People, building a Group
Figure 5-12.  Call Group
Figure 5-13.  Text entry box (with emoticons) and sharing options
To the left of the text entry box at the bottom of the Conversation pane 
is a paperclip icon. This launches a menu that gives you options to send 
a photo/image, send a file (see the section “File Transfer”), send a video 
message or send a contact. The last option sends the entire Skype profile 
of any Contact that you choose to the selected Contact (see Figure 5-13). 
Clicking the icon on the right brings up the emoticon selection panel.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
80
File Transfer
There are five different ways to trigger a file transfer using Skype’s File 
Transfer feature.
 Method 1: Right-click a Contact in the Contacts  
pane (either in the Contacts or Recent tab), and select 
Send files ….
 Method 2: Select the paperclip icon to the left of the 
text entry box, click Send File, and browse to the file 
you want to send. Note that when in a Group Chat or 
Call, the file can only be transferred to those members 
of the Group whom you have accepted as a Skype 
Contact.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
81
 Method 3: During a call, click the “+” symbol in the Call 
Management bar and select Send File…. When a file 
transfer occurs during a call, the transfer speed may be 
somewhat slower.
 Method 4: In File Explorer, right-click any File name, 
select Send To, and select Skype in the drop-down 
menu.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
82
 Method 5: Using the screen capture program SnagIt8 
you can add the Skype plugin that allows you to send 
a capture image directly to a Skype Contact as a file 
transfer. This is the file transfer method I use most 
frequently. It is very handy for complementing the 
conversation with live, in-context bug reporting or 
training and help.
8http://www.techsmith.com/snagit/

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
83
In October 2014, Skype started storing transferred files on the cloud such 
that file transfers remain available for recall by either the sender or receiver. 
If the cloud mode is fully supported in a Skype client or application you will 
see a thumbnail representing the file. In the case of an image, the thumbnail 
is of the image itself; for documents the thumbnail is an icon image of the 
application that is associated with the document’s extension. Simply click 
the thumbnail to view the image in an application associated with the file 
extension. See Figure 5-14 for Skype 7 for Windows and Mac.
Figure 5-14.  File transfer Conversation pane images—sent and received
If a client has yet to support the cloud-based storage, there will be a URL to 
click to view the image (see Figure 5-15). This is a temporary situation until 
all clients support cloud-based file storage.
Figure 5-15.  Interim file transfer records in Conversation pane
During a file transfer any active security software, such as Norton 360, will 
check for viruses.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
84
A Skype Voice Call
On launching or accepting a Skype voice call, the Conversation pane 
becomes a dark background Call Screen (see Figure 5-16) and shows the 
profile image(s) of the called Contact(s) along with the Call Management bar, 
which includes icons for Show/Hide Chat, Show/Hide Contacts, and going 
to full screen display:
Full Screen
Show/Hide
Chat
Call Quality
Info
Show/Hide
Contacts
Figure 5-16.  Voice call screen

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
85
Essential to managing the call is the Call Management bar at the bottom of 
the Call Screen. If it has disappeared after showing for several seconds, run 
your mouse over the lower portion of the Call Screen to bring it back.
Click the relevant icon to switch the webcam on/off, mute/unmute mic, end 
a call, access Call Quality Information, show/hide the Chat pane or, in the 
case of the “+” icon, to display a menu showing the sharing options. Call 
duration appears under the Skype profile picture of the calling party.
From within the Call Management Bar you can turn on/off full screen display 
(see Figure 5-16). However, there is also a call monitor window that is 
displayed whenever the user goes to another application on the desktop 
during a call. Running the cursor over this window brings up the mute/
unmute and end call controls shown in Figure 5-17.
Figure 5-17.  Call Monitor window
Tip  Where is that Chat area?9 When launching a call the Call screen 
takes up the entire Conversation pane (or Skype client if you hide 
Contacts). Click the Chat icon on the right side of the Call Management bar 
and, as shown in Figures 5-18 and 5-19, an area will appear at the bottom 
of, or on the right side of, the client window for chat messages that can 
complement and support the conversation.
9http://voiceontheweb.biz/2011/06/skype-5-x-chat-show-the-chat-window/

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
86
Figure 5-18.  Voice Call screen with Chat—narrow
Becoming familiar with the use of the Call Management bar is fundamental 
to taking full advantage of Skype’s call support features during a call.
During the call you can have a two- or three-panel screen comprising the 
Call Screen, Contacts, and/or Chat (see Figures 5-18 and 5-19).

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
87
Click Show/Hide Contacts and you have the three panel client as shown in 
Figure 5-20.
Figure 5-19.  Voice Call screen with chat—wide
By widening the Skype client window the chat moves to a right sidebar  
(see Figure 5-19).

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
88
If you have made a Skype-to-Skype call, you should have a crystal-clear 
voice connection. If not, use the Call Quality Info tool to determine whether 
your speakers, mic, webcam, and Internet connection are working properly.
Call Quality Info
The Call Quality Info feature (see Figure 5-21) allows you to easily check 
your audio/video hardware and Internet connection quality in situ during a 
call. This is a most useful and user friendly feature; when your mic/speaker 
doesn’t work, the webcam video is fuzzy, and the Internet connection 
becomes weak. It provides a much simplified path for checking out any 
hardware issues during a call as opposed to checking via the Windows 
Control Panel or even Skype’s Tools | Options utility—not exactly user friendly 
processes.
Figure 5-20.  Three panel screen: Contacts, Call, and Chat

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
89
Select a microphone and speak into it. While Automatic 
 
usually suffices, the option to manually adjust is there. 
Also there is the option to change the microphone being 
used in the call.
The speaker tab allows you to change the speaker 
 
selection if you’re not hearing the other party.
You can select your webcam and check its image 
 
quality.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
90
During a call you may also see the video status. Having 
 
a powerful enough PC does help with the overall call 
quality. At a minimum a multi-core processor, such as 
Intel’s iCore series, is required for good video.
Finally, check the Connection status between the call 
 
participants.
Should you lose your Internet connection Skype attempts to restore the 
connection for up to 60 seconds; if not restored it will end the call (see 
Figure 5-22).
Figure 5-22.  Call connection recovery

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
91
When you complete a call (use the red End Call button on the Call 
Management bar or in a Call Monitor window), a Call Detail Record Entry 
(see Figure 5-23) is made in the Contact’s Conversation pane showing who 
was called, the call duration, and when the call was terminated.
Figure 5-23.  Call detail record
MAKING A SKYPE TEST CALL
If you want to test your mic, speakers, and webcam prior to making a call, place a call to 
Skype Test Call. This contact appears in your Contact list by default when you install Skype. 
It may also be called Echo / Sound Test Service or Skype Test Call (echo123). “Gertrude” 
explains how Skype Test Call works, gives you 10 seconds to say something, and then plays 
back what you said.
Next let’s turn to making a video call.
A Skype Video Call
Provided your PC has a webcam, which can be checked out via the Call 
Quality Info icon in the Call Bar (or Tools | Options | General | Video Settings), 
a Skype video call is launched via the Video Call button (see Figure 5-24). 
However, a voice call can also be escalated to a video call using the Manage 
Video icon in the Call Management bar.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
92
The Skype Video Call Management bar closely approximates the operation 
of a Skype voice call. A full screen display option (via the double arrow in 
the upper right of the Call pane) is incorporated as well as a Call Monitor 
window.
Of course, the other major difference is that the call screen also shows the 
video image in lieu of the Caller’s Skype photo/avatar.
In this example both parties used webcams that supported HD video as you 
can tell by the wider (16:9) video window aspect ratio. Otherwise the video 
image will appear with the standard 4:3 aspect ratio.
The Video Call Monitor window (see Figure 5-25) pops up as a smaller 
window that remains available on the desktop whenever you go to another 
Windows application during the call. Note that controls can still be accessed 
for muting the mic and hanging up the call. While this window remains 
“always on top,” it can be readily moved to any location on the desktop.
Figure 5-24.  Video call screen

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
93
Finally, it is possible to show the video image full screen on the display 
monitor; in this case, for displays greater than 20 inches, one starts to 
approach a telepresence scenario.
Let’s turn to one of the key sharing features available during a voice or video 
call: screen sharing.
Screen Sharing
While in either a voice or video call there is an option in the Sharing menu on 
the Call Management bar (Figure 5-16) to share your screen. You can share 
either the full screen or a selected window. Either party on a one-to-one 
Skype call or any participant on a group voice or video call can share his or 
her full desktop screen or a selected window within the desktop.
On selecting the Share your screen option a transparent pop up window 
appears (see Figure 5-26).
Figure 5-25.  Video Call Monitor window

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
94
On selecting the Share a window option thumbnails of the various active 
windows appear on a transparent background (see Figure 5-27).
Figure 5-26.  Start screen sharing options – full screen or a window

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
95
Note that again it is a transparent window that cannot be moved from the 
center of the screen; as a result any content behind the background shows 
up faintly.
On selecting s particular window or the full screen, a red outline will appear 
around the window or full screen identifying it as the area of the desktop 
being shared (see Figure 5-28).
Figure 5-27.  Select a window for screen sharing

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
96
The call monitoring window also indicates that sharing is occurring by 
offering a Stop sharing option (see Figure 5-29).
Figure 5-28.  A red outline identifies the shared window 
Figure 5-29.  Call monitoring window during screen sharing
The viewer has the option to go full screen using the same full screen icon 
shown earlier in Figure 5-16.
For my own activities Skype screen sharing has become a heavily used 
support tool for assisting others with demonstrating or using applications, 
including Skype itself.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
97
Caution  Keep in mind that screen sharing will show all the content 
selected whether full screen or only a window. Ensure there is no content 
being shared that you would want to be confidential. Also be aware 
that the recipient can use a screen capture program, such as SnagIt, to 
capture anything being shared.
Group Video Calling
Skype for Windows Desktop supports Group Video Calling (see Figure 5-30), 
with up to ten participants. It can also share one participant’s desktop during 
a Skype Group Video Call. In the spring of 2014, Skype made Group Video 
Calling a free feature.
Figure 5-30.  Group Video Call

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
98
For each participant connected through a Skype client, a Group Video Call 
takes advantage of Skype’s SILK technology to provide crystal-clear audio. 
Participants can also be added to the call’s voice stream from a PSTN 
phone (see Chapter 6 for more details); however, voice quality is limited to 
that of the participant’s carrier network. Again the speaker is highlighted 
by a blue “halo” around his/her video or avatar. When a participant goes 
to another application during the call, the Call Monitor window appears 
showing the video image or avatar of the speaker; it changes the video 
image shown as speakers change.
Skype for Windows Options
Select Tools | Options from the Skype client’s main menu to customize 
Skype according to your local desires and hardware. Beyond the General 
options shown in Figure 5-31, options are available for:
 Privacy: Allow calls and messages from anyone or only 
your Skype Contacts.
 Notifications: Select from several options when  
you want to see notification of an activity in the 
Windows tray.
 Call Settings: Allow calls from other than Skype 
Contacts, and set call forwarding numbers, voice 
messages, and video settings.
 Instant Messaging settings: Manage history 
(archiving), compact chat view, selecting folder for 
received files, SMS settings.
IM appearance provides font selection and 
 
switching between small and large emoticons.
 Advance Settings: Manage automatic Skype software 
updates, hotkey settings, and accessibility mode.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
99
Once you have experienced a few conversations and calls it is advised 
that you review these options to customize them to your individual privacy, 
activity, and hardware preferences.
SKYPE 7 FOR WINDOWS – DISPLAY OPTIONS
Skype 7 for |Windows comes with significant changes to the user interface. Many users 
have had issues with its increased use of white space and user profile images in both the 
Contacts pane and the conversation pane. The following options allow you to restore it to 
something close to its original appearance:
View | Compact Sidebar View
• 
Tools | Options | IM & SMS 
• 
➤ uncheck Compact Chat View
Tools | Options | IM & SMS | IM Appearance 
• 
➤ change font size
Tools | General 
• 
➤ Uncheck Show profile pictures
View | Split Window View
• 
These settings allow you to customize the user interface experience to suit you. 
Figure 5-31.  Skype options

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
100
Skype for Mac
Skype for Mac (OS X 10.5.8 and later) offers all the major communications 
features of Skype for Windows; however, the user interface has some 
significant differences from Skype for Windows Desktop. The most 
fundamental change is the use of the left and right panes, resulting in 
different user navigation for using a feature.
Note  This discussion reflects the user experience in Skype 7.0 for Mac, 
released in October 2014.
Skype for Mac offers the same Home Page, Profile access, Contacts 
listings or directory and Conversation panes as found in Skype for Windows 
Desktop; however, they are accessed in a different way.
The overall user interface again has a left pane and right pane; however, the 
left pane simply acts as an index or sidebar menu.
The Index Pane
The Index pane provides access to the User Account Profile, Home Page, 
Contacts, Favorites, Recent Contacts, and a History option (Figure 5-32). 
The content associated with each of these items, including “directory” 
access to Contacts, appears in the right-hand pane.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
101
User’s Skype Profile
Clicking on your Skype Name in the top-left corner brings up your Skype 
profile shown in Figure 5-33. This pane lets you edit your phone numbers, 
email addresses, and other fields. Note that there is no setting for time zone; 
this is picked up from the Mac’s Date and Time settings.
Figure 5-32.  Skype for Mac Index pane

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
102
Contacts Directory or Listing
Clicking Contacts brings up a panel listing either all Contacts or subsets 
as determined by certain standard categories, or by Lists you created. 
If Contacts were originally set up with List assignments under Skype for 
Windows, they will carry over to Lists in Skype for Mac. In Figure 5-34, the 
All option lists all contacts, whether Skype, Facebook, or phone numbers 
only, while Online lists only those contacts who are currently online, and 
Skype lists only your Skype contacts. Not shown, but accessed via the >> 
button, is the Facebook option for accessing contacts added via Facebook. 
You can also access any other subset of Contacts that have been assigned 
to Lists in Skype for Windows.
Figure 5-33.  Skype for Mac Skype profile

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
103
In the left-hand sidebar (not shown), Recent lists only those Contacts with 
whom you have had a conversation either the same day or in the previous 
24 hours, and History brings up a complete Conversation history in the right 
pane in reverse chronological order.
Skype Home Page
The Skype 7.0 for Mac Home page comprises the Contacts’ most recent 
Mood Messages and/or your Facebook newsfeed. At the top you can enter 
or change your Mood Message. Figure 5-35 provides an example.
Figure 5-34.  Skype for Mac Contacts Directory
Figure 5-35.  Skype for Mac Home page

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
104
The Window Menu
Skype for Mac includes a Window menu (see Figure 5-36) that provides 
access to separate windows in addition to the primary Skype conversation 
window. You can access the Dial Pad, a Contacts Monitor, Skype WiFi 
connections and Technical Call Info with this menu. The first three items 
are described here. The Technical Call Info Window provides diagnostic 
information about the call’s performance.
Figure 5-36.  Skype for Mac Window menu
The Dial Pad (see Figure 5-37) allows entry of landline and mobile phone 
numbers to make a call and DTMF tones for working through interactive 
voice menus once a call is answered. It can also be accessed via the Dial 
Pad icon in the top bar of the Skype client.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
105
The Contacts Monitor window (see Figure 5-38) provides a list of Contacts 
in a separate window. They can be filtered by a Group/List name.
Figure 5-37.  Skype for Mac Dial Pad
Figure 5-38.  Skype for Mac Home Contacts Monitor
The Skype WiFi menu shows any Skype WiFi access points available.
The Content Pane
The right pane’s content depends on the items selected in the Index pane. 
For instance, as shown in Figure 5-39, select Contacts, search for a Contact 
in the top bar’s Search entry and you see the various options for launching a 
conversation:

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
106
Note that there are separate Contact listings for Skype and Facebook chat. 
Selecting a listed Contact opens a chat window with the ability to escalate the 
conversation to voice or video via the webcam and phone icons in the header. 
Within the Conversation pane’s activity options (see Figure 5-40) you can:
Launch a video or voice call
 
Send files, a video message and/or a Contact profile
 
Add People (for Group conversation)
 
Figure 5-39.  Skype for Mac Contact Search
Figure 5-40.  Skype for Mac Contact’s Conversation Activity pane

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
107
Once a (chat, voice, or video) conversation has been initiated the Content 
pane contains the Conversation log, similar to what is seen in the Skype for 
Windows Conversation pane. It displays and records all chat conversation 
messages, file transfer activity, and call detail records for voice and video 
calls. Once again all the content is stored on the local PC and is searchable 
using Command-F. More information on using the Conversation pane, 
especially for chat, is covered in Chapter 8.
A Skype Voice Call
Launching a voice call brings up the dark background call screen with the 
Contact’s Profile image and the Call Management bar (see Figure 5-41). 
The other party’s name and time of the call appear in the upper-left corner. 
Clicking the double arrow in the upper-right corner expands the window to 
full screen.
Figure 5-41.  Skype for Mac Voice Call screen
Essential to managing the call is the Call Management bar at the bottom 
of the Call Screen (see Figure 5-42). If it has disappeared after showing for 
several seconds, click your mouse over the lower portion of the Call Screen 
to bring it back. 

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
108
Again Skype for Mac does make it convenient to escalate a conversation 
from chat to voice to video. At any point screen sharing can also be invoked. 
With Show Contacts and Show Chat invoked, the screen becomes a three-
panel display (see Figure 5-43).
Figure 5-42.  Skype for Mac Call Management bar
Figure 5-43.  Skype for Mac three-panel call screen

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
109
By narrowing or widening the Skype window the chat is moved between a 
sidebar on the right side (wide) and a panel below the call screen (narrow) as 
shown in Figure 5-44.
Figure 5-44.  Skype for Mac chat panel with narrow (left) and wide (right) Skype client
There is no Call Quality Information bar as in Skype for Windows; however, 
from the Window menu (shown earlier in this section) one can access the 
Technical Call Info (see Figure 5-45). (Audio and Video settings are found in 
Skype | Preferences | Audio/Video.)

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
110
If you change the cursor focus to another Mac application, a small Call 
Monitor window (see Figure 5-46) will appear on your desktop, with video if 
in a video call. From this window you can mute a mic and end the call. 
Figure 5-45.  Skype for Mac Call Technical Info Window
Figure 5-46.  Skype for Mac Voice Call Monitor window

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
111
A Skype Video Call
Either from the Contact toolbar or, if in a voice call, clicking the webcam 
button launches a video call. Most often video from the Mac comes using 
the built-in webcam at VGA resolution; however, if you have a Summer 2011 
MacBook or Mac with the second generation Intel Core processor or later, 
Skype supports sending 720p HD resolution video.
Upon launching a call you will again get the Call screen but with the 
Contact’s video in lieu of his/her avatar (see Figure 5-47).
Figure 5-47.  Skype for Mac Video Call Screen
The Call Management bar is the same as for a voice call, but with the 
webcam icon activated.
If you switch to another application during a call, the call monitor windows 
appears on the desktop incorporating a video image along with the ability to 
mute the mic and end the call (see Figure 5-48).

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
112
Figure 5-48.  Skype for Mac Video Call Monitor
Skype for Mac also supports hosting of Group Video calls with up to ten 
participants and screen sharing by one of the participants.
In a call with a party on Skype for iPhone/iPad/Android, the Skype 7.0 for 
Mac (or later) call screen automatically rotates the video image on the Mac 
to avoid having the image go “sideways” when the other party rotates their 
mobile device.
Note  Historically Skype for Mac lagged behind in features found on 
Skype for Windows but more recently they have become virtually feature 
equivalent. Features introduced on upgrades now occur on both platforms 
concurrently. While the user experience may have some differences, 
including implementation of some unique Mac OS X user interface 
features, the call experience itself is very similar.
More details on using Chat in business and participating in multi-party 
conversations will be covered in future chapters.
Tip  If left unattended or even logged off for a while, many messages will 
pop up as unread when returning to Skype. However, you can easily mark 
all conversations as read (see Figure 5-49).

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
113
Figure 5-49.  Mark All As Read
Skype for Mac Preferences
Select Skype | Preferences from the Skype client’s main menu to customize 
Skype according to your local desires and hardware. Beyond the General 
options shown in Figure 5-50, options are available for:
 Privacy: Allow calls and messages from anyone or only 
your Skype Contacts.
 Calls: Allow calls from other than Skype Contacts, set 
call forwarding numbers, voice messages, and video 
settings.
 Messaging: Set SMS and emoticon features.
 Notifications: Select from several options when you 
want to see a Notification of an activity in the Windows 
tray.
 Audio/Video: Select mic, speakers, and webcam 
(default is the hardware embedded into a Mac).
 Advance Settings: Manage automatic Skype software 
updates, hotkey settings, and accessibility mode.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
114
Figure 5-50.  Skype for Mac General options
Once you have experienced a few conversations and calls, it is advised 
that you review these options to customize them to your individual privacy, 
activity, and hardware preferences.
Summary
This chapter provides a guide to the details of using Skype’s key features in 
your real time and asynchronous communications activities on a Windows 
or Mac PC. One should take the time to check out all the options available 
while participating in conversations. Very quickly navigating through 
and participating in conversations should become intuitive. The biggest 
challenge is understanding how these features can be integrated into your 
business processes to facilitate overall productivity.

CHAPTER 5: Using Skype on the Desktop 
115
Key Points
The common Skype Home screen terminology provides 
 
access to Recent, Favorites, and People (Contacts).
Using Skype on a PC can archive conversations going 
 
back years; while Skype on a mobile device will, at 
most, archive conversations for up to 30 days.
The Skype Call Management bar on a PC, seen during 
 
a call, provides access to features such as file transfer, 
chat sessions, mic and speaker management, and the 
dial pad during a voice or video call. You can also add 
people to build a group call, share screens, hide/show 
contacts, and display the call full screen.
Options or preferences provide the flexibility to 
 
customize privacy, notification, hardware, and call 
handling settings to your individual choices.
See Chapter 6 for coverage of Skype for modern 
 
Windows, as this is a mobile-style interface, even when 
used on a desktop.

117
Chapter 6
Using Skype on Mobile 
Devices
After experimenting with various attempts at using Skype on mobile phones, 
Skype launched a true Skype application on the iPhone in April 20091. 
Initially, it only worked over Wi-Fi access points but you could call landline 
and mobile phone numbers from any Wi-Fi access point worldwide. 
Subsequent releases and upgrades for mobile devices have delivered:
Support for use on wireless carrier networks  
 
(using data plans)
Skype for Android, iPad, BlackBerry 10, Windows 8 
 
tablets, Windows Phone 8, and Amazon Fire
Fully featured chat, including support for SMS 
 
messages and edit/remove messages
Integration with native contacts on a device
 
Significant reductions in battery drain such that it is not 
 
an issue any longer
HD video calling with high-quality images
 
Support for Bluetooth audio and video shake 
 
compensation technology.
1http://voiceontheweb.biz/2009/04/skype-for-iphone-the-response-and-coverage/

CHAPTER 6: Using Skype on Mobile Devices
118
Bluetooth audio allows hands-free Skype calls to be made 
 
in suitably equipped vehicles (iOS and BlackBerry 10 only)
A common user interface across most platforms
 
Participation in Group conversations (text and voice; 
 
voice only in Group Video)
In September 2014, Skype for iPhone introduced two new features that will 
migrate to Skype on other mobile platforms:
Ability to host a Group Voice call for up to four 
 
participants
Answering a Skype call directly from the lock screen 
 
such that an incoming Skype call is treated like an 
incoming mobile phone call over a wireless carrier’s 
voice channel
Let’s start by looking at the Skype features available on the various mobile 
applications.
SKYPE FOR MOBILE ON WIRELESS CARRIERS
Skype’s software is built using IP-based communications protocols. As a result Skype on 
any mobile device needs access to a data connection to the Internet, whether over a Wi-Fi 
access point or a wireless carrier. To minimize costs, recommendations include:
Wherever possible use Wi-Fi for your Internet connection, especially 
• 
when roaming outside your carrier’s “home” territory.
On the home carrier ensure a subscription includes a multi-GB  
• 
data plan; the amount depends on expected usage of Skype over  
the carrier.
When roaming and using a carrier, look for multi-carrier, multi-country 
• 
service offerings, such as Truphone’s World Plan, to minimize  
data plan costs.
Skype Features on Mobile Devices
Note  The following discussion covers iPhone, Android phones and 
tablets, BlackBerry 10 (which is a hybrid Android/BlackBerry 10 app), 
Windows 8 tablets, Windows Phone 8, and Amazon Fire. Skype for iPad’s 
user interface is similar to Skype for Mac OS X.

CHAPTER 6: Using Skype on Mobile Devices
119
Skype is an application available on the Apple App Store, Google Play, 
BlackBerry World, Amazon Appstore, and Windows Phone Store. Simply 
install it and log in to your Skype account (via either your Microsoft ID or 
Skype ID).
On smartphones and tablets, functionality is usually limited to:
One-to-one voice and video calling
 
Participation in multi-party calls
 
Presence
 
Text messaging
 
Chat, including Group Chat and SMS
 
Conversation archiving (up to 30 days)
 
Voice mail
 
Video messaging
 
File transfer
 
Photos only on iPhone and iPad
 
As mentioned before, all these features are free except calls to landline  
and mobile phone numbers (including participants on a multi-party call), 
SMS messaging and call forwarding to a landline or wireless number  
(call forwarding to another Skype user is free).
Now let’s look at the various Skype screens seen on the mobile devices.
Navigating Skype Mobile Screens
A major difference between Skype on a PC and Skype on a mobile 
device is the need to navigate through multiple screens for accessing and 
participating in conversations due to the screen size. But there is a common 
starting point; across all devices the Home screen (see Figure 6-1) provides 
access to:
Recent conversations, including Group Chats
 
Favorites – frequently called contacts  
 
(see discussion in Chapter 5)
People (Contacts)
 

CHAPTER 6: Using Skype on Mobile Devices
120
The People list can include (see Figure 6-2):
Skype contacts
 
All: Skype and native device contacts
 
Available/Online contacts
 
Figure 6-2.  The People category on mobile Skype
Figure 6-1.  Skype on mobile Home screen

CHAPTER 6: Using Skype on Mobile Devices
121
Touch any Contact in any of these categories to start a conversation via 
the Chat screen. Across the different smartphone platforms the viewable 
content is determined by the screen size (see Figure 6-3), but there is a 
commonality of icons.
Figure 6-3.  Skype on various mobile screens
Tablets (with screen size greater than seven inches) show even more content 
within the display.
Below the text entry pane are navigation options from the conversation 
screen (see Figure 6-4):
The message entry window and icon bar
 
The Voice call options
 
The three dot menu options
 
The message entry window accepts text with the option 
 
to include emoticons in the message
The + icon launches a file transfer (documents and 
 
photos). The paperclip on the iPhone launches photo 
sharing only.
The telephone icon opens options for making a voice 
 
call, either via Skype or to landline or mobile phone 
numbers associated with the contact.
The webcam icon launches a Skype video call to the 
 
contact.

CHAPTER 6: Using Skype on Mobile Devices
122
The three dot menu leads to options associated with 
 
Favorites and the contact’s Skype profile.
On iPhone it also offers the option to Add Participants for  
 
a Group Chat or Voice Call, set notifications, and delete the 
Chat session history.
On Android/BlackBerry 10 it also provides for editing, 
 
blocking, or removing a contact.
Figure 6-4.  Skype on mobile navigation options

CHAPTER 6: Using Skype on Mobile Devices
123
Note  You can always return to the Home screen or previous screen 
using the left arrow at the top of each screen.
Figure 6-5.  Skype on mobile conversation icons
The Skype Home screens on mobile devices incorporate other icons that 
can lead directly to launching a conversation (see Figure 6-5).
Selecting the phone/dial pad icon launches a dial pad. 
 
Note the small directory icon in the upper-right corner of 
the dial pad screen from which you can select a Contact 
and then a phone number.
Selecting the cloud icon launches a chat session; 
 
however when launching these sessions you then need 
to select a contact.
Tapping on the Skype Profile image on the opening screen opens a screen 
for managing the user’s account (see Figure 6-6).

CHAPTER 6: Using Skype on Mobile Devices
124
Figure 6-6.  Skype Profiles on mobile
Now that we’ve seen how to navigate the interface, let’s look at what 
happens when you want to make a Skype call from your mobile device.
Making a Voice Call on Mobile Devices 
While chat remains the most used feature of Skype on mobile platforms, 
Skype is also very convenient for making voice and video calls at low cost.
As mentioned earlier, clicking on a phone icon launches a voice call, while 
clicking on a webcam icon launches a video call.
On placing or answering a voice call, one of three screens appears  
(see Figure 6-7).

CHAPTER 6: Using Skype on Mobile Devices
125
Figure 6-7.  Skype on mobile voice call screens
The call management bar across the bottom of each screen manages:
 Webcam: This is an on/off button for the webcam and 
the toggle between rear and front camera. It initially 
opens with front camera (if available).
 Mic mute: Toggles the microphone on/off.
 Speaker: Switches between the internal and external 
speaker.
 + (Android/BlackBerry 10): Accesses the dial pad or 
shows the Chat conversation screen.
 Head “+” (iPhone only): Add (up to three) contacts for a 
multi-party call.
 Dial pad: (Windows Phone 8 only): Accesses the dial pad.
There is no option to share a screen from any of these platforms, but it 
is possible to receive a screen share from another call participant who is 
calling from a PC.
Note  When viewing a shared screen on a mobile device, your screen 
size may limit how much detail you can see.

CHAPTER 6: Using Skype on Mobile Devices
126
AN IMPROVEMENT TO THE MOBILE CALLING EXPERIENCE
Beyond echo cancellation and superwideband audio, one outstanding issue affecting the 
calling environment has been the background noise environment you’re in when making or 
receiving a call, such as in an airport, train station, shopping mall, sports event, or concert 
hall. However, taking advantage of phones with multiple microphones, such as more 
recent Microsoft Lumia phones and the BlackBerry Passport, Skype has introduced audio 
processing technology such that when using Skype in these situations, signals from all the 
microphones are combined using the phone’s inherent smart signal processing technology 
to zoom in to your voice and cancel everything else.
The Future of Mobile Skype
Over the past few years since the Microsoft acquisition, Skype has made it a 
priority to improve the mobile Skype experience, not only with crystal-clear 
audio and HD video but also improving the underlying infrastructure so that 
you can, for instance, keep your chat session content up to date, especially 
when you have been out of the Skype app for a while. New capabilities, 
such as the ability to view transferred photos within the conversation screen 
are coming. With automatic updates on these devices, you will always have 
the latest version installed.
Skype on mobile devices will soon become an alternative conversation 
service, replacing the legacy voice channel. This has evolved through the 
availability of:
More robust and feature-rich software
 
Evolution of a “cloud” environment for buffering 
 
messages and shared files/photos
More powerful processors on newer devices
 
Operating system upgrades that allow Skype to remain 
 
present in the background
Note  To enable Skype as a background application waiting for a chat 
message or call, simply open Skype and go to other applications. At this 
point Skype remains invisibly available to receive calls and provide message 
notifications when activity is triggered.

CHAPTER 6: Using Skype on Mobile Devices
127
Summary
Skype functionality on mobile devices is limited, but improving all the 
time. With the ability to answer Skype calls directly from the lock screen 
on an iPhone (added September 2014), the calling experience increasingly 
resembles a normal mobile call, but with Skype’s characteristic ability to 
enrich your conversations with features like chat and file and photo sharing.
The mobile Skype interface differs across devices, but has certain features 
in common that make it easier to find the functions you are looking for, no 
matter what device or combination of devices you are using.
Key Points
Skype on mobile devices supports most Skype features 
 
with the exclusion of hosting group calls (except on 
iPhone) and long-term conversation archiving.
The Skype Home screen on mobile devices follows the 
 
Recent, Favorites, People paradigm as the launch point 
for conversations.
Skype provides a crystal-clear audio quality, overcoming 
 
the distorted voice quality of the mobile carrier’s legacy 
voice channel.
Skype on mobile devices requires the user to navigate 
 
through multiple screens to access all Skype’s features 
on the smaller display of smartphones.
Using Skype on a mobile device over a robust enough 
 
Wi-Fi connection provides a low cost or free means of 
placing international calls from hotels, airports, coffee 
shops, and conference center while traveling.

129
Chapter 7
Calling and Messaging 
Landlines and Mobile 
Phones
While voice and video calls to other Skype users are free, Skype users also 
want to make voice calls with their family, friends, and business colleagues 
who do not have Skype access but do have conventional landline or mobile 
phone voice services. Many business operations also use Skype on their PC 
as their sole desktop phone, yet need an inbound number for receiving calls 
from suppliers, contractors, and customers. Skype offers not only services 
for outbound and inbound calling but also uses the same infrastructure to 
provide other low-cost calling features.
Connecting with the Legacy Phone Network
Skype has made available several ways to place and receive calls to/from 
landlines and mobile phones:
 Calling landlines and mobile phones: Outbound 
calling from a Skype client to landlines and mobile 
phones worldwide
 Skype Numbers: Inbound calling to a phone number 
that is answered on a Skype client

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
130
 SMS Messaging: Sending SMS messages to a  
mobile phone
 Skype To Go: Calls to local phone numbers that forward 
to landlines and mobile phones worldwide using Skype 
credit or a Skype Calling Plan subscription
Calling Phone Numbers Worldwide at  
Low Costs
“Calling phone numbers” refers to calls made from Skype to landlines and 
mobile phones worldwide. Skype has already negotiated arrangements with 
phone companies (carriers) in over 180 countries that result in rates as low as 
2.3 cents per minute for calls to U.S., Canada, and most European countries.
Here are a few details associated with calling landlines and mobile phones:
All offerings are “prepaid” using Skype Credit or a Skype 
 
Calling Plan subscription.
Pay-as You-Go per minute calling rates
 
1 depend on the 
country and, in some cases, the carrier where the call is 
terminated.
On Pay-as-You-Go calls, in addition to the per-minute 
 
charge there is a small per call connection fee2 that 
varies by termination country.
Skype Calling Plans are unlimited subscriptions to 
 
landlines in 63 countries and mobile phones in 8 of 
those 63 countries.
Skype Calling Plan minutes can also be applied to:
Each leg of a Skype multi-party call where the participant 
 
is connected through a landline or mobile phone.
Call forwarding a Skype call to a landline or mobile 
 
number.
This chapter starts out by discussing the various prepaid payment programs 
available for placing and receiving calls to/from landlines and mobile 
phones. The discussion continues with examples of using the various 
services described previously.
1http://www.skype.com/intl/en/prices/payg-rates/?currency=USD#viewAllRates.
2http://www.skype.com/intl/en-us/prices/payg-rates/connection-fees/.

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
131
The Skype Account
As there are charges associated with these calls, Skype offers several programs 
for using these services. Initiating and managing them is provided through your 
Skype Account on the Skype website. Simply go to www.skype.com and sign in 
via the button on the upper right.
The following discussion covers the Skype Account as it relates to calling 
landlines and mobile phones (Figure 7-1). A more extensive outline of the full 
Skype Account management is covered in Chapter 9, including managing 
payment options.
Figure 7-1.  Managing Skype features
Note  You’ll never get a phone bill with Skype!
Calls to and from landlines and mobile phones may be prepaid through:
A Pay-as You-Go basis, using prepaid Skype Credit
 
3
A monthly, quarterly, or full year Skype Calling Plan 
 
subscription4
A Skype Number
 
5 subscription
3http://www.skype.com/intl/en-us/prices/skype-credit/.
4http://www.skype.com/intl/en/prices/pay-monthly/.
5http://www.skype.com/intl/en/features/allfeatures/online-number/.

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
132
Skype Credit
Skype Credit is used for Pay-As-You-Go to cover:
Calls to landline and mobile numbers without a 
 
subscription
Skype Online Numbers
 
Skype To Go
 
Call forwarding to a landline or mobile phone
 
Skype WiFi
 
SMS Messaging
 
Skype credit may be purchased by signing into your Skype account on the 
Skype website or via links on the Skype Profile screen on mobile devices.
Alternatively, you can set up a Skype Calling Plan subscription that covers 
these services at fixed costs.
CALLS TO MOBILE PHONES
In most countries worldwide calls to mobile phones are “caller pays.” As a result, outbound 
calls to mobile phones in these countries can have rates ranging from $.10 per minute to 
over $.50 per minute. They use Skype Credit and are not included in Skype Calling Plan 
subscriptions. As of March 2015 calls to mobile phones in U.S., Canada, China, Singapore, 
Hong Kong, Thailand, Puerto Rico, and Guam are included in a Skype Calling Plan subscription.
Skype’s Calling Plan Subscriptions
Skype has established flat-rate subscriptions that provide unlimited calling 
to a designated geographical region, within the limits of their Fair Usage 
policy. Skype Calling Plan subscriptions:
Provide flat-rate unlimited calling to landline and  
 
mobile phones:
Unlimited Country: Within your home country code
 
Unlimited Continent: Within a continent (North 
 
America and Europe)
Unlimited World: Worldwide to over 60 countries
 

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
133
Offer options to purchase 60-, 120-, or 400-minute 
 
monthly bundles for calls within the local country 
(available in select countries)
Offer a 50% discount on one Skype Online number with 
 
a 12-month subscription
Include call forwarding to a phone number
 
The Unlimited World Plan coverage includes 8 countries to landlines and 
mobile phones and 55 countries to landlines only (see Figure 7-2).
Figure 7-2.  Skype Calling Plan subscription countries

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
134
SKYPE WORLD PLAN SPECIAL OFFERS
As Skype is integrated into Microsoft’s other products, such as Office 365, special offers are 
becoming available for Skype World calling:
Sign up for a Skype Unlimited World subscription and get the first 
• 
month free with no obligation to continue after the free month.
Office 365 subscribers get 60 free World calling minutes per month 
• 
with their Office 365 subscription.
For example, for Skype users in the U.S. and Canada (country code 1) there are three 
options available:6
 Unlimited U.S. and Canada: $2.99/month
 Unlimited North America: $7.99/month (adds landlines 
to three cities in Mexico; Mexico City, Guadalajara, and 
Monterrey)
 Unlimited World: $13.99/month (adds calls to all  
60+ countries shown in Figure 7-2)
From Skype.com’s main navigation bar select Prices ➤ Rates7 and select a 
destination country for more details on an individual country basis. A 15% 
discount applies to a 12-month subscription.
Set up a Skype Calling Plan subscription via the Prices ➤ Rates menu on 
the Skype.com home page or via My Account on the Skype website.
Calling Landlines and Mobile Phones
While the dial pad (see Figure 7-3) is available to manually launch calls to 
landline and mobile phones, calls can also be initiated by clicking or  
tapping on:
Phone number entries in People in Office 365, especially 
 
Outlook 2013
Phone number entries in a mobile device’s People 
 
directory on the Home Screen of Skype’s mobile 
applications; it incorporates contacts in the device’s 
native Contacts
6http://www.skype.com/intl/en-us/prices/pay-monthly/.
7http://www.skype.com/intl/en-us/prices/.

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
135
Having entered or selected a phone number, from a Contacts directory 
click the phone icon to launch a call. Once answered, you see the voice call 
screen described in the following section.
The Phone Number Voice Call Screen
When making a call to a landline or mobile phone number there are two 
options on the Call Management Bar for calls using either a PC or Mac  
(see Figure 7-4) or mobile device (see Figure 7-5):
A Dial Pad icon, to interact with interactive voice menus
 
Chat offers to send an SMS message
 
Native Contacts
Figure 7-3.  Skype on mobile dial pad

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
136
Figure 7-5.  Voice Call screens on smartphones and tablets
Figure 7-4.  Dial pad on landline and mobile phone calls from a PC

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
137
CALLER ID
When placing a call to landlines and mobile phones, Skype sends a caller ID with either your 
SkypeID or the anonymous 0123456.
However, you can set your caller ID to be one of two numbers:
A mobile phone number registered in your Skype profile
• 
A Skype Online number
• 
To set the caller ID, log in to your Skype Account on Skype.com and select Caller ID from 
the Manage Features bar (see Figure 7-6). Note that, where you have both a mobile number 
and Skype number(s), there is the option to have the displayed caller ID be a local number to 
the place you are calling.
Figure 7-6.  Selecting a Caller ID

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
138
Skype Numbers: “Local” Numbers with 
Worldwide Reach
A Skype Number allows Skype users to receive calls from landlines and 
mobile phones on their Skype client wherever it may be open worldwide.
A landline or mobile phone call to a Skype online phone 
 
number can be answered on your PC, smartphone, 
tablet, TV, or other Skype-enabled devices.
Skype Online Numbers are available for 24 countries 
 
(see Figure 7-7)
In Germany you must be a German resident to have 
 
a German Skype number
A Skype account can be associated with up to ten 
 
Skype Numbers; such that one can have a “local” U.S., 
U.K., and France number.
Skype Numbers for business use can be provisioned 
 
with Skype Manager.
Figure 7-7.  Skype Number countries

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
139
A most common consumer application of Skype Online numbers is to provide 
“free” calling to expats living on another continent. For instance a U.S. citizen 
living in Europe can have his family call a U.S. Skype Online number for calls 
that will be received on their Skype client wherever they are in Europe. In 
fact, with call forwarding calls can be then be forwarded to a mobile phone at 
outbound calling rates, if the call is not answered using Skype.
The countries shown in Figure 7-7 are current as of February 2015 and may 
change at Skype’s discretion.
Set up personal Skype Numbers via the Skype Number tab on your Skype 
Account page.
FAIR USAGE POLICY
Skype subscriptions are designed for consumer and small business calling worldwide. As a 
result there are some restrictions on their use in a business. These restrictions include:
Using subscriptions for telemarketing or call center operations
• 
Re-selling subscription minutes
• 
Sharing subscriptions between users whether via a PBX, call center, 
• 
computer, or any other means
Calling numbers (whether singly, sequentially, or automatically) to 
• 
generate income for yourself or others as a result of placing the call, 
other than for your individual business communications (and subject to 
Section 4.1 of the Terms of Use);
Unusual calling patterns inconsistent with normal, individual 
• 
subscription use; for example, regular calls of short duration or calls to 
multiple numbers in a short period of time.
Skype reserves the right to change these restrictions at its discretion.
SMS Messaging
Skype’s SMS Messaging8 allows you to send text messages from your 
Skype chat window to mobile phones worldwide. SMS Messaging rates9 
start as low as $0.05 per message; they are based on the destination 
country of the message and tend to be in the $0.10 +/-$0.02 per message 
range for U.S., Canada, U.K., and most European countries.
8http://www.skype.com/intl/en/features/allfeatures/sms/.
9http://www.skype.com/intl/en/prices/sms-rates/#viewAllRates.

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
140
Note that for some countries SMS messaging may only be one way from 
Skype to the mobile phone. Figure 7-8 is an example in which the Canadian 
SMS message service will not forward SMS messages to Skype. In this case 
it is considered to provide notification rather than support true conversations 
that can be carried on via true SMS. An alternative is to converse by chat 
using Skype for iPhone, Android, BlackBerry 10, or Windows Phone.
Figure 7-8.  SMS messaging is outbound only
Skype To Go
Skype To Go10 is a Skype feature, available in 24 countries, which allows a 
Skype user to assign a “local” phone number to as many as 30 designated 
contacts worldwide (Figure 7-9). As a result, provided you are within your 
“local” calling region, landline and mobile calls can be made to these  
30 contacts using either Skype Credits or a Skype Calling Plan subscription. 
The called party answers the call on their remote landline or mobile phone.
10http://www.skype.com/intl/en/features/allfeatures/skype-to-go-number/.

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
141
For example, on my Skype To Go plan11, there are nine “local” +1 (647) numbers 
that forward calls out to contacts in Canada, U.S., U.K., Hong Kong, and 
South Africa at the cost of a local landline or wireless call, since a Skype 
Calling Plan subscription comes into play. Basically Skype To Go has 
become a plan for making low-cost international long distance calls from a 
landline or mobile phone within the user’s “home” territory to a designated 
contact’s landline or mobile phone.
Skype To Go is especially useful for making calls to these designated 
contacts from a mobile phone when in your mobile phone’s “home” territory. 
On mobile devices the call does go out over your carrier’s voice channel, 
whereas Skype-to-Skype calls go over the carrier’s data channel. On all 
devices these calls use Skype Credit or a Skype Calling Plan subscription.
Skype To Go is set up via the tab of the same name on your Skype Account 
page. The countries supported in February 2015 are shown in Table 7-1 and 
may change at Skype’s discretion.
Figure 7-9.  Skype To Go numbers
Table 7-1.  Countries Supported by Skype To Go
Australia
Ireland
Romania
Canada
Latvia
Slovenia
Chile
Lithuania
Singapore
Denmark
Luxembourg
South Africa
Estonia
Mexico
Sweden
Finland
New Zealand
Taiwan
Greece
Poland
United Kingdom
Hungary
Portugal
USA
11http://voiceontheweb.biz/2010/11/skype-to-go-becoming-my-first-choice-
wireless-long-distance-service/.

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
142
Click-to-Call
When you install Skype for Windows you have the option to install a browser 
plug-in called Click-to-Call. Click-to-Call12 scans a web page as you load it 
and enables landline or mobile phone calling to any phone numbers found 
on the web page.
You can administer Click-to-Call by clicking the Skype icon found in the 
browser toolbar (see Figure 7-11). clicking the Skype logo in any of Chrome, 
Firefox, and Internet Explorer gives the option shown in Figure 7-10.
Figure 7-10.  Click-to-Call browser toolbar button
Figure 7-11.  Click-to-Call navigation
When number highlighting is turned on, a phone number found on a web 
page is highlighted with Skype’s Click-to-Call icon comprising the phone 
number and a Skype logo. Click the number to launch a SkypeOut call to 
the number. Mouse over the number to get the Call / Add to Skype menu.
12http://www.skype.com/intl/en/get-skype/on-your-computer/click-to-call/.
13http://www.skype.com/intl/en/advertise/click-to-call/.
Click-to-Call does require that you have Skype credit or a Skype Calling 
Plan subscription. However, businesses can register as an advertiser13 with 
Skype such that a Click-to-Call button always appears on the advertiser’s 
web page, allowing the web page visitor to make a free landline call to the 
advertiser.

CHAPTER 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and Mobile Phones
143
Click-to-Call is an extension in the various browsers and will often offer 
updates within the browser independent of updates to Skype for Windows.
Summary
Skype offers several services that bridge calls to the legacy telephone 
network of landline and mobile phones. Outbound calling to landlines and 
mobile phones is available to over 200 countries. A Skype account can add 
Skype Online number(s) for inbound calling to a user’s Skype activities, and 
SMS messages can be sent to wireless phones.
Key Points
Calling to any landline or mobile phone worldwide from a PC can happen at 
low cost. But there are notable use cases for the various landline and mobile 
phone offerings that can bring significant savings:
 Outbound calling from Skype: Calling any number 
worldwide from any geographical location worldwide 
with appropriate Wi-Fi or wired Ethernet Internet access 
(hotels, airports, restaurants, coffee shops, etc.)
When Wi-Fi access is available calling to landlines and 
 
mobile phones using Skype is a low-cost alternative to 
carrier-supported mobile phone voice calls for calling 
relatives or business colleagues from any Skype-
supported smartphone or tablet. This avoids wireless 
carrier roaming charges.
 Skype Number: Providing a “local” number in the 
traveler’s home country which relatives, friends, 
and business colleagues can call while traveling 
internationally.
 Caller ID: Select either your registered mobile phone 
number or Skype Number.
 Skype To Go: Make calls at Skype’s low costs to 
landlines and mobile phones from your mobile phone 
while traveling within your “Home” territory.
 SMS Messaging: Sending (but not receiving) SMS 
messages as an alternative to carriers’ roaming SMS 
messaging.

145
Chapter 8
Skype Chat: A Virtual 
Water Fountain
While Skype has built its reputation for making free voice and video calls, 
Skype’s chat feature changes how and why we carry out conversations. 
Since 2007 Skype Chat has become one of my primary communication 
services—on both PCs and mobile devices. This chapter builds from 
those experiences, whether working with clients operating worldwide or 
having ad hoc occasional conversations with both business and personal 
acquaintances from Germany to Australia.
With the recent changes to Skype’s underlying support infrastructure, 
Chat opens up the ability to support asynchronous ad hoc or spontaneous 
dialogue—where both parties do not need to be “online” concurrently in order 
to exchange thoughts, ideas, and responses.
Why Chat?
As a business communications tool, chat provides the largest opportunity 
for enhancing productivity, especially across a geographically dispersed 
business’s ecosystem:
Conversations can be followed and tracked whether 
 
in the home office or on the road across PCs, 
smartphones, and tablets.
Chat messages leave an archival record of 
 
conversations for later search and recall, going back 
years on PCs or up to 30 days on mobile devices.

CHAPTER 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
146
Chat opens up a new etiquette for starting voice or 
 
video conversations by checking whether other parties 
are available for a call. In a business environment it is 
considered responsible etiquette to use Skype chat to 
determine if another party is available and only call at an 
agreed on time, whether immediately, in five minutes, or 
five hours.
Chat exchanges minimize the need to start a 
 
conversation with pleasantries such as “How’s the 
weather?” or providing an update on personal life.
Multiple chat threads can be followed concurrently.
 
Chat supports ad hoc activity. Sustainable group chat 
 
sessions become virtual water fountain conversations in 
which participants make contributions and comments 
on an ad hoc basis.
Chat allows a quick Yes/No/Maybe response to 
 
questions that require a simple clarification.
Chat provides a home for a searchable “notebook,
 
” 
archiving meeting agendas and discussion notes while 
sharing website URLs, document files, photos, and 
contact information.
The Conversation Pane
The Conversation pane, on the right side of the Windows Desktop or Mac 
client, builds a persistent archive of all your Skype activity with each individual 
contact and group. When you select a contact, the Conversation pane:
Includes a dialog box at the bottom for text and 
 
emoticon entry (along with a menu—via the paperclip 
icon—for sharing files, photos, and Skype contacts, and 
leaving video messages).
Stores and recalls conversation history by Contact or 
 
Group going back in time.
Records voice and video call details, including time of 
 
call, duration of call (Call Detail Records).
Records file sharing activity with an active link to both 
 
the file and the folder in which it was stored.

CHAPTER 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
147
Converts any entered website URL and email address to 
 
an active link.
Permits editing or removal of a message for up to an 
 
hour after it has been posted.
Text messages and other information are recorded with the most recent 
item at the bottom of the window. Note there is a time associated with each 
entry; if you scroll up you will also find date dividers.
In Skype for Windows the Conversation pane can be optionally split off as  
a separate window using the View | Split Window View menu selection  
(see Figure 8-1). This way you can have a separate window for each 
Contact’s chat session or each Group Chat activity.
Figure 8-1.  Compact View—separate Windows for separate chats
When you go to this mode double-click on a Contact’s name in the Contact 
pane (now a separate window) and a new window opens up with that 
Contact’s conversation log. It is probably best to do this when you have a 
second display on which you can display just those chat sessions.
Return to the single window view via View | Default View.
Figure 8-2 illustrates the various features of the Conversation pane.

CHAPTER 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
148
Figure 8-3 demonstrates both document and photo file sharing activity. 
Click the image to go to the document or open a default photo/graphics 
application. In the transition to buffering transferred files onto the Skype 
cloud, URLs may appear in lieu of these images.
Figure 8-2.  Conversation pane content

CHAPTER 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
149
Within the Conversation pane there are several additional features:
How far back do you want to display the Conversation 
 
history content? Scroll to the top of the conversation 
pane, click Today or any date divider and select a time 
period (see Figure 8-4).
Figure 8-3.  The Conversation pane—file sharing

CHAPTER 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
150
You can search content to, say, retrieve URLs, meeting 
 
minutes, agendas, or any other word or phrase 
recorded into the Conversation history. A simple Ctrl-F 
(Command-F on Mac) opens the search window  
(see Figure 8-5). This is where Skype chat is a valuable 
productivity tool for accurately recording and later 
retrieving spellings, website or FTP URLs, or email 
addresses and contact information, amongst other 
content that can have later value.
Figure 8-5.  Search the conversation history
Figure 8-4.  Restoring Conversation pane content
You don’t need to miss messages simply because 
 
you have been offline. If you are using the most 
recent Skype updates, any messages entered by a 
contact while you were offline are stored by Skype and 
displayed in your Conversation pane when you next 
log in. Messages are stored for up to 30 days. Stored 
messages are even synchronized across multiple PCs 
and mobile devices should you log in to Skype on a 
different PC or device.
Need to copy, edit, or remove a message? Right-click a message and a 
menu with several options appears (see Figure 8-6).

CHAPTER 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
151
For up to an hour after you enter a message you can edit 
 
or remove a message. However there are other options 
in this menu that are available beyond the first hour:
 Copy Message: Copy the individual message to 
the clipboard; you then have the option to paste the 
copied message into the chat windows (optionally, 
say, into a session with another contact or group chat) 
either as a quote or text (see Figure 8-7).
Figure 8-6.  Right-click a message and a menu appears
Figure 8-7.  Paste options
 
 Copy Selection or Select All: Highlight multiple 
or all messages in a thread and copy them to the 
clipboard; they can then be copied as text only 
into another chat entry window or pasted into any 
document available via your desktop.
 Search for Bing: does a Bing search on any text 
highlighted in the message.

CHAPTER 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
152
Skype chat conversations and associated content concurrently appear 
across the various platforms with Skype clients and applications.
A conversation can be followed on a Windows or Mac 
 
PC as well as an iPhone/iPod, an iPad, an Android 
smart device, a BlackBerry 10 phone, and a Windows 
Phone.
There is never any indication which platform a contact 
 
is using; it’s not needed. The user interface may 
be different on each; however, the chat content is 
consistent.
Figure 8-8.  Chat slash / commands via /help
Warning  Your Skype chat history is only stored locally on your PC. If you 
move to a new PC or reinstall your operating system, you should back up 
the data prior to making the change.
On a Windows PC the chat history is found at C:\Users\[Windows 
User Name]\AppData \Roaming\Skype\[SkypeID] and can be 
copied to the same location after installing Skype on the new or reinstalled 
PC. On a Mac this is in ~/Library/Application Support/Skype/
[user name]/ and you need to copy the main.db file after first running 
Skype on a new Mac.
Chat Commands
Skype Chat also has a set of chat slash (/) commands that can be used 
within any version of Skype to manage chat activity. The most commonly 
used is /alertsoff, which stops those annoying sounds whenever someone 
logs on to Skype or enters a new message. The /me [text] command also 
gets a lot of use, especially in Group Chats. To get a list of commands type 
/help into the text entry pane and you will see what is shown in Figure 8-8.

CHAPTER 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
153
Clicking on the link at the end takes you to “What are chat commands and  
their roles?1” on the Skype website where you can obtain a complete list 
of available chat (/) commands. On that page you find instructions for 
determining whether a group chat is cloud-based or P2P-based along with 
two different sets of commands (see Figure 8-9):
Figure 8-9.  Chat commands and roles—two versions
Figure 8-10.  “/me” Example
All one-to-one chat sessions are now cloud based; older group chats (before 
early 2013) are P2P based. Group chat options are discussed in Chapter 9.
For one-to-one chat sessions several of these commands can be useful 
while chatting:
 /alertsoff disables the audio message alert notification 
whenever someone adds a message to a session.
 /me [text] allows you to enter a comment that  
starts with your name followed by the text you enter 
(see Figure 8-10).
 /add [skypename] adds another Skype contact to the 
chat session.
 /showplaces returns and identifies all the devices on which 
a particular Skype account is open (see Figure 8-11).
1https://support.skype.com/en-us/faq/FA10042/What-are-chat-commands- 
and-roles

CHAPTER 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
154
Emoticons
A unique feature of Skype Chat is the large set of emoticons available for 
graphically expressing not only “facial” emotions but also illustration of other 
gestures, such as handshakes and dancing (see Figure 8-12). In fact, Skype 
has taken this one step further with graphics representing objects such as a 
birthday cake, a cup of coffee, and a dynamic “dancing” icon.
Figure 8-12.  Skype Chat emoticons
Figure 8-11.  Concurrent Skype online devices

CHAPTER 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
155
Access the emoticons via the small emoticon icon at the right end of the 
Chat text entry window. On a PC scroll over the images to see what each 
represents as shown in the bottom status bar along with the character 
representation of the emoticon. In the example above, sweating is 
represented by (:|. On mobile apps, simply tap the desired icon.
Finally, there is a “hidden” range of rather expressive emoticons that have 
become favorites (or otherwise) over time as shown in Figure 8-13, including 
a working from home emoticon (wfh). To insert one you need to enter the 
character code within a pair of brackets. Using the ISO standard abbreviations 
for a country’s name, you can create a flag icon using (flag:%%) where %% is 
the country’s ISO code to obtain an appropriate flag graphic.
Figure 8-13.  Expressive emoticons

CHAPTER 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
156
As for the others, it is necessary to enter the associated text (Table 8-1); 
note that several of these emoticons are dynamic with a repetitive change 
over a few seconds.
Table 8-1.  “Hidden” emoticon shortcuts
Text
Expression
(swear)
Swearing 
(headbang) (banghead)
Banging head on wall 
(drunk)
Drunk 
(poolparty)
Pool Party 
(rock)
Rock 
(smoking) (smoke) (ci)
Smoking 
(bug)
Bug 
(e) (m) (mail)
You have mail 
(o) (O) (time) (clock)
Time 
(~) (film) (movie)
Movie 
(skype) (ss)
Skype 
(talk)
Talking 
(call)
Call 
(punch)
Punch 
(u) (U) (brokenheart)
Broken heart 
(mooning)
Mooning 
(wfh)
Working from home 
 
(flag:%%) e.g. (flag:ca)
Flag 

CHAPTER 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
157
Facebook Chat
As mentioned earlier, if you have connected a Skype for Windows Desktop 
or Skype for Mac client with your Facebook account, a completely 
independent set of contacts will show up in your Contacts pane, accessed 
through the Facebook tab. If you select to have a Facebook chat session the 
contact’s name at the top of the Conversation pane will have “Facebook” 
under the Contact’s name (see Figure 8-14).
Figure 8-14.  Facebook chat
The conversation itself is accessible also on other Facebook-supported 
platforms such as iPhone, iPad, Android, BlackBerry 10, and Windows 
Phone. Also keep in mind that Skype chat message content and Facebook 
chat message content comprise two fully independent message threads. 
Facebook message threads are archived on the local PC and searchable.
Summary
Chat has become perhaps the primary communications feature of Skype; 
it allows for asynchronous conversations across all platforms supported by 
Skype. It also provides searchable logging and archiving that records not 
only chat conversations but also call detail records, file transfer information, 
and clickable URLs.
Key Points
When fully implemented, chat becomes a productivity 
 
enhancement tool working across a business’s entire 
ecosystem.
The Conversation pane on Skype for PCs or 
 
Conversation screen in Skype on mobile devices logs all 
activity amongst the chat participants: text messages, 
file transfer, call detail records, etc.

CHAPTER 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
158
Right-clicking a message in the PC or Mac client lets 
 
you copy, edit, or remove a message or selection of 
messages. Tapping and holding on a message on 
a mobile device will bring up a menu with the same 
options.
The chat slash “/
 
” commands provide management of 
the chat infrastructure: participants, notifications, roles, 
topics, as well as providing information such as all the 
devices logged in to a Skype account and number of 
participants in a group chat.
Emoticons bring graphic expression to message content 
 
along with a participant’s moods and feelings.
If you have chosen to connect your Skype to your 
 
Facebook, you can use your Skype client on a Windows 
desktop or Mac to chat to your Facebook contacts.
“Ctrl-F” on PC’s or “Cmd-F” on Macs opens a search 
 
window to find archived content.

159
Chapter 9
Managing Your 
Skype Account and 
Subscriptions
In Chapter 7 the discussion included mention of your Skype Account as it 
relates to setting up various services, such as Calling Plan subscriptions 
when calling landlines and mobile phones. However, the Skype Account goes 
beyond managing these services to include managing your Skype profile 
and password, handling payments, and reviewing your Skype activity. Skype 
Manager also can manage Skype activity across a business or organization.
Pay in Advance—No Phone Bills
Skype’s services for calling landline and mobile phones are Skype’s major 
revenue source. Managing customer accounts, especially receivables, has 
always been a major logistics overhead and expense for the legacy landline 
and wireless phone companies.
Skype has avoided the significant overhead and expenses for generating and 
collecting revenue by setting up an account management infrastructure that:
Requires payment in advance via a credit card or 
 
PayPal.
Only allows access to an offering with prepaid Skype 
 
credit or subscriptions

CHAPTER 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
160
Has no collections requirements
 
Reports on outbound calling details
 
Takes measures to address security issues associated 
 
with using credit cards
Sends no bills (although it does send out reminder 
 
emails when subscriptions are about to expire or Skype 
credit runs low)
The bottom line: With Skype you will never receive a phone bill—no 
surprises! You’re in control. Now let’s turn to how you manage your 
Account activities.
Managing Your Account
Individual users can manage their Skype Account by
Navigating directly to the My Account page on the 
 
Skype website
Selecting Manage my Account, accessed by clicking on 
 
your name in Skype for Windows Desktop or Skype for 
Mac button in a Skype client.
Tapping on your Skype profile image on a touch screen 
 
mobile phone or tablet
If on a Windows PC or Mac OS X, sign in to your account and the My 
Account web page shown in Figure 9-1 comes up.

CHAPTER 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
161
From this screen you can:
Buy Skype credit
 
Purchase Skype Calling Plan subscriptions
 
Set up caller ID for use with SkypeOut calls
 
Purchase a Skype number
 
Set up Skype to Go numbers
 
Enable Skype voice messages
 
Set up call forwarding
 
View usage: your outbound calling and SMS text 
 
messaging history
The details behind the landline and mobile phone services mentioned here 
are outlined in Chapter 7.
Figure 9-1.  My Account web-based Skype portal

CHAPTER 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
162
Note  for security and fraud prevention reasons a credit card number can 
only be associated with a single Skype account. Using the Skype Manager 
(discussed later in this chapter), businesses can allocate Skype Credits 
to employees’ business Skype accounts from a “master” Skype Manager 
account. The Skype Manager account would be associated with the user 
account used to log in to Skype Manager
Figure 9-2.  My Account details
On mobile devices, touch your Skype profile image on the home screen and 
various options related to managing your account will appear. If you select 
Skype Credit you will then be offered options to buy either a Subscription or 
Skype Credit.
But there’s more to managing your Skype account. You can check out 
details behind use of your account (see Figure 9-2) by scrolling down on the 
screen shown in Figure 9-1.
These include options to:
Redeem Skype Gift vouchers
 
Set up an auto-recharge to reload Skype Credit
 
Review billing information (name, address, credit card, 
 
PayPal accounts)
Manage subscriptions
 
Set the currency used for your purchases
 
Review purchase history
 
View and edit your Skype profile
 

CHAPTER 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
163
Change your password
 
Manage Account settings: links to Microsoft and 
 
Facebook account; notifications
Access a Skype Manager account (see below for more 
 
details)
For additional security Skype has established a few policies when dealing 
with your account:
An individual credit card may only be associated with 
 
one personal Skype account.
Skype has established monthly purchase limits
 
1 as one 
inhibitor to fraud.
After ten minutes of inactivity, Skype will log you out of 
 
your Skype Account screen and ask you to log in again.
From your Skype Account web page you’re free to select and purchase the 
offerings that you require and customize your Settings and preferences; 
it’s basically how you can customize your Skype activity to your individual 
requirements.
To activate a subscription, click Add subscription on the Manage Account 
page left sidebar. This brings you to the Rates page where you can select 
a termination country (see Figure 9-3) where there are a variety of options 
available. Initially select a termination country. For Canada there are both 
Pay-As-You-Go option to buy Skype Credit and three subscription options; 
other countries may include plans with limited minutes. The Details links 
describe the actual countries covered by a particular subscription. Select an 
option and proceed to enter payment information via credit card or PayPal 
to initialize a subscription.
1https://support.skype.com/en/faq/FA1137/What-are-monthly-purchase-limits

CHAPTER 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
164
Let’s go on to a few tips that help to ensure you are getting maximum value 
at minimum overall costs.
Figure 9-3.  Launching a subscription

CHAPTER 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
165
Optimizing Your Skype Activities and 
Associated Costs
It is important to consider the balance between the services you need for your 
routine Skype activities and the associated costs. Some considerations include:
Where do you call frequently? Within a single country, 
 
continent, or worldwide?
Calling Subscription Plans options are broken down along 
 
these geographical regions.
Payments can be monthly, quarterly (5% discount), or 
 
annually (15% discount)
Calling plans are based on the call destination country. 
 
For example, calling to Canada/U.S. landlines and mobile 
phones from other countries worldwide are included in a 
Canada/U.S. calling plan subscription.
Do you have an Office 365 subscription?
 
If so, you have 60 minutes worldwide per month already 
 
available to over 60 countries.
Ensure you have linked your Skype account to your 
 
Microsoft account via Account settings (see Figure 9-2)
Are you frequently “roaming” outside your home 
 
country?
If so, data charges become important. Put your phone in 
 
Airplane mode and look for Wi-Fi access points or consider 
a Truphone World Plan. (See Chapter 6 for more details.)
Do you call mobile phone numbers in “caller pay” 
 
countries, defined in Chapter 8?
If so, you will need to have Skype Credit in addition to any 
 
Calling Plan Subscriptions.
In the example in Figure 9-1 I have both an Unlimited World subscription 
and an Office 365 subscription. When it comes time to renew my 12-month 
Unlimited World subscription I will change to an Unlimited North America 
(Canada and U.S.) subscription as the Office 365 allowance is sufficient for 
the number of landline calls I make outside of North America. In practice 
most of my calls outside North America tend to be Skype-to-Skype 
calls, whereas in my office, I usually use Skype for calls to landlines and 
mobile phones within North America. On devices where I have no carrier 
connection, such as my iPad with Wi-Fi support only, I use Skype over 

CHAPTER 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
166
Wi-Fi when I need to call landlines from the iPad. I also keep in reserve a 
minimum amount of Skype credit for any calls to mobile phones in caller 
pays countries. 
A few more tips related to managing your Skype Account:
 Auto-recharge: for Skype Credit you can set up  
auto-recharge. In North America when your Skype 
Credit drops below $3.00 it will do an auto-recharge to 
the default amount ($10.00 in U.S.; C$14.00 in Canada). 
This allows you to continue use of your calling activities 
without interruption while traveling, for instance.
 Redeem vouchers: vouchers are supplied by some 
Skype partners; also Skype gift cards are available. 
These may be redeemed via the Redeem vouchers 
option, shown earlier in Figure 9-2.
HOW SKYPE BECAME LESS EXPENSIVE IN 2014
During 2014 Skype made some important changes such that my annual Skype expenses 
will become significantly reduced in 2014. These include:
Free Group Video calling along with elimination of Skype Premium 
• 
(over $100/year); in fact I received a credit for unused time in the form 
of Skype Credits.
Office 365 now includes 60 minutes per month of free landline calling to 
• 
over 60 countries, as well a mobile calling to 8 countries. As a result I am 
changing my Worldwide Calling Plan subscription (over $100/year) to a 
U.S./Canada one (less than $40/year) as I still use Skype almost daily for 
calls to landlines in U.S./Canada from my PC or mobile smartphone. 
At the same time I do ensure there is some Skype Credit available 
• 
to cover SMS messages and calls to mobile phones in caller pays 
countries.
Of course, where possible I do make Skype-to-Skype calls due to not only the zero cost but 
also the excellent voice quality and HD video quality.
Managing Skype in a Business
For business use there are two scenarios for managing Skype activity across 
the business.

CHAPTER 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
167
Accounts Managed by Individuals
In this scenario employees at a business usually manage their PC 
configurations individually. For their Skype implementation they create 
personal Skype accounts, participate in Group Chats, arrange individual 
Calling Plan subscriptions (as described in Chapter 7), purchase Skype 
credit, and take advantage of the various multi-party calling, file sharing 
and desktop sharing Skype features to enhance their Skype-to-Skype 
conversations.
Fundamentally this mode involves using Skype’s “individual user” features 
for business communications with no management administration involved. 
Accounts Managed by an Administrator
In this scenario, a Skype Administrator is designated to be responsible 
for Skype Manager, a web-based management tool that lets you centrally 
manage Skype across a business or organization (or even across your 
family). A designated Administrator can create and log in to a Skype 
Manager via the Features ➤ Business menu items at the Skype website. 
Scroll down to find the link to set up or log in to a Skype Manager account 
using your Microsoft ID. Login requires using the Administrator’s Microsoft 
account login.
The Skype administrator can manage members’ Skype activities via 
the Skype Manager and implement Skype across Windows PCs via 
the business version of Skype2 that can be remotely installed from an 
administrator’s PC. (Mac users can install Skype for Mac on individual PCs; 
mobile users can install the appropriate Skype application onto their device.) 
The Skype Manager navigation bar (see Figure 9-4) provides access to a 
Dashboard, Members, Features, and Reports.
Figure 9-4.  Skype Manager
2http://www.skype.com/intl/en-us/business/download

CHAPTER 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
168
With Skype Manager the business takes control of employee usage, 
inbound and outbound calling paths, and subscription costs while having 
access to call detail records across the business (but still requires call 
recording utilities for voice and video call conversations).
Figure 9-5 shows the Skype Manager dashboard, including a summary of 
the manager’s own account balance, and key information about the Skype 
users (members) being managed from this account. 
Figure 9-5.  Skype Manager Dashboard

CHAPTER 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
169
The designated administrator uses Skype Manager to:
Create (and delete) Skype accounts
 
3 for individual users 
(employees, contractors, etc.)
Often a business will establish a standard Skype ID format, 
 
for example, business_name.user_name
Invite individuals with a personal Skype account to join
 
Create Skype Numbers (for Individual Users)
 
Set up Calling Plan subscriptions for Individual Users’ 
 
Skype Accounts
Purchase Skype Credit on behalf of the business or 
 
organization
Allocate Skype Credit to Users
 
Pull unused Skype credit pulled back into the Skype 
 
Manager account for reallocation
Assign which Skype features a User can use (such as 
 
file transfer)
Setup Voice Mail (for individual Users’ Business Skype 
 
Accounts)
Monitor Usage through reports
 
Create Skype Connect profiles to make outbound Skype 
 
calls through an existing SIP-enabled PBX that supports 
Skype Connect
A major use of Skype Manager is to allocate and manage Skype Credit to 
members. Navigate to the Features page and select Credit allocations from 
the sidebar menu (see Figure 9-6). The resulting list shows the current status 
of Skype credit allocations to each member along with links to Manage 
Credit and Manage Auto-recharge for each member. The Administrator can 
also pull back into the manager’s pool Skype Credits (especially useful when 
an employee leaves an organization).
3http://blogs.skype.com/enterprise/2011/04/sm_what_are_business_accounts.html

CHAPTER 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
170
From other options in the sidebar you can also create subscriptions, 
manage voice mail activity, assign Skype Online Numbers, and manage call 
forwarding to landlines and mobile phones 
Note that Skype Premium is no longer available now 
 
that Group Video calling is free.
Skype Connect provides a path for SIP connections to 
 
supported third-party PBX systems.
Summary
My Account is the Skype portal to purchase and manage your Skype 
subscriptions, online numbers, caller ID, call forwarding, and voice 
messaging. In addition, it provides access to manage billing and payments 
as well as usage reports. Skype Manager is a web-based portal for 
administering Skype activity across a business.
Figure 9-6.  Managing Features including Skype Credit 

CHAPTER 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
171
Key Points
Skype operates on a pay-in-advance basis, using either 
 
Skype Credit or Skype calling plans.
With Skype you never receive a phone bill.
 
Skype calling plans can be optimized for local country, 
 
continent, or worldwide calling activity
An Office 365 subscription includes 60 minutes of  
 
worldwide Skype calling to over 60 countries.
The web-based My Account Skype portal allows users 
 
to manage the services and subscriptions associated 
with an individual account as well as payment and 
billing options.
Businesses can either let employees manage their  
 
individual Skype accounts or administer Skype use across 
the business using Skype Manager.

173
Chapter 10
Hardware 
Considerations: PCs, 
Mobiles, and Peripherals
Perhaps the biggest user experience change in voice calling with Skype 
is the transition from a legacy desktop or wall phone to the wide range of 
platforms and devices on which you can make and receive Skype calls: 
PCs, smartphones, TVs, Blu-ray players, and tablets. Most come with 
applications that can completely replace the desktop phone yet carry out 
the functionality of a business desktop phone.
As mentioned previously, Skype requires as an end point a hardware  
device that incorporates Skype software, whether as an application  
(PCs, smartphones, tablets) or embedded into an intelligent device’s 
firmware (TVs, Blu-ray players). So the hardware device you use must meet 
minimum requirements to run Skype software.
In addition consideration must be given to the microphone and speakers, 
and, for video calls, a webcam—whether embedded or from a third-party 
vendor. Speakerphones open up additional configurations for participating in 
voice conversations, especially when multiple participants are gathered in an 
office or conference room.

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
174
Hardware Requirements 
While today’s PCs tend to have more powerful multi-core processors 
running at speeds well over 2.0 GHz with multi-GB of RAM memory, there 
are minimum requirements for using Skype on a Windows PC or Mac  
(see Table 10-1).
Table 10-1.  Minimum Requirements for Using Skype on a PC or Mac
Windows PC
Mac
Skype version
Skype 7.0 for Windows 
Desktop
Skype 7.0 for Mac
Operating system
Windows XP SP3,  
Vista, 7, 8.1
Mac OS X 10.9 (Mavericks), 
10.10 (Yosemite)
Minimum processor 
speed (CPU) (voice only)
1.0 GHz
1.0 GHz (Core 2 Duo)
Recommended 
processor speed (video)
1.8 GHz dual core
2.0 GHz dual core
RAM
512 MB
1 GB
Additional software
DirectX v9.0 or later
Latest version of QuickTime
The evolution of PCs and Macs with dual- and quad-core processors, such 
as Intel’s iCore line, has also contributed to improving the robustness, 
reliability, and performance of Skype voice and video calls.
For mobile devices the hardware configuration is basically defined with the 
only option being user accessible memory (16GB, 32GB, 64GB, etc.—either 
embedded or via an SD card). However, as new devices appear they have 
faster processors and graphics displays; these allow Skype’s developers 
to modify the user interface, improve the audio and video performance 
(such as the recent upgrades supporting HD quality video), reduce battery 
drain (significantly), as well as introduce new features such as video 
messaging.

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
175
Choosing Peripheral Hardware
While all PCs incorporate a microphone and speakers and some notebooks 
and PC display monitors include a webcam, there are many reasons to consider 
third-party accessories such as headsets, webcams, and speakerphones:
To take full advantage of Skype’s proprietary voice 
 
technology that can deliver crystal-clear audio on 
Skype-to-Skype calls between PCs, iPhone, Android, 
iPad, BlackBerry 10, Windows Phone, TVs, and Blu-ray 
players
To take full advantage of Skype’s proprietary video 
 
technology that can deliver High Quality (VGA) or HD 
(720p or 1080p) Video on Skype-to-Skype calls at 
relatively low upload speeds
To provide privacy in open office and other noisy 
 
background environments
To allow you to move away from your PC during a voice 
 
call (using a wireless headset)
To ensure optimal voice quality (microphone, speakers)
 
To establish benchmarks for peripheral performance Skype developed, 
over its first eight or nine years, a Skype-certified hardware program 
that assisted in ensuring that users can take full advantage of these 
features. However, over this period PC vendors introduced embedded 
webcams supporting HD video and higher performance audio hardware, 
while peripheral vendors also introduced higher performance webcams, 
microphones, headsets, and speakerphones whose specifications have 
become standard across several vendors.
As a result the market for hardware peripherals took a severe decline and 
the need for an ongoing certification program evaporated. What at one time 
produced excitement over its innovation has now evolved into industry 
standard performance across the peripherals market.
While Skype certification addressed technical and user experience issues, it 
did not address features on a product such as whether a webcam includes a 
microphone or a headset that includes a volume control. Those are product 
marketing decisions of the individual peripheral hardware vendors.
What follows provides guidelines and considerations to be taken into 
account when purchasing these peripherals in today’s market.

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
176
Where do you find these peripherals? The former Skype Shop is migrating 
into the Microsoft Store; accessories are available on the Microsoft U.S. 
Store and will become available in other countries over time. Skype has 
also designated Chat and Vision1 as a Skype Global Merchant Partner (see 
Figure 10-1). Third-party vendors, such as Logitech, ClearOne, Creative 
Labs, and Plantronics include a website store and/or make them available 
via Amazon and other e-commerce vendors. Of course many items can also 
be purchased in electronics retail stores.
Figure 10-1.  Chat and Vision Store
1https://ca.chatandvision.com/skype_shop

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
177
When buying from a third-party store or website, you will need to be more 
careful to select hardware with the right specifications for Skype. The 
Microsoft and Chat and Vision Stores are the safest way to ensure you get 
hardware that will work well with Skype (see Figure 10-2).
Figure 10-2.  Skype headsets (Microsoft Store)
The choice of hardware available can be bewildering. Let’s look at some types 
of hardware starting with the most common Skype accessory: headsets.
Headsets
It’s possible to make a Skype call using the built-in speakers and 
microphone on devices such as laptops and tablets, but to get the best 
experience, sound quality, echo cancellation, and privacy, a headset is a 
good investment.
Headsets come in three general styles: supra-aural, circumaural, and in-ear. 
Supra-aural headsets have smaller, lighter earpads that rest directly on the 
ear. Circumaural headsets completely cover and surround the ear, resting on 

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
178
the side of the head. In-ear headsets have small ear buds that sit inside the 
ear, and a microphone built in to the wire. Which kind of headset you prefer 
will partly come down to personal preference, but some examples of their 
typical characteristics are:
Supra-aural headsets are compact and lightweight, but 
 
don’t block out or contain noise as much as the other 
two designs.
Some people find supra-aural and/or in-ear headsets 
 
uncomfortable to wear over long periods because they 
press or sit directly on or in the ears. If you’re one of 
these people, you might find a circumaural headset 
more comfortable, but be aware that they can also be 
quite heavy.
In-ear headsets are small, light, and easy to transport, 
 
but the microphone placement might not be ideal 
for longer or hands-free calling, especially in a noisy 
environment.
When looking at headsets, some questions to ask yourself might be
Do I already have a preference for a particular form 
 
factor: in-ear, on-ear, or over-ear?
Will I need to use the headset for long periods?
 
Is the padding comfortable?
 
Is it heavy/light?
 
Is it the right size or fit for me (e.g., right size of ear 
 
bud; ear pads not pressing too hard on the ears)?
Will I be working in a noisy environment?
 
Is the microphone placement right for me?
 
Will I need to transport it (size/robust design)?
 
Is freedom to move around during a call required?
 
Should it be a wireless headset?
 
Does the headset support stereo audio?
 
Do I want to connect to a PC via a wireless Bluetooth 
 
connection, a physical USB port, or 3.5 mm stereo  
mini-jack?

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
179
Do I also want to use the headset with a smartphone, 
 
such as an iPhone or BlackBerry, or a media player, 
such as an iPod, which use either a 3.5mm headset jack 
or wireless Bluetooth connection?
Some headsets may have multiple connections, for example:
The Logitech H800 wireless headset has options for 
 
Bluetooth or a USB wireless adapter.
The Freetalk Everyman, available online from Chat and 
 
Vision, includes both a USB adapter and, for listening 
to your media player or smartphone/tablet, a 3.5 
mm stereo headphone jack. It also includes an audio 
chip that bypasses the audio chip on a PC to assure 
capturing the full crystal-clear audio available using 
Skype.
Webcams for PCs
Many PC monitors and most notebook PCs now incorporate a webcam that 
meets minimum standards for at least High Quality Video and often for HD 
Video. Skype video calling will also work with most third-party webcams 
that are supported by Windows or Mac OS X. These usually deliver an 
acceptable quality video call for personal and business calling.
But how do you get the best quality video?
As its video quality evolved toward supporting HD video resolutions Skype 
worked with some webcam vendors to develop webcams that could deliver 
Skype’s High Quality Video or HD Video while dealing with the network 
connection issues and frame rates (frames-per-second) that are required 
to deliver a video stream that is similar to HD television quality. The key for 
these webcams was not simply resolution, but also delivering video at the 
frame rate (frames-per-second or fps) required for a non-flickering or non-
pixelating video stream while not impacting Skype’s superwideband audio. 
Today, whether embedded or a peripheral, most webcams support at least 
High Quality Video (VGA: 640x480). Figure 10-3 shows screenshots of both 
high-quality and HD video. Although you probably can’t see the difference in 
resolution in the figure, you can see that HD video enables you to use more 
of your screen real estate. High Quality offers a 4:3 aspect ratio while HD 
video has a wider 16:9 aspect ratio. This is similar to the difference in ratios 
between conventional and HD TVs.

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
180
Webcam considerations include:
What resolution do I want/need?
 
VGA (640 
 
× 480) resolution is the minimum 
requirement for a realistic video image.
HD’s 720p (1280 
 
× 720) or 1080p (1920 × 1080) 
resolution deliver an image that approaches 
telepresence quality2, especially when viewing in 
Full Screen mode on a 20” to 27” monitor.
What is the video viewing range to be supported?  
 
1.5 meters works for personal video and up to 5 meters 
for a small to medium size conference room or the 
family room.
Can it auto-focus? For example, could it show a 
 
business card clearly when brought close to the 
webcam?
Does it have a face following feature?
 
Figure 10-3.  Skype video resolutions
2http://www.disruptivetelephony.com/2012/03/skypes-hd-video-quality-is-
amazing.html

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
181
Is a microphone or microphone array necessary or 
 
desirable?
Some webcams include built-in microphones, but a 
 
longer-range conference webcam would need to be 
used in conjunction with a closer-range microphone 
or microphone array.
How well does the webcam adapt to low-light 
 
conditions?
Does the webcam include support software for video 
 
recording, managing the webcam settings, downloading 
video to YouTube?
Is the webcam to be used with a Skype-enabled TV or 
 
Blu-ray player?
Figure 10-4 shows some of the webcams available via the Microsoft store. 
Webcams that support both High Quality Video and HD Video on a Windows 
PC with a dual core 2.0 GHz processor include:
Logitech C920 HD Pro Webcam
 
3 (Windows only)
Logitech C615
 
4/C/525/C3105/C270
faceVsion Touchcam V1 (720p with H.264 processor)
 
3http://voiceontheweb.biz/skype-world/skype-ecosystem/skype-partner-
solutions/logitech-c920-webcam-superior-skype-video-calling/
4http://www.logitech.com/en-us/webcam-communications/webcams/devices/hd-
webcam-c615
5http://www.logitech.com/en-us/webcam-communications/webcams/
devices/7076

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
182
The Logitech C920 HD Video webcams incorporate an embedded H.264 
processor to reduce the video image processing load on the PC’s primary 
CPU and the amount of data transmitted over the Internet. These webcams 
can send/receive 30 frames per second (fps) for High Quality Video and 22 
fps for HD video; Logitech HD webcams support 30 fps for HD video.
Sending video to your contacts is an upload activity from your PC or TV. 
Whereas High Quality Video requires a minimum 512 Kbps upload speed for 
the Internet connection, HD Video webcams require a minimum 1.0 to 1.2 
Mbps upload speed for 720p video or 2.0 Mbps for 1080p. A webcam will 
send High Quality Video if there is insufficient upload speed for HD Video.
Figure 10-4.  Skype webcams (Microsoft Store)

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
183
Note  A couple of comments about the Logitech C920 (Windows only): in 
tests with the Logitech C920 webcam it uniquely supports:
720p video at up to 30 fps; requires 1.0 Mbps upload speed
• 
1080p video; requires 2.0 Mbps upload speed
• 
Other brands supplying webcams include Creative Labs Live! and Lifecam 
Studio.
Webcams for TV
In early 2010, with the emergence of smart TVs that had an Internet 
connection, Skype started appearing embedded into Samsung, Sony, LG, 
and other vendors’ high-end TVs. By 2014 Smart TV with the inclusion of 
Skype has become a standard feature on all but the lowest-end HDTV sets 
from these brands.
Today Skype is available on smart HDTV sets from LG, Panasonic, Philips, 
Samsung, Sharp, Sony, Toshiba, and Vizio. Check with the individual 
vendors to see which models include at least a smart TV feature. It is also 
available on Blu-ray players from Panasonic, Philips, and Sony.
When investigating TVs with embedded Skype check for the following:
Is the webcam embedded in the TV set or do you need 
 
to purchase a compatible webcam designed to work 
with that particular model?
If you need to buy a webcam, does it support a  
 
two- or four-microphone array for picking up audio 
across a small conference room or family room? 
Webcams used with Skype for TV must be able to pick 
up multiple voices as far as 4 to 6 meters (15 to 20 feet) 
away from the webcam, so these webcams include  
2 or 4 microphones with noise cancelling. Skype for TV 
firmware has been optimized to ensure audio quality 
integrity in such a scenario.

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
184
Note  Skype for TV can only be used for one-to-one Skype calls; it 
cannot be used as a participant on a multi-party voice or video call. To 
view a multi-party call on a TV display requires use of Skype on a PC with 
an appropriate setup to use the TV display as a PC monitor.
All webcams include a wide-angle lens to capture everyone in the room 
within the video image.
An All-In-One Solution for HDTV Sets
If you have a flat panel HDTV set with an HDMI connection, one option you 
might want to consider is a telyHD, which brings Skype for TV to any HDTV 
set (see Figure 10-5). This is an all-in-one hardware and software (Android-
based) solution made by Tely Labs.
Figure 10-5.  Skype on TelyHD
The TelyHD:
Embeds a wide-angle HD webcam supporting 720p 
 
resolution at 30 frames per second (fps), with a privacy 
shutter
Includes four noise cancelling microphones that take 
 
advantage of Skype’s audio processing technology
Requires an HDTV set with an HDMI input
 

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
185
Incorporates a remote control for managing the Skype 
 
calling experience from across the room
Makes calls to Skype contacts on PCs, smartphones, 
 
and tablets, Skype for TV and other telyHDs
Includes an onboard H.264 processor to reduce the 
 
video codec processing load on the main processor
Connects to the Internet via either Wi-Fi or an Ethernet 
 
cable
Includes a USB port for a wired/wireless keyboard and/
 
or USB memory stick for photo sharing
telyHD Base Edition can be upgraded to telyHD Pro via a software upgrade. 
This is a full business teleconferencing system providing interoperability 
across multiple video conferencing offerings.
Speakerphones and Microphones
While using the native PC’s audio hardware or headsets certainly meets the 
basic requirements for participating in a voice call, situations will arise where 
it is preferable to:
Have several people participate on the call via a shared 
 
audio device
Use Skype in a family room, office, or conference room
 
Not be seen wearing a microphone during a video call 
 
or video call recording
Use a high-quality microphone, especially when 
 
recording
For these situations a speakerphone addresses these requirements. The 
major consideration for a speakerphone decision is whether you want 
a short-range personal speakerphone or a long- range speakerphone 
configuration, such as the length of a conference room table.
Other considerations include:
Ability to fit readily into a briefcase (personal 
 
speakerphones)
Power source, a USB connection or independent power 
 
supply
Echo cancellation
 

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
186
One vendor of high-quality speakerphones is ClearOne with their ChatAttach 
series (see Figure 10-6).
Figure 10-6.  ClearOne Chat 160
Microphones come in many forms, such as those included with headsets 
and free standing mics. They usually provide sufficient quality for normal 
conversations. Some microphones associated with capturing conversation 
in a meeting room may deal with issues such as echo cancellation; others, 
such as the Yeti Blue, are recognized for their broadcast quality, appropriate 
for use in, say, podcasts.
Summary
With Skype, the end point for placing and receiving calls becomes intelligent 
hardware, whether PCs, smartphones, tablets or TVs and DVD players. 
Skype’s technology, along with its options for video, file sharing, echo 
cancellation and more, is more advanced than traditional phone technology 
and comes with certain minimum hardware requirements. In addition to 
this, you will often need or want supporting hardware such as a headset, 
webcam or conferencing solution. When choosing hardware to use with 
Skype, you need to decide what factors matter to you, whether it’s price, 
comfort, convenience, or audio and video quality.

CHAPTER 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles, and Peripherals
187
Key Points
The evolution of duo- and quad-core processors has 
 
been a major factor that has contributed to more 
reliable, robust, and sustainable Skype conversations.
Whether embedded into the hardware or acquired as 
 
third-party peripherals, high-performance webcams, 
headsets, and microphones are required to achieve 
superwideband audio and HD video Skype calling.
Some webcams include built-in microphones or 
 
microphone arrays.
Most TV sets are now “smart,” with Internet connectivity 
 
built in and the ability to run Skype for TV. Some smart 
TVs come with the necessary hardware (webcam, 
microphone array) built in, while others require you to 
buy your own.
The telyHD Basic Edition is one way to bring Skype 
 
voice and video calling to any HDTV equipped with an 
HDMI connection, and can be upgraded to telyHD Pro 
for use as a full business teleconferencing system.

189
Chapter 11
Building Geographically 
Dispersed Teams  
Over Skype
One key to a profitable and effective business is building team rapport 
across employees. This is accomplished more readily when everyone is in 
one location. However, with the rise of geographically dispersed business 
teams, the ability to easily converse spontaneously across continents and 
oceans at little or no cost becomes an essential ingredient for success.
As a result Skype has become a key to not only building business teams 
that comprise the best resources available worldwide but also to generating 
revenues internationally with minimum overhead. While Skype helps 
minimize travel expenses, it also keeps in contact with those team members 
who do have to travel.
Skype and Collaboration: Building Teams  
and Communities
Skype supports multi-party (or Group) Chat, Voice, and Video conversations 
that are available free to all Skype users. This includes Group Video 
calling. Skype supports both the collaboration activities of business teams 
and special interest groups working around the world, as well as ad hoc 
consumer conversations, such as a family conference call.

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
190
Personally I have participated in very productive multi-party voice and 
video calls with participants in North America, Europe, South Africa, and 
Hong Kong; the main challenge is finding a time convenient for all parties 
across time zones spanning up to 15 hours. I have also participated in 
multiple Group chats, some of which have been running (and archived) 
since May 2007.
While there are other voice and video conferencing options they tend to 
be managed services, whereas Skype is more ad hoc, supporting both 
asynchronous (text) and real time (text, voice, and video) conversations. 
Skype has unique features when conferencing such as:
All conversation text-based information (chat messages, 
 
file transfers, URL’s, call detail records, etc.) is archived 
and searchable.
Voice and video recordings require third-party 
 
applications such as Pamela on Windows PC’s and 
Call Recorder for Mac
It’s available on all platforms: participants in a group 
 
conversation can be on PCs, iOS, Android devices, 
BlackBerry 10, and Windows Phones.
All activity is buffered such that:
 
It is transcribed across the various devices the 
 
account is logged into.
Messages sent to a user while offline appear when 
 
the user goes back online.
Creating a Group
Creating a Group involves starting with a selected contact and clicking on 
the 
 icon (see Figure 11-1) in the conversation pane’s header. This results 
in a drop-down list of all your (Skype) Contacts. Here you can search for and 
check all those you want to add and then click the Add to Group button. 
Figure 11-1 shows adding a contact to a group already containing seven 
people. The same process applies even when adding the first person to a 
group.

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
191
After you add a contact to a group the new participant receives a chat 
notification (see Figure 11-2).
Figure 11-1.  Building a group
Figure 11-2.  Group participation notification
The new contact may see earlier messages in the Group Chat along with 
all new messages going forward. If the participant wants to leave the 
Group, right-click the Group name in the Contacts pane and select Leave 
Conversation or select “Conversation | Leave Conversation” from the main 
drop-down menu.
A topic for the group can be set using the /topic [text] command (no 
square brackets). Ensure the topic briefly, but adequately describes the 
purpose of the group. The creator of the group assumes the ADMIN role, 
while other participants are USERs unless others are assigned an ADMIN or 
MASTER role using the /setrole command shown in Figure 11-3.

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
192
Alternatively, a group can be created using “Contacts | Create New Group” 
from the Skype client main menu. Once again, click the 
 icon and proceed 
as described previously.
For management and administration of various parameters governing the 
chat session, type /help and a list of the various setting options appears in 
the chat window (see Figure 11-3). At the end of the list is a link to obtain 
more details about each option.
Group Chat: Skype as a Virtual Water 
Fountain
Let’s start with the most used collaboration tool: Group Chat. A Group Chat 
(see Figure 11-4):
can include up to 300 participants,
 
is persistent over time and
 
acts as a virtual worldwide water cooler.
 
Figure 11-3.  Group Chat administration options

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
193
Keep in mind that Group Chats should be contributing to not only the 
business operations but also the internal culture and team building 
within the business. Best practices guidelines should be established to 
reinforce the need to focus on the business team’s goals, while keeping 
the conversation constructive, respecting the views of other ethically, and 
avoiding “trash talk.”
Topic Call Icons
#Participants
Participants
(with presence status)
Date
(click for history)
Author
Time
Searched word
Active URL
Search box
Text Entry Emotions
Sharing Menu
Figure 11-4.  Skype Group Chat overview

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
194
One person creates a Group Chat and adds the initial participants as 
outlined in the previous section; others can be added as an Admin 
(Moderator) or Speaker (Participant) via the /setrole command. As with 
chat sessions with individual contacts, Group Chat contents are stored 
on your local PC and are searchable; however, a warning: following a very 
active greater than 50 participant Group Chat over a long period of time can 
consume considerable storage on your PC.
In practice, Group Chats can be somewhat ad hoc in that often a session 
may remain quiet for a few days and then go very active when a hot  
topic arises.
When used in business or as a virtual community forum, it is wise to adopt 
a specific operational role for a Group Chat, usually defined through the 
Topic setting (/topic) described earlier in this chapter. Assigning a topic also 
helps to enforce a business discipline such that chat activity stays focused 
on its primary topic and does not wander into conversations irrelevant to the 
primary agenda for the Group Chat.
Chat conversation messages may comprise a mix of those that require 
immediate action and those that are involved simply to discuss a topic 
of interest that provides dialogue and background for future activities or 
projects. In a business environment, there should be an inherent discipline 
not only to keep the conversation on topic but also to ensure participants 
have an implicit understanding of what type of message requires an 
immediate action.
Files and photos can be transferred only to Group participants who are also 
the sending participant’s accepted Contacts. Starting with Skype 7.0 for 
Windows Desktop and Mac, the transferred file is represented by either a 
thumbnail of an image (see Figure 11-5) or a document file image related to 
the relevant application (see Figure 11-6). Click the image to either view the 
photo or download the document into the relevant application itself.
Figure 11-5.  File transfer image for a photo or image file

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
195
When you send a file transfer to a group you can actually see who has 
downloaded the file. If all have accepted or the transfer is cancelled after a 
few have accepted you can click on the “sent to n people” link to see who 
has accepted (see Figure 11-7).
Figure 11-6.  File transfer image for a document file
Figure 11-7.  Group File Transfer Acceptance List
A business operation will often have multiple Group Chats built around 
business operations teams and/or designated projects.
Group Chats can be escalated to a multi-party Voice call with up to  
25 participants and a Group Video call with up to 10 participants simply by 
clicking the appropriate icon in the Group Chat header.
Group Chats can be recalled back to their beginning. Click on a “date” at 
the top of the conversation pane and you can select how far back you want 
to view or scroll (see Figure 11-8).

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
196
Using Ctrl-F (Windows)/Command-F (Mac) you can search for a word or 
phrase back through the entire archived period. In Figure 11-4 a search was 
done for the acronym RTCWEB and searched messages entered over three 
years ago.
Multi-Party Voice Calls: Travel-Free 
Conferencing
Multi-party Voice calls are hosted on the originator’s PC and can support up 
to 25 participants. Beyond adding or removing participants to/from the call, 
the host has little control over the call’s flow. All parties are visible, via their 
avatar, in the Skype conversation/chat pane. One very helpful feature is a blue 
“halo” appearing around the avatar of the person who is currently speaking.
If a host’s PC is not powerful enough to support the call or has a weak 
Internet connection, another participant with a more powerful PC or more 
robust Internet connection can easily become the host and reconnect the 
call. Simply select the previously created Group from the Contact pane and 
click on the “Phone” icon in the Group conversation pane header. Should 
there be more than 25 participants in the Group, you will be asked to select 
those participants whom you want to include on the call.
Skype’s multi-party calling is great for ad hoc and intra-company multi-party 
calls. However, for robust managed conference calls hosted on a server, you 
must register for and deploy third-party offerings such as Microsoft Lync, 
GoToMeeting, Uberconference, or FreeConference. These offerings provide 
moderator features, such as participant muting and hand raising. They 
often will include a chat session and can at least share documents. Most 
importantly these offerings can support several hundred or even thousands 
of participants, most of whom would be in a “listener” mode.
Figure 11-8.  Recalling archived conversations

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
197
Whereas five to ten party conference calls on the legacy phone network 
could quickly run up a significant bill, Skype’s multi-party Voice calls are 
either totally free if all parties are on Skype or invoke landline/mobile calling 
charges only for each of those participants on a landline or mobile phone.
Note  Skype recently released Skype 5.4 for iPhone, which supports hosting 
a Group Voice call with up to four participants. Skype expects to release other 
mobile versions with a similar feature, provided the underlying hardware 
(processor, RAM) can handle the hosting.
WHY MIGHT YOU CHOOSE A MANAGED COLLABORATION SERVICE OVER SKYPE?
Skype’s free multi-party services involve hosting the session on a Skype user’s PC. For this reason,  
Skype on smartphones (iPhone Android, BlackBerry 10, or Windows Phone), only supports 
participation, but not hosting on a Skype multi-party call. Also sessions hosted on a user’s PC 
may be limited due to other programs running on the PC, bandwidth of the Internet connection, 
or even the processor speed—a minimum 2GHz dual-core processor is recommended.
But, other than to add or remove participants to/from a call, the host has little control over 
the flow of the call.
Third-party managed services, on the other hand, allow a host or moderator to manage 
other aspects of the call, such as:
Muting of participants and selecting which participants can speak
• 
Hand raising to allow a participant to indicate an interest in speaking
• 
Invitations can be sent out prior to the call along with information on 
• 
how to call in
Call-in via Skype or local phone numbers (worldwide in some services)
• 
Presentation mode: Support for 100s or even 1000s of participants
• 
Chat sessions seen by all participants on the call
• 
Document sharing, desktop sharing, and/or file management features 
• 
are common options
Host robustness and participant scalability via a robust, scalable, 
• 
managed server
Meeting rooms that are persistently available with supporting content
• 
Call recording and archiving for later access
• 

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
198
Group Video Calling: Togetherness Across 
Continents and Oceans
While Group Chat and Voice offer opportunities to build team rapport, a 
Group Video session provides the ability to hold virtual conference room 
meetings with participants located anywhere at multiple locations worldwide. 
It delivers opportunities to graphically reinforce an issue or offering through 
a visual demonstration, perform screen sharing for slide presentations and 
document reviews, as well as add visual emotion to a virtual conference room 
meeting through facial expressions and arm waving gestures.
Skype initially launched Group Video calling requiring a Skype Premium 
subscription; however, over the summer of 2014 it became a free offering. 
Including the host, a Skype Group Video call can support up to ten 
participants. Skype Group Video supports participation by Skype contacts 
at no cost. However, it also can include “voice only” participants added via 
their landline or mobile number; this feature does require that the host has 
either Skype credit or a Skype Calling Plan to landlines and mobile.
As with Group Voice calls, Group Video calls can only be hosted on 
Windows PCs and Macs, yet participants can join the call on mobile 
devices. If it’s a hybrid meeting where several participants are in a 
headquarters office or conference room and others participate remotely, it’s 
recommended to use a large display screen in the physical office/conference 
room with microphones or speakerphones equipped to pick up audio from 
anyone in the room (more details in Chapter 10).
When a Skype Group Video call is launched, a dark background comes 
down in your conversation pane and shows either video images of the other 
participants or their Skype profile avatar. Generally if a user either has no 
webcam or a poor Internet connection that won’t support video, he or she 
can still participate on a call as a voice participant where he or she appears 
as a Skype profile avatar.
In Figure 11-9, the call involves participants in Canada and the U.S. but 
readily can incorporate participants worldwide. However, user “Voice On The 
Web” did not have a webcam; this represents a voice-only participant.

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
199
Note that, during the call, the host can click on the Group Chat icon (lower 
right) to lift the blind sufficiently to see an accompanying text chat pane.  
If the Skype client window is wide enough, the chat session appears as right 
sidebar (Figure 11-10); otherwise it appears below the Call Screen.  
All participants can contribute to and view the chat dialogue.
Figure 11-9.  Group Video call screen

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
200
During the call one user can also share a desktop screen or individual 
windows within the desktop.
Clicking the arrow icon in the top left of the call screen removes the 
Contacts pane.
Figure 11-10.  Three pane Group Video call with contacts and chat
Figure 11-11.  Group Video call screen header

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
201
The participants’ images will move around the screen as the speakers 
change as determined by Skype’s embedded algorithms. Figure 11-12 is 
an example in which the speaker at the moment appears as a much larger 
video image.
Figure 11-12.  Group Video call- speaker appears in larger image
Clicking the Full Screen option on the three-dot menu in the upper right 
opens up a Full Screen view (Figure 11-13). This is where the images are 
approaching telepresence.

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
202
If you move to another application on the desktop, the call continues and 
the Call Monitor window appears showing whoever is talking at the time  
(see Figure 11-14).
Figure 11-13.  Group Video call full screen
Figure 11-14.  Group Video call monitor window
As with Skype multi-party Voice calls, calls are hosted on the host’s local PC 
and do not offer full conference call managed hosting features.
Group Video calls support only VGA resolution (640 × 480). This is more of a 
pragmatic “available screen real estate” issue rather than a technical limitation 
when viewing multiple video images within a display’s overall resolution.

CHAPTER 11: Building Geographically Dispersed Teams Over Skype 
203
Summary
Skype’s Group conversation features are especially useful for creating an ad 
hoc virtual office environment across a geographically disbursed business. 
Water fountain chat sessions keep colleagues up to date on activity within 
the business, while providing a forum for informal and formal discussion of 
designated topics.
Skype’s Group conversation features offer very low cost communications 
services for building a small business or startup that needs to focus on cost 
control, even for working with suppliers and providing customer service. 
On the other hand, businesses of any size may want to deploy Skype for its 
face-to-face high quality video and/or crystal clear voice quality on Skype-
to-Skype calls.
Key Points
It’s easy to create a contact group on Skype by going  
 
to an existing contact or conversation and clicking on 
the 
 icon to add participants. You can name a group 
by team or topic to make it easy to find.
Skype Group Chat provides an informal environment 
 
for building virtual water fountain discussions across a 
worldwide business ecosystem.
Skype Group Voice calling provides an easily configured 
 
service for voice conference calls with fewer than  
25 active participants.
Skype Group Video becomes a virtual conference room 
 
for geographically dispersed businesses.

205
Chapter 12
Skype on Office 365, 
Outlook.com and Lync
When Microsoft acquired Skype they were not only looking at improving 
the Skype user experience on PCs and mobile devices but also realized 
there were opportunities to enable Skype-enriched communications within 
other Microsoft platforms such as Office Online, incorporating Outlook.
com (formerly Hotmail), Office, and Lync. At the same time Microsoft was 
rebuilding Skype’s back end infrastructure to facilitate the completion of 
these integrations.
Shortly after the Microsoft acquisition of Skype, Microsoft migrated Hotmail 
to Outlook.com, a more fully featured web-based communications service, 
incorporating email, Skype, and some social networking. The embedding 
of Skype access has evolved to the point where an Outlook.com website 
becomes a more unified web-based communications platform that includes 
both email and Skype on a single “web page” without the need to use 
a dedicated Skype client. In turn, Outlook.com has been incorporated 
into Microsoft’s evolving Office Online applications, several of which now 
include, or will soon include, Skype integration.
Enabling Skype’s communications infrastructure within an online application 
allows the user the flexibility to access the various online applications from 
any web browser without the need to use a Skype client. This is particularly 
useful when using third-party PCs in, say, public locations such as libraries 
and airport lounges. It also facilitates real time collaboration when preparing 
Word documents and PowerPoint presentations while away from a user’s 
primary desktop PC or laptop.

CHAPTER 12: Skype on Office 365, Outlook.com and Lync
206
Skype on Outlook.com
To set up Outlook.com you need to have (or open) a Microsoft account and 
to have linked your Skype account with your Microsoft account (via the 
Skype Account profile, see Chapter 9). In a web browser go to Outlook.
com where you will be asked to log in to your Microsoft account, click the 
Messaging (speech bubble) icon to the left of your account name and a 
screen similar to the one in Figure 12-1 appears.
Figure 12-1.  Outlook.com connection to Skype setup
Sign in to your Skype account; at some point you will be asked to install a 
Skype plug-in for your browser. Once you’ve completed setup, you should 
see a screen similar to the one shown in Figure 12-2.

CHAPTER 12: Skype on Office 365, Outlook.com and Lync
207
Either complementary to or, instead of, an Outlook.com email address 
you can set up Outlook.com to pick up email from other email addresses 
via POP. To access Skype from the main Outlook.com screen, click the 
Messenger or chat icon at the right end of the blue navigation bar across the 
top of the screen. Initially Skype replaces the ads on the right and opens a 
Recent sidebar (see Figure 12-3). A vertical green bar on the left of an avatar 
indicates presence status as available for that contact.
Figure 12-2.  Outlook.com completed setup

CHAPTER 12: Skype on Office 365, Outlook.com and Lync
208
When you click on a Skype contact in the Recent sidebar you can enter text 
to chat with them and/or launch a voice or video call, or add another person 
to the conversation, via the appropriate icons (see Figure 12-4). If you 
want to reach a contact who is not in the Recent chat sidebar, search for the 
contact in the Search contacts box shown at the top of the sidebar.
Figure 12-3.  Outook.com web page view (with Skype sidebar)

CHAPTER 12: Skype on Office 365, Outlook.com and Lync
209
Figure 12-4.  Chat session in Outlook.com with icons to launch voice or video call, or add another party

CHAPTER 12: Skype on Office 365, Outlook.com and Lync
210
Important to recognize is that Outlook.com is the first component of the 
evolving Office Online offering (see Figure 12-5).
Figure 12-5.  Office Online applications
Skype access is always provided via the same chat icon and right-hand 
sidebar within People, Calendar, and OneDrive. In addition to Skype 
conversations, People also provides links to send an email, a Tweet, or a 
Facebook message, as well as make an entry on the contact’s Facebook 
wall (see Figure 12-6). At the time of writing Skype had announced that 
Word Online and PowerPoint Online will also incorporate Skype in a similar 
manner during document collaboration sessions.

CHAPTER 12: Skype on Office 365, Outlook.com and Lync
211
When you make a call from an Office Online module, a new frameless 
window appears with the familiar Skype call background, call management 
bar and the ability to open the chat discussion as a sidebar (see Figure 12-7). 
However, as Office Online modules are web-based there is no chat history 
shown and chat messages are not buffered. If the account is also open in 
a Skype client on a PC, any chat discussion during the call from an Office 
Online module is transcribed into the PC client’s conversation pane as well 
as the Office Online module’s Skype sidebar. As with other chat messages, 
when not online in a PC Skype client the message is buffered, ready to 
appear the next time a PC Skype client is logged in. It also is archived on the 
PC for later recall.
Figure 12-6.  Contact Card in People via Outook.com

CHAPTER 12: Skype on Office 365, Outlook.com and Lync
212
Figure 12-7.  Voice Call Screen and Chat using Outlook.com
Outlook.com provides a convenient way to check email and Skype activity 
via a web browser, especially when using a “foreign” PC that, say, does not 
have a Skype client readily available. It also provides convenient access to 
other Office Online modules from any PC- or Mac-based web browser.
Note  Windows Live Messenger migrated to Skype Instant Messaging. 
When Microsoft acquired Skype they had two real-time communications 
offerings that duplicated most of the functionality. As a result, all Windows 
Live Messenger accounts were migrated to Skype accounts, providing a 
richer feature set that also takes full advantage of Skype’s unique voice 
and video technology.
Skype and Outlook
You can also launch Skype chat, voice, and video conversations from 
Outlook 2010 and 2013. When viewing an Outlook email message, scroll 
your mouse over the sender’s (or recipient’s) name and a box appears with 
several options (see Figure 12-8).

CHAPTER 12: Skype on Office 365, Outlook.com and Lync
213
Clicking Edit (or a down arrow) at the lower right brings up the full contact 
card (see Figure 12-9).
Figure 12-9.  Outlook 2013 People contact card with outbound calling link via Skype
Figure 12-8.  Outlook Message header with Skype and email links
In this case clicking the appropriate icon launches a chat session, voice, or 
video call in the native Skype for Windows Desktop client. Clicking the Email 
icon opens up a new Outlook message window.

CHAPTER 12: Skype on Office 365, Outlook.com and Lync
214
In summary, Outlook provides a convenient way to launch Skype 
conversations in the Skype for Windows Desktop client when working with 
email messages, whether sent or received. (Note that it does not launch 
calls using Skype for Windows Modern).
Microsoft Lync
Microsoft Lync was initially developed as an enterprise-grade unified 
communications platform providing robust, secure communications across 
larger enterprises. Lync clients are available across many platforms, 
including Windows, Mac, iOS, Android, and Windows Phone. Lync provides 
a consistent, single-client experience for presence, instant messaging, 
voice, HD video, and also online meeting features.
Lync users can connect to anyone on Skype, extending its instant 
messaging, presence sharing, and voice calling to the hundreds of millions 
of Skype users worldwide. In December 2014, Microsoft introduced video 
calling between Lync and Skype users.
Lync users add Skype contacts by typing their Skype users’ Microsoft 
account names into Lync’s Add Skype Contact window (available through 
‘Add a contact not in my organization’). Skype users can likewise add Lync 
contacts by typing users’ email addresses into the search bar within Skype 
and clicking Add Contact. This makes it possible to contact a wider network 
of people through Skype.
Lync was initially targeted to larger businesses with associated Lync server 
resource requirements. This comes with higher costs, recovered through 
its enterprise features such as supporting online meetings with hundreds of 
participants. For the purposes of this book, only the Skype−Lync integration is 
mentioned; for additional information follow up with Microsoft’s Lync website.
However, Lync requires a premise-based or hosted server managed by an 
enterprise’s IT management. Recently Microsoft has begun offering Lync 
Online as a standalone service within Office 365 where Microsoft provides 
the required hosting. This allows smaller businesses to take advantage of 
the Lync feature set at a low monthly per seat cost. 
Skype has announced that in the first half of 2015 Lync will be rebranded 
as Skype for Business with a user interface consistent with Skype’s and 
many value added features, such as managed conferencing, for a complete 
business grade service.

CHAPTER 12: Skype on Office 365, Outlook.com and Lync
215
Summary
Microsoft’s acquisition of Skype has provided tighter integration with its 
business products such as Office Online, incorporating Outlook.com, Office, 
and Lync. Essentially this integration brings Skype connectivity to individual 
applications without the need to use a Skype client.
Key Points
Outlook.com and several of its complementary Office 
 
Online applications let you link to your Skype account 
so you can use Skype while checking your email or 
editing a document during a collaboration session.
Skype Chat in Outlook.com requires no installation, but 
 
remembers that your chat history won’t be visible and 
chat messages won’t be buffered if your contact is offline.
A browser plugin is necessary to make voice or video 
 
calls through Skype on Office Online modules.
Outlook 2010 and 2013 now include integration with 
 
Skype such that Skype conversations can be launched 
and accessed from an Office contact header or the 
People module of Outlook.
Skype integration with Lync opens up a broader range of contacts with 
whom instant messaging and voice calling can occur.

217
Chapter 13
The Way Ahead
This book has covered a lot of ground for the business or power professional 
or any individual who seeks out a low-cost worldwide communications 
service. Skype has extended the technology originally known as VoIP (Voice 
over Internet Protocol) to evolve into an IP-based communications tool that 
not only provides “free voice calling,” but also makes it possible for people 
to build relationships, share experiences, host multi-party conversations 
(including voice and video) and, most importantly, build a business where 
geography is no longer a barrier to hiring employees, working with suppliers 
or, most critically, establishing a worldwide customer base.
After 11 years, Skype has matured in many ways. While it went from a 
startup through a couple of investment plays, most recently Skype has 
become a relatively independent business unit within Microsoft, supporting 
seven operating systems. Features beyond simply making voice and video 
connections will continue to be enhanced and introduced. In the quest to 
become more robust and reliable, a new backend infrastructure has evolved 
to the point where Skype can support text message buffering, file storage 
when sharing, and other features in more user-friendly ways.
But product maturity also means the quest for innovation becomes more 
difficult, especially when there is the need to ensure existing popular 
features need to be maintained. (Yes, several Skype features have come and 
gone, largely due to lack of interest, privacy and spam issues, and customer 
feedback). Every new user interface generates controversy; yet these 
changes make other features more effective.

CHAPTER 13: The Way Ahead
218
Where Does Skype Go From Here?
We see Skype evolving with new features on Skype for mobile devices, 
including deeper integration into the overall mobile operating system 
to make Skype a feature equivalent alternative to carrier voice channel 
calling. Microsoft continues to enhance their Office and Xbox products 
with embedded Skype calling to support document collaboration activities. 
Lync—about to rebranded as Skype for Business with a new Skype-like user 
interface—is now being offered as a module in Office 365 online, supporting 
collaboration activities at a very low per seat cost. Skype has announced a 
beta Skype for Web—providing the ability to access Skype from within a web 
browser—useful when using PCs that do not have a Skype client installed.
Can Skype continue to build its user base with competition coming from 
Facebook (and their $22B WhatsApp investment), Google (and their 
expanding Hangouts features), and Apple’s FaceTime? BlackBerry’s BBM 
offers some interesting features such as complementing group chat with 
photo libraries, lists, and event coordination. BBM Meetings supports 
multiparty voice and video calls with up to 25 participants; meetings can 
be created and hosted on both mobile devices and PCs. (Full disclosure: 
the author used BBM on a recent month long trip to send daily “photo 
postcards” back to his family.)
Where do Internet-Based Communications Go 
From Here?
Possibly the highest profile activity involving IP-based communications 
is the attempt to develop a WebRTC standard—or more clearly the ability 
to initiate a conversation directly from within a web browser. But this is an 
activity that is ripe with challenges:
WebRTC is a technology not a solution; it needs to 
 
be implemented within user applications embedded 
into web browsers. This involves embracing developer 
communities to incorporate it into websites, 
web applications, and, most challenging, mobile 
applications.
What is the disruptive (business) pain that would 
 
necessitate WebRTC? Simply put it’s about faster 
engagement—instantly join a conference call or answer 
a customer call without the pregnant pause that occurs 
while a connection is completed. And place that call 
directly from a web browser, ideally with no plugin 
installation required.

CHAPTER 13: The Way Ahead
219
Can the various players even come to an agreement 
 
on standards, especially with video codecs, which 
is the protocol required to make video calling work 
at all. It appears that both VP8 and H.264 are 
becoming required; however, VP9 and H.265 are under 
development.
The downside to H.26x is the requirement for royalties 
 
although Cisco has attempted to alleviate these when  
using Firefox.
H.264 is heavily embedded into many video hardware 
 
devices; this reduces the video processing load on PC  
and mobile device processors and was a driving force 
behind supporting both VP8 and H.264.
VP8 (and potentially VP9) are embedded into Google 
 
Chrome and Google Hangouts on a royalty-free basis. 
Can it become supported in all browsers? Currently the 
 
proposed WebRTC standard is supported in Firefox and 
Google Chrome but players such as Microsoft’s Internet 
Explorer (along with Skype) are taking their own path 
while Apple is totally mum (as is usual) on the issue with 
respect to Safari implementation.
There is agreement on voice or audio codecs such that WebRTC-supported 
conversations incorporate the crystal-clear voice associated with  
Skype-to-Skype calls. In fact the primary standard includes the royalty-free 
SILK technology developed by Skype.
In summary, while WebRTC allows users to make calls and launch chat 
conversations directly from a web browser, it does require developer activity 
to embed call activation in each website or web application. Also developers 
need the appropriate tools to support WebRTC on mobile devices; these are 
only now slowly emerging. As a result, we will see slow ramp up of WebRTC 
usage (and Skype for Web activity) as developer exposure and support 
evolve.
From a business perspective, where the business wants to encourage 
immediate engagement directly from a website, WebRTC is suitable for 
conference calls, inbound customer sales, and support services (such as 
Amazon’s Mayday service for Kindle owners) and possibly an involvement 
in the emerging Internet of Things. However, with its huge number of active 
users, Skype for Web also has the potential to be used for directly accessing 
Skype features from within a web browser.

CHAPTER 13: The Way Ahead
220
Yet Skype clients and mobile applications provide a totally independent 
feature-rich communications-focused environment that can replace legacy 
voice and video calling.
Questions that arise include:
Can live chat combined with WebRTC become the final 
 
blow to requiring a premise-based legacy business 
telephone system (PBX or private branch exchange) 
with an automated call answer directory for routing 
inbound calls to sales or service? This is partially driven 
by the fact that many call centers offer chat as a way 
to initiate engagement directly from a website; the 
WebRTC (and Skype for Web) opportunity is the ability 
to escalate to a voice or video call in context). 
Can a WebRTC voice call be combined with today’s 
 
computerized automobile services to send car 
diagnostic information to a dealer immediately, from the 
“road,” upon a component breakdown?
IP-Based Communications and the  
Traditional Telcos
While not apparent to the end user, most telecommunications service 
providers rely on IP-based communications technology to carry long 
distance calls to their destination. The user may experience it through 
offerings that provide unlimited calling within a country or mobile carrier’s 
Home territory. For example Rogers wireless and landline services recently 
incorporated plans that include unlimited calling within Canada at little 
incremental cost, if any.
Where the consumer will notice a difference is where a provider implements 
HD Voice (incorporating Skype’s SILK technology or an equivalent) to 
incorporate crystal-clear voice quality. For instance, Verizon and AT&T 
Mobility have introduced a service called VoLTE (Voice over LTE, a fourth 
generation network protocol) that has the potential to replace legacy 
mobile carrier voice channels. Currently it only works between customers 
on the same network; however, it is anticipated there will be cross network 
interoperability at some time in 2015.
Recall that placing Skype calls over wireless carriers uses the carriers’ data 
networks and plans. VoLTE brings another change in that; it also operates 
over the carriers’ data networks as opposed to the voice channel of earlier 
carrier protocols. This does place a significantly increased load onto the 
carrier’s wireless network capacity.

CHAPTER 13: The Way Ahead
221
EMERGENCY CALLING 911 AND ALL THAT
One area of contention for Skype has been emergency calling or, as it is called in North 
America, 911 services. At this point Skype states:
Skype Software is not a replacement for your ordinary mobile 
or fixed line telephone. In particular, apart from in very limited  
circumstances, the Software does not allow you to make 
emergency calls to emergency services. You must make alternative  
communication arrangements to ensure you can make emergency 
calls if necessary.
However, there is immense potential to make emergency calling more effective using  
IP-based technology. As a start, how about location identification when you make a call from 
a mobile device? Combining text chat, voice activation such as Siri, and other features could 
make emergency calling more effective. However, it’s a case of telcos, software publishers, 
and public safety agencies working together to come up with an appropriate solution. 
Guidelines for Evaluating the Evolution of  
IP-Based Communications
There are several new IP-based communication offerings emerging; however, 
over time very few have survived in the long term. When it comes to new 
offerings or upgrades to current offerings the questions I always ask include:
Does it support crystal-clear voice and HD video 
 
calling?
Is it available across all PCs, laptops, and multiple 
 
mobile devices?
Does it support calling to landlines and mobile phones?
 
Can calls be complemented with photo sharing, 
 
document sharing, and screen sharing?
What is the level of support for multi-party calls?
 
Can multi-party calls be established, managed, and hosted 
 
only on PCs or also on mobile devices?
How many participants can be involved in a voice or video 
 
multi-party call?

CHAPTER 13: The Way Ahead
222
Does a multi-party call support participation by all on  
 
the call?
Does a multi-party call support a “presentation” mode 
 
with a few active participants but a much larger listening 
audience?
Is call activity logged or archived? 
 
Can it be readily searched? How far back in time?
 
Are chat sessions buffered such that offline parties 
 
can view previous messages sent while the party was 
offline?
Are chat and logging activities mirrored onto other 
 
devices that support the same user account?
And perhaps the most overriding question: Whom can 
 
I call? Who are my contacts and how much effort is 
required to build up a Contact directory?
Are there options to minimize spam calling?
 
Conclusion
My first experience with voice calling over the Internet was in 1996 when 
my employer of the day launched a voice calling application running over 
43kbps dialup modems on PCs with 50MHz processors. Our developers 
were stressed out trying to just make it happen under these conditions. 
There was no directory service and the concept of Internet (chat) messaging 
had not been introduced. You would run the application and hope that 
somebody “out there” would actually answer using the same application.
In 2003 the Internet had matured to the point where the infrastructure was 
in place for a reliable, yet free, communications experience. Higher speed 
processors and broadband Internet had moved beyond their infancy. Two 
software pioneers had achieved the expertise to come up with an easy-
to-install, robust, and innovative communications application. Internet 
messaging was already in its infancy while the concept of a Contacts 
directory was introduced. Skype was launched and became viral in 
adoption.
Twelve years later over 300 million use the current versions of Skype every 
month. And it has a rich feature set that incorporates HD video calling, 
crystal clear voice along with complementary features such as file transfer, 
screen sharing, voice and video messaging, along with others that make 

CHAPTER 13: The Way Ahead
223
for a very productive communications ecosystem. And those calls can 
be handled on a wide range of intelligent hardware platforms—PC’s, 
smartphones, tablets, and TVs—over both wired and wireless connections.
One of the reviews for the first edition of Experience Skype to the Max 
stated, “I didn’t know what I didn’t know.” It is my hope that this edition 
not only brings you up to date on the full range of Skype features but also 
encourages you to find ways to turn Skype into a critical productivity tool for 
your business communications as well as a resource for supporting family 
and friend activity in today’s very hyper-active, always connected world of 
work and play.
IP communications will continue to evolve; innovation is endemic to today’s 
communications offerings. While the only application with communications 
as its core feature set across all multiple platforms, Skype will be competing 
with Facebook Messenger and Google Hangouts who want you to be able 
to launch a conversation directly from an email message or while viewing 
a Facebook post. The user interface continues to be a prime target for 
new ideas but the evolution of supporting hardware also presents new 
opportunities.
You can keep up with developments at Skype via the Skype Blogs  
(http://blogs.skype.com/) and at Voice On The Web  
(http://voiceontheweb.biz/) where I cover not only Skype but also other 
activity involving internet-based communications.
Now it’s your turn—go ahead, place calls, share experiences and ideas, 
build business and family relationships, and seize benefit from a more 
connected world.

225
Appendix A
Glossary
While every attempt has been made to focus on the personal user 
experience while avoiding reference to technology terms and background, 
occasionally there are some terms that creep into any conversation or 
discussion about Skype that may need some clarification. Hopefully this 
Glossary provides some of that clarification.
3G – A term related to the speed of a wireless carrier’s data service; means 
the carrier uses a third generation protocol that is significantly faster than 
2G/EDGE protocols. HSPA and HSPA+ are faster enhanced versions of 3G. 
The most common protocol offered by wireless carriers after 2011; mobile 
phones offered in 2011 or later support at least 3G protocol.
4G/LTE – A term related to the speed of a wireless carrier’s service; means 
a fourth generation protocol that is faster than 3G. Gradually introduced by 
carriers over the 2012−2014 time frame. Requires mobile phones that can 
support 4G/LTE; these include most phones launched during or after 2013. 
LTE is also the first protocol that is a common worldwide standard with a 
migration path from carriers who offered either GSM 3G or CDMA 3G.
Audio Terminology − Relates to the audio quality of a voice call resulting 
from limitations imposed by the connection between the parties on a call.  
As a guideline keep in mind that our ears can respond to (or hear) 
frequencies from 50 Hz to 22 KHz; the broader the audio frequency range 
supported in a voice call, the better the voice quality.

APPENDIX A: Glossary
226
 Narrowband: Has been used by the landline carriers for 
decades resulting in the deterioration of voice quality when 
making a PSTN call relative to speaking face-to-face. 
Frequency range: 200 Hz to 3700 Hz (3.7 KHz); only 
captures the “fundamental” frequencies of your voice.
 Wideband: Used by Internet-based voice applications 
where there is a direct Internet connection between 
the parties on a call (i.e., the call does not go through a 
landline or mobile carrier at any point). Provides much 
better voice quality due to picking up the “harmonics” 
of your voice; frequency range ~100 Hz to 7.5-8 KHz. 
Results in fewer “can you repeat that” and clearer 
handling of accents.
 Superwideband: Was initially introduced with the launch of  
Skype’s SILK voice technology. Provides the crystal-clear  
audio quality heard on any Skype-to-Skype call, including 
video calls. Frequency range: ~50 Hz to 12 KHz.
Carrier – A more technical term for a traditional phone company that 
connects and carries landline and/or wireless (mobile) voice conversations. 
Rogers, Bell Canada, Telus, AT&T, Verizon, British Telecom (BT), and 
Deutsche Telecomm are examples of carriers.
HD Video − Equivalent of one of two HDTV video resolutions:  
720p (1280 × 720) or 1080p (1920 × 1080). HD Video resolutions require 
faster upload speeds than High Quality Video.
High Quality Video − Video delivered at 640 × 480 resolution and  
24 frames-per-second.
Internet Bandwidth − Refers to the speeds at which data is delivered over 
an Internet connection, with separate download and upload speeds. Usually 
the download speed is significantly higher than upload speed but they may 
become close to equal on, say, fiber-based connections. For Skype the 
minimum and recommended speeds are:

APPENDIX A: Glossary
227
Call Type
Minimum  
download/upload  
speeds
Recommended  
download/upload  
speeds
Voice
30kbps/30kbps
100kbps/100kbps
Video
128 kbps/128kbps
300kbps/300kbps
High Quality Video
400 kbps/400kbps
500kbps/500kbps
HD Video
1.2Mbps/1.2Mbps
1.5Mbps/1.5Mbps
Group Video  (3 participants)
512kbps/128kbps
2Mbps/512Mbps
Group Video  (5 participants)
2Mbps/128kbps
4Mbps/512kbps
Group Video  (7+ Participants)
4Mbps/128kbps
8Mbps/512kbps
Over-the-Top (OTT) Communications − Text, voice, and video 
communications services that are carried directly between PCs and 
smartphones using the inherent Internet infrastructure for transporting data 
packets, bypassing the traditional landline and wireless carriers as service 
providers.
PC or Personal Computer – Any desktop or laptop computer that uses the 
Windows, Mac OS X or, in some cases, Linux operating system.
Peer-to-Peer − An Internet software technology where two or more 
parties are connected directly (without any “server” support) to carry out a 
transaction or real time conversation. This is the core technology that allows 
Skype-to-Skype calls and conversations to be “free”; it has also been used 
for file sharing.
POTS – Plain old telephone service (see PSTN).
Presence – An indication of your current status for receiving Skype calls: 
Online, Away, Do Not Disturb, Offline, etc. that is seen by your Skype 
Contacts in the Skype Contact directory within their Skype client. On 
Android, BlackBerry 10 and Windows Phone devices presence only has two 
options: Available, Invisible.
PSTN – Public switched telephone network. The legacy landline and 
wireless voice communications services where calls are essentially made by 
dialing a number comprising a country code, area code, and local number.
Roaming charges − Wireless carrier fees for use of a smartphone over 
carrier networks outside the user’s “home” network. Usually quite expensive 
relative to the charges for the same services on a user’s home carrier network.

APPENDIX A: Glossary
228
Skype – A real-time communications software application that takes 
advantage of the Internet’s underlying technology to support free or low cost 
text, voice, and video conversations worldwide.
Skype Account – Manages your Skype subscriptions and “Pay-As-You-Go” 
payments (call phones, SMS messaging) and calling features such as voice 
mail, call forwarding, callerID, Skype To Go numbers, and Skype Online 
number(s).
Skype Client – The Skype software application installed on a PC, 
smartphone, tablet, or other device.
Skype Credit – Skype’s “currency” used for prepaying for SkypeOut calls, 
SMS messages, and other offerings on a “Pay-As-You-Go” basis. Fund your 
Skype Account with Skype credit in amounts of $10.00 or $30.00 or similar 
amounts in other currencies. Credits are then used as you make calls that 
require a “per call” payment. (Check out Skype Calling Plans for fixed cost 
subscriptions.)
Skype Online Number – A phone number that can be called from a landline 
or mobile phone (PSTN) to reach a Skype user on a Skype client.
SkypeOut – The Skype offering that allows you to make calls from a Skype 
client on a PC, mobile smartphone, tablet or other device to landlines and 
wireless phones (or to the PSTN). Charges and calling plan subscriptions 
apply. Now called “Calls to Landlines and Mobile Phone”.
Skype Profile – Your personal registration information directly associated 
with your Skype activity: SkypeID, Picture (Avatar), First Name, Last Name, and 
many optional items, including Location (City, Country), Home/Work/Mobile 
phone numbers, website address, time zone, birthday, etc.
Smartphone – Any mobile phone that can supports applications that require 
the Internet for delivering and receiving information in the form of data 
delivered by a wireless carrier. Often referred to as a mobile PC, due to the 
proliferation of applications now available for smartphones.
VoLTE – with the availability of very fast 4G/LTE carrier services for data, 
Voice over LTE will use the data channel to complement or even replace the 
legacy voice channel. With VoLTE support carriers can take advantage of 
superwideband audio for significantly improved voice quality.
VoIP − Voice Over Internet Protocol. This is the generic term for the 
technology behind the ability to place voice (and video) calls over the 
Internet. It involves digitizing a voice (or video image) at the sending end for 
transmitting the audio (or video) content over the Internet and decoding the 
digital information back to an audio voice or video image at the receiving 
end, all in real time.

APPENDIX A: Glossary
229
WebRTC – An evolving technology to allow chat, voice and video 
conversations to be launched directly from a website or web application, 
In effect it would support these conversations without the need to use a 
separate client or application.
Wi-Fi – An unregulated wireless protocol that allows connections to the 
Internet over a short range (less than 50 meters) from a Wi-Fi access point. 
Used for connecting Wi-Fi−enabled PCs and devices to the Internet via 
local area networks (at home or a business operation) or Wi-Fi hotspots at 
airports, restaurants, coffee shops, hotels, and other road warrior locations. 
Often referred to as the “stealth” carrier as Wi-Fi is usually associated with 
free or low-cost wireless Internet connections that can be substituted for 
expensive wireless carrier roaming connections when traveling outside the 
home country.

231
A■
■
Account opening
login screen, 18
Mac sign, 18
requirement, 19
B■
■
Bicycle re-engineering
bicymple, 57
communications platform, 57
Skype facilitates, 57
travel and startup costs, 57
Business productivity, 4
Business, Skype
barriers to growth, 55
bicycle re-engineering, 57–58
building hardware, 55
communications and costs, 55
social algorithm, 55–56
software solutions  
building, 58–60
C, D
■
■
Call connection recovery, 90
Caller ID, 137
Calling phone numbers, 130
Call Quality Info
audio/video hardware, 88
connection status, 90
image quality, 89
internet connection quality, 88
microphone, 89
records, 91
speaker tab, 89
video status, 90
Chat commands
alertsoff, 152
concurrent Skype, 154
group chats, 153
me command, 152
showplaces, 153
slash, 152
Click-to-Call tool, 142–143
Cloud storage, 83
Comment, email addresses, 30
Compact view—individual  
chat windows, 77
Contacts pane
call management bar, 76
conversation, 70
description, 70
lists and groups, 75
rename, 74
Skype 7.0 for Windows  
Desktop, 71
View Profile, 72
Contacts, Skype
Android/BlackBerry 10, 30
division, 29
phone number search, 31
spam and security, 32
Conversation flow
call management bar, 48
contact search, 45
share menu, 48
voice calling options, 46
Index

Index
232
Conversation pane
Bing search, 151
compact View, 147
Contact’s conversation, 147
copied message, 151
emoticon and text entry, 146
file sharing activity, 148–149
header, 78–79
individual and group contact, 76
paste options, 151
productivity tool, 150
recalls and stores, 146
restoring, 150
single window view, 77
stored messages, 150
text messages, 147
user interface, 152
E■
■
Echo/sound test service, 91
Emoticons
character representation, 155
expressive, 155
graphics representation, 154
hidden, 156
F■
■
Facebook
chat, 78
connection, 64
Favorites selection
contacts management, 34
conversations, 33
filters, 35
Windows, 33
File transfer
call Management bar, 81
contacts, 80
explorer, 81
images, sent and received, 83
records, 83
screen capture program, 82
security software  
(see Security software)
G■
■
Group chat
acceptance list, 195
administration options, 192
collaboration tool, 192
conversation messages, 194
file transfer image, 194–195
recalling archived  
conversations, 196
setrole command, 194
Group creation
chat notification, 191
MASTER/ADMIN role, 191
Group video calling
advantages, 97–98
call monitor window appears, 98
conference room meetings, 198
monitor window, 202
pane group chat  
and contacts, 200
screen, 199, 202
Skype Premium  
subscription, 198
speaker image, 201
VGA resolution, 202
Windows PCs and Macs, 198
H■
■
Hardware
benchmarks, 175
business desktop phone, 173
certification program, 175
chat and vision, 176
HDTV sets, 184–185
headsets, 177–179
intelligent device’s firmware, 173
Macs, 174
microphones, 185–186
multi-core processors, 174
product marketing  
decisions, 175
Skype headsets, 177
speakerphones, 185–186
user accessible memory, 174

Index 
233
video and voice technology, 175
webcams, 179–183
websites, 177
HD video, 51–52
Headsets
circumaural, 177
in-ear, 178
microphones, 177
multiple connections, 179
noisy environment, 178
smartphone, 179
supra-aural, 177
I, J, K
■
■
Index pane
contacts directory/list, 102
home page, 103
users profile, 101–102
Internet messaging
broadband, 222
contacts directory, 222
higher speed processors, 222
robust and innovative 
communications 
application, 222
IP-based communications
Facebook Messenger, 223
Google Hangouts, 223
guidelines, 221–222
traditional telcos, 220–221
L■
■
Landline and mobile phone calls
clicking/tapping, 134
voice call screen (see Phone 
number voice call screen)
M, N, O
■
■
Microsoft
acquisition, 205
Lync, 214
Mobile dial pad, 135
Multi-party voice calls, 196
P, Q
■
■
Personal computers (PCs), 205
Personal pane, 68–69
Phone network  
connections, 129–130
Phone number voice call screen
call management options, 135
dial pad, 136
smartphones, 136
tablets, 136
Profile considerations, 22–24
Profile creation
birthdate and language, 22
email address, 22
home screen, 21
picture, 22
Windows/Mac client, 21
Public switched telephone  
network (PSTN) phone, 98
Public Wi-Fi, 26–27
R■
■
Rapid acceptance  
and adoption, 5
S■
■
Screen sharing
call monitoring window, 96
full screen/selected  
window, 93–94
red outline, 95–96
transparent background, 94
Security software
call monitor window, 85
crystal-clear voice  
connection, 88
Norton 360, 84
show/hide contacts, 87
voice call screen, 84
SILK technology, 98
Skype
account opening 18–19
applications, 2

Index
234
BBM meetings, 218
business and productivity tool
features, 12
hand, smartphones  
and tablets, 13
iPhone and BlackBerry, 13
mobile devices, 13
office, 12
platforms, 13
video resolution support, 13
business setting, 14–15
blogs, 223
contacts (see Contacts, Skype)
credit, 132
definition, 6
Ethernet, 17
and Facebook, 218
feature set, 43–45, 218
and Google, 218
HD video calling, 222
home office, 24–25
home screen, 19–20
Microsoft Lync, 7
models, 6
network effect, 2–4
and Outlook, 212–213
PCs, 8–9
peer-to-peer sharing, 5
profile (see Profile creation)
public Wi-Fi, 26–27
smartphones  
and tablets, 10–11
software application, 5
status, 35–36
TV, 11
at Voice On The Web, 223
voice and video calling, 4
voice and video connections, 17
voice conversation, 41, 43
wide adoption  
and acceptance, 6–7
worldwide uberplatform, 6
Skype account
activities and associated  
costs, 165–166
calling landlines and  
mobile phones, 131
calling plan  
subscriptions, 132–134, 171
individual users, 160
managed by  
administrator, 167–170
managed by individuals, 167
management infrastructure, 159
my account details, 162
my account web-based  
Skype portal, 161
policies, 163
revenue source, 159
screen, 161
services, 159
subscription, 163–164
web-based my account  
Skype portal, 171
Skype chat
business’s ecosystem, 145
communication services, 145
conversation pane (see 
Conversation pane)
Facebook chat, 157
messages, 145
voice and video calls, 145
Skype for Mac
content pane, 105, 107
Index pane (see Index pane)
video call, 111–112
voice call, 107–110
Window menu, 104
Skype for Windows
calling activity, 65
conversation  
pane content, 67
elements, 67
Facebook chat, 78
video call, 91–93
Skype (cont.)

Index 
235
Skype 7.0 for Windows  
Desktop client, 66
Skype number
consumer application, 139
landlines and mobile  
phones calls, 138
subscriptions, 139
Skype on Outlook.com
chat session, 209
completed setup, 207
connection to Skype setup, 206
contact card in people, 210–211
Microsoft account, 206
office Online applications, 210
office Online module, 211
voice call screen and chat, 212
web page view, 208
Skype’s calling plan
flat-rate subscriptions, 132
minutes, 130
subscription countries, 133
Skype To Go, 140–141
Skypet test call, 91
SMS messaging rates, 139
Software solutions building
business collaboration, 60
collaboration investment, 58
dynamic organization, 58
employees communication, 60
innovative business, 58
video calling, 59
T■
■
Teams and communities, 189–190
Third-party managed services, 197
U■
■
The Unlimited World Plan, 133
V■
■
Voice calling application
43kbps dialup  
modems, 222
PCs with 50MHz  
processors, 222
Voice call screen
chat—narrow, 86
chat—wide, 87
Voice conversation, 41
W, X, Y, Z
■
■
Webcams
HD video quality, 179
internet connection, 182
Logitech C920 HD, 182
microphones, 181
Microsoft store, 182
personal and  
business calling, 179
Skype video resolutions, 180
telepresence quality, 180
TVs, 179, 183
video image  
processing, 182
WebRTC voice, 218–220
Windows desktop  
dial pad, 69
Windows options, 98–99
Wireless carriers, 27–28

Experience  
Skype to the Max
The Essential Guide to the World’s Leading 
Internet Communications Platform
Jim Courtney 

Experience Skype to the Max: The Essential Guide to the World’s Leading Internet  
Communications Platform
Copyright © 2015 by Jim Courtney
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part 
of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, 
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or 
information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar 
methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief 
excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied specifically for the 
purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of 
the work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the 
Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must always 
be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright 
Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4842-0657-7 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4842-0656-0 
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark 
symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos, and 
images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of 
infringement of the trademark.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if they 
are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are 
subject to proprietary rights. 
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of 
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility 
for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, 
with respect to the material contained herein.
Managing Director: Welmoed Spahr 
Lead Editor: Gwenan Spearing 
Technical Reviewer: Greg Kettell
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell,  
Louise Corrigan, Jim DeWolf, Jonathan Gennick, Robert Hutchinson, Michelle Lowman, 
James Markham, Susan McDermott, Matthew Moodie, Jeffrey Pepper, Douglas Pundick, 
Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, Gwenan Spearing, Matt Wade, Steve Weiss
Coordinating Editor: Christine Ricketts
Copy Editor: Linda Seifert
Compositor: SPi Global
Indexer: SPi Global
Artist: SPi Global
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York,  
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505,  
e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com. Apress Media, LLC is a  
California LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance  
Inc (SSBM Finance Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation.
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit www.apress.com. 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promotional use. 
eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, reference our  
Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at www.apress.com/bulk-sales.
Any source code or other supplementary material referenced by the author in this text is available to 
readers at www.apress.com. For detailed information about how to locate your book’s source code, 
go to www.apress.com/source-code/.

To my understanding wife, Evelyn, whose patience I often challenged with 
my passion for everything digital

v
Disclaimer
The contents of this book reflect the experience the author has gained using 
IP-based communications applications since 1995, including eight years’ 
experience working with various players in the Skype™ ecosystem—Skype 
employees, Skype hardware and software partners, participants at various 
events where Skype is either a sponsor or participant, and bloggers who 
write about Skype and other IP-based communications.
This book and its contents have not been endorsed or reviewed by Skype. 
Any views or opinions expressed are entirely views of the author or the cited 
source only. There has been no endorsement or other form of support for 
the publication of this book supplied by Microsoft, Skype, and its affiliates 
other than through content that may arise from activities related to Skype’s 
public relations programs.
This book is based, in part, on communications software licensed, and 
information published, by Skype at the time of writing. At its sole discretion 
Skype may add, modify, or remove features and change pricing without 
notice. Please consult the Skype website for the current features, offerings, 
and pricing policies. While the author has diligently attempted to provide 
accurate information, the author takes no responsibility for any errors or 
omissions, and makes no warranties with respect to the accuracy and 
completeness of the contents of this book.
The Skype name, associated trademarks and logos and the “S” logo 
are trademarks of the Microsoft group of companies. The author and 
Denali InterConneXions NA Inc. is not affiliated, sponsored, authorized, or 
otherwise associated with or by the Skype group of companies. All other 
trademarks are the property of their registered owners.

ix
Contents
About the Author..............................................................................xv
About the Technical Reviewer........................................................xvii
Acknowledgments...........................................................................xix
Introduction.....................................................................................xxi
Chapter 1: People Like to Talk!
■
■
....................................................... 1
Why Skype?............................................................................................. 2
What Is Skype?........................................................................................ 6
Where and When Do You Use Skype?..................................................... 7
Skype on PCs............................................................................................................8
Skype on Smartphones and Tablets.......................................................................10
Skype for TV...........................................................................................................11
Skype as a Business and Productivity Tool........................................... 12
Using Skype In the Office.......................................................................................12
Using Skype On the Road.......................................................................................13
Where Does This Book Take You?......................................................... 14
Summary............................................................................................... 15
Key Points...............................................................................................................15

Contents
x
Chapter 2: Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad
■
■
.................. 17
Opening a Skype Account...................................................................... 18
The Home Screen...................................................................................................19
Building a Skype Profile..........................................................................................20
Profile Considerations............................................................................................22
Connecting to Skype at Home and Abroad............................................ 24
Home Office............................................................................................................24
Public Wi-Fi.............................................................................................................26
Wireless Carriers....................................................................................................27
Managing Contacts: Whom Are You Going to Call?................................ 29
Skype Contacts.......................................................................................................30
Selecting Favorites.................................................................................................33
Contact Status........................................................................................................35
Skype Security and Privacy................................................................... 36
Skype Privacy Settings...........................................................................................36
Security and Safety of Skype Communications......................................................38
Summary............................................................................................... 39
Key Points...............................................................................................................40
Chapter 3: Enriching Conversations with Skype
■
■
.......................... 41
Enhancing and Moving Beyond the Voice Conversation........................ 41
Skype’s Full Feature Set........................................................................ 43
Conversation Flow................................................................................. 45
Skype’s Unique Technology: Innovation for the Masses........................ 49
Emulating Face-to-Face Conversation Voice Quality..............................................49
Evolving to HD Video...............................................................................................51
Rich Conversation in Action: Skype as a Support Tool.......................... 52
Summary............................................................................................... 53
Key Points...............................................................................................................53

Contents
xi
Chapter 4: Using Skype in Business—Use Cases
■
■
......................... 55
zenPeak—Recruiting Executives with a Social Algorithm.................... 55
Bicymple—Innovative Bicycle Re-Engineering..................................... 57
Advansys—Software Solutions Building Business Productivity........... 58
Summary............................................................................................... 61
Chapter 5: Using Skype on the Desktop
■
■
....................................... 63
Skype for Windows Desktop.................................................................. 65
The Personal Pane..................................................................................................68
The Contacts Pane..................................................................................................70
The Conversation Pane...........................................................................................76
Facebook Chat........................................................................................................78
The Conversation Pane Header..............................................................................78
File Transfer............................................................................................................80
A Skype Voice Call..................................................................................................84
Call Quality Info.......................................................................................................88
A Skype Video Call..................................................................................................91
Screen Sharing.......................................................................................................93
Group Video Calling................................................................................................97
Skype for Windows Options....................................................................................98
Skype for Mac..................................................................................... 100
The Index Pane.....................................................................................................100
The Window Menu................................................................................................104
The Content Pane.................................................................................................105
A Skype Voice Call................................................................................................107
A Skype Video Call................................................................................................111
Skype for Mac Preferences..................................................................................113
Summary............................................................................................. 114
Key Points.............................................................................................................115

Contents
xii
Chapter 6: Using Skype on Mobile Devices
■
■
................................ 117
Skype Features on Mobile Devices..................................................... 118
Navigating Skype Mobile Screens....................................................... 119
Making a Voice Call on Mobile Devices............................................... 124
The Future of Mobile Skype................................................................ 126
Summary............................................................................................. 127
Key Points.............................................................................................................127
Chapter 7: Calling and Messaging Landlines and  
■
■
Mobile Phones............................................................................ 129
Connecting with the Legacy Phone Network....................................... 129
Calling Phone Numbers Worldwide at Low Costs................................ 130
The Skype Account...............................................................................................131
Calling Landlines and Mobile Phones.................................................. 134
Skype Numbers: “Local” Numbers with Worldwide Reach................. 138
SMS Messaging................................................................................... 139
Skype To Go......................................................................................... 140
Click-to-Call........................................................................................ 142
Summary............................................................................................. 143
Key Points.............................................................................................................143
Chapter 8: Skype Chat: A Virtual Water Fountain
■
■
....................... 145
Why Chat?........................................................................................... 145
The Conversation Pane........................................................................ 146
Chat Commands.................................................................................. 152
Emoticons............................................................................................ 154
Facebook Chat..................................................................................... 157
Summary............................................................................................. 157
Key Points.............................................................................................................157

Contents
xiii
Chapter 9: Managing Your Skype Account and Subscriptions
■
■
........159
Pay in Advance—No Phone Bills......................................................... 159
Managing Your Account....................................................................... 160
Optimizing Your Skype Activities and Associated Costs...................... 165
Managing Skype in a Business........................................................... 166
Accounts Managed by Individuals........................................................................167
Accounts Managed by an Administrator...............................................................167
Summary............................................................................................. 170
Key Points.............................................................................................................171
Chapter 10: Hardware Considerations: PCs, Mobiles,  
■
■
and Peripherals.......................................................................... 173
Hardware Requirements..................................................................... 174
Choosing Peripheral Hardware............................................................ 175
Headsets...............................................................................................................177
Webcams for PCs.................................................................................................179
Webcams for TV....................................................................................................183
An All-In-One Solution for HDTV Sets...................................................................184
Speakerphones and Microphones........................................................................185
Summary............................................................................................. 186
Key Points.............................................................................................................187
Chapter 11: Building Geographically Dispersed  
■
■
Teams Over Skype...................................................................... 189
Skype and Collaboration: Building Teams and Communities.............. 189
Creating a Group................................................................................. 190
Group Chat: Skype as a Virtual Water Fountain................................... 192
Multi-Party Voice Calls: Travel-Free Conferencing.............................. 196
Group Video Calling: Togetherness Across Continents and Oceans......................198
Summary............................................................................................. 203
Key Points.............................................................................................................203

Contents
xiv
Chapter 12: Skype on Office 365, Outlook.com and Lync
■
■
........... 205
Skype on Outlook.com........................................................................ 206
Skype and Outlook.............................................................................. 212
Microsoft Lync..................................................................................... 214
Summary............................................................................................. 215
Key Points.............................................................................................................215
Chapter 13: The Way Ahead
■
■
........................................................ 217
Where Does Skype Go From Here?..................................................... 218
Where do Internet-Based Communications Go From Here?................ 218
IP-Based Communications and the Traditional Telcos......................... 220
Guidelines for Evaluating the Evolution of IP-Based Communications.....221
Conclusion........................................................................................... 222
Appendix A: Glossary
■
■
................................................................. 225
Index.............................................................................................. 231

xv
About the Author
Jim Courtney has over 30 years of sales, marketing, business development 
management, and consulting experience in the high-technology market 
space. From operating an IBM 7090/94 at a university computer center 
to using his iPhone 5 and BlackBerry z30 today, Jim brings a unique 
perspective on the evolution of various technologies, including the evolution 
of real-time communications over the Internet since 1995. Formerly associate 
editor of Skype Journal, he has been editor and publisher of Voice On The 
Web since early 2009, covering IP-based communications, including Skype 
as well as the transition to a mobile world through smartphones and tablets.

xvii
About the Technical 
Reviewer 
Greg Kettell is a software developer and writer with over 25 years’ experience 
in programming everything from enterprise applications, to websites and 
single- and multi-player games. He has contributed to numerous books on 
Windows, Mac, and iOS applications. Greg is an avid photographer and 
amateur astronomer, and has recently been getting used to the empty nest 
life in upstate New York with his wife, their dog, and two rambunctious cats.

xix
Acknowledgments
In July 2012 I published the first edition of Experience Skype to the Max. 
Of course because Skype is continuously under development, modifying 
features, and adding new ones, the book needed an update three 
years later. In the spring of 2014 I was approached by Apress about the 
opportunity of authoring such an update, this time with the resources and 
support of a proven publisher.
I want to thank Gwenan Spearing, Acquisitions Editor at Apress, who 
approached me initially and championed this edition at Apress; she has also 
served as the Lead Editor during the authoring and editing process. Gwenan 
has provided both the support and guidance needed to make this happen. 
I also would like to acknowledge the participation of Christine Ricketts, 
Coordinating Editor, who managed all the behind the scenes logistics 
required to pull the entire team together to produce the final outcome. 
Finally I need to acknowledge the contributions of the other members of the 
Apress team, mentioned in the introduction, who ensured both the integrity 
and readability of the content through their review, copy editing, and proof 
reading activities. They have all been a pleasure to work with, even when it 
only involves communicating via Word’s Markups and Comments features. 
On the other hand, Skype Group Chat with Gwenan and Christine proved 
invaluable in making the communications flow during this process.
I also need to acknowledge the support and patience of my wife, Evelyn, 
for giving me the leeway to follow the evolution of the Internet as a 
communications and information delivery tool. 

