
TEXTBOOKS in MATHEMATICS
Exploring 
Geometry
Michael Hvidsten
Gustavus Adolphus College
St. Peter, Minnesota, USA
Second Edition

TEXTBOOKS in MATHEMATICS
Series Editors: Al Boggess and Ken Rosen
PUBLISHED TITLES
ABSTRACT ALGEBRA: A GENTLE INTRODUCTION
Gary L. Mullen and James A. Sellers
ABSTRACT ALGEBRA: AN INTERACTIVE APPROACH, SECOND EDITION
William Paulsen
ABSTRACT ALGEBRA: AN INQUIRY-BASED APPROACH
Jonathan K. Hodge, Steven Schlicker, and Ted Sundstrom
ADVANCED LINEAR ALGEBRA
Hugo Woerdeman
APPLIED ABSTRACT ALGEBRA WITH MAPLE™ AND MATLAB®, THIRD EDITION
Richard Klima, Neil Sigmon, and Ernest Stitzinger
APPLIED DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS: THE PRIMARY COURSE
Vladimir Dobrushkin
COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS: MODELS, METHODS, AND ANALYSIS WITH MATLAB® AND MPI,  
SECOND EDITION
Robert E. White
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS: THEORY, TECHNIQUE, AND PRACTICE, SECOND EDITION
Steven G. Krantz
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS: THEORY, TECHNIQUE, AND PRACTICE WITH BOUNDARY VALUE PROBLEMS
Steven G. Krantz
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS WITH APPLICATIONS AND HISTORICAL NOTES, THIRD EDITION
George F. Simmons
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS WITH MATLAB®: EXPLORATION, APPLICATIONS, AND THEORY
Mark A. McKibben and Micah D. Webster
ELEMENTARY NUMBER THEORY 
James S. Kraft and Lawrence C. Washington
EXPLORING CALCULUS: LABS AND PROJECTS WITH MATHEMATICA® 
Crista Arangala and Karen A. Yokley

EXPLORING LINEAR ALGEBRA: LABS AND PROJECTS WITH MATHEMATICA® 
Crista Arangala
GRAPHS & DIGRAPHS, SIXTH EDITION 
Gary Chartrand, Linda Lesniak, and Ping Zhang
INTRODUCTION TO ABSTRACT ALGEBRA, SECOND EDITION 
Jonathan D. H. Smith
INTRODUCTION TO MATHEMATICAL PROOFS: A TRANSITION TO ADVANCED MATHEMATICS, SECOND EDITION
Charles E. Roberts, Jr.
INTRODUCTION TO NUMBER THEORY, SECOND EDITION
Marty Erickson, Anthony Vazzana, and David Garth 
LINEAR ALGEBRA, GEOMETRY AND TRANSFORMATION 
Bruce Solomon 
MATHEMATICAL MODELLING WITH CASE STUDIES: USING MAPLE™ AND MATLAB®, THIRD EDITION 
B. Barnes and G. R. Fulford 
MATHEMATICS IN GAMES, SPORTS, AND GAMBLING–THE GAMES PEOPLE PLAY, SECOND EDITION 
Ronald J. Gould 
THE MATHEMATICS OF GAMES: AN INTRODUCTION TO PROBABILITY
David G. Taylor
A MATLAB® COMPANION TO COMPLEX VARIABLES
A. David Wunsch
MEASURE THEORY AND FINE PROPERTIES OF FUNCTIONS, REVISED EDITION
Lawrence C. Evans and Ronald F. Gariepy
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS FOR ENGINEERS: METHODS AND APPLICATIONS, SECOND EDITION
Bilal Ayyub and Richard H. McCuen
ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS: AN INTRODUCTION TO THE FUNDAMENTALS
Kenneth B. Howell
RISK ANALYSIS IN ENGINEERING AND ECONOMICS, SECOND EDITION
Bilal M. Ayyub
SPORTS MATH: AN INTRODUCTORY COURSE IN THE MATHEMATICS OF SPORTS SCIENCE AND  
SPORTS ANALYTICS
Roland B. Minton
TRANSFORMATIONAL PLANE GEOMETRY 
Ronald N. Umble and Zhigang Han
PUBLISHED TITLES CONTINUED

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2017 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
Version Date: 20161019
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-6080-5 (Hardback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts 
have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers 
have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to 
copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has 
not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmit-
ted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, 
without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.
com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood 
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and 
registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, 
a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used 
only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data
Names: Hvidsten, Michael. | Hvidsten, Michael. Geometry with Geometry 
Explorer.
Title: Exploring geometry / Michael Hvidsten.
Other titles: Geometry with Geometry Explorer
Description: Second edition. | Boca Raton : CRC Press, 2017. | Series: 
Textbooks in mathematics series | Previous edtion: Geometry with Geometry 
Explorer / Michael Hvidsten (Dubuque, Iowa : McGraw-Hill, 2005).
Identifiers: LCCN 2016027443 | ISBN 9781498760805 (hardback : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Geometry--Textbooks.
Classification: LCC QA445 .H84 2017 | DDC 516--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016027443
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

Contents
Preface to the Second Edition
xiii
Acknowledgments
xix
Chapter
1 ■Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
1
1.1
EARLY ORIGINS OF GEOMETRY
1
1.2
THALES AND PYTHAGORAS
4
1.2.1
Thales
6
1.2.2
Pythagoras
7
1.3
PROJECT 1 - THE RATIO MADE OF GOLD
8
1.3.1
Golden Section
9
1.3.2
Golden Rectangles
14
1.4
THE RISE OF THE AXIOMATIC METHOD
17
1.5
PROPERTIES OF AXIOMATIC SYSTEMS
26
1.5.1
Consistency
27
1.5.2
Independence
28
1.5.3
Completeness
29
1.5.4
Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem
31
1.6
EUCLID’S AXIOMATIC GEOMETRY
35
1.6.1
Euclid’s Postulates
36
1.7
PROJECT 2 - A CONCRETE AXIOMATIC SYSTEM
43
Chapter
2 ■Euclidean Geometry
49
2.1
ANGLES, LINES, AND PARALLELS
51
2.2
CONGRUENT TRIANGLES AND PASCH’S AXIOM
62
2.3
PROJECT 3 - SPECIAL POINTS OF A TRIANGLE
70
v

vi
■Contents
2.3.1
Circumcenter
70
2.3.2
Orthocenter
72
2.3.3
Incenter
75
2.4
MEASUREMENT AND AREA
76
2.4.1
Mini-Project - Area in Euclidean Geometry
77
2.4.2
Cevians and Areas
82
2.5
SIMILAR TRIANGLES
85
2.5.1
Mini-Project - Finding Heights
92
2.6
CIRCLE GEOMETRY
94
2.6.1
Chords and Arcs
95
2.6.2
Inscribed Angles and Figures
96
2.6.3
Tangent Lines
99
2.6.4
General Intercepted Arcs
101
2.7
PROJECT 4 - CIRCLE INVERSION AND ORTHOGONAL-
ITY
108
2.7.1
Orthogonal Circles Redux
112
Chapter
3 ■Analytic Geometry
117
3.1
THE CARTESIAN COORDINATE SYSTEM
119
3.2
VECTOR GEOMETRY
123
3.3
PROJECT 5 - BÉZIER CURVES
128
3.4
ANGLES IN COORDINATE GEOMETRY
135
3.5
THE COMPLEX PLANE
141
3.5.1
Polar Form
143
3.6
BIRKHOFF’S AXIOMATIC SYSTEM
144
Chapter
4 ■Constructions
151
4.1
EUCLIDEAN CONSTRUCTIONS
151
4.2
PROJECT 6 - EUCLIDEAN EGGS
163
4.3
CONSTRUCTIBILITY
167
4.3.1
Mini-Project - Origami Construction
177

Contents
■vii
Chapter
5 ■Transformational Geometry
185
5.1
EUCLIDEAN ISOMETRIES
186
5.2
REFLECTIONS
192
5.2.1
Mini-Project - Isometries through Reﬂection
194
5.2.2
Reﬂection and Symmetry
196
5.3
TRANSLATIONS
200
5.3.1
Translational Symmetry
203
5.4
ROTATIONS
205
5.4.1
Rotational Symmetry
210
5.5
PROJECT 7 - QUILTS AND TRANSFORMATIONS
213
5.6
GLIDE REFLECTIONS
218
5.6.1
Glide Reﬂection Symmetry
221
5.7
STRUCTURE AND REPRESENTATION OF ISOMETRIES
224
5.7.1
Matrix Form of Isometries
225
5.7.2
Compositions of Rotations and Translations
227
5.7.3
Compositions of Reﬂections and Glide Reﬂections 230
5.7.4
Isometries in Computer Graphics
231
5.7.5
Summary of Isometry Compositions
232
5.8
PROJECT 8 - CONSTRUCTING COMPOSITIONS
234
Chapter
6 ■Symmetry
239
6.1
FINITE PLANE SYMMETRY GROUPS
241
6.2
FRIEZE GROUPS
246
6.3
WALLPAPER GROUPS
253
6.4
TILING THE PLANE
263
6.4.1
Escher
263
6.4.2
Regular Tessellations of the Plane
265
6.5
PROJECT 9 - CONSTRUCTING TESSELLATIONS
267
Chapter
7 ■Hyperbolic Geometry
271
7.1
BACKGROUND AND HISTORY
271
7.2
MODELS OF HYPERBOLIC GEOMETRY
274

viii
■Contents
7.2.1
Poincaré Model
274
7.2.2
Mini-Project - The Klein Model
279
7.3
BASIC RESULTS IN HYPERBOLIC GEOMETRY
284
7.3.1
Parallels in Hyperbolic Geometry
284
7.3.2
Omega Points and Triangles
290
7.4
PROJECT 10 - THE SACCHERI QUADRILATERAL
296
7.5
LAMBERT QUADRILATERALS AND TRIANGLES
300
7.5.1
Lambert Quadrilaterals
300
7.5.2
Triangles in Hyperbolic Geometry
303
7.6
AREA IN HYPERBOLIC GEOMETRY
308
7.7
PROJECT 11 - TILING THE HYPERBOLIC PLANE
312
Chapter
8 ■Elliptic Geometry
317
8.1
BACKGROUND AND HISTORY
317
8.2
PERPENDICULARS AND POLES IN ELLIPTIC GEOME-
TRY
319
8.3
PROJECT 12 - MODELS OF ELLIPTIC GEOMETRY
325
8.3.1
Double Elliptic Model
326
8.3.2
Spherical Lunes
327
8.3.3
Single Elliptic Geometry
331
8.4
BASIC RESULTS IN ELLIPTIC GEOMETRY
334
8.4.1
Stereographic Projection Model
335
8.4.2
Segments and Triangle Congruence in Elliptic
Geometry
339
8.5
TRIANGLES AND AREA IN ELLIPTIC GEOMETRY
342
8.5.1
Triangle Excess and AAA
345
8.5.2
Area in Elliptic Geometry
346
8.6
PROJECT 13 - ELLIPTIC TILING
351
Chapter
9 ■Projective Geometry
359
9.1
UNIVERSAL THEMES
359
9.1.1
Central Projection Model of Euclidean Geometry 361
9.1.2
Ideal Points at Inﬁnity
362

Contents
■ix
9.2
PROJECT 14 - PERSPECTIVE AND PROJECTION
363
9.3
FOUNDATIONS OF PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY
368
9.3.1
Aﬃne Geometry
369
9.3.2
Axioms of Projective Geometry
370
9.3.3
Duality
370
9.3.4
Triangles and Quadrangles
372
9.3.5
Desargues’ Theorem
375
9.4
TRANSFORMATIONS AND PAPPUS’S THEOREM
380
9.4.1
Perspectivities and Projectivities
381
9.4.2
Projectivity Constructions and Pappus’s Theorem 384
9.5
MODELS OF PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY
391
9.5.1
The Real Projective Plane
391
9.5.2
Transformations in the Real Projective Plane
395
9.5.3
Collineations
400
9.5.4
Homogeneous Coordinates and Perspectivities
404
9.5.5
Elliptic Model
405
9.6
PROJECT 15 - RATIOS AND HARMONICS
406
9.6.1
Ratios in Aﬃne Geometry
407
9.6.2
Cross-Ratio
409
9.6.3
Harmonious Ratios
413
9.7
HARMONIC SETS
416
9.7.1
Harmonic Sets of Points
416
9.7.2
Harmonic Sets of Lines
418
9.7.3
Harmonic Sets and the Cross-Ratio
421
9.8
CONICS AND COORDINATES
426
9.8.1
Conic Sections Generated by Euclidean Trans-
formations
426
9.8.2
Point Conics in Projective Geometry
429
9.8.3
Non-singular Conics and Pascal’s Theorem
432
9.8.4
Line Conics
435
9.8.5
Tangents
436
9.8.6
Conics in Real Projective Plane
439

x
■Contents
Chapter 10 ■Fractal Geometry
445
10.1
THE SEARCH FOR A “NATURAL” GEOMETRY
445
10.2
SELF-SIMILARITY
447
10.2.1
Sierpinski’s Triangle
447
10.2.2
Cantor Set
450
10.3
SIMILARITY DIMENSION
451
10.4
PROJECT 16 - AN ENDLESSLY BEAUTIFUL SNOWFLAKE
454
10.5
CONTRACTION MAPPINGS
458
10.6
FRACTAL DIMENSION
469
10.7
PROJECT 17 - IFS FERNS
472
10.8
ALGORITHMIC GEOMETRY
479
10.8.1
Turtle Geometry
480
10.9
GRAMMARS AND PRODUCTIONS
483
10.9.1
Space-Filling Curves
484
10.10
PROJECT 18 - WORDS INTO PLANTS
489
Appendix A ■A Primer on Proofs
495
A.1
AXIOMATIC SYSTEMS AND PROOFS
495
A.2
DIRECT PROOFS
497
A.3
PROOFS BY CONTRADICTION
500
A.4
CONVERSE STATEMENTS
502
A.5
IF AND ONLY IF STATEMENTS
503
A.6
PROOFS AND WRITING
504
Appendix B ■Book I of Euclid’s Elements
505
B.1
DEFINITIONS
505
B.2
THE POSTULATES (AXIOMS)
507
B.3
COMMON NOTIONS
507
B.4
PROPOSITIONS (THEOREMS)
507
Appendix C ■Birkhoﬀ’s Axioms
515
C.1
AXIOMS
515

Contents
■xi
Appendix D ■Hilbert’s Axioms
517
D.1
INCIDENCE AXIOMS
517
D.2
BETWEENESS AXIOMS
517
D.3
CONGRUENCE AXIOMS
518
D.4
PARALLELISM AXIOM
518
D.5
CONTINUITY AXIOM
518
Appendix E ■Wallpaper Groups
521
E.1
PATTERNS
521
References
527
Index
531


Preface
It may well be doubted whether, in all the range of science,
there is any ﬁeld so fascinating to the explorer, so rich in
hidden treasures, so fruitful in delightful surprises, as Pure
Mathematics. – Lewis Carroll (Charles Dodgson), 1832–1898
Geometry is one of the most ancient subjects within mathematics. It
is also one of the most vibrant and modern. One can simply walk down
any street and see geometry come to life. The shapes that one sees in
buildings, traﬃc signs, billboards, and paving stones are all based on
some fundamental geometric design.
Geometry is also key to the development of computational “virtu-
alities” that are now ubiquitous. These include the three-dimensional
computer graphics animations used in television and ﬁlm, virtual-reality
displays, robotics, and the layout and design of architectural structures.
Geometry is a rich and rewarding area for mathematical exploration.
The visual aspects of the subject make exploration and experimentation
natural and intuitive. At the same time, the abstractions developed to
explain geometric patterns and connections make the subject extremely
powerful and applicable to a wide variety of physical situations.
The interplay between the practical and the abstract is one of the
main features of this text. For students new to geometry, there are nu-
merous concrete exploratory activities to aid in the understanding of ge-
ometric concepts. For students who have prior experience in geometry,
the text provides detailed proofs and explanations and oﬀers advanced
topics such as elliptic and projective geometry. In general, the pedagog-
ical approach used in this text is to give equal weight to the intuitive
and imaginative exploration of geometry as well as to abstract reasoning
and proofs.
xiii

xiv
■Preface
DISCOVERY LEARNING
Tell me and I forget.
Teach me and I remember.
Involve me and I learn. – Benjamin Franklin, 1706–1790
Ben Franklin’s approach to teaching ﬁnds its current expression in
the pedagogy of discovery learning. To truly learn, a student must be
actively involved. In our modern era of instant communication it is a
challenge to deeply engage students, especially in mathematical subjects
such as geometry.
This textbook has been designed to promote student engagement
with the beautiful ideas of geometry. Every major concept is introduced
in its historical context and is explained in a way that connects the idea
with some real-life basis. For example, in the ﬁrst chapter on axiomatics,
an analogy is made with playing a game. In a game it is important to have
a solid understanding of the rules of play, so that the game can function
correctly. This is the role of axiomatics in a mathematical system.
A system of experimentation followed by rigorous explanation and
proof is central to the pedagogical approach of the text. Students conduct
guided computer explorations of important foundational topics, followed
by proofs of results they have observed. While many texts oﬀer computer
projects as part of homework assignments, or as supplementary activ-
ities, exploratory projects play an integral role in this text. They are
the vehicle whereby students become actively engaged in learning. They
help students develop a better sense of how to prove a result. The goal
of this pedagogical approach is to enable students to master concepts at
a deep level.
CHANGES IN SECOND EDITION
1. Elliptic and Projective geometry New chapters have been
added on elliptic and projective geometry. The text now gives com-
plete coverage of the three possible geometries (Euclidean, Hyper-
bolic, and Elliptic) based on variations of Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate.
The new chapter on projective geometry provides a “universal”
geometry that builds on the commonalities of these three geome-
tries. The discovery learning approach is used extensively in both
of these new chapters.
2. Proofs Supplemental material on proofs has been added as an

Preface
■xv
appendix. This helps students identify types of proofs and helps
them learn strategies to use in writing proofs. There is also an
expanded discussion of proofs in the ﬁrst chapter.
3. Computer Software Almost all the computer projects are writ-
ten in a neutral way so that any dynamic geometry software can
be used for the projects. Supplementary material is available on
the author’s website for the support of various geometry software
platforms, such as Geometer’s Sketchpad and GeoGebra.
4. Instructor’s Manual An instructor’s manual, complete with
worked out solutions for the homework and the projects, is avail-
able from the publisher.
5. Student’s manual An on-line student manual is available with
additional support for students. The manual also includes the solu-
tions to all odd-numbered problems (except for project exercises).
6. Consistency of Level All chapters have been carefully reviewed
for consistency of level. Material that is of a more advanced nature
is now available separately as web chapters on the author’s website
at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text.
COMPUTER PROJECTS
To encourage a playful appreciation of geometric ideas, we have incorpo-
rated many computer explorations in the text. These explorations can
be accomplished using geometry software packages such as Geometry
Explorer, GeoGebra, Geometer’s Skecthpad, etc. These programs pro-
vide a virtual geometry laboratory where students can create geometric
objects (like points, circles, polygons, areas, etc.), carry out transforma-
tions on these objects (dilations, reﬂections, rotations, and translations),
and measure aspects of these objects (like length, area, radius, etc.). As
such, it is much like doing geometry on paper (or sand) with a ruler
and compass. However, on paper such constructions are static—points
placed on the paper cannot be moved. When using a geometry program,
all constructions are dynamic. One can draw a segment and then grab
one of the endpoints and move it around the canvas, with the segment
moving accordingly. Thus, one can construct a geometric ﬁgure and test
out hypotheses by experimentation with the construction.
The goal of the computer projects in each chapter is to have students
actively explore geometry through a three-fold approach. Students ﬁrst

xvi
■Preface
see a topic introduced in the text. Then, they explore that topic using
available geometry software or by means of in-class group projects. Fi-
nally, they review and report on their exploration, discussing what was
discovered, conjectured, and proved during the course of the project.
The beginning of each project is designated by a special heading—
the project title set between two horizontal lines. The conclusion of each
project is designated by an ending horizontal line. Projects are illus-
trated with screen shots from the Geometry Explorer program. This is
the recommended software for this text. Geometry Explorer can be down-
loaded from the author’s website at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/gex.
Projects are designed to be general in scope, so that other, commonly
used geometry software can also be used for exploration. Speciﬁc instruc-
tions for carrying out each project using diﬀerent geometry programs can
be found at the author’s website http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-
text.
PROOFS AND FOUNDATIONS
The development of intuition is a critical ﬁrst step in understanding
geometric concepts. However, intuition alone cannot provide the basis
for precise calculation and analysis of geometric quantities. For example,
one may know experimentally that the sides of a right triangle follow the
Pythagorean Theorem, but data alone do not show why this result is true.
Only a logical proof of a result will give us conﬁdence in using it in any
given situation.
Throughout this text there is a focus on intuition/experimentation
as a means to gain insight on explanations and proofs. This integration
of exploration and explanation can be seen most clearly in the way com-
puter projects are designed to help students develop abstract reasoning.
For example, the ﬁrst computer project explores the golden ratio and its
amazing and ubiquitous properties. Students not only experimentally
discover the properties of the golden ratio, but are then asked to dig
deeper and analyze why these properties are true.
To aid students in the art of proof writing, there is a brief summary
of proof techniques in Appendix A. Additionally, each chapter has a wide
variety of completely worked-out proofs of major theorems. One unique
feature of this text, in comparison to many other geometry texts, is the
careful consideration of the foundations of mathematical reasoning found
in Chapter 1. The chapter starts with a broad discussion of the historical
development of the axiomatic method followed by a study of topics like

Preface
■xvii
completeness and independence. In keeping with the discovery learning
focus of the text, the axiomatic foundation is accompanied by several
concrete computer explorations.
A review of the main topics of Euclidean geometry in Chapter 2 fol-
lows this discussion of axiomatics. This review is prefaced with a brief
discussion of axiomatic systems such as Hilbert’s axioms and Birkhoﬀ’s
axioms. However, a rigorous analysis of these axioms is put oﬀso that
students can fully explore more advanced notions of Euclidean geometry.
A similar approach is taken in the chapters on constructions, transfor-
mations, hyperbolic geometry, and elliptic geometry.
A carefully developed consideration of geometric principles, based on
Hilbert’s axioms, can be found in a supplemental on-line chapter, which
can be accessed at the website http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-
text. This chapter is a thorough axiomatic development of the geometric
principles that serve as the foundation for all of the diﬀering geometric
systems that the book covers, including elliptic geometry.
INTENDED AUDIENCE
The design of the text makes it appropriate for college courses at several
levels. The focus on exploration followed by proof makes the text ac-
cessible to prospective high school teachers. The author has successfully
used this text to teach a geometry course for math education majors at
Gustavus Adolphus College.
The rigorous analysis of all three classical geometries (Euclidean,
Hyperbolic, and Elliptic) makes the text appropriate for courses designed
for students with a strong mathematical background.
PREREQUISITES
This text is designed for use by mathematics students at the junior
or senior collegiate level. Prior experience with proving mathematical
results is recommended. A basic understanding of analytic geometry,
including vectors, is needed throughout the text. This is reviewed in
detail in Chapter 3. Some basic matrix algebra is used in Chapter 5.
This material is at an elementary level and should not prove diﬃcult for
students who have not had linear algebra.

xviii
■Preface
ARRANGEMENT OF TOPICS
The arrangement of topics in the text was designed to give as much
ﬂexibility as possible. While Chapters 1 and 2 are fundamental, many
of the other chapters can be covered independently from one another.
Chapter 3 covers basic analytic geometry of vectors and angles, as
well as complex numbers. Unless review of such matters is necessary,
Chapter 3 can be viewed as optional foundational material.
Chapter 4 covers Euclidean constructions and depends only on the
material in Chapters 1 and 2.
Chapters 5 and 6 are devoted to transformational geometry and re-
quire only a basic understanding of vectors and angles from Chapter
3, beyond the material covered in Chapters 1 and 2. Chapter 5 is a
prerequisite for many subsequent chapters.
Chapters 7, 8, and 9 all cover various non-Euclidean geometries.
Chapter 7 covers hyperbolic geometry, Chapter 8 covers elliptic geom-
etry, and Chapter 9 covers projective geometry. While Chapters 7, 8,
and 9 are quite independent of each other, it is advisable to cover hy-
perbolic geometry (Chapter 7) before covering the other non-Euclidean
geometries.
The on-line chapter on Hilbert’s axioms is a review of the foundations
of neutral, elliptic, hyperbolic, and Euclidean geometry based on David
Hilbert’s axiomatic system. This chapter can be found at the author’s
website http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text.
Chapter 10 covers fractal geometry. This chapter is quite diﬀerent
from any other material in the text, as it is highly computational.
SUGGESTED COURSE SYLLABI
A suggested syllabus for a one-semester course for prospective high-
school geometry teachers would include Chapters 1, 2, 4, sections 5.1–5.6,
sections 6.1–6.2, and sections 7.1–7.6.
A suggested syllabus for a one-semester course for math majors would
include Chapters 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, and as much of Chapter 9 as time permits.
If the focus of the course for math majors is on a thorough grounding
of Euclidean geometry on an axiomatic foundation, then it would be
advisable to start with Chapter 1 and then jump to the on-line chapter
on Hilbert’s axioms. A quick review of Chapter 2 can be followed by
Chapters 5, 7, and as much of Chapter 9 as time permits.
A suggested syllabus for a one-semester course focusing on non-
Euclidean geometry would include Chapters 1, 5, 7, 8, and 9.

Acknowledgments
This text, and the Geometry Explorer software, have evolved from the
many geometry courses I have taught at Gustavus Adolphus College. I
am deeply grateful to my students, who have graciously allowed me to
experiment with diﬀerent strategies in discovery-based learning and the
integration of technology into the classroom. Their encouragement and
excitement over these new approaches have been the primary motivat-
ing factors for writing an integrated learning environment for the active
exploration of geometry.
I am especially grateful to those who helped out in the early phases
of this project. Alicia Sutphen, a former student, provided valuable as-
sistance in the early stages of designing the Geometry Explorer software.
Special thanks go to those faculty members who ﬁeld-tested early drafts
of the text: Steve Benzel, Berry College; Jason Douma, University of
Sioux Falls; George Francis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign;
Dan Kemp, South Dakota State University; Bill Stegemoller, Univer-
sity of Southern Indiana; Mary Wiest, Minnesota State University at
Mankato; Matt Haines at Augsburg College, and Stephen Walk, St.
Cloud State University.
I greatly appreciate the assistance of Bob Ross at CRC Press. He
has been supportive of this project since it began with the ﬁrst edition
published in 2005. His commitment to this project has been continuous
and I am thankful for his faith in the work. Ken Rosen, Series Editor
and author of a fantastic book on discrete mathematics, provided many
helpful suggestions on how to improve the text.
I would also like to thank the following reviewers: Nick Anghel,
University of North Texas; Brian Beaudrie, Northern Arizona Univer-
sity; David Boyd, Valdosta State University; Anita Burris, Youngstown
State University; Victor Cifarelli, University of North Carolina at Char-
lotte; Michael Dorﬀ, Brigham Young University; Gina Foletta, North-
ern Kentucky University; Matthew Jones, California State University–
Dominguez Hills; Tabitha Mingus, Western Michigan University; Chris
Monico, Texas Tech University; F. Alexander Norman, University of
xix

xx
■Acknowledgments
Texas at San Antonio; Ferdinand Rivera, San Jose State University;
Craig Roberts, Southeast Missouri State University; Philippe Rukimbira,
Florida International University; Don Ryoti, Eastern Kentucky Univer-
sity; Sherrie Serros, Western Kentucky University; and Wendy Hageman
Smith at Radford University.
The design of the cover was accomplished with the assistance of Sarah
Hickman, an artist and art therapist from Sacramento, California.
The material in this text is based upon work supported by the Na-
tional Science Foundation under Grant No. 0230788.
Finally, I am grateful to my wife, Rebekah Richards, for her encour-
agement, her help in editing, and her understanding of the many hours
needed to complete this project.

C H A P T E R 1
Geometry and the
Axiomatic Method
We owe geometry to the tax collector.
– J. L. Heilbron, Geometry Civilized [21]
Let no one ignorant of geometry enter here.
—Inscription over the doors to Plato’s Academy
1.1
EARLY ORIGINS OF GEOMETRY
In a fundamental sense, geometry is a natural outgrowth of our exposure
to the physical universe and in particular to the natural world. In our
interactions with our environment, we encounter physical shapes, such as
rocks and mountains, that we then organize by patterns into groups and
classes. Rocks get put into the “round” category and mountains into a
separate category. As our powers of perception become more reﬁned, we
notice other patterns of objects, such as the symmetries found in nature.
An example of a natural symmetry is that of the rotational symmetry
found in the California Poppy (Figure 1.1).
1

2
■Exploring Geometry
Figure 1.1 California Poppy, Mimi Kamp, Southwest School of Botanical
Medicine
It is not surprising that human beings, being embedded in the natural
world, should be inspired by and curious about geometrical shapes. For
example, when constructing shelters our ancestors invariably chose to
use precise geometric ﬁgures—most often circles or rectangles. There
were very practical reasons to use these shapes; rectangular structures
are easily laid out and circular huts provide a maximum of living space
for the area they enclose.
While ancient peoples used geometric shapes for quite utilitarian
purposes, they also surrounded themselves with patterns and designs
that did not have any functional purpose.
In this classic Navajo rug, there is
no practical need to decorate the
fabric with such an intricate de-
sign. The decoration met a diﬀer-
ent need for the individual who
created it, the need for beauty
and abstraction. (Image courtesy
of the National Park Service)

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■3
From the earliest times geometric ﬁgures and patterns have been used
to represent abstract concepts, concepts that are expressed through the
construction of objects having speciﬁc geometric shapes. A good example
of this connection between the abstract and the concrete is that of the
pyramids of ancient Egypt (Figure 1.2).
Figure 1.2 The Giza Pyramids and Giza Necropolis, Egypt, seen from
above. Photo taken on 12 December 2008 by O.Mustaﬁn (Creative Com-
mons License)
The pyramids were built primarily as tombs for the pharaohs. How-
ever, a tomb for a pharaoh could not be just an ordinary box. The
pharaoh was considered a god and as such his tomb was designed as a
passageway connecting this life to the afterlife. The base of each pyramid
represented the earth. It was laid out precisely with four sides oriented to
face true north, south, east, and west. From the base, the sides reached
a peak that symbolized the connection with the Egyptian sun god.
While the design and construction of the pyramids required very
speciﬁc geometric knowledge—basic triangle geometry and formulas for
the volume of four-sided pyramids—the Egyptians also developed simple
geometric rules for handling a quite diﬀerent task, that of surveying. The
arable land of ancient Egypt lay close to the Nile and was divided into
plots leased to local Egyptians to farm. Each year, after the Nile had
ﬂooded and wiped out portions of the land, tax collectors were forced
to re-calculate how much land was left in order to levy the appropriate
amount of rent. The Egyptians’ study of land measurement was passed
on to the Greeks and is evidenced by the word geometry itself, which in
Greek means “earth measure.”
A special class of Egyptian priests arose to handle these two types of

4
■Exploring Geometry
geometrical calculations—practical surveying and the more abstract and
spiritual design of monuments and tombs. The ancient Greek philoso-
pher Aristotle believed that the existence of this priestly class motivated
a more abstract understanding of geometry by the Egyptians than by
any of their predecessors. However, this higher study of geometry was
still quite primitive by our standards. A truly abstract and logical un-
derstanding of geometry would come with the Greeks’ absorption of
Egyptian ideas through the schools of Thales and Pythagoras.
1.2
THALES AND PYTHAGORAS
The Egyptians had remarkably good formulas for the volume of a trun-
cated pyramid (not surprisingly) and had a good approximation (about
3 1
6) for the constant π. However, there was a serious problem with Egyp-
tian geometry. They did not delineate between values that were approx-
imations and those that were exact. Indeed, nowhere in Egyptian geom-
etry is there a concern for what the “actual” value of a computation is.
Their method of solving a problem was to take the numbers involved
and follow a recipe of adding, subtracting, and so on, until they ended
up with a ﬁnal number. For example, they knew that certain triples of
integers, say 3, 4, and 5, would form the lengths of a right triangle, but
they had no notion of what the relationship between the sides of a right
triangle were in general.
In the period between 900 and 600 BC, while the Egyptian empire
was waning, a new seafaring and trading culture arose in Greece. As
the Greeks traveled throughout the Mediterranean, they interacted with
a diverse set of cultures, including the Egyptians. The entrepreneurial
spirit of the Greeks was reﬂected in the creation of independent schools
of learning led by master teachers such as Thales and Pythagoras. This
was in stark contrast to the centralized monopoly of the priestly class in
Egypt. The Greeks created a marketplace of ideas where theories were
created and debated vigorously.
In this society of ideas, two notable schools arose—the Ionian school
founded by Thales of Miletus and the Pythagorean school founded by
Pythagoras of Samos. Much about both men is lost to history and comes
down to us through myths and legends. However, the impact that their
schools had on mathematics, science, music, and philosophy was revolu-
tionary.
To understand the profound change that occurred in how we think
of mathematics now versus before the Greeks, let us consider a simple

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■5
problem—that of computing the area of a triangle. The Egyptians were
aware that if the triangle were a right triangle, then one could “ﬂip” the
triangle across the longest side and get a rectangle. The triangle’s area
is then half the product of the two shortest sides.
They also knew that in some special triangles, with certain ﬁxed
lengths of sides, the area was half the length of one side times the height
of the triangle. However, this is all that the Egyptians knew, or wanted
to know, about the area of a triangle in general. Geometry to them was
an empirical subject, needed only to analyze those triangles found in real
objects.
The Greeks, on the other hand, viewed the abstraction of things
as the ideal and perfect form of reality. Sides and edges in this world
were imperfect. By abstracting edges into segments having no width
and having exact length, the Greeks could talk about the exact answer
to questions such as the area of a triangle. And not only that, they could
discuss in general what the area should be for any triangle that is built
of three abstract segments.
This abstraction, freed from the constraints of empirical foundation,
allowed for the study of classes of objects, rather than the objects them-
selves. For example, if one supposed the earth was a sphere, then one
could deduce many properties of the earth just by using what was known
about abstract spheres.
But this way of thinking required a new way of determining the
veracity of statements. For the Egyptians, the statement “a triangle
with sides of length 3, 4, and 5 has a right angle” would be accepted
as true if one drew a 3-4-5 triangle in the sand and measured the angle
to be approximately a right angle. However, a statement about abstract
triangles cannot be proved this way—one cannot draw a perfect 3-4-5
triangle, no matter how hard one tries. The greatest achievement of the
Greeks was the development of a precise and logical way of reasoning
called the deductive method, which provided sound rules of argument
to be used for abstract systems of objects. The deductive method has
formed the basis for scientiﬁc reasoning from the time of the Greeks until
the modern age.
The Greeks’ focus on abstraction and their creation of the deductive
method can be traced to the two great schools of Thales and Pythagoras.

6
■Exploring Geometry
1.2.1
Thales
Thales (ca. 624–548 BC) lived in the coastal city of Miletus in the ancient
region of Ionia (present day Turkey). He is reported to have visited Egypt
in the ﬁrst half of the sixth century BC. While there, he studied Egyptian
mathematics and measured the height of the Egyptian pyramids by the
use of shadows and similar triangles.
Thales was, in many respects, a bridge between the empirical and
mythical world of the Egyptians and the abstract and rational world of
Greek civilization. To the Egyptians, reality was infused with the ac-
tions of spiritual and mystical beings, and thus, while one could discover
some basic facts about how things worked, the true nature of reality was
not important—the gods would do as they wanted to with the world.
Thales is known as the ﬁrst scientist because he believed in a rational
world where one could discover universal truths about natural phenom-
ena by abstracting properties of the world into ideal terms. This was a
fundamental shift in how nature was perceived. No longer were natural
processes simply the whims of mythical beings; they were products of
processes that could be described in terms that could be debated and
proved true or false. Thales was perhaps the ﬁrst thinker to seriously
consider the question, What is matter composed of? His answer was wa-
ter, which we know today to be incorrect, but it was an answer that
Thales could back up with a logical argument and could, in principle,
be shown to be true or false.
Thales is known for being the ﬁrst mathematician, the ﬁrst to use
deductive reasoning to prove mathematical results. As best we can tell,
his methods of proof actually involved a combination of deductive rea-
soning and inductive reasoning from examples. The full development of
deductive reasoning from ﬁrst principles (axioms) would come later, with
its most complete expression found in the work of Euclid.
The ﬁve geometric theorems attributed to Thales are
1. A circle is bisected by a diameter.
2. The base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal.
3. The pairs of vertical angles formed by two intersecting lines are
equal.
4. Two triangles are congruent if they have two angles and the in-
cluded side equal.

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■7
5. An angle inscribed in a semicircle is a right angle.
The last result has become known as “The Theorem of Thales.” It
can be proved in several ways. In Figure 1.3 we suggest one method.
Before moving on, try to develop your own proof (or explanation) of this
theorem based on Figure 1.3. That is, show that β + γ = 90. In your
proof you can use Thales’ theorem on isosceles triangles (Theorem 2 in
the list above) and the fact that the sum of the angles in a triangle is
180 degrees.
Figure 1.3
1.2.2
Pythagoras
According to legend, Pythagoras (ca. 580–500 BC) was a pupil of Thales.
Like Thales, Pythagoras traveled widely, gathering not only mathemati-
cal ideas, but also religious and mystical teachings. To the Pythagoreans,
philosophy and mathematics formed the moral basis of life. The words
philosophy (love of wisdom) and mathematics (that which is learned)
were coined by the Pythagoreans.
In the Pythagorean worldview, mathematics was the way to study
the ideal, that which was truly harmonious and perfect. “Numbers rule
the universe” was their motto. They believed that all of nature could be
explained by properties of the natural numbers 1, 2, 3, . . . . The search
for harmony and perfection were of utmost importance and translated
directly to a focus on ratios and proportion—the harmonious balance of
numbers.

8
■Exploring Geometry
The theorem historically attributed to Pythagoras, that in a right
triangle the square on the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares
on the two sides, was known as an empirical fact to the Egyptians and
others in the ancient Orient. However, it was the Pythagoreans who ﬁrst
provided a logical proof of this result.
The Pythagoreans’ development of geometry and their focus on the
theory of numbers in relation to music, astronomy, and the natural world
had a profound eﬀect on Greek culture. As Boyer and Merzbach state
in their history of mathematics [7, page 57], “Never before or since has
mathematics played so large a role in life and religion as it did among
the Pythagoreans.”
One of the most important features of the schools of both Pythagoras
and Thales was their insistence that mathematical results be justiﬁed
or proved true. This focus on proofs required a method of reasoning
and argument that was precise and logical. This method had its origins
with Pythagoras and Thales and culminated with the publication of The
Elements by Euclid in about 300 BC. The method has become known as
the “Axiomatic Method.” Howard Eves in [12] records the invention of
the axiomatic method as one of the very greatest moments in the history
of mathematics. Before we investigate the axiomatic method, let’s take
a little side trip into one of the most elegant constructions used by the
Pythagoreans—the construction of the golden section.
1.3
PROJECT 1 - THE RATIO MADE OF GOLD
Leonardo Da Vinci called it the “Sectio aurea.” Luca Paccioli, an
Italian mathematician of the 1500s, wrote a book, which Da Vinci illus-
trated, called De Divine Proportione. Johannes Kepler, in the late 1500s,
said:
Geometry has two great treasures: one is the theorem of
Pythagoras; the other, the division of a line into extreme
and mean ratio. The ﬁrst we may compare to a measure of
gold; the second we may name a precious jewel.
What these great thinkers were referring to is one of the simplest, yet
most aesthetically pleasing, geometric constructions—that of the golden
ratio.

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■9
The ﬁrst study of the golden ratio is attributed to the Pythagoreans.
In their search for harmony of number, they sought the ideal ﬁgure,
one in which the dimensions were in perfect harmony of proportion.
Proportion has to do with ratios of measurements. We say that two
ratios are in proportion if they are equal to one another. The simplest
geometric ratio is that of two segment lengths. The simplest way to
create a proportion of ratios is to start with a single segment and cut it
into two parts. We create one ratio by looking at the ratio of the total
segment to the longer of the two sub-pieces, and we can create another
ratio by that of the longer sub-piece to the smaller. The splitting of the
segment will be most harmonious if these two ratios are equal, that is,
if they are in proportion.
Our ﬁrst project will be to construct geometric ﬁgures that
have this perfect harmony of proportion. We will do so by us-
ing a dynamic geometry software environment. Before you start this
project, review the brief notes on using geometry software found
at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text. In particular, review the
notes on creating versus constructing geometric objects and the informa-
tion about attaching points to objects.
You should work through all the constructions and exercises, keeping
notes on how ﬁgures are constructed and writing down answers to the
exercises. Your notes and answers will form the basis of the report you
will create at the conclusion of the project.
1.3.1
Golden Section
Start up your geometry software. You should see a window in which you
can create geometric objects. In Figure 1.4 we see the window opened
using the Geometry Explorer software. Our ﬁrst task will be to create
a segment AB on the screen. Using the Segment tool in your software,
click and drag on the screen to create a segment. Using the Point tool,
attach a point C to segment AB. Note that C is always “stuck” on AB;
if we drag C around, it will always stay on AB. Now, measure the ratio
of the length of segment AB to the length of segment BC. Instructions
for doing this measurement for various geometry programs can be found
at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text. In Figure 1.4 we see this
ratio displayed in Geometry Explorer.
Next measure the ratio of the length of segment BC to CA. Drag
point C around and see if you can get these two ratios to match up; that
is, see if you can create a proportion of ratios.

10
■Exploring Geometry
Figure 1.4 Geometry Explorer main window
Interesting!! The ratios seem to match at a magic ratio of about 1.62.
Let’s see why this is. For the sake of argument, let’s set the length of
BC equal to 1. Let x be the length of AB. Then, what we are looking
for is a value of x that satisﬁes the equation
x
1 =
1
x −1
If we solve this equation, we get that x must satisfy x2 −x −1 = 0.
This has two roots 1±
√
5
2
. The positive solution is 1+
√
5
2
, which is about
1.62. This ratio is the perfection of balance for which the Pythagoreans
were searching. The segment subdivision having this ratio is what Da
Vinci called the Golden Section.
Construction of the Golden Ratio
We can see from the previous discussion that it is not too hard to ap-
proximate the golden ratio by moving point C. However, in the true
Pythagorean spirit, is it possible to construct two segments whose ratio
of lengths is exactly the golden ratio?

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■11
Traditionally, the question of geometric construction of numerical
values or geometric ﬁgures has played a key role in the development
of geometry. (Euclid’s notion of construction encompasses both of the
ideas of creating and constructing used in many geometry programs.)
Euclidean constructions are carried out by drawing lines (or segments)
and circles and by ﬁnding the intersections of lines and circles. Such
constructions are called straightedge and compass constructions as they
represent pencil and paper constructions using a straightedge (line) and
compass (circle). A review of constructions will come later in the text.
For now, we point out that all of the tools available in the Create and
Construct panels of buttons in Geometry Explorer are valid Euclidean
constructions.
To construct the golden ratio of a segment, we will need to split a
segment into two sub-segments such that the ratio of the larger to the
smaller sub-segment is exactly
1+
√
5
2
. How can we do this? Since the
fraction 1
2 appears in the expression for the golden ratio, it might be
useful to construct the midpoint of a segment. Also, an easy way to
construct
√
5 would be to construct a right triangle with base lengths of
1 and 2. We’ll keep these ideas in mind as we explore how to construct
the golden ratio.
Golden Ratio Construction Step 1
To get started, we need a segment. Clear the screen and create segment
AB.
Since we already discussed the
need for midpoints, let’s construct
the midpoint C of AB by using
the Midpoint tool in your pro-
gram. To make life easier for our-
selves, let’s assume the length of
AB is 2. Then, we have one base
of the triangle we discussed above.
To get the other base, we need a right angle at B. Use the perpendicular
line tool in your program to construct the perpendicular to AB at B
(refer to the preceding ﬁgure).

12
■Exploring Geometry
Golden Ratio Construction Step 2
Now, we need to create a segment up from B along the vertical line that
has length 1. This can be done using a circle centered at B of radius 1.
To create this circle, use the Circle tool in your program. Click on point
B. Drag the cursor until it is directly over point C. When the cursor is
over C, that point will become highlighted. The cursor represents the
radius point of the circle we want to construct, and we want this radius
point to be equal to C so that the circle has radius exactly equal to 1.
Release the mouse button and drag points A and B around the screen.
Notice how the circle radius is always of constant length equal to the
length of BC.
The technique of dragging a point of a new circle or line until it
matches an existing point will be a common technique used throughout
the labs in this text. It is an easy way to create objects that are in
synchronization with existing objects.
To construct the vertical leg of
the desired right triangle, return
A and B to the position shown.
We will use the Point tool to con-
struct the intersection point D.
Hover the mouse where the inter-
section should be. The intersect-
ing line and circle should be high-
lighted. Click the mouse to create
D.
At
this
point,
you
should
check that you have constructed
all of the ﬁgures correctly. Drag
points A and B around the screen
and check that your circle moves
accordingly, with center B and ra-
dius to C, and that your intersec-
tion points D and E move with
the circle and the perpendicular.
A great advantage in working with a geometry program, as compared
with paper and pencil, is that you can dynamically move geometric ﬁg-

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■13
ures, exploring how their properties change (or stay constant) as you do
so.
Golden Ratio Construction Step 3
Point D is the point we are after, so let’s hide the circle. Move AB back
to a horizontal position and create a segment connecting A to D. To
ﬁnish our triangle, create segment BD.
By the Pythagorean Theorem we know that the length of AD will be
√
5. So we have constructed all the numbers that appear in the fraction
for the golden ratio, but we have not actually found a point on AB that
will subdivide this segment in this ratio.
Let’s experiment a bit with what we are trying to ﬁnd. Suppose G is
a point between A and B that subdivides the segment into the golden
ratio; that is AB
AG = 1+
√
5
2
. Let x be the length of AG. (Draw a picture
on a scrap piece of paper—all good mathematicians have paper on hand
when reading math books!)
Exercise 1.3.1. Given that the length of AB is 2, show that x must be equal
to
√
5 −1.
From this exercise, we see that to ﬁnish our construction we need to
ﬁnd a point G on AB such that the length of AG is
√
5 −1.
We make use of the fact that we
already have a length of
√
5 in the
hypotenuse of our right triangle.
To cut oﬀa length of 1 from the
hypotenuse, create a circle cen-
tered at D with radius point B.
Then, construct the intersection
point F of this new circle with
AD.

14
■Exploring Geometry
To construct G, we just need
to transfer AF to AB. Create a
circle with center A and radius
point F and construct the inter-
section point G of this new circle
with AB. Then, compute the ratio
of the length of AG to the length
of GB. (Refer to the construction
earlier in this project if you need a
refresher on how to calculate this
ratio)
It looks like our analysis was correct. We have constructed a golden
section for AB at G!
1.3.2
Golden Rectangles
The golden ratio has been used extensively in art and architecture—not
in the subdivision of a single segment but in the creation of rectangular
shapes called golden rectangles. A Golden Rectangle is a rectangle where
the ratio of the long side to the short side is exactly the golden ratio.
To construct a golden rectangle, we will again need to construct the
numbers 1, 2, and
√
5. But this time we can interpret the numerator
and denominator of the golden ratio fraction 1+
√
5
2
as the separate side
lengths of a rectangle. It makes sense to start out with a square of side
length 2, as we can take one of its sides as the denominator and can split
an adjacent side in two to get the 1 term in the numerator. To get the
√
5 term, we need to extend this smaller side appropriately.
Golden Rectangle Construction Step 1
To start the construction, clear the screen and create segment AB. We
will assume this segment is of length 2.

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■15
To construct a square on AB,
ﬁrst construct the perpendicular
to AB at A. Then construct a cir-
cle at A with radius AB. Next,
construct the intersection point
C. Do a similar series of con-
structions at B to get point D as
shown.
Points A, B, C, and D will
form a square. Hide all of the per-
pendiculars and circles and create
the segments AC, CD, and DB
to form a square.
Golden Rectangle Construction Step 2
Construct the midpoint E of CD. If we can extend CD to a point F so
that DF has length
√
5 −1, then segment CF will have length
√
5 + 1
and we will have the length ratio of CF to AB equal to the golden ratio.
To extend CD, create a ray from
C to D. Then, create a circle
with center at E and radius point
B and construct the intersection
point F.
Exercise 1.3.2. Use a right triangle to argue that DF has length
√
5 −1,
given the construction of F done in the step above.

16
■Exploring Geometry
Golden Rectangle Construction Step 3
Finally, to ﬁnish oﬀthe rectangle
partially deﬁned by B, D, and F,
we construct a perpendicular to
ray −−→
CD at F, then create a ray
from A to B, and construct the
intersection point G of the per-
pendicular with this ray. Measure
the ratio of AB to BG. We have
created a segment (AG) that is
cut in the golden ratio at B, as
well as a rectangle (DFGB) that
is “golden.”
Exercise 1.3.3. Grab a ruler and a few of your friends and measure the
proportions of the rectangles enclosing your friends’ faces. Measure the ratio
of the distance from the bottom of the chin to the top of the head to the distance
between the ears. Make a table of these distances and ﬁnd the average “face
ratio.” Does the average come close to the golden ratio? Find some magazine
photos of actors and actresses considered beautiful. Are their faces “golden”?
The Fibonacci sequence has a fascinating connection with the golden
ratio. The sequence is deﬁned as a sequence of numbers u1, u2, u3, . . .
where u1 = 1, u2 = 1, and un = un−1 + un−2. Thus, u3 = 2, u4 = 3, u5 =
5, and so on. The ﬁrst ten terms of this sequence are 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13,
21, 34, 55, 89. These numbers come up in surprising places. They appear
in the branching patterns of plants, in the numbers of rows of kernels in
a sunﬂower head, and in many spiral patterns, such as the spiral found
in the Nautilus shell. The ratio of successive Fibonacci numbers is also
related to the golden ratio. Consider the ﬁrst few ratios of terms in the
sequence
2
1 = 2, 3
2 = 1.5, 5
3 = 1.666..., 8
5 = 1.6, 13
8 = 1.625, 21
13 = 1.61538...
It appears that these ratios are approaching the golden ratio. In fact,
these ratios actually do converge exactly to the golden ratio (see [25] for
a proof).
Exercise 1.3.4. Find ﬁve objects in your environment that have dimen-
sions given by two succeeding terms in the Fibonacci sequence. For example,
a simple 3x5 index card is close to being a golden rectangle as
5
3 is one of
our Fibonacci ratios. Once you start looking, you will be amazed at how many
simple, everyday objects are nearly golden.

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■17
Project Report
This ends the exploratory phase of this project. Now it is time for the ex-
planation phase—the ﬁnal project report. The report should be carefully
written and should include three main components: an introduction, a
section discussing results, and a conclusion.
The introduction should describe what was to be accomplished in
the project. It should focus on one or two major themes or ideas that
were explored.
The main body of the report will necessarily be composed of the
results of your investigation. This will include a (brief) summary of the
constructions you carried out. This should not be a verbatim list or recipe
of what you did, but rather a general discussion of what you were asked
to construct and what you discovered in the process. Also, all results
from exercises should be included in this section.
The conclusion of the report should document what you learned by
doing the project and also include any interesting ideas or conjectures
that you came up with while doing the project.
1.4
THE RISE OF THE AXIOMATIC METHOD
In the last section we looked at the ancient Greeks’ search for the perfect
harmony of proportion. In this section we consider another example of
the Greeks’ quest for perfection—that of perfection of reasoning. This
quest culminated in the creation of a pattern of reasoning called the
axiomatic method.
The axiomatic method is based on a system of deductive reasoning.
In a deductive system, statements used in an argument must be derived,
or based upon, prior statements used in the argument. These prior state-
ments must themselves be derived from even earlier statements, and so
on. There are two logical traps that one can fall into in such a system.
First, there is the trap of producing a never-ending stream of prior
statements. Consider, for example, the deﬁnition of a word in the dic-
tionary. If we want to deﬁne a word like orange we need to use other
words such as fruit and round. To deﬁne fruit we need to use seed, and
so forth. If every word required a diﬀerent word in its deﬁnition, then
we would need an inﬁnite number of words in the English language!
Second, there is the trap of circular reasoning. In some dictionaries

18
■Exploring Geometry
a line is deﬁned as a type of curve, and a curve is deﬁned as a line that
deviates from being straight.
The Greeks recognized these traps and realized that the only way
out of these logical dilemmas was to establish a base of concepts and
statements that would be used without proof. This base consisted of
undeﬁned terms and postulates/axioms.
Undeﬁned terms were those terms that would be accepted without
any further deﬁnition. For example, in the original formulation of Eu-
clid’s geometry, the terms breadth and length are undeﬁned, but a line
is deﬁned as “breadth-less length.” One may argue whether this is a
useful deﬁnition of a line, but it does allow Euclid to avoid an inﬁnite,
or circular, regression of deﬁnitions. In modern treatments of Euclidean
geometry, the terms point and line are typically left undeﬁned.
A postulate or axiom is a logical statement about terms that is ac-
cepted as true without proof. To the Greeks, postulates referred to state-
ments about the speciﬁc objects under study and axioms (or common
notions) referred to more universal statements about general logical sys-
tems. For example, the statement “A straight line can be drawn from
any point to any point” is the ﬁrst of Euclid’s ﬁve postulates; whereas
the statement “If equals be added to equals, the wholes are equal” is
one of Euclid’s axioms. The ﬁrst is a statement about the speciﬁcs of a
geometric system and the second is a general logical statement. In mod-
ern mathematical axiomatic systems, there is no distinction between
these two types of mutually accepted statements, and the terms axiom
and postulate are used interchangeably to refer to a statement accepted
without proof.
Starting from a base of undeﬁned terms and agreed upon axioms,
we can deﬁne other terms and use our axioms to argue the truth of
other statements. These other statements are called the theorems of the
system. Thus, our deductive system consists of four components:
1. Undeﬁned Terms
2. Axioms (or Postulates)
3. Deﬁned Terms
4. Theorems
A system comprising these four components, along with some basic
rules of logic, is an axiomatic system. (In Appendix B there is a complete

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■19
listing of the axiomatic system Euclid used at the start of his ﬁrst book
on plane geometry.)
One way to think about an axiomatic system is by analogy with
playing a game like chess. We could consider the playing pieces (as black
and white objects) and the chessboard as undeﬁned parts of the game.
They just exist and we use them. A particular playing piece, for example
the bishop, would be a deﬁned term, as it would be a special kind of
playing piece. The rules of chess would be axioms. The rules are the
ﬁnal say in what is allowed and what is not allowed in playing the game.
Everyone (hopefully) agrees to play by the rules. Once the game starts, a
player moves about the board, capturing his or her opponent’s pieces. A
particular conﬁguration of the game, for example with one player holding
another player in check, would be like a theorem in the game in that it is
derived from the axioms (rules), using the deﬁned and undeﬁned terms
(pieces) of the game, and it is a conﬁguration of the game that can be
veriﬁed as legal or not, using the rules. For example, if we came upon
a chessboard set up in the starting position, but with all of a player’s
pawns behind all of the other pieces, we could logically conclude that
this was not a legal conﬁguration of the game.
It is actually very useful to have a game analogy in mind when work-
ing in an axiomatic system. Thinking about mathematics and proving
theorems is really a grand game and can be not only challenging and
thought-provoking like chess, but equally as enjoyable and satisfying.
As an example of playing the axiomatic game, suppose that we had
a situation where students enrolled in classes. Students and classes will
be left as undeﬁned terms as it is not important for this game what
they actually mean. Suppose we have the following rules (axioms) about
students and classes.
A1 There are exactly three students.
A2 For every pair of students, there is exactly one class in which
they are enrolled.
A3 Not all of the students belong to the same class.
A4 Two separate classes share at least one student in common.
What can be deduced from this set of axioms? Suppose that two
classes shared more than one student. Let’s call these classes C1 and C2.
If they share more than one student—say students A and B are in both

20
■Exploring Geometry
classes—then we would have a situation where A and B are in more
than one class. This clearly contradicts the rule we agreed to in Axiom
2, that two students are in one and only one class. We will use a rule
of logic that says that an assumption that contradicts a known result,
or an axiom, cannot be true. The assumption that we made was that
two classes could share more than one student. The conclusion we must
make is that this assumption is false, and so two classes cannot share
more than one student.
By Axiom 4 we also know that two separate classes share at least one
student. Thus, two separate classes must have one and only one student
in common. We can write these results down as a theorem. The set of
explanations given above is called a proof of the theorem.
Theorem 1.1. Two separate classes share one and only one student
in common.
A proof is a logical explanation for why a theorem statement is true.
A valid proof is based solely on statements that are either axioms or
that have already been proven. For a brief review of proofs, consult
Appendix A.
Here is another theorem and proof based on our axiomatic system.
Note how the proof uses only the axioms and the theorem proved above.
Theorem 1.2. There are exactly three classes in our system.
Proof: By Axiom 2 we know that for each pair of students, there is
a class. By Axiom 3 all three students cannot be in a common class.
Thus, there must be at least three classes, say C1, C2, C3, as there are
three diﬀerent pairs of students. Suppose there is a fourth class, say C4.
By the theorem just proved, there must be a student shared by each
pairing of C4 with one of the other three classes. So C4 has at least one
student. It cannot contain all three students by Axiom 3. Also, it cannot
have just one student since if it did, then classes C1, C2, and C3 would
be forced by Axiom 4 to share this student and, in addition, to have
three other, diﬀerent students among them, because the three classes
must have diﬀerent pairs of students. This would mean that there are at
least four students and would contradict Axiom 1. Thus, C4 must have
exactly two students. But, since this pair of students must already be

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■21
in one of the other three classes, we have a contradiction to Axiom 2.
Thus, there cannot be a fourth class. 2
Here is another example. Again, note the careful way the proof only
uses axioms and previously proven theorems.
Theorem 1.3. Each class has exactly two students.
Proof: By the previous theorem we know that there are exactly three
classes. By Axiom 4 we know that there is at least one student in a class.
Suppose a class had just one student, call this student S. All classes
would then have student S by Axiom 4. The other two students are in
some class, call it class X, by Axiom 2. Class X must then have all three
students as it also needs to have student S, the student common to all
three classes. But, this contradicts Axiom 3. Thus, all classes must have
at least two students and by Axiom 3 must have exactly two students.
2
The careful reader will see that we are using basic properties of count-
ing in this proof. While not axiomatically based, this will be a generally
accepted rule of reasoning that we will use for proofs. We are also as-
suming that we can label objects with letters and that there is mutual
agreement about what words mean. This will also be tacitly assumed
for the readership of a proof. What cannot be assumed in a proof is any
relationship between the terms (deﬁned and undeﬁned) of the axiomatic
system, other than that given by the system.
Another rule of reasoning we are using in this proof is the idea of
arguing by the contradiction principle. This is the idea that if we as-
sume the opposite of a statement, and reach a result that contradicts a
statement we know is true, then the original statement must be true.
In the proof above, we consider the opposite of the statement that
each class has at least two students. One way to negate this statement is
to say that some class has only one student. This leads to a contradiction
to Axiom 3. Thus, we can conclude that the statement that each class has
at least two students must be true. For further review of this principle,
consult Appendix A.
It is important to point out that the precise meaning of the terms
students and classes is not important in this axiomatic system. We could
just as well have used the following axiom set:

22
■Exploring Geometry
A1 There are exactly three snarks.
A2 For every pair of snarks, there is exactly one bittle.
A3 Not all of the snarks belong to the same bittle.
A4 Two separate bittles have at least one snark in common.
By changing the labels in the theorems above, we would get equiva-
lent theorems about snarks and bittles. The point of this silly little aside
is that we are concerned about the relationships and patterns among the
objects in an abstract axiomatic system and not about the objects them-
selves. This is the great insight of the Greeks—that it is the relationships
that matter and not how we apply those relationships to objects.
The insistence on proofs in formal axiomatic mathematics can seem,
at times, to be a tedious exercise in belaboring the obvious. This senti-
ment is actually as old as Greek geometry itself. J. L. Heilbron, in [21]
describes how the Greek philosopher Epicurus (341–270 BC) criticized
Euclid’s proof that no side of a triangle can be longer than the sum of the
other two sides. As Epicurus stated, “It is evident even to an ass.” For
if a donkey wanted to travel to a bale of hay, it would go directly there
along a line and not go through any point not on that line (Figure 1.5).
Figure 1.5 Donkey geometry
But, the Greek geometer Proclus (411–485 AD) refuted this criticism
by arguing that something that seems evident to our senses cannot be
relied on for scientiﬁc investigation. By training our minds in the most
careful and rigorous forms of reasoning abstracted from the real world,
we are preparing our minds for the harder task of reasoning about things
that we cannot perceive. For Proclus, this type of reasoning “arouses
our innate knowledge, awakens our intellect, purges our understanding,
brings to light the concepts that belong essentially to us, takes away the
forgetfulness and ignorance that we have from birth, and sets us free
from the bonds of unreason” [21, page 8].

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■23
One clear illustration of Proclus’ point is the development of mod-
ern views on the nature of the universe. From the time of Euclid, math-
ematicians believed that the universe was ﬂat, that it was essentially
a three-dimensional version of the ﬂat geometry Euclid developed in
the plane. In fact, Euclidean geometry was considered the only possi-
ble axiomatic geometric system. This was a reasonable extrapolation
from these mathematicians’ experience of the world. However, in the
nineteenth century, a revolution occurred in the way mathematicians
viewed geometry. Non-Euclidean geometries were developed that were
just as logically valid as Euclidean geometry. The notion of a curved
universe was now mathematically possible, and in 1854 George Fred-
erich Riemann (1826–1866) set out the basic mathematical principles
for analyzing curved spaces of not just three dimensions, but arbitrary
dimensions. This mathematical theory must have seemed incredibly wild
and impractical to non-mathematicians. However, Riemann’s geometry
of curved space was fundamental in Einstein’s development of the theory
of relativity and in his view of space-time as a four-dimensional object.
This revolution in the axiomatic basis of geometry laid the ground-
work for a movement to formalize the foundations of all of mathematics.
This movement reached its peak in the formalist school of the late 1800s
and early 1900s. This school was led by David Hilbert (1862–1943) and
had as its goal the axiomatic development of all of mathematics from
ﬁrst principles. Hilbert’s Grundlagen der Geometrie, published in 1899,
was a careful development of Euclidean geometry based on a set of 21
axioms.
Exercise 1.4.1. Trace the following words through a dictionary until a cir-
cular chain of deﬁnitions has been formed for each: power, straight, real (e.g.,
power - strength - force - power). Why must dictionary deﬁnitions be inher-
ently circular?
Exercise 1.4.2. In the game of Nim, two players are given several piles of
coins, each pile having a ﬁnite number of elements. On each turn a player
picks a pile and removes as many coins as he or she wants from that pile but
must remove at least one coin. The player who picks up the last coin wins.
(Equivalently, the player who no longer has coins to pick up loses.) Suppose
that there are two piles with one pile having more coins than the other. Show
that the ﬁrst player to move can always win the game.
Exercise 1.4.3. Consider a system where we have children in a classroom
choosing diﬀerent ﬂavors of ice cream. Suppose we have the following axioms:
A1 There are exactly ﬁve ﬂavors of ice cream: vanilla, chocolate, straw-
berry, cookie dough, and bubble gum.

24
■Exploring Geometry
A2 Given any two diﬀerent ﬂavors, there is exactly one child who likes
these two ﬂavors.
A3 Every child likes exactly two diﬀerent ﬂavors among the ﬁve.
How many children are there in this classroom? Prove your result.
Exercise 1.4.4. Using the ice cream axiom system, show that any pair of
children likes at most one common ﬂavor.
Exercise 1.4.5. In the ice cream system, show that for each ﬂavor there are
exactly four children who like that ﬂavor.
One of the most universal of abstract mathematical structures is
that of a group. A group G consists of a set of undeﬁned objects called
elements and a binary operation “◦” that relates two elements to a third.
The axioms for a group are
A1 For all elements x and y, the binary operation on x, y is again
an element of G. That is, for all x, y ∈G, x ◦y ∈G.
A2 For all x, y, z ∈G, (x ◦y) ◦z = x ◦(y ◦z). That is, the binary
operation is associative.
A3 There is a special element e ∈G such that x ◦e = e ◦x = x for
all x ∈G. The element e is called the identity of G.
A4 Given x ∈G, there is an element x−1 ∈G such that x ◦x−1 =
x−1 ◦x = e. The element x−1 is called the inverse to x.
The next three exercises are to be proven using just the group axioms.
We will return to the idea of groups when we investigate transformations
and symmetry in Chapters 5 and 6.
Exercise 1.4.6. Show that if x, y, z ∈G and x ◦z = y ◦z, then x = y.
Exercise 1.4.7. Assume that the equation x ◦y ◦z = e holds in a group G.
Does it follow that y ◦z ◦x = e? Give a justiﬁcation for your answer.
Exercise 1.4.8. Show that a group G can have only one identity.
In 1889 Giuseppe Peano (1858–1932) published a set of axioms, now
known as the Peano axioms, as a formal axiomatic basis for the natural
numbers. Peano was one of the ﬁrst contributors to the modern axiomatic
and formalist view, and his system included ﬁve axioms based on the
undeﬁned terms natural number and successor. We will let N stand for
the set of all natural numbers in the following listing of Peano’s axioms.

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■25
A1 1 is a natural number.
A2 Every natural number x has a successor (which we will call x′)
that is a natural number, and this successor is unique.
A3 No two natural numbers have the same successor. That is, if x, y
are natural numbers, with x ̸= y, then x′ ̸= y′.
A4 1 is not the successor of any natural number.
A5 Let M be a subset of natural numbers with the property that
(i) 1 is in M.
(ii) Whenever a natural number x is in M, then x′ is in M.
Then, M must contain all natural numbers, that is, M = N.
The next four exercises are to be proven using just the Peano axioms.
Exercise 1.4.9. The ﬁfth Peano axiom is called the Axiom of Induction.
Let M be the set of all natural numbers x for which the statement x′ ̸= x
holds. Use the axiom of induction to show that M = N, that is, x′ ̸= x for all
natural numbers x.
Exercise 1.4.10. Must every natural number be the successor of some num-
ber? Clearly, this is not the case for 1 (why not?), but what about other num-
bers? Consider the statement “If x ̸= 1, then there is a number u with u′ = x.”
Let M be the set consisting of the number 1 plus all other x for which this
statement is true. Use the axiom of induction to show that M = N and, thus,
that every number other than 1 is the successor of some number.
Exercise 1.4.11. Deﬁne addition of natural numbers as follows:
• For every x, deﬁne x + 1 = x′.
• For every x and y, deﬁne x + y′ = (x + y)′.
Show that this addition is well-deﬁned. That is, show that for all x and w, the
value of x + w is deﬁned. [Hint: You may want to use induction.]
Exercise 1.4.12. Think about how you might deﬁne multiplication in the
Peano system. Come up with a two-part deﬁnition of multiplication of natural
numbers.
Exercise 1.4.13. Hilbert once said that “mathematics is a game played ac-
cording to certain simple rules with meaningless marks on paper.” Lobachevsky,
one of the founders of non-Euclidean geometry, once said, “There is no branch
of mathematics, however abstract, which may not someday be applied to phe-
nomena of the real world.” Discuss these two views of the role of mathematics.
With which do you most agree? Why?

26
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 1.4.14. Historically, geometry had its origins in the empirical ex-
ploration of ﬁgures that were subsequently abstracted and proven deductively.
Imagine that you are designing the text for a course on geometry. What em-
phasis would you place on discovery and empirical testing? What emphasis
would you place on the development of proofs and axiomatic reasoning? How
would you balance these two ways of exploring geometry so that students would
become conﬁdent in their ability to reason logically, yet also gain an intuitive
understanding of the material?
1.5
PROPERTIES OF AXIOMATIC SYSTEMS
In this section we will look a bit deeper into the properties that charac-
terize axiomatic systems. We will look at the axiomatic structure itself
and at its properties.
In the last section, we looked at an axiomatic system consisting of
classes and students. We saw that we could re-label these terms as snarks
and bittles without any real change in the structure of the system or
in the relationships between the terms of the system. In an axiomatic
system, it does not matter what the terms represent. The only thing that
matters is how the terms are related to each other. By giving the terms
a speciﬁc meaning, we are creating an interpretation of the axiomatic
system.
Suppose in our example of the last section that we replaced class and
student by line and point.
We interpret line to be one of the
three segments shown at right and
point to be any one of the three
points A, B, or C.
Then, our axioms would read as follows:
A1 There are exactly three points.
A2 Two distinct points belong to one and only one line.
A3 Not all of the points belong to the same line.
A4 Two separate lines have at least one point in common.

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■27
We should check that our axioms still make correct sense with this
new interpretation and they do. In our new interpretation, the theorems
above now say that there are exactly three lines, each pair of lines inter-
sects in exactly one point, and each line has exactly two points, as can
be seen in the ﬁgure above. This system is called Three-Point geometry.
This new interpretation of our original axiomatic system is called a
model of the system.
Deﬁnition 1.1. A model is an interpretation of the undeﬁned
terms of an axiomatic system such that all of the axioms are true
statements in this new interpretation.
In any model of an axiomatic system, all theorems in that system are
true when interpreted as statements about the model. This is the great
power of the axiomatic method. A theorem of the abstract system needs
to be proved once, but can be interpreted in a wide variety of models.
Three important properties of an axiomatic system are consistency,
independence, and completeness.
1.5.1
Consistency
Consider the following axiomatic system:
A1 There are exactly three points.
A2 There are exactly two points.
One may consider this a rather stupid system, and rightly so. It is
basically useless as Axiom 1 contradicts Axiom 2. It would be impos-
sible to logically deduce theorems in this system as we start out with
a fundamental contradiction. The problem here is that this system is
inconsistent. One may argue that to avoid creating an inconsistent sys-
tem, we just need to choose axioms that are not self-contradictory. This
is not always easy to do. It may be the case that the axioms look ﬁne, but
there is some theorem that contradicts one of the axioms. Or, perhaps
two theorems contradict one another. Any of these situations would be
disastrous for the system.

28
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 1.2. An axiomatic system is consistent if no two state-
ments (these could be two axioms, an axiom and theorem, or two
theorems) contradict each other.
To determine whether an axiomatic system is consistent, we would
have to examine every possible pair of axioms and/or theorems in the
system. In systems such as Euclidean geometry, this is not possible. The
best we can do is to show relative consistency. If we can ﬁnd a model for
a system—let’s call it system A—that is embedded in another axiomatic
system B, and if we know that system B is consistent, then system A
must itself be consistent. For, if there were two statements in A that
were contradictory, then this would be a contradiction in system B,
when interpreted in the language of B. But, B is assumed consistent, so
there can be no contradictory statements in B.
If we believe that Euclidean geometry is consistent, then the ax-
iomatic system for classes and students we have described must be con-
sistent, as it has a model (Three-Point geometry) that is embedded in
Euclidean geometry.
1.5.2
Independence
Deﬁnition 1.3. An individual axiom in an axiomatic system is
called independent if it cannot be proved from the other axioms.
For example, consider the following system for points and lines:
A1 There are exactly three points.
A2 Two distinct points belong to one and only one line.
A3 Not all of the points belong to the same line.
A4 Two separate lines have at least one point in common.
A5 A line has exactly two points.
In the preceding section, we saw that Axiom 5 could be proved from
the ﬁrst four. Thus, Axiom 5 is not independent. While this axiomatic
system would be perfectly ﬁne to use (it is just as consistent as the orig-
inal), it is not as economical as it could be. A system with numerous

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■29
axioms is diﬃcult to remember and confusing to use as a basis for prov-
ing theorems. Just as physicists search for the most simple and elegant
theories to describe the structure of matter and the evolution of the
universe, so too mathematicians search for the most concise and elegant
basis for the foundations of their subject. However, it is often the case
that the more compact an axiomatic system is, the more work has to be
done to get beyond elementary results.
How do we show that an axiom is independent of the other axioms in
an axiomatic system? Suppose that we could ﬁnd a model for a system
including Axiom X. Suppose additionally that we could ﬁnd a model for
the system where we replaced Axiom X by its logical negation. If both
models are consistent then Axiom X must be independent of the other
axioms. For if it were dependent, then it would have to be provably true
from the other axioms and its negation would have to be provably false.
But, if consistent models exist with both X and the negation of X valid,
then X must be independent of the other axioms.
As an example, consider the system for Three-Point geometry. Sup-
pose we replaced Axiom 3 with “All of the points belong to the same
line.” A model for this would be just a line with three points. This would
clearly be consistent with the ﬁrst two axioms. Since there is only one
line in the system, Axiom 4 would be vacuously true. (Here we use the
logical rule that a statement is true if the hypothesis, the existence of two
lines in this case, is false.) Thus, we can say that Axiom 3 is independent
of Axioms 1, 2, and 4.
1.5.3
Completeness
The last property we will consider is that of completeness.
Deﬁnition 1.4. An axiomatic system is called complete if it is
impossible to add a new consistent and independent axiom to the
system. The new axiom can use only deﬁned and undeﬁned terms
of the original system.
An equivalent deﬁnition would be that every statement involving
deﬁned and undeﬁned terms is provably true or false in the system. For
if there were a statement that could not be proved true or false within
the system, then it would be independent of the system, and we could
add it to get an additional axiom.
As an example consider the following system for points and lines:

30
■Exploring Geometry
A1 There are exactly three points.
A2 Two distinct points belong to one and only one line.
Now consider the additional statement “Not all of the points belong
to the same line.” (This is our original Axiom 3 from the last section.)
We have already looked at a consistent model for this larger system.
Now, consider the logical opposite of this statement: “All of the points
belong to the same line.” A consistent model for a system with axioms
A1, A2, and this additional statement is that of three points on a line.
Thus, the statement “Not all of the points belong to the same line” is
not provably true or false within the smaller system consisting of just
axioms A1 and A2, and this smaller system cannot be complete.
What of the four axioms for Three-Point geometry? Do they form a
consistent system? Suppose we label the points A, B, C. We know from
Theorem 1.2 and Theorem 1.3 in section 1.4 that there must be ex-
actly three lines in Three-Point geometry and that each line has exactly
two points. The three lines can then be symbolized by pairs of points:
(A, B), (A, C), (B, C).
Suppose we had another model of Three-Point geometry with points
L, M, N. Then, we could create a one-to-one correspondence between
these points and the points A, B, C so that the lines in the two mod-
els could be put into one-to-one correspondence as well. Thus, any two
models of this system are essentially the same, or isomorphic; one is just
a re-labeling of the other. This must mean that the axiomatic system is
complete. For if it were not complete, then a statement about points and
lines that is independent of this system could be added as a new axiom.
If this were the case, we could ﬁnd a consistent model not only for this
new augmented system, but also for the system we get by adding the
negation of this new axiom, and obviously these two models could not
be isomorphic.
An axiomatic system is called categorical if all models of that system
are isomorphic to one other. Thus, Three-Point geometry is a categorical
system. In Chapter 7 we will see a much more powerful display of this
idea of isomorphism of systems when we look in detail at the system of
non-Euclidean geometry called Hyperbolic Geometry.

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■31
1.5.4
Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem
We cannot leave the subject of completeness without taking a side-trip
into one of the most amazing results in modern mathematics—the In-
completeness Theorem of Kurt Gödel.
At the second International Congress of Mathematics, held in Paris
in 1900, David Hilbert presented a lecture entitled “Mathematical Prob-
lems” in which he listed 23 open problems that he considered critical for
the development of mathematics. Hilbert was a champion of the formal-
ist school of thinking in mathematics, which held that all of mathematics
could be built as a logical axiomatic system.
Hilbert’s second problem was to show that the simplest axiomatic
system, the natural numbers as deﬁned by Peano, was consistent; that
is, the system could not contain theorems yielding contradictory results.
Ten years after Hilbert posed this challenge to the mathematical
community, Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) and Alfred North Whitehead
(1861–1947) published the ﬁrst volume of the Principia Mathematica, an
ambitious project to recast all of mathematics as an expression of formal
logic. This line of reasoning has become known as logicism. Russell and
Whitehead succeeded in deriving set theory and natural number arith-
metic from a formal logical base, yet their development still begged the
question of consistency. However, the Principia was very inﬂuential in
that it showed the power of formal logical reasoning about mathematics.
In 1931, an Austrian mathematician named Kurt Gödel (1906–1978)
published a paper titled “On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Prin-
cipia Mathematica and Related Systems” in the journal Monatshefte für
Mathematik und Physik. In this paper Gödel used the machinery of for-
mal logic to show the impossibility of the universalist approach taken
by the formalists and the logicists. This approach had as its goal the
development of consistent and complete systems for mathematics.
To address the question of consistency, Gödel showed the following
result:
Theorem 1.4. Given a consistent axiomatic system that contains
the natural number system, the consistency of such a system cannot
be proved from within the system.
Thus, Hilbert’s second problem is impossible! If one built a formal
system, even one based on pure logic like Whitehead and Russell, then

32
■Exploring Geometry
Gödel’s theorem implies that it is impossible to show such a system has
no internal contradictions.
Even more profound was the following result of Gödel’s on the com-
pleteness of systems:
Theorem 1.5 (Incompleteness Theorem). Given a consistent ax-
iomatic system that contains the natural number system, the system
must contain undecidable statements, that is, statements about the
terms of the system that are neither provable nor disprovable.
In other words, a system suﬃciently powerful to handle ordinary
arithmetic will necessarily be incomplete! This breathtaking result was
revolutionary in its scope and implication. It implied that there might be
a simple statement in number theory that is undecidable, that is impos-
sible to prove true or false. Even with this disturbing possibility, most
mathematicians have accepted the fact of incompleteness and continue
to prove those theorems that are decidable.
Now that we have reviewed most of the important features of ax-
iomatic systems, we will take a closer look in the next section at the
ﬁrst, and for most of history the most important, axiomatic system—
that of Euclid’s geometry.
Exercise 1.5.1. Consider sets as collections of objects. If we allow a set
to contain objects that are themselves sets, then a set can be an element of
another set. For example, if sets A, B are deﬁned as A = {{a, b}, c} and
B = {a, b}, then B is an element of A. Now, it may happen that a set is an
element of itself! For example, the set of all mathematical concepts is itself a
mathematical concept.
Consider the set S which consists only of those sets which are not ele-
ments of themselves. Can an axiomatic system for set theory, that allows the
existence of S, be a consistent system? [Hint: Consider the statement “S is an
element of itself.”] The set S has become known as the Russell Set in honor
of Bertrand Russell.
Exercise 1.5.2. Two important philosophies of mathematics are those of
the platonists and the intuitionists. Platonists believe that mathematical ideas
actually have an independent existence and that a mathematician only dis-
covers what is already there. Intuitionists believe that we have an intuitive
understanding of the natural numbers and that mathematical results can and
should be derived by constructive methods based on the natural numbers, and
such constructions must be ﬁnite.
Of the four main philosophies of mathematics—platonism, formalism, logi-

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■33
cism, and intuitionism—which most closely matches the way you view mathe-
matics? Which is the prevalent viewpoint taken in the teaching of mathemat-
ics?
Exercise 1.5.3. Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem created a revolution in
the foundations of mathematics. It has often been compared to the discovery
of incommensurable magnitudes by the Pythagoreans in ancient Greece. Re-
search the discovery of incommensurables by the Pythagoreans and compare
its eﬀect on Greek mathematics with the eﬀect of Gödel’s theorem on modern
mathematics.
The exercises that follow deal with various simple axiomatic systems.
To gain facility with the abstract notions of this section, carefully work
out these examples.
In Four-Point geometry we have the same types of undeﬁned terms
as in Three-Point geometry, but the following axioms are used:
A1 There are exactly four points.
A2 Two distinct points belong to one and only one line.
A3 Each line has exactly two points belonging to it.
Exercise 1.5.4. Show that there are exactly six lines in Four-Point geome-
try.
Exercise 1.5.5. Show that each point belongs to exactly three lines.
Exercise 1.5.6. Show that Four-Point geometry is relatively consistent to
Euclidean geometry. [Hint: Find a model.]
Exercise 1.5.7. A regular tetrahedron is a polyhedron with four sides being
equilateral triangles (pyramid-shaped). If we deﬁne a point to be a vertex of
the tetrahedron and a line to be an edge, will the tetrahedron be a model for
Four-Point geometry? Why or why not?
Exercise 1.5.8. Consider an axiomatic system that consists of elements in
a set S and a set P of pairings of elements (a, b) that satisfy the following
axioms:
A1 If (a, b) is in P, then (b, a) is not in P.
A2 If (a, b) is in P and (b, c) is in P, then (a, c) is in P.
Let S = {1, 2, 3, 4} and P = {(1, 2), (2, 3), (1, 3)}. Is this a model for the
axiomatic system? Why or why not?

34
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 1.5.9. In the previous problem, let S be the set of real numbers and
let P consist of all pairs (x, y) where x < y. Is this a model for the system?
Why or why not?
Exercise 1.5.10. Use the results of the previous two exercises to argue that
the axiomatic system with sets S and P is not complete. Think of another
independent axiom that could be added to the axioms in Exercise 1.5.8, for
which S and P from Exercise 1.5.8 is still a model, but S and P from Exercise
1.5.9 is not a model.
Several of the examples and exercises of this section deal with ax-
iomatic systems having a ﬁnite number of points and lines. These are
called ﬁnite geometries. An important class of ﬁnite geometries is the
class of projective planes of order n.
Deﬁnition 1.5. A projective plane of order n has undeﬁned terms:
point, line, and incident. Deﬁned terms are:
1. Collinear: points incident with the same line are collinear.
2. Concurrent: lines incident with the same point are concurrent.
We have the following axioms for a projective plane of order n:
A1 Given two distinct points, there is exactly one line incident
with them both.
A2 Given two distinct lines, there is at least one point that is
incident with both lines.
A3 There are at least four points, no three of which are collinear.
A4 There exists at least one line with exactly n + 1(n > 1)
distinct points incident with it.
Exercise 1.5.11. Let the points in
a projective plane be the seven points
A, B, C, D, E, F, G as shown. Let a
line be any Euclidean segment, or the
arc from E to G to F. Show that this
ﬁgure is a model for the projective
plane of order 2.

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■35
Exercise 1.5.12. Show that for a projective plane of order n there are at
least four lines, no three of which are concurrent. [Hint: By Axiom 3, there
are at least four points, call them A, B, C, and D. By Axiom 1, there are four
lines l1, l2, l3, l4 incident on pairs of points (A, B), (B, C), (C, D) and (A, D).
Show that no three of these lines can be concurrent.]
The last exercise shows that the dual to Axiom 3 holds in this ﬁnite
geometry.
Deﬁnition 1.6. The dual of a statement in the axiomatic system
for a projective plane is obtained by replacing each occurence of the
words point and collinear by line and concurrent, respectively.
Exercise 1.5.13. Write down and prove the dual of Axiom 1 for a projective
plane of order n.
Exercise 1.5.14. Write down and prove the dual of Axiom 2 for a projective
plane of order n.
Exercise 1.5.15. The dual of Axiom 4 would be: There exists at least one
point with exactly n+1(n > 1) distinct lines incident with it. Prove this result.
[Hint Axiom 4 guarantees the existence of a line l with n + 1 points, say P1,
. . . , Pn+1. By Axiom 3, there must be a point Q that is not on l. Show there
are n + 1 lines through Q that satisfy the dual statement of Axiom 4]
1.6
EUCLID’S AXIOMATIC GEOMETRY
The system of deductive reasoning begun in the schools of Thales and
Pythagoras was codiﬁed and put into deﬁnitive form by Euclid (ca. 325–
265 BC) around 300 BC in his 13-volume work Elements. Euclid was a
scholar at one of the great schools of the ancient world, the Museum of
Alexandria, and was noted for his lucid exposition and great teaching
ability. The Elements were so comprehensive in scope that this work
superseded all previous textbooks in geometry.
What makes Euclid’s exposition so important is its clarity. Euclid
begins Book I of the Elements with a few deﬁnitions, a few rules of logic,
and ten statements that are axiomatic in nature. Euclid divides these
into ﬁve geometric statements which he calls postulates, and ﬁve common
notions. These are listed in their entirety in Appendix B. We will keep
Euclid’s terminology and refer to the ﬁrst ﬁve axiomatic statements—
those that speciﬁcally deal with the geometric basis of his exposition—as
postulates.

36
■Exploring Geometry
1.6.1
Euclid’s Postulates
Euclid I To draw a straight line from any point to any point.
Euclid II To produce a ﬁnite straight line continuously in a
straight line.
Euclid III To describe a circle with any center and distance (i.e.,
radius).
Euclid IV That all right angles are equal to each other.
Euclid V If a straight line falling on two straight lines makes the
interior angles on the same side less than two right angles,
the two straight lines, if produced indeﬁnitely, meet on that
side on which are the angles less than the two right angles.
The ﬁrst three postulates provide the theoretical foundation for con-
structing ﬁgures based on a hypothetically perfect straightedge and com-
pass. We will consider each of these three in more detail, taking care to
point out exactly what they say and what they do not say.
The ﬁrst postulate states that given two points, one can construct
a line connecting these points. Note, however, that it does not say that
there is only one line joining two points.
The second postulate says that ﬁnite portions of lines (i.e., segments)
can be extended. It does not say that lines are inﬁnite in extent, however.
The third postulate says that given a point and a distance from that
point, we can construct a circle with the point as center and the distance
as radius. Here, again, the postulate does not say anything about other
properties of circles, such as continuity of circles.
As an example of Euclid’s beautiful exposition, consider the very
ﬁrst theorem of Book I of the Elements. This is the construction of an
equilateral triangle on a segment AB (Figure 1.6). The construction goes
as follows:
1. Given segment AB.
2. Given center A and distance equal to the length of AB, construct
circle c1. (This is justiﬁed by Postulate 3.)
3. Given center B and distance equal to the length of BA, construct
circle c2. (This is justiﬁed by Postulate 3.)

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■37
4. Let C be a point of intersection of circles c1 and c2.
Figure 1.6 Euclid Book I, Proposition I
5. Construct segments from A to C, from C to B, and from B to A.
(This is justiﬁed by Postulate 1.)
6. Since AC and AB are radii of circle c1, and CB and AB are radii
of c2, then AC and CB are both equal to AB and, thus, must
be equal to one another. (This is justiﬁed by use of the Common
Notions.)
7. By deﬁnition, then, triangle ABC is equilateral.
The proof is an almost perfect example of a well-written mathemat-
ical argument. Euclid takes care to justify the steps in the construction
in terms of the initial set of ﬁve postulates and ﬁve common notions, ex-
cept for the step where the intersection point of the two circles is found.
Euclid here assumed a principle of continuity of circles. That is, since
circle c1 has points inside and outside of another circle (c2), then the
two circles must intersect somewhere. In other words, there are no holes
in the circles. To make this proof rigorous, we would have to add a pos-
tulate on circle continuity, or prove circle continuity as a consequence of
the other ﬁve postulates.
We can see that from the very ﬁrst proposition, Euclid was not log-
ically perfect. Let’s look at the last two postulates of Euclid.
Whereas the ﬁrst three postulates are ruler and compass statements,
the fourth postulate says that the rules of the game we are playing do not
change as we move from place to place. In many of Euclid’s theorems, he

38
■Exploring Geometry
moves parts of ﬁgures on top of other ﬁgures. Euclid wants an axiomatic
basis by which he can assume that segment lengths and angles remain
unchanged when moving a geometric ﬁgure. In the fourth postulate,
Euclid is saying that, at least, right angles are always equal no matter
what conﬁguration they are in.
In many of his proofs, Euclid assumes much more than Postulate
4 guarantees. For example, consider his proof of the Side-Angle-Side
Congruence theorem for triangles.
Figure 1.7 Euclid SAS theorem
Euclid starts with two triangles ABC and DEF with AB congruent
to DE, AC congruent to DF, and angle A congruent to angle D, as
shown in Figure 1.7. (For the time being, assume congruent to mean
equal in magnitude.)
Euclid proceeds by moving angle A on top of angle D. Then, he
says that since two sides are congruent and the angles at A and D are
congruent, then point B must move to be on top of point E and point
C must move to be on top of point F. Thus, the two triangles have to
be congruent.
The movement or transformation of objects was not on a solid logical
basis in Euclid’s geometry. Felix Klein, in the late 1800s, developed an
axiomatic basis for Euclidean geometry that started with the notion of
an existing set of transformations and then constructed geometry as the
set of ﬁgures that are unchanged by those transformations. We will look
at transformations and transformational geometry in greater detail in
Chapter 5.
The ﬁnal postulate seems very diﬀerent from the ﬁrst four. Euclid
himself waited until Proposition 29 of Book I before using the ﬁfth pos-

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■39
tulate as a justiﬁcation step in the proof of a theorem. Euclid’s ﬁfth
postulate is often referred to as the parallel postulate, even though it is
actually more of an “anti-parallel” postulate as it speciﬁes a suﬃcient
condition for two lines to intersect.
From the time of Euclid, the ﬁfth postulate’s axiomatic status has
been questioned. An axiom should be a statement so obvious that it can
be accepted without proof. The ﬁrst four of Euclid’s postulates are simple
statements about the construction of ﬁgures, statements that resonate
with our practical experience. We can draw lines and circles and can
measure angles. However, we cannot follow a line indeﬁnitely to see if it
intersects another line.
Many mathematicians tried to ﬁnd simpler postulates, ones that were
more intuitively believable, to replace Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate, and then
prove the postulate as a theorem. Others tried to prove Euclid’s ﬁfth
postulate directly from the ﬁrst four. That is, they tried to show that
the ﬁfth postulate was not independent of the other four.
One of the attempts to ﬁnd a simpler postulate for Euclid’s ﬁfth was
that of John Playfair (1748–1819). His substitute can be expressed as
follows:
Given a line and a point not on the line, it is possible to con-
struct one and only one line through the given point parallel
to the line.
This statement, which has become known as Playfair’s Postulate, is
certainly easier to read and understand when compared to Euclid’s ﬁfth
postulate. However, it is not hard to show that this statement is logically
equivalent to Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate and, thus, does not really simplify
Euclid’s system at all. A full discussion of this and other statements
about parallelism can be found in the next chapter.
Other mathematicians tried to prove that Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate was
actually a theorem that could be derived from the ﬁrst four postulates.
A popular method of attack was to assume the logical opposite of Eu-
clid’s ﬁfth postulate and try to prove this new statement false, or ﬁnd
a contradiction to an already accepted result. Amazingly, no one could
prove that the negation of the ﬁfth postulate was false or produced a
contradiction.
In hindsight, this persistent lack of success would seem to imply
that there could be consistent non-Euclidean geometries, obtained by
replacing the ﬁfth postulate by its opposite. However, this possibility

40
■Exploring Geometry
ran counter to the generally held belief that Euclidean geometry was
the only consistent geometry possible. This belief had been a bedrock
of philosophy from the time of Euclid, and it was not until the 1800s
that non-Euclidean geometry was fully explored. Even then, Carl Fred-
erich Gauss (1777–1855), who was undoubtedly the ﬁrst to recognize
the consistency of non-Euclidean geometry, refrained from publishing
results in this area. It wasn’t until the work of Janos Bolyai (1802–1860)
and Nicolai Lobachevsky (1793–1856) that theorems resulting from non-
Euclidean replacements for Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate appeared in print. We
will look at the fascinating development of non-Euclidean geometry in
more detail in Chapter 7.
To end this discussion of Euclid’s original axiomatic system, let’s con-
sider the system in terms of the properties discussed in the last section.
Perhaps the most important question is whether this system is complete.
A careful reading of the postulates shows that Euclid assumed the ex-
istence of points with which to construct his geometry. However, none
of the postulates implies that points exist! For example, the statement
“There exists at least two points” cannot be proven true or false from
the other postulates. Thus, Euclid’s axiomatic system is not complete.
Euclid’s work contains quite a few hidden assumptions that make his
axiomatic system far from complete. However, we should not be too hard
on Euclid. It was only in the late 1800s that our modern understanding
of abstract axiomatic systems and their properties was developed. No
theorem that Euclid included in the Elements has ever been shown to
be false, and various attempts to provide better axioms for Euclidean
geometry have served to shore up the foundations of the subject, but the
results that Euclid proved thousands of years ago are just as true today.
The ﬁrst geometric axiomatic system to be shown logically consis-
tent (at least relative to the consistency of natural number arithmetic)
was the system developed by David Hilbert in 1899 [22]. Other modern
axiomatic systems for geometry have been developed since then and it
would be interesting to compare and contrast these. However, having a
good axiomatic foundation is only the ﬁrst step in exploring geometry.
One must also do geometry, that is, one must experiment with geometric
concepts and their patterns and properties. In the next chapter we will
start with a basic set of geometric results and assumptions that will get
us up and running in the grand game of Euclidean geometry.
Exercise 1.6.1. Euclid’s Elements came to be known in Europe through a
most circuitous history. Research this history and describe the importance of

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■41
Arabic scholars to the development of Western mathematics of the late Middle
Ages.
Exercise 1.6.2. The 13 books of Euclid’s Elements contain a wealth of re-
sults concerning not only plane geometry, but also algebra, number theory, and
solid geometry. Book II is concerned with geometric algebra, algebra based on
geometric ﬁgures. For example, the ﬁrst proposition of Book II is essentially
the distributive law of algebra, but couched in terms of areas. Show, using rect-
angular areas, how the distributive law (a(b + c) = ab + ac) can be interpreted
geometrically.
Exercise 1.6.3. Show how the algebraic identity (a + b)2 = a2 + 2ab + b2
can be established geometrically.
Exercise 1.6.4. Euclid’s Elements culminates in Book XIII with an explo-
ration of the ﬁve Platonic Solids. Research the following questions:
• What are the Platonic Solids? Brieﬂy discuss why there are only ﬁve
such solids.
• The solids have been known for thousands of years as Platonic solids.
What is the relationship to Plato and how did Plato use these solids in
his explanation of how the universe was constructed?
Exercise 1.6.5. The Elements is most known for its development of geome-
try, but the 13 books also contain signiﬁcant non-geometric material. In Book
VII of the Elements, Euclid explores basic number theory. This book starts out
with one of the most useful algorithms in all of mathematics, the Euclidean
Algorithm. This algorithm computes the greatest common divisor (gcd) of two
integers. A common divisor of two integers is an integer that divides both. For
example, 4 is a common divisor of 16 and 24. The greatest common divisor
is the largest common divisor. The Euclidean Algorithm works as follows:
• Given two positive integers a and b, assume a ≥b.
• Compute the quotient q1 and remainder r1 of dividing a by b. That is,
ﬁnd integers q1, r1 with a = q1b + r1 and 0 ≤r1 < b. If r1 = 0, we stop
and b is the gcd(a, b).
• Otherwise, we ﬁnd the quotient of dividing b by r1, that is, ﬁnd q2, r2
with b = q2r1 + r2 and 0 ≤r2 < r1. If r2 = 0, we stop and r1 is the
gcd(a, b).
• Otherwise, we iterate this process of dividing each new divisor (r1, r2,
etc.) by the last remainder (r2, r3, etc.), until we ﬁnally reach a new
remainder of 0. The last non-zero remainder is then the gcd of a, b.
Use this algorithm to show that the gcd(36, 123) = 3.
Exercise 1.6.6. Prove that the Euclidean Algorithm works, that it does ﬁnd
the gcd of two positive integers.

42
■Exploring Geometry
Suppose
we
re-interpreted
the
term point in Euclid’s postulates
to mean a point on a sphere and
a line to be a part of a great circle
on the sphere. A great circle is a
circle on the sphere cut by a plane
passing through the center of the
sphere.
O
B
A
To gain an intuitive feel for this geometry, one could take a ball (beach
ball, bowling ball, soccer ball, etc.) and a string and experiment with
constructing lines (segments) on the sphere. Distance in this new geom-
etry will be measured along lines (segments) on the sphere. With this
notion of distance, circles will be deﬁned analogously with the Euclidean
deﬁnition of circles. Angles will be deﬁned by tangent directions deﬁned
by lines on the sphere.
With this basis of deﬁnitions and interpretations for lines, points,
circles, and angles, we will consider whether Euclid’s postulates hold in
this new spherical geometry.
Exercise 1.6.7. Show that Euclid’s ﬁrst postulate holds for most pairs of
points, but not all. Show that the second, third, and fourth postulates do hold
in spherical geometry. Show that the ﬁfth postulate (or equivalently Playfair’s
Postulate) does not hold. (Give general explanations for your answers — we
do not yet have the resources to do rigorous proofs in spherical geometry)
In the following exercises, experiment to determine if each statement
is most likely true or false in spherical geometry. Give short explanations
(not proofs) for your answers.
Exercise 1.6.8. The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180 degrees.
Exercise 1.6.9. Given a line and a point not on the line, there is a perpen-
dicular to the line through that point.
Exercise 1.6.10. A four-sided ﬁgure with three right angles must be a rect-
angle.
Exercise 1.6.11. One can construct a triangle with three right angles.

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■43
1.7
PROJECT 2 - A CONCRETE AXIOMATIC SYSTEM
We have seen that the axioms in an axiomatic system are the state-
ments about the terms of the system that must be accepted without
proof. Axioms are generally statements that are written down at the
start of the development of some mathematical area.
When exploring geometry using a dynamic geometry program, there
are similarly constructions and tools that one uses without proof. That is,
we draw lines and circles, ﬁnd intersections, and construct perpendiculars
using the tools built into the software, assuming that these constructions
are valid. We might say that the abstract Euclidean axiomatic system
has been made concrete within the software world of the program.
When one ﬁrst starts up a dynamic geometry program, construc-
tions are based on the Euclidean axiomatic system. However, there is
another axiomatic system that one can explore in most geometry pro-
grams. This is the Poincaré Disk model of Hyperbolic Geometry. The
most natural implementation of this model is found in Geometry Ex-
plorer, but there are versions of this model available in all major dy-
namic geometry software packages. Before you start this project, go
to http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text for instructions on how to
download the hyperbolic geometry system for your particular software
environment.
To start this project, open the Poincaré Disk model for your partic-
ular geometry software. The world for hyperbolic geometry will be the
interior of the disk that you see on the screen. The Euclidean points on
the boundary circle are not points in this new geometry. If one lived in
this two-dimensional geometry, one could approach the boundary circle,
but never actually reach it.
The dynamic software environment you are using will provide a set
of tools for this new geometry, just as we had for Euclidean geometry. In
Figure 1.8, we see the environment for the Poincaré Disk model as you
would see it in Geometry Explorer.

44
■Exploring Geometry
Figure 1.8 A concrete axiomatic system
Try creating some segments, lines, rays, and circles using the new
tools for the Poincaré Disk model.
How is this system like Euclidean geometry and how is it diﬀerent?
Let’s review Euclid’s ﬁrst postulate—that between any two points we
can draw a segment. Experiment with creating segments on the screen.
We know that points in this new geometry are restricted to points within
the boundary disk. Thus, it does appear that given any two points inside
this disk, we can always create a segment connecting those points. It is
true that segments do not look “normal” in the sense that they are not
straight. However, we must use the axiomatic view in this new geometry.
That is, a segment is whatever gets created when we use the Segment
tool. Thus, it appears that Euclid’s ﬁrst postulate holds in this new
geometry.
Euclid’s second postulate states that segments can always be ex-
tended. Before we explore the validity of this postulate in our new ge-
ometry, let’s consider what is meant by extending segments. In Euclidean
geometry we can extend a segment AB by moving one of the endpoints,
say B, a certain distance in the direction determined by the segment AB.
As has been mentioned before, the movement of objects in Euclidean ge-
ometry is not speciﬁed in the postulates, but is nevertheless assumed by
Euclid in many of his proofs.

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■45
Create a segment on the screen
and drag one of the endpoints to-
wards the boundary. It appears
that we get “stuck” at the bound-
ary, but this is merely a limitation
of the ﬁnite nature of the software
(mouse movement and pixel res-
olution) we are using. Since the
boundary can never be reached,
then, no matter how close we are,
we can always move a little bit
closer. So, it appears that Euclid’s
second postulate holds.
As one approaches the bound-
ary, strange things happen in this
geometry. If one creates a segment
and then selects and drags that
segment towards the boundary, it
appears to change length. Using
your hyperbolic geometry tools,
measure the length of the segment
and then drag the segment around
inside the disk. The length does
not change!
Even though the shape and length appear to change (to us outsiders
looking at the geometry), the shape and length actually do not change, as
viewed internally to the geometry. To try and make sense of this, imagine
you were a two-dimensional creature living entirely within this geometry
and you had no idea there was an outside to your world. Imagine dragging
a piece of rope (a segment) around your world. You would notice no
diﬀerence in the rope’s shape and length, even though from the outside
things look much diﬀerent.
Let’s consider Euclid’s third postulate on the constructibility of cir-
cles.

46
■Exploring Geometry
Clear the screen and create a va-
riety of circles on the screen us-
ing the circle construction tool for
your software. For later use, let’s
measure the radius of one of these
circles.
If we drag one of these circles
towards the boundary, we see that
the circle appears to change shape
and size. However, the measured
radius does not change. We also
note that since our circles seem
to shrinking to nothing as we ap-
proach the boundary, then we can
cram circles of ever larger radii
into the space near the boundary.
Thus, it appears that circles with any center and any speciﬁed length
can be constructed in this geometry.
Let’s now consider the fourth Euclidean axiom—that all right angles
are congruent. Let’s consider not just a right angle, but any angle.

Geometry and the Axiomatic Method
■47
Clear the screen and create a
segment AB near the center of
the disk. Then, create another
segment AC originating from A.
Next, measure the angle created
by A, B, C.
Now, select the three points A, B,
and C in a group and drag them
with the mouse, moving the an-
gle around the screen. Verify that
movement of the angle has no ef-
fect on the angle measurement.
We see that the ﬁrst four of Euclid’s axioms still hold in this strange
new geometry. What about the parallel axiom?
Clear the screen and create a line
l near the bottom. Then, create a
point P above l. As shown in the
ﬁgure at the right, one can cre-
ate many lines through P that do
not intersect l, that is, are parallel
to l. In fact, there should be two
unique parallels through P that
are just parallel to l. These are
lines n and m in the ﬁgure.
The geometry we have been discussing in this project is called hy-
perbolic geometry. From the last construction above on parallel lines we
see that Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate does not hold in this geometry, and so

48
■Exploring Geometry
we have had our ﬁrst exploration of a non-Euclidean geometry. We will
cover this geometry in more depth in Chapter 7.
Exercise 1.7.1. Determine which of the following Euclidean properties holds
in the Hyperbolic geometry of Geometry Explorer.
• Rectangles can be constructed. (Try any construction you remember
from high school geometry.)
• The sum of the angles of a triangle is 180 degrees.
• Euclid’s construction of an equilateral triangle.
• Given a line and a point not on the line there is a perpendicular to the
line through that point.
Project Report
Your report should include a general discussion of how this new system
of geometry is similar to Euclidean geometry and how it is diﬀerent. This
discussion should reference the ﬁve postulates as we have explored them
in this chapter, and should include your analysis from Exercise 1.7.1.

C H A P T E R 2
Euclidean Geometry
Euclid alone has looked on Beauty bare.
Let all who prate of Beauty hold their peace,
And lay them prone upon the earth and cease
To ponder on themselves, the while they stare
At nothing, intricately drawn nowhere
In shapes of shifting lineage; let geese
Gabble and hiss, but heroes seek release
From dusty bondage into luminous air.
O blinding hour, O holy, terrible day,
When ﬁrst the shaft into his vision shone
Of light anatomized! Euclid alone
Has looked on Beauty bare. Fortunate they
Who, though once only and then but far away,
Have heard her massive sandal set on stone.
– Edna St. Vincent Millay (1892–1950)
In the ﬁrst chapter we saw that the origins of our modern views on
geometry can be traced back to the work of Euclid and earlier Greek
mathematicians. However, Euclid’s axiomatic system is not a complete
axiomatic system. Euclid makes many assumptions that are never for-
malized as axioms or theorems. These include assumptions about the
existence of points, the unboundedness and continuity of space, and the
transformation of ﬁgures.
Since the time of Euclid, mathematicians have attempted to “com-
plete” Euclid’s system by either supplementing Euclid’s axioms with
additional axioms or scrapping the whole set and replacing them with
an entirely new set of axioms for Euclidean geometry.
49

50
■Exploring Geometry
Hilbert’s Grundlagen der Geometrie [22] is the best example of a con-
sistent formal development of geometry in the spirit of Euclid. Hilbert
uses six undeﬁned terms (point, line, plane, incident (or on), between,
congruent) and a set of 21 axioms as a foundation for Euclidean geom-
etry. Hilbert’s axioms for plane geometry are included in Appendix D.
Some of Euclid’s axioms are repeated in Hilbert’s axioms and others
are provable as theorems. Is Hilbert’s system complete? Is it consistent?
Axioms V-1a and V-2b in Appendix D can be used to show that any
model of Hilbert’s axiomatic system is isomorphic to the real Cartesian
Plane [19, page 70]. Assuming real arithmetic is consistent, then Hilbert’s
system is consistent as well. Also, completeness of Hilbert’s system trans-
lates to the question of completeness of an axiomatic system for the real
numbers.
A very diﬀerent axiomatic development of Euclidean geometry was
created in 1932 by G. D. Birkhoﬀ[6]. This system departs signiﬁcantly
from Euclid’s style of using purely geometric constructions in axioms and
theorems and assumes at the outset an arithmetic structure of the real
numbers. The system has only four axioms and two of these postulate
a correspondence between numbers and geometric angles and lengths.
From this minimal set of axioms (fewer than Euclid!), Birkhoﬀdevelops
planar Euclidean geometry, and his development is as logically consis-
tent as Hilbert’s. Birkhoﬀachieves his economy of axioms by assuming
the existence of the real numbers and the vast array of properties that
entails, whereas Hilbert has to construct the reals from purely geometric
principles.
We will not take the time at this point to go through the sequence
of proofs and deﬁnitions needed to base Euclidean geometry ﬁrmly and
carefully on Hilbert’s axioms or Birkhoﬀ’s axioms. Hilbert’s approach
to geometry is covered in detail in the on-line chapter on Hilbert’s
axioms found at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text. The reader
who wishes to have this foundational material covered ﬁrst, should jump
to that chapter before continuing with the current chapter.
Birkhoﬀ’s axiomatic system is described in Appendix C and also
discussed at the end of Chapter 3. If one wants to cover the analytic,
coordinate system basis for geometry, one should jump to that appendix
and chapter before continuing.
In this chapter we will ﬁrst review some of the basic results from
classical Euclidean geometry, referencing those theorems that are most
important for doing geometry. Again, for complete proofs and a careful
development of this material, the reader is referred to the on-line chap-

Euclidean Geometry
■51
ter on Hilbert’s axioms. We will then look at some interesting results
not often covered in high school geometry. We will take care to provide
precise deﬁnitions of terms and to point out areas where the work of
Hilbert and Birkhoﬀhas ﬁlled in the “gaps” of Euclid described above.
2.1
ANGLES, LINES, AND PARALLELS
The simplest ﬁgures in geometry are points, lines, and angles. The terms
point and line will remain undeﬁned, and an angle will be deﬁned in
terms of rays, which are themselves deﬁned in terms of segments. We
used many of these terms in the last chapter without really giving them
a precise deﬁnition. To begin our review of Euclidean geometry, it is
critical to have a solid set of deﬁnitions for these basic terms.
Deﬁnition 2.1. A segment AB
consists of points A and B and
all those points C on the line
through A and B such that C
is between A and B.
Note that this deﬁnition relies on the ﬁrst of Euclid’s postulates, the
postulate on the existence of lines. Also, this deﬁnition uses an undeﬁned
term—between. The notion of the ordering of points on a line is a critical
one, but one which is very hard to deﬁne. Hilbert, in his axiomatic
system, leaves the term between undeﬁned and establishes a set of axioms
on how the quality of betweenness works on points. We will assume that
betweenness works in the way our intuition tells us it should.
Also, note that this deﬁnition is not very useful unless we actually
have points to work with and can tell when they lie on a line. Here,
again, Hilbert introduces a set of axioms about the existence of points
and how the property of being on a line works, the term on being left
undeﬁned.
Deﬁnition 2.2. A ray −→
AB con-
sists of the segment AB to-
gether with those points C on
the line through A and B such
that B is between A and C.

52
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 2.3. The angle with
vertex A consists of the point
A together with two rays −→
AB
and −→
AC (the sides of the an-
gle). We denote an angle with
vertex A and sides −→
AB and −→
AC
by ∠BAC.
Deﬁnition 2.4. Two angles with
a common vertex and whose
sides form two lines are called
vertical angles.
Deﬁnition 2.5. Two angles are
supplementary if they share a
common side and the other
sides lie in opposite directions
on the same line. (Here ∠BAC
and
∠CAD
are
supplemen-
tary.)
We will often talk of congruent angles and segments. Congruence is
another of those terms that is diﬃcult to deﬁne explicitly. For Euclid,
congruence of angles or segments meant the ability to move an angle
or segment on top of another angle or segment so that the ﬁgures co-
incided. This transformational geometry pre-supposes an existing set of
transformations that would itself need an axiomatic basis. Hilbert leaves
the term congruence undeﬁned and provides a set of axioms as to how
the quality of congruence works for angles, as well as for segments.
When speaking of two angles being congruent, we will assume that
we have a way of associating an angle with a real number, called the
degree measure of the angle, in such a way that
• The measure of an angle is a real number between 0 and 180 de-
grees.

Euclidean Geometry
■53
• Congruent angles have the same angle measure.
• The measure of a right angle is 90.
• If two angles are supplementary, then the sum of the measures of
the angles is 180.
Deﬁnition 2.6. The degree measure of ∠ABC will be denoted by
m∠ABC.
Similarly, for any segment AB we will assume that we have a way of
associating a real number, called the length of AB, satisfying the usual
notions of Euclidean length. For example, congruent segments will have
the same length, and if B is between A and C, then the length of AC is
equal to the sum of the lengths of AB and BC.
Deﬁnition 2.7. The length of AB will be denoted by AB.
In classical Euclidean geometry, the orientation of an angle is not
signiﬁcant. Thus, ∠ABC is congruent to ∠CBA, and both angles have
the same measure, which is less than or equal to 180 degrees. This is dis-
tinctly diﬀerent from the notion of angle commonly found in trigonom-
etry, where orientation is quite signiﬁcant. Be careful of this distinction
between oriented and unoriented angles, particularly when using Geom-
etry Explorer, as the program measures angles as oriented angles.
Deﬁnition 2.8. A right angle is an angle that has a supplementary
angle to which it is congruent.
Deﬁnition 2.9. Two lines that intersect are perpendicular if one
of the angles made at the intersection is a right angle.
Deﬁnition 2.10. Two lines are parallel if they do not intersect.

54
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 2.11. A bisector of a segment AB is a point C on the
segment such that AC is congruent to CB. A bisector of an angle
∠BAC is a ray −−→
AD such that ∠BAD is congruent to ∠DAC.
Now that we have a good base of precise deﬁnitions, let’s review some
of the basic results on points, lines, and angles from the ﬁrst 28 proposi-
tions of Book I of Euclid’s Elements. We will review these propositions
without proof. Proofs can be found in the on-line chapter on Hilbert’s
axioms.
Theorem 2.1. (Prop. 9, 10 of Book I) Given an angle or segment,
the bisector of that angle or segment can be constructed.
We point out that to construct a geometric ﬁgure we mean a very
speciﬁc geometric process, a sequence of steps carried out using only a
straightedge and compass. Why just these two types of steps? Clearly, if
one does geometry on paper (or sand), the most basic tools would be a
straightedge, for drawing segments, and a compass, for drawing circles.
Euclid, in his ﬁrst three axioms, makes the assumption that there are
ideal versions of these tools that will construct perfect segments and
circles. Euclid is making an abstraction of the concrete process we carry
out to draw geometric ﬁgures. By doing so, he can prove, without a
shadow of a doubt, that properties such as the apparent equality of
vertical angles are universal properties and not just an artifact of how
we draw ﬁgures.
For example, how would we use a straightedge and compass to bisect
an angle? The following is a list of steps that will bisect ∠BAC (see
Figure 2.1). The proof is left to the reader as an exercise at the end of
the next section.
• At A construct a circle of radius AB, intersecting −→
AC at D.
• At B construct a circle of radius BD and at D construct a circle
of radius BD. These will intersect at E.
• Construct ray −→
AE. This will be the bisector of the angle.

Euclidean Geometry
■55
Figure 2.1 Bisector of an angle
A more complete discussion of constructions can be found in Chap-
ter 4. You may wish to review some of the simple constructions in the
ﬁrst section of that chapter before continuing.
Theorem 2.2. (Prop. 11, 12 of Book I) Given a line and a point
either on or oﬀthe line, the perpendicular to the line through the
point can be constructed.
Theorem 2.3. (Prop. 13, 15 of Book I) If two straight lines
cross one another they make the vertical angles congruent. Also,
the angles formed by one of the lines crossing the other either
make two right angles or will have angle measures adding to two
right angles. In Figure 2.2, ∠BEC and ∠AED are congruent and
m∠BEC + m∠CEA = 180.
Figure 2.2 Angles made by lines

56
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 2.4. (Prop. 14 of Book I) If the measures of two adjacent
angles add to two right angles (180 degrees), then the angles form
a line.
Theorem 2.5. (Prop. 23 of Book I) Given an angle, a line (or part
of a line), and a point on the line, an angle whose vertex is at the
point, and whose measure is equal to the measure of the given angle,
can be constructed.
For the next set of theorems, we need a way of specifying types of
angles created by a line crossing two other lines.
Deﬁnition 2.12. Let t be a line crossing lines l and m and meeting
l at A and m at A′, with A ̸= A′ (Figure 2.3). Choose points B and
C on either side of A on l and B′ and C′ on either side of A′ on
m, with C and C′ on the same side of t.
Then ∠CAA′, ∠C′A′A, ∠BAA′, and ∠B′A′A are called interior
angles (the angles having −−→
AA′ as a side). Also, ∠CAA′ and ∠B′A′A
are called alternate interior angles, as are ∠C′A′A and ∠BAA′. All
other angles formed are called exterior angles. Pairs of nonadja-
cent angles, one interior and one exterior, on the same side of the
crossing line t are called corresponding angles.
Figure 2.3 Interior-exterior angles

Euclidean Geometry
■57
Deﬁnition 2.13. We will say an angle is greater than another
angle if its angle measure is greater than the other angle’s measure.
Theorem 2.6. (The Exterior Angle Theorem, Prop. 16 of Book I)
Given ∆ABC, if one of the sides (AC) is extended, then the exterior
angle produced (∠DAB) is greater than either of the two interior
and opposite angles (∠BCA or ∠ABC) as shown in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4
In the proof of this result found in the on-line chapter on Hilbert’s
axioms, we note that the proof uses the idea of extending a segment
along a line, which is the focus of Euclid’s second axiom. Geometers have
often intuitively understood this axiom to imply that a line has inﬁnite
extent, or length. A careful reading of the second Euclidean axiom does
not support this understanding.
In fact, consider the “spherical”
geometry introduced in Exercise
1.6.7 of Chapter 1. Here we inter-
preted the term point to mean a
point on a sphere and a line to
be a part of a great circle on the
sphere. In this geometry segments
can always be extended (you can
always move around the great cir-
cle, even though you may re-trace
your path), but lines are not inﬁ-
nite in extent.
O
B
C
A

58
■Exploring Geometry
We will return to this question of the boundedness of lines in Chapter
8, where we develop a non-Euclidean geometry akin to that of the sphere.
Theorem 2.7. (Prop. 27 of Book I) If a line n falling on two
lines l and m makes the alternate interior angles congruent to one
another, then the two lines l and m must be parallel (Figure 2.5).
l
m
n
Figure 2.5 Alternate interior angles
Theorem 2.8. (Prop. 28 of Book I) If a line n falling on two lines
l and m makes corresponding angles congruent, or if the sum of
the measures of the interior angles on the same side equal two right
angles, then l and m are parallel (Figure 2.6).
l
m
n
Figure 2.6 Angles and parallels
We note here that all of the preceding theorems are independent of
the ﬁfth Euclidean postulate, the parallel postulate. That is, they can be
proved from an axiom set that does not include the ﬁfth postulate. Such
results form the basis of what is called absolute or neutral geometry. All

Euclidean Geometry
■59
of the theorems and results found in the on-line chapter on Hilbert’s
axioms, except the section on Euclidean Geometry, are independent of
the parallel postulate and thus form the basis for neutral geometry.
The ﬁrst time that Euclid actually used the ﬁfth postulate in a proof
was for Proposition 29 of Book I. Recall that the ﬁfth postulate states:
If a straight line falling on two straight lines make the interior
angles on the same side less than two right angles, the two
straight lines, if produced indeﬁnitely, meet on that side on
which are the angles less than the two right angles.
As was noted in the last chapter, many mathematicians have at-
tempted to prove this postulate or replace it with a more palatable al-
ternative. One of these alternatives is Playfair’s Postulate, which we
restate here:
Given a line and a point not on the line, it is possible to con-
struct one and only one line through the given point parallel
to the line.
Let’s see how Playfair’s Postulate can be used to prove Proposition
29, which is essentially the converse of Propositions 27 and 28.
Theorem 2.9. (Prop. 29 of Book I) If a line n falls on two parallel
lines l and m, then alternate interior angles are congruent, corre-
sponding angles are congruent, and the sum of the measures of the
interior angles on the same side of n is equal to two right angles
(see Figure 2.7).
A
D
n
l
m
B
F
E
C
G
H
Figure 2.7 Proposition 29

60
■Exploring Geometry
Proof: Let n be the line through A and B and let the two parallel
lines be ones through A, D and B, F. We will prove the statement about
the corresponding angles and leave the other two parts of the proof as
an exercise.
Assume ∠FBG is not congruent to ∠DAB. We may assume that
∠FBG is greater than ∠DAB. By Theorem 2.5 we can create a new an-
gle ∠HBG on −−→
BG so that ∠HBG is congruent to ∠DAB. By Theorem
2.8 the line through H and B will be parallel to ←→
AD. But this means
that there are two diﬀerent lines through B that are parallel to ←→
AD,
which contradicts Playfair’s Postulate. 2
In Euclid’s original proof of Proposition 29, he bases the proof on
the ﬁfth Euclidean postulate, whereas we have used Playfair’s Postulate.
Actually, these two postulates are logically equivalent. Either postulate,
when added to Euclid’s ﬁrst four postulates, produces an equivalent
axiomatic system. How can we prove this?
The simplest way to show logical equivalence is to prove that each
postulate is a theorem within the other postulate’s axiomatic system. To
show this, we need to prove two results: ﬁrst, that Playfair’s Postulate
can be derived using the ﬁrst ﬁve Euclidean postulates and second, that
Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate can be derived using the ﬁrst four Euclidean
postulates plus Playfair’s Postulate. These derivations are shown in the
exercises.
Exercise 2.1.1. Finish the proof of Theorem 2.9. That is, show that ∠DAB
is congruent to ∠EBA and that m∠DAB + m∠ABF = 180.
Exercise 2.1.2. Use the Exterior Angle Theorem to show that the sum of the
measures of two interior angles of a triangle is always less than 180 degrees.
It is critical to have a clear understanding of the terms of an ax-
iomatic system when working on a mathematical proof. One must use
only the facts given in the deﬁnitions and not impose preconceived no-
tions on the terms.
Exercise 2.1.3. Each of the following statements are about a speciﬁc term
of this section. Determine, solely on the basis of the deﬁnition of that term, if
the statement is true or false.
(a) A right angle is an angle whose measure is 90 degrees.
(b) An angle is the set of points lying between two rays that have a common
vertex.
(c) An exterior angle results from a line crossing two other lines.

Euclidean Geometry
■61
(d) A line is the union of two opposite rays.
Exercise 2.1.4. In this exercise we will practice deﬁning terms. Be careful
to use only previously deﬁned terms, and take care not to use imprecise and
colloquial language in your deﬁnitions.
(a) Deﬁne the term midpoint of a segment.
(b) Deﬁne the term perpendicular bisector of a segment.
(c) Deﬁne the term triangle deﬁned by three non-collinear points A, B, C.
(d) Deﬁne the term equilateral triangle.
In the next set of exercises, we consider the logical equivalence of
Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate with Playfair’s Postulate. You may use any of
the ﬁrst 28 Propositions of Euclid (found in Appendix B) and/or any of
the results from this section for these exercises.
Exercise 2.1.5. In this exercise you are to show that Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate
implies Playfair’s Postulate. Given a line l and a point A not on l, we can
copy ∠CBA to A to construct a parallel line n to l. (Which of Euclid’s ﬁrst 28
Propositions is this based on?) Suppose that there was another line t through
A that was not identical to n. Use Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate to show that t cannot
be parallel to l (Figure 2.8).
B
l
A
n
m
C
E
t
D
Figure 2.8
Exercise 2.1.6. Now, we will prove the converse of the preceding exercise,
that Playfair’s Postulate implies Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate. Consider Figure 2.8.
Suppose line m intersects lines t and l such that the measures of angles ∠CBA
and ∠BAD add up to less than 180 degrees. Copy ∠CBA to A, creating line
n, and then use Playfair’s Postulate to argue that lines t and l must intersect.
We now need to show that the lines intersect on the same side of m as D and
C. We will prove this by contradiction. Assume that t and l intersect on the
other side of m from point C, say at some point E. Use the exterior angle
∠CBA to triangle ∆ABE to produce a contradiction.

62
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 2.1.7. Show that Playfair’s Postulate is equivalent to the state-
ment, Whenever a line is perpendicular to one of two parallel lines, it must
be perpendicular to the other.
Exercise 2.1.8. Given triangle ∆ABC, construct a parallel to ←→
BC at A.
(How would we do this?) Use this construction to show that Playfair’s Postu-
late (or Euclid’s ﬁfth) implies that the angle sum in a triangle is 180 degrees,
namely, equal to two right angles. (The converse to this statement is also true:
If the angle sum of a triangle is always 180 degrees, then Playfair’s Postulate
is true. For a proof see [43], [pages 21–23].)
Exercise 2.1.9. Show that Playfair’s Postulate is equivalent to the state-
ment, Two lines that are parallel to the same line are coincident (the same)
or themselves parallel.
Exercise 2.1.10. Show that Playfair’s Postulate is equivalent to the state-
ment, If a line intersects but is not coincident with one of two parallel lines,
it must intersect the other.
2.2
CONGRUENT TRIANGLES AND PASCH’S AXIOM
One of the most useful tools in a geometer’s toolbox is that of congru-
ence, especially triangle congruence. In this section we will review the
basic triangle congruence results found in Propositions 1–28 of Book I
of Elements.
Deﬁnition 2.14. Two triangles are congruent if and only if there is
some way to match vertices of one to the other such that correspond-
ing sides are congruent and corresponding angles are congruent.
If ∆ABC is congruent to ∆XY Z, we shall use the notation ∆ABC ∼=
∆XY Z. We will use the symbol “∼=” to denote congruence in general for
segments, angles, and triangles. Thus, ∆ABC ∼= ∆XY Z if and only if
AB ∼= XY , AC ∼= XZ, BC ∼= Y Z
and
∠BAC ∼= ∠Y XZ, ∠CBA ∼= ∠ZY X, ∠ACB ∼= ∠XZY
Let’s review a few triangle congruence theorems.

Euclidean Geometry
■63
Theorem 2.10. (SAS: Side-
Angle-Side, Prop. 4 of Book
I) If in two triangles there is
a correspondence such that two
sides and the included angle of
one triangle are congruent to
two sides and the included an-
gle of another triangle, then the
triangles are congruent.
A
B
C
X
Y
Z
This proposition is one of the axioms in Hilbert’s axiomatic basis for
Euclidean geometry. Hilbert chose to make this result an axiom rather
than a theorem to avoid the trap that Euclid fell into in his proof of
the SAS result. In Euclid’s proof, he moves points and segments so as to
overlay one triangle on top of the other and thus prove the result. How-
ever, there is no axiomatic basis for such transformations in Euclid’s
original set of ﬁve postulates. Most modern treatments of Euclidean ge-
ometry assume SAS congruence as an axiom. Birkhoﬀchooses a slightly
diﬀerent triangle comparison result, the SAS condition for triangles to
be similar, as an axiom in his development of Euclidean geometry.
Theorem 2.11. (ASA: Angle-
Side-Angle, Prop. 26 of Book
I) If in two triangles there is
a correspondence in which two
angles and the included side
of one triangle are congruent
to two angles and the included
side of another triangle, then
the triangles are congruent.
A
B
C
X
Y
Z

64
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 2.12. (AAS: Angle-
Angle-Side, Prop. 26 of Book
I) If in two triangles there is
a correspondence in which two
angles and the side subtending
one of the angles are congruent
to two angles and the side sub-
tending the corresponding an-
gle of another triangle, then the
triangles are congruent.
A
B
C
X
Y
Z
Theorem 2.13. (SSS: Side-
Side-Side, Prop. 8 of Book I)
If in two triangles there is
a correspondence in which the
three sides of one triangle are
congruent to the three sides of
the other triangle, then the tri-
angles are congruent.
A
B
C
X
Y
Z
We note here for future reference that the four fundamental triangle
congruence results are independent of the parallel postulate; that is,
their proofs do not make reference to any result based on the parallel
postulate.
Let’s see how triangle congruence can be used to analyze isosceles
triangles.
Deﬁnition 2.15. An isosceles triangle is a triangle that has two
sides congruent. The two congruent sides are called the legs of the
triangle and the third side is called the base. The base angles of the
triangle are those angles sharing the base as a side.
Isosceles triangles were a critical tool for many of Euclid’s proofs,
and he introduced the next result very early in the Elements. It followed
immediately after SAS congruence (Proposition 4).

Euclidean Geometry
■65
Theorem 2.14. (Prop. 5 of Book I) In an isosceles triangle, the
two base angles are congruent.
Proof: Let triangle ∆ABC have sides AB and BC congruent, as
shown in Figure 2.9. Let −−→
BD be the bisector of ∠ABC, with D inside
the triangle. Let −−→
BD intersect AC at E. Then, by SAS we have triangles
∆ABE and ∆CBE congruent and thus ∠EAB ∼= ∠ECB and we’re
done. 2
A
C
E
B
D
Figure 2.9 Base angles congruence
This proof seems okay—it relies solely on deﬁnitions, on the existence
of an angle bisector, and on the SAS congruence result. It is the proof
one ﬁnds in many modern geometry texts, but is not the proof Euclid
used. Why not?
If we were true to Euclid’s development, we would have a major
problem with this proof. First, the construction of angle bisectors comes
in Proposition 9 of the Elements, which itself depends on Proposition 5,
the result we are trying to prove. To use angle bisectors for this proof
would be circular reasoning, if we assumed Euclid’s development of ax-
ioms and theorems. Circular reasoning is an often subtle error that can
creep into our attempts to prove a result.
Beyond the problem of circular reasoning, there is an even more
fundamental axiomatic problem with this proof, as seen from within
Euclid’s system. The use of SAS congruence is ﬁne, except for a hidden
assumption that has slipped into the proof—that the bisector actually
intersects the third side of the triangle. This seems intuitively obvious
to us, as we see triangles having an inside and an outside; that is, we
see the triangle separating the plane into two regions. In fact, Euclid

66
■Exploring Geometry
assumes this separation property without proof and does not include it
as one of his axioms.
Moritz Pasch (1843–1930) was the ﬁrst to notice this hidden as-
sumption of Euclid, and in 1882 he published Vorlesungen uber neure
Geometrie, which for the ﬁrst time introduced axioms on separation and
ordering of points in the plane. One of these axioms speciﬁcally addresses
the issue of triangle separation and has become known as Pasch’s Axiom:
Let A, B, C be three non-collinear points and let l be a line
that does not pass through A, B, or C. If l passes through
side AB, it must pass through either a point on AC or a
point on BC, but not both.
Hilbert built on Pasch’s work in his own axiomatic system. Hilbert’s
four axioms of “order” or “betweenness” are essentially the axioms Pasch
used in 1882. Using Pasch’s Axiom, the hidden assumption in Euclid’s
proof of Theorem 2.14 can be justiﬁed. (See the Crossbar Theorem in
the on-line chapter covering Hilbert’s axioms).
In fact, the proof given above for the isosceles triangle theorem is
perfectly correct within Hilbert’s axiomatic system, as SAS congruence
is an axiom in this system, and thus needs no proof, and the triangle
intersection and angle bisection properties are proved before this theorem
appears.
We see, then, that the same proof can be valid in one system and
not valid in another. What makes the diﬀerence is how the two systems
progressively build up results that then are used for proving later results.
Can we give a valid proof in Euclid’s system? We know that we can
safely use SAS as it is Proposition 4 of Book I. If we consider ∆ABC
in comparison to itself by the ordering ∆ABC with ∆CBA, then we
get the base angles congruent by a simple application of SAS. (Convince
yourself of this.) This may seem like cheating, but if we look carefully
at the statement of SAS, it never stipulated that the two triangles for
comparison needed to be diﬀerent.
This concludes our whirlwind review of the highlights of basic planar
geometry (the ﬁrst 28 Propositions of Book I of Elements). This basic
material concerns points, lines, rays, segments and segment measure,
angles and angle measure, parallels, and triangles as covered in many
elementary geometry courses. We summarized these areas without taking
the time to carefully derive the results from ﬁrst principles, although we
did take care to point out where more foundational work was needed.

Euclidean Geometry
■67
Our brief treatment of formal issues is not an indication that careful
axiomatic exposition of basic geometry is unimportant. Hilbert’s ax-
iomatic system is an outstanding achievement in the foundations of
geometry and we thoroughly cover that system in the on-line chapter
covering Hilbert’s development of basic geometry. However, it is also im-
portant to cover the power and complexity of more advanced geometric
concepts, which we do in the rest of this chapter and in the following
chapters.
Exercise 2.2.1. Is it possible for a line to intersect all three sides of a
triangle? If so, does this contradict Pasch’s Axiom?
Exercise 2.2.2. Use Pasch’s Axiom to show that a line intersecting one side
of a rectangle, at a point other than one of the vertices of the rectangle, must
intersect another side of the rectangle. Will the same be true for a pentagon?
A hexagon? An n-gon? If so, develop a proof for the case of a line intersecting
a side of a regular n-gon (all sides and angles equal).
Exercise 2.2.3. If a line intersects three (or more) sides of a four-sided
polygon (any shape made of four connected segments), must it contain a vertex
of the polygon? If so, give a proof; if not, give a counter-example.
Let l be a line and A, B two points not on l. If A = B, or if segment
AB contains no points on l, we will say that A and B are on the same
side of l. Otherwise, they are on opposite sides (i.e., AB must intersect
l). We say that the set of points all on one side of l are in the same
half-plane.
Use Pasch’s Axiom to prove the following pair of results, which
Hilbert termed the Plane Separation Property. This property is some-
times used to replace Pasch’s Axiom in modern axiomatic developments
of geometry.
Exercise 2.2.4. For every line l and every triple of points A, B, C not on
l, if A, B are on the same side of l and B, C are on the same side of l, then
A, C are on the same side of l.
Exercise 2.2.5. For every line l and every triple of points A, B, C not on
l, if A, B are on opposite sides of l and B, C are on opposite sides of l, then
A, C are on the same side of l.

68
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 2.16. Deﬁne a point
D to be in the interior of an an-
gle ∠CAB if D is on the same
side of ←→
AC as B and also D is
on the same side of ←→
AB as C.
(The interior is the intersection
of two half-planes.)
Exercise 2.2.6. Deﬁne precisely what is meant by the interior of a triangle.
The next set of exercises deals with triangle congruence.
Exercise 2.2.7. Prove the converse to Theorem 2.14. That is, show that if
a triangle has two angles congruent, then it must be isosceles.
Exercise 2.2.8. Use congruent triangles to prove that the angle bisector
construction discussed in section 2.1 is valid.
Exercise 2.2.9. Show that if two sides of a triangle are not congruent,
then the angles opposite those sides are not congruent, and the larger angle is
opposite the larger side of the triangle. [Hint: Use isosceles triangles.]
Exercise 2.2.10. Using SAS congruence, prove Angle-Side-Angle congru-
ence.
Exercise 2.2.11. Show that for two right triangles, if the hypotenuse and
leg of one are congruent to the hypotenuse and leg of the other, then the two
triangles are congruent. [Hint: Try a proof by contradiction.]
A quadrilateral ABCD is composed of segments AB, BC, CD, and
DA such that no three of the points of the quadrilateral are collinear and
no pair of segments intersects, except at the endpoints. Saccheri quadri-
laterals are quadrilaterals having two congruent sides perpendicular to
a third side, called the base. The remaining side is called the summit.
Saccheri quadrilaterals are named for Giovanni Saccheri (1667–1773 who
studied them in detail, and almost discovered non-Euclidean geometry
(see Chapter 7).

Euclidean Geometry
■69
Figure 2.10
Exercise 2.2.12. Show that the summit angles in a Saccheri Quadrilateral
(Figure 2.10) are always congruent.
Exercise 2.2.13. Given a triangle ∆ABC, Let E, and F be the midpoints
of sides AB and AC, as shown in Figure 2.11. (We show two possible conﬁg-
urations of the triangle for assisting in the proof for this exercise).
Figure 2.11
Construct the line through F and E and drop perpendiculars to this line
from A, B, and C meeting the line at G, H, and I, respectively. Show that
BHIC is a Saccheri Quadrilateral and that the angle sum of the triangle is
equal to the sum of the summit angles.
Exercise 2.2.14. Use the preceding exercise, Exercise 2.1.8, and Theorem
2.9 to show that Playfair’s Postulate is equivalent to the statement, The sum-
mit angles of a Saccheri quadrilateral are right angles. [Remember: This re-
quires two proofs]
Exercise 2.2.15. State and prove a SASAS (Side-Angle-Side-Angle-Side)
congruence result for quadrilaterals.

70
■Exploring Geometry
2.3
PROJECT 3 - SPECIAL POINTS OF A TRIANGLE
Triangles are the simplest two-dimensional shapes that we can con-
struct with segments. The simplicity of their construction masks the
richness of relationships exhibited by triangles. In this project we will
explore several interesting points of intersection that can be found in
triangles.
We will be using dynamic geometry software for this project. Notes
on how to use particular software packages for this project can be found
at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text.
2.3.1
Circumcenter
Start up your geometry software
and use connected segments to
create ∆ABC on the screen.
A
B
C
Construct the midpoints D, E, F
of the sides using the midpoint
tool of your software.
A
B
C
D
E
F

Euclidean Geometry
■71
Now, construct the perpendic-
ular bisectors of AB and BC by
using the perpendicular construc-
tion tool of your software. Then,
construct the intersection point G
where these perpendiculars meet.
Create a segment from F to G and
measure ∠CFG.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Angle(C,F,G) = 90.00 degrees
It appears that ←→
GF is perpendicular to ←→
AC and thus all three per-
pendicular bisectors meet at G. Drag the vertices of the triangle around.
Does the common intersection property persist? This suggests a theorem.
Theorem 2.15. The perpendicular bisectors of the sides of a tri-
angle intersect at a common point called the circumcenter of the
triangle.
Let’s see if we can prove this.
Consider the two perpendicular bisectors we constructed, the ones
at D and E. Since ←→
AB and ←→
BC are not parallel, we can ﬁnd their inter-
section at point G.
Exercise 2.3.1. Show that triangles ∆DGB and ∆DGA are congruent, as
are triangles ∆EGB and ∆EGC. Use this to show that the line through F
and G will be a perpendicular bisector for the third side, and thus all three
perpendicular bisectors intersect at point G. (Make sure your labels match the
ones shown above.)
Create a circle with center at the circumcenter (point G above) and
radius point equal to one of the vertices of the triangle. (Be careful that
you drag the radius point onto one of the triangle vertices, thus attaching
the circle’s radius point to a triangle vertex.) What do you notice about
the circle in relation to the other vertices of the triangle?
Corollary 2.16. The circle with center at the circumcenter of a
triangle and radius out to one of the vertices will pass through the
other vertices of the triangle. This is called the circumscribed circle
of the triangle (Figure 2.12).

72
■Exploring Geometry
A
B
C
Circumcenter
Circumscribed Circle
Figure 2.12 Circumscribed circle of a triangle
Exercise 2.3.2. Prove Corollary 2.16.
2.3.2
Orthocenter
An altitude of a triangle will be a perpendicular to a side of the triangle
that passes through the opposite vertex. In Figure 2.13, line a is an
altitude to ∆ABC through vertex B.
A
B
C
a
Figure 2.13 Altitude
What can we say about the three altitudes of a given triangle? Do
they intersect at a common point?
We will show that the altitudes of a triangle do intersect at a common
point by showing that the altitudes are also the perpendicular bisectors
of an associated triangle to the given triangle.

Euclidean Geometry
■73
Clear the screen and create a tri-
angle ∆ABC. Use the Parallel
tool of your software to construct
three parallels, each one a paral-
lel to a side of the triangle pass-
ing through an opposite triangle
vertex. Since the original sides of
∆ABC were not parallel, each
pair of the new parallels will in-
tersect. These three intersection
points will form a new triangle,
∆DEF. We will call this the as-
sociated triangle to ∆ABC.
B
A
C
D
E
F
Drag the vertices around and
notice the relationship among the
four triangles ∆BAD, ∆ABC,
∆FCB, and ∆CEA. What would
your conjecture be about the rela-
tionship among these four trian-
gles?
B
A
C
D
E
F
Exercise 2.3.3. Use Theorem 2.9 to verify the angle congruences illustrated
in Figure 2.14 for ∆ABC and its associated triangle ∆DEF. Then, show that
all four sub-triangles are congruent. That is,
∆ABC ∼= ∆BAD ∼= ∆FCB ∼= ∆CEA

74
■Exploring Geometry
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 2.14
This leads directly to the following result:
Theorem 2.17. The altitudes of a triangle are the perpendicular
bisectors of the associated triangle as we have described.
Exercise 2.3.4. Prove Theorem 2.17. [Hint: Use the preceding exercise.]
Since the altitudes of a triangle are the perpendicular bisectors of
the associated triangle, and since we have already shown that the three
perpendicular bisectors of any triangle have a common intersection point,
then we have the following.
Corollary 2.18. The altitudes of a triangle intersect at a common
point. This point is called the orthocenter of the triangle.
Corollary 2.19. The orthocenter of a triangle is the circumcenter
of the associated triangle.
Does the orthocenter have a nice circle like the circumscribed circle?

Euclidean Geometry
■75
Create a circle with center at the orthocenter and radius point equal to
one of the vertices of triangle ∆ABC. What do you notice that is diﬀer-
ent about this situation in comparison to the preceding circumscribed
circle?
2.3.3
Incenter
Clear
the
screen
and
create
∆ABC one more time. In this
part of our project, we will ﬁnd
the angle bisectors of each of the
three interior angles of the trian-
gle. Use the Angle Bisector tool of
your software to bisect each of the
triangles angles.
B
A
C
D
X
Y
It appears that the three angle bisectors have a common intersection
point.
Theorem 2.20. The angle bisectors of triangle ∆ABC intersect
at a common point. This point is called the incenter of the triangle.
Proof: First note that the bisector at A will intersect side BC at
some point X. The bisector at B will intersect AC at some point Y and
AX at some point D that is interior to the triangle.
In the next exercise, we will show that the points on an angle bisector
are equidistant from the sides of an angle and, conversely, if a point is
interior to an angle and equidistant from the sides of an angle, then it
is on the bisector. Thus, the distance from D to −→
AB equals the distance
from D to −→
AC. Also, the distance from D to −→
AB equals the distance
from D to −−→
BC, as D is on the bisector at B. Thus, the distance from D
to −→
AC equals the distance from D to −−→
BC, and D must be on the bisector
at C. 2
Exercise 2.3.5. Use congruent triangles to show that the points on an angle
bisector are equidistant from the sides of the angle and, conversely, if a point
is interior to an angle and equidistant from the sides of an angle, then it is on
the bisector. [Hint: Distance from a point to a line is measured by dropping
a perpendicular from the point to the line. You may also use the Pythagorean
Theorem if you wish.]

76
■Exploring Geometry
Drop a perpendicular line from the incenter to one of the sides of
the triangle and ﬁnd the intersection of this perpendicular with the side.
(For example, we get point Z in Figure 2.15 by dropping a perpendicular
from D to ←→
BC.) Create a circle with center at the incenter and radius
point equal to the intersection point.
Deﬁnition 2.17. The circle just constructed is called the inscribed
circle to the triangle. A circle is inscribed in a triangle (or other
polygon) if it intersects each side of the triangle (polygon) in a single
point.
B
A
C
D
X
Y
Z
Figure 2.15
Project Report
It is amazing what structure exists in a simple shape like a triangle!
In your report discuss the similarities and diﬀerences you discovered in
exploring these three special points of a triangle. Also, take care that all
of your work on proofs and exercises is written in a logical and careful
fashion.
2.4
MEASUREMENT AND AREA IN EUCLIDEAN
GEOMETRY
Euclid, in his development of triangle congruence, had a very restrictive
notion of what congruence meant for segments and angles. When we hear
the word congruence our modern mathematical background prompts us
to immediately think of numbers being equal. For example, we imme-

Euclidean Geometry
■77
diately associate a number with a segment and consider two segments
congruent if their numerical lengths are equal.
This is very diﬀerent from the way that Euclid viewed congruence.
In fact, Euclid’s notion of congruence was one of coincidence of ﬁgures.
That is, two segments were congruent if one could be made to be coin-
cident with the other, by movement of one onto the other. Euclid never
used segments as substitutes for numerical values, or vice versa. If one
looks at Book II of Euclid, where he develops what we would now call
algebraic relationships, we see that these relationships are always based
on geometric ﬁgures. When Euclid mentions the square on segment AB,
he literally means the geometric square constructed on AB and not the
product of the length of AB with itself.
Modern axiomatic treatments of Euclidean geometry resolve this
problem of dealing with numerical measure by axiomatically stipulat-
ing that there is a way to associate a real number with a segment or
angle. Hilbert, staying true to Euclid, does not explicitly tie numbers to
geometric ﬁgures, but instead provides two axioms of continuity that al-
low for the development of measurement through an ingenious but rather
tedious set of theorems. Birkhoﬀ, on the other hand, directly speciﬁes
a connection between real numbers and lengths in his ﬁrst axiom and
between numbers and angles in his third axiom (see Appendix C).
In the following project, we will continue to assume the standard
connection between geometric ﬁgures and real numbers via lengths and
angle degree measures. This connection will lead naturally to a deﬁnition
of area based on segment length.
2.4.1
Mini-Project - Area in Euclidean Geometry
In this project we will create a deﬁnition for area, based on properties
of four-sided ﬁgures. Our investigation of area will follow Euclid’s use
of the idea of equality of ﬁgures, beginning in his proof of Prop. 35 of
Book I. Euclid never uses the terminology of area to describe how two
ﬁgures can be considered "equal", but it is clear from his proofs that his
reasoning about shapes can be directly compared to our modern notion
of area.
As you work through this project you will notice that it is diﬀerent
than our previous computer-based activities. Whereas earlier projects

78
■Exploring Geometry
used computer software, for this project we will primarily be using hu-
man “grayware,” that is, the canvas of our minds.
We start our investigation where Euclid did, with the study of four-
sided shapes.
Deﬁnition 2.18. A quadrilateral ABCD is a ﬁgure comprised of
segments AB, BC, CD, and DA such that no three of the points
of the quadrilateral are collinear and no pair of segments intersects,
except at the endpoints. We call AB, BC, CD, and DA the sides
of the quadrilateral and AC, BD the diagonals of the quadrilateral.
Deﬁnition 2.19. A parallelogram is a quadrilateral ABCD, where
←→
AB is parallel to ←→
CD and ←→
BC is parallel to ←→
AD. That is, opposite
sides are parallel.
Here’s the ﬁrst set of exercises to work through. The tools that will
prove most helpful to you include the theorems covered so far on parallels
and triangle congruence.
Exercise 2.4.1. (Prop. 34 of Book
I) Show that in parallelogram ABCD,
opposite sides are congruent, oppo-
site angles are congruent and the
diagonal bisects the parallelogram.
(That is, the diagonal divides the
parallelogram into two congruent tri-
angles.).
A
B
D
C
Now that we have covered the basic properties of a parallelogram we
will consider Euclid’s ﬁrst analysis of how two parallelogram shapes can
be compared.
Prop. 35 of Book I: Two parallelograms having the same base and
deﬁned between the same parallels are equal.
Euclid never deﬁnes what “equals” means, but from his proofs it is
clear that it has to do with being able to dissect two ﬁgures into pairs of
congruent triangles. We will deﬁne two ways of dissecting ﬁgures —one
additive and one subtractive.

Euclidean Geometry
■79
Deﬁnition 2.20. We will call two geometric ﬁgures P and P ′
equidecomposable or congruent by addition if it is possible to de-
compose each into a ﬁnite number of non-overlapping triangles
P
=
T1 ∪· · · ∪Tn
P ′
=
T ′
1 ∪· · · ∪T ′
n
where for each i, triangle Ti is congruent to T ′
i [19, page 197].
For the proof of Prop. 35 of Book I, let parallelograms ABCD
and EBCF be two parallelograms sharing base BC with ←→
AF parallel to
←→
BC.
There are two possible conﬁgura-
tions for the parallelograms: ei-
ther D will be between E and F
as shown in the top conﬁguration,
or D will not be on segment EF
as shown in the second conﬁgura-
tion.
B
C
A
E
D
F
B
C
A
E
D
F
Exercise 2.4.2. In the ﬁrst case,
where D is between E and F, use a
SAS argument to show that triangles
∆EAB and ∆FDC are congruent.
Then, show that these two parallelo-
grams are congruent by addition.
B
C
A
E
D
F

80
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 2.21. We say that two geometric ﬁgures P and P ′ have
equal content or are congruent by subtraction if there are ﬁgures Q,
Q′, that are congruent by addition with P and Q non-overlapping
and P ′, Q′ non-overlapping such that
R
=
P ∪Q
R′
=
P ′ ∪Q′
are congruent by addition.
Exercise 2.4.3. Let’s consider the
second case for Prop. 35 of Book
I. We have parallelograms ABCD
and EBCF sharing base BC with
←→
AF parallel to ←→
BC and D not on seg-
ment EF.
B
C
A
G
E
D
F
Let Q = Q′ be the ﬁgure deﬁned by triangle DEG. Show that the two
parallelograms are congruent by subtraction, using ﬁgure Q.
It is clear that if two ﬁgures are congruent by addition, then they
are congruent by subtraction (Q can be empty). What is not so clear
is the converse. If we take the axiomatic system of Hilbert and assume
a reasonable method of assigning numerical areas to ﬁgures, then the
converse is true. However, a geometry built on all of Hilbert’s axioms,
except the Archimedean axiom, is possible, and in this geometry the
converse is not true [19, pages 198–199].
It is reasonable to take as a replacement for Euclid’s vague notion
of equality of ﬁgures the concept of congruence by subtraction, as it
is intuitively clear that two ﬁgures that are congruent by subtraction
should have the same area. With this replacement, and the results of the
previous exercises, we have established a proof of Prop. 35 of Book I.
We now are in a position to deﬁne area in terms of rectangles!
Deﬁnition 2.22. A rectangle is a quadrilateral in which all the
angles deﬁned by the vertices are right angles. Given a rectangle
ABCD, we can identify two adjacent sides and call the length of
one of the sides a base of the rectangle and the length of the other
a height. The area of the rectangle will be deﬁned as the product of
a base and height.

Euclidean Geometry
■81
Exercise 2.4.4. Show that this deﬁnition of rectangular area is not am-
biguous. That is, it does not depend on how we choose the sides for the base
and height. [Be careful—this is not as trivial as it may appear. You need to
base your argument only on known geometric theorems and not on analytic or
numerical reasoning.]
Deﬁnition 2.23. If two ﬁgures are congruent by subtraction, we
will say that they have the same area.
Deﬁnition 2.24. If we identify a side of a parallelogram to be a
base side, then the height of the parallelogram, relative to that base
side, is the perpendicular distance between the base side and the
opposite side.
Exercise 2.4.5. Show that the area of a parallelogram ABCD is the product
of its base length and its height by showing that the parallelogram is congru-
ent by subtraction (or addition) to a rectangle with those side lengths (Fig-
ure 2.16). [Hint: Given parallelogram ABCD, with base AB, drop perpendic-
ulars from A to ←→
CD at E and from B to ←→
CD at F. Show that ABFE is a
rectangle with the desired properties.]
D
C
A
E
B
F
Figure 2.16
The next set of theorems follows immediately from your work.
Theorem 2.21. The area of a right triangle is one-half the product
of the lengths of its legs, the legs being the sides of the right angle.

82
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 2.22. (Essentially Prop. 41 of Book I) The area of any
triangle is one-half the product of a base of the triangle with the
height of the triangle.
Project Report
In this project we have developed the notion of area from simple ﬁgures
such as parallelograms, rectangles, and triangles. From these simple be-
ginnings, we could expand our idea of area to arbitrary polygonal ﬁgures,
and from there ﬁnd areas of curved shapes by using approximating recti-
linear areas and limits, as is done in calculus when deﬁning the integral.
Provide a summary of the proofs for each of the exercises in this
project. If you ﬁnish early, discuss what aspects of area are still not
totally deﬁned. That is, were there hidden assumptions made in our
proofs that would necessitate area axioms?
2.4.2
Cevians and Areas
We will now apply our results on areas to a very elegant development
of the intersection properties of cevians. A full account of the theory of
cevians can be found in the monograph Geometry Revisited, by Coxeter
and Greitzer [10].
Deﬁnition 2.25. Given a triangle, a cevian is a segment from a
vertex to a point on the opposite side.
Theorem 2.23. Given ∆ABC, and cevians AX, BY , and CZ (re-
fer to Figure 2.17), if the three cevians have a common intersection
point P, then
BX
XC
CY
Y A
AZ
ZB = 1

Euclidean Geometry
■83
B
A
C
Z
X
Y
P
Figure 2.17
Proof: Since two triangles with the same altitudes have areas that
are proportional to the bases, then
area(∆ABX)
area(∆AXC) = BX
XC
and
area(∆PBX)
area(∆PXC) = BX
XC
A little algebra shows
area(∆ABX) −area(∆PBX)
area(∆AXC) −area(∆PXC) = area(∆ABP)
area(∆APC) = BX
XC
Similarly,
area(∆BCP)
area(∆APB) = CY
Y A
and
area(∆CAP)
area(∆BPC) = AZ
ZB
Thus,
BX
XC
CY
Y A
AZ
ZB = area(∆ABP)
area(∆APC)
area(∆BCP)
area(∆ABP)
area(∆APC)
area(∆BCP)
Cancellation of terms yields the desired result. 2
This theorem has become known as Ceva’s Theorem, in honor of
Giovanni Ceva (1647–1734), an Italian geometer and engineer. The term
cevian is derived from Ceva’s name, in recognition of the signiﬁcance of
his theorem in the history of Euclidean geometry.
The converse to Ceva’s theorem is also true.

84
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 2.24. If the three cevians satisfy
BX
XC
CY
Y A
AZ
ZB = 1
then they intersect at a common point (refer to Figure 2.18).
B
A
C
Z
X
Y
P
X’
Figure 2.18
Proof: BY will intersect CZ at some point P which is interior to the
triangle. The ray −→
AP will intersect BC at some point X′ that is between
B and C. By the previous theorem we have
BX′
X′C
CY
Y A
AZ
ZB = 1
Thus, BX′
X′C = BX
XC .
Suppose that X′ is between B and X. Then
BX
XC = BX′ + X′X
X′C −X′X
Since BX′
X′C = BX
XC , we have
BX′
X′C = BX′ + X′X
X′C −X′X
Cross-multiplying in this last equation gives
(BX′)(X′C −X′X) = (X′C)(BX′ + X′X)
Simplifying we get
−(BX′)(X′X) = (X′C)(X′X)

Euclidean Geometry
■85
Since X′ is between B and C, the only way that this equation can be
satisﬁed is for X′X to be zero. Then X′ = X.
A similar result would be obtained if we assumed that X′ is between
X and C. 2
Deﬁnition 2.26. A median of a triangle is a segment from the
midpoint of a side to the opposite vertex.
Exercise 2.4.6. Show that the medians of a triangle intersect at a common
point. This point is called the centroid of the triangle.
Exercise 2.4.7. Use an area argument to show that the centroid must be the
balance point for the triangle. [Hint: Consider each median as a “knife edge”
and argue using balancing of areas.]
Exercise 2.4.8. The medians of a triangle split the triangle into six sub-
triangles. Show that all six have the same area.
Exercise 2.4.9. Use Exercise 2.4.8 and an area argument to show that the
medians divide one another in a 2:1 ratio.
2.5
SIMILAR TRIANGLES
One of the most useful tools for a more advanced study of geometric
properties (e.g., the geometry used in surveying) is that of similar tri-
angles.
Deﬁnition 2.27. Two triangles are similar if and only if there is
some way to match vertices of one to the other such that corre-
sponding sides are in the same ratio and corresponding angles are
congruent.
If ∆ABC is similar to ∆XY Z, we shall use the notation ∆ABC ∼
∆XY Z. Thus, ∆ABC ∼∆XY Z if and only if
AB
XY = AC
XZ = BC
Y Z
and
∠BAC ∼= ∠Y XZ, ∠CBA ∼= ∠ZY X, ∠ACB ∼= ∠XZY
Similar ﬁgures have the same shape but are of diﬀering (or the same)
size. One is just a scaled-up version of the other. The scaling factor

86
■Exploring Geometry
is the constant of proportionality between corresponding lengths of the
two ﬁgures. Thus, similarity has to do with the equality of ratios of
corresponding measurements of two ﬁgures.
Let’s review some basic similarity and proportionality results.
Theorem 2.25. Suppose that a line is parallel to one side of a
triangle and intersects the other two sides at two diﬀerent points.
Then, this line divides the intersected sides into proportional seg-
ments (refer to Figure 2.19).
A
B
C
l
D
E
F
Figure 2.19
Proof: Let line l be parallel to ←→
BC in ∆ABC. Let l intersect sides AB
and AC at points D and E. Construct a perpendicular from point E to
←→
AB intersecting at point F. Consider the ratio of the areas of triangles
∆BED and ∆AED:
Area(∆BED)
Area(∆AED) =
1
2(BD)(EF)
1
2(AD)(EF) = BD
AD
Now, consider dropping a perpendicular from D to ←→
AC, intersecting
this line at point G (Figure 2.20).
A
B
C
l
D
E
G
Figure 2.20

Euclidean Geometry
■87
Then,
Area(∆CED)
Area(∆AED) =
1
2(CE)(DG)
1
2(AE)(DG) = CE
AE
Now, triangles BED and CED share base DE and so the heights of
these two triangles will be the same, as both heights are the lengths of
perpendiculars dropped to ←→
DE from points on another line parallel to
←→
DE. Thus, these two triangles have the same area and
Area(∆BED)
Area(∆AED) = Area(∆CED)
Area(∆AED)
Thus,
BD
AD = CE
AE
This completes the proof. 2
Corollary 2.26. Given the assumptions of Theorem 2.25, it follows
that
AB
AD = AC
AE
Proof: Since AB = AD + BD and AC = AE + CE, we have
AB
AD = AD + BD
AD
= 1 + BD
AD = 1 + CE
AE = AE + CE
AE
= AC
AE
2
The converse to this result is also true.
Theorem 2.27. If a line intersects two sides of a triangle so that
the segments cut oﬀby the line are proportional to the original sides
of the triangle, then the line must be parallel to the third side.
Proof: Let line l pass through ∆ABC at sides AB and AC, inter-
secting at points D and E (Figure 2.21).

88
■Exploring Geometry
A
B
C
D
E
l
F
m
Figure 2.21
It is given that
AB
AD = AC
AE
By Playfair’s Axiom there is a unique parallel m to ←→
BC through D.
Since m is parallel to ←→
BC and it intersects side AB, then it must intersect
side AC at some point F. But, Corollary 2.26 then implies that
AB
AD = AC
AF
Thus,
AC
AE = AC
AF
and AE = AF. This implies that points E and F are the same and lines
l and m are the same. So, l is parallel to ←→
BC. 2
We now have enough tools at our disposal to prove the following
similarity condition.
Theorem 2.28. (AAA Similarity) If in two triangles there is a
correspondence in which the three angles of one triangle are con-
gruent to the three angles of the other triangle then the triangles
are similar (Figure 2.22).
Proof: Let ∆ABC and ∆DEF be two triangles with the angles at
A, B, and C congruent to the angles at D, E, and F, respectively. If seg-
ments AB and DE are congruent, then the two triangles are congruent
by the AAS congruence theorem and thus are also similar.

Euclidean Geometry
■89
A
B
C
D
G
H
E
F
Figure 2.22 AAA similarity
Suppose that AB and DE are not congruent. We can assume that
one is larger than the other, say DE is larger than AB. Then, there is a
point G between D and E such that DG ∼= AB. Also, there must be a
point H along the ray −−→
DF such that DH ∼= AC. Then, since the angles
at A and D are congruent, we have that ∆ABC ∼= ∆DGH (SAS) and
∠DGH ∼= ∠ABC. Since ∠ABC and ∠DEF are assumed congruent,
then ∠DGH ∼= ∠DEF and GH ∥EF (Theorem 2.7). This implies that
H is between D and F. Applying Corollary 2.26, we get that
DG
DE = DH
DF
Since DG ∼= AB and DH ∼= AC, we get
AB
DE = AC
DF
A similar argument can be used to show that
AB
DE = BC
EF
2
Another important similarity condition is the SAS condition.
Theorem 2.29. (SAS Similarity) If in two triangles there is a
correspondence in which two sides of one triangle are proportional to
two sides of the other triangle and the included angles are congruent,
then the triangles are similar (Figure 2.23).

90
■Exploring Geometry
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Figure 2.23 SAS similarity
Proof: Let triangles ∆ABC and ∆DEF be as speciﬁed in the theo-
rem with
AB
DE = AC
DF
If AB and AC are congruent to their counterparts in ∆DEF, then
the triangles are congruent by SAS and thus are similar as well. We
may then assume that AB and AC are greater than their counterparts
in ∆DEF. On AB and AC there must be points G and H such that
AG = DE and AH = DF. It is left as an exercise to show that ←→
GH and
←→
BC are parallel and thus the angles at B and C are congruent to the
angles at E and F. 2
Exercise 2.5.1. In ∆ABC let points D and E be the midpoints of sides AB
and AC. Show that DE must be half the length of BC.
Exercise 2.5.2. Fill in the gap in Theorem 2.29. That is, show in Fig-
ure 2.23 that ←→
GH and ←→
BC are parallel.
Exercise 2.5.3. (SSS Similarity Condition) Suppose that two triangles have
three sides that are correspondingly proportional. Show that the two triangles
must be similar.
Exercise 2.5.4. Let ∆ABC be a
right triangle with the right angle
at C. Let a, b, and c be the side
lengths of this triangle. Let CD be
the altitude to side AB (the hy-
potenuse). Use similarity to prove
the Pythagorean Theorem; that is,
show that a2 + b2 = c2.
A
C
b
B
a
c
D
x
y

Euclidean Geometry
■91
Exercise 2.5.5. The basic results on similar triangles allow us to deﬁne the
standard set of trigonometric functions on angles as follows:
Given an acute angle ∠BAC, construct a right triangle with one angle
congruent to ∠BAC and right angle at C. Then, deﬁne
• sin(∠A) = BC
AB
• cos(∠A) = AC
AB
Show that these deﬁnitions are well deﬁned; that is, they do not depend
on the construction of the right triangle.
Exercise 2.5.6. We can extend the functions deﬁned in the last exercise to
obtuse angles (ones with angle measure greater than 90 degrees) by deﬁning
• sin(∠A) = sin(∠A′)
• cos(∠A) = −cos(∠A′)
where ∠A′ is the supplementary angle to ∠A. We can extend the deﬁnitions to
right angles by deﬁning sin(∠A) = 1 and cos(∠A) = 0 if ∠A is a right angle.
Using this extended deﬁnition of the trig functions, prove the Law of Sines,
that in any triangle ∆ABC, if a and b are the lengths of the sides opposite A
and B, respectively, then
a
b = sin(∠A)
sin(∠B)
[Hint: Drop a perpendicular from C to AB at D and use the two right triangles
∆ADC and ∆BDC.]
Exercise 2.5.7. In
this
exercise
we will prove Menelaus’s Theorem:
Given triangle ABC, let R be a point
outside of the triangle on the line
through A and B. From R draw any
line intersecting the other two sides
of the triangle at points P, Q. Then
CP
PA
AR
RB
BQ
QC = 1
C
A
B
R
Q
P
S
Prove this result using similar triangles. Speciﬁcally, construct a parallel
to ←→
AC through B and let this intersect ←→
RP at point S. (Why must these lines
intersect?) Then, show that ∆RBS and ∆RAP are similar, as are ∆PCQ
and ∆SBQ, and use this to prove the result. (Menelaus was a Roman math-
ematician who lived in Alexandria from about 70–130 AD.)

92
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 2.5.8. Blaise Pascal (1623–1662) did fundamental work in many
areas of science and mathematics, including the physics of hydrostatics, the
geometry of conic sections, and the foundations of probability and philosophy.
He is also credited with inventing the ﬁrst digital calculator. The following
result is due to Pascal.
Given ∆ABC, construct a line ←→
DE,
intersecting sides AB and AC at
D, E, and parallel to ←→
BC. Pick any
point F on BD and construct FE.
Then, construct ←→
BG parallel to ←→
FE,
intersecting side AC at G. Then,
←→
FC must be parallel to ←→
DG.
C
A
B
D
E
F
G
Prove Pascal’s Theorem. [Hint: Use the theorems in this section on parallels
and similar triangles to show that
AD
AG =
AF
AC .] Hilbert [22, page 46] used
Pascal’s Theorem extensively to develop his “arithmetic of segments,” by which
he connected segment length with ordinary real numbers.
2.5.1
Mini-Project - Finding Heights
A surveyor is one who measures things like distances and elevations.
While modern surveyors use sophisticated equipment like laser range
ﬁnders, the basic mathematics of surveying is that of triangle geometry
and in particular similar triangles.
Consider the situation shown in Figure 2.24. At C we have a water
tower. At a particular time of the day, the sun will cast a shadow of the
tower that hits the ground at A. Suppose that a person stands at exactly
point B, where his or her shadow will match the shadow of the tower at
A.

Euclidean Geometry
■93
B
C
A
Figure 2.24 Finding heights
For this project, choose a partner and ﬁnd a tall building (or tree)
to measure in this fashion. You will need a long tape measure (or you
can use a yard stick) and a pencil and paper for recording your measure-
ments.
The report for this part of the project will include (1) a discussion
of how to calculate the height using similar triangles, (2) a table of
measurements needed to ﬁnd the height of the building (or tree), and
(3) the calculation of the height of your tall object.
Now, let’s consider a second method of ﬁnding the height, as depicted
in Figure 2.25.
B
C
M
Figure 2.25 Finding heights by mirror
For this method you will need a measuring device and a small mirror.
Place the mirror ﬂat on the ground some distance from the tall object
whose height you wish to measure. Then, walk back from the mirror and
stop when the top of the object is just visible in the mirror. Describe
how you can ﬁnd the height of the object using this mirror method.
Include in your project report a table of measurements for this second

94
■Exploring Geometry
method and a short discussion of which method is more accurate and/or
practically useful.
2.6
CIRCLE GEOMETRY
One of the most beautiful of geometric shapes is the circle. Euclid de-
voted Book III of the Elements to a thorough study of the properties of
circles.
To start our discussion of circles, we begin with the following funda-
mental result on the existence of circles deﬁned by three points.
Theorem 2.30. Given three distinct points, not all on the same
line, there is a unique circle through these three points.
Proof: Let the three points be A, B, C. Let l1 and l2 be the perpen-
dicular bisectors of AB and BC, with M1, M2 the midpoints of AB and
BC (Figure 2.26). We ﬁrst show that l1 and l2 must intersect.
A
B
C
M1
M2
l1
l2
E
Figure 2.26
Suppose l1 and l2 were parallel. Then, since ←→
AB intersects l1, it must
intersect l2 at some point E (by Exercise 2.1.10). Since A, B, C are not
collinear, then E cannot be M2. Since l1 and l2 are parallel, then by
Theorem 2.9 ∠BEM2 must equal the right angle at M1. But, this is
impossible as then triangle ∆BEM2 would have an angle sum greater
than 180 degrees. This would contradict Exercise 2.1.8, which showed
that the angle sum for a triangle is 180 degrees.
Thus l1 and l2 intersect at some point O (Figure 2.27). By SAS we
know that ∆AM1O and ∆BM1O are congruent, as are ∆BM2O and
∆CM2O, and thus AO ∼= BO ∼= CO and the circle with center O and
radius AO passes through these three points.

Euclidean Geometry
■95
A
B
C
M1
M2
l1
l2
O
Figure 2.27
Why is this circle unique? Suppose there is another circle c′ with
center O′ passing through A, B, C. Then, O′ is equidistant from A and
B and thus must be on the perpendicular bisector l1. (This can be seen
from a simple SSS argument.) Likewise O′ is on l2. But, l1 and l2 already
meet at O and thus O = O′. Then, O′A ∼= OA and c′ must be equal to
the original circle. 2
2.6.1
Chords and Arcs
It will be useful to have terminology to refer to pieces of circles.
Deﬁnition 2.28. Let c be a
circle with center O. If A and B
are distinct points on c, we call
the segment AB a chord of the
circle. If a chord passes through
the center O, we say it is a di-
ameter of the circle.
O
B
c
A
Chord
A’
Diameter

96
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 2.29. A chord AB of a circle c with center O will divide
the points of a circle c (other than A and B) into two parts, those
points of c on one side of ←→
AB and those on the other side. Each
of these two parts is called an open arc of the circle. An open arc
determined by a diameter is called a semi-circle. If we include the
endpoints A, B we would call the arc or semi-circle closed.
Deﬁnition 2.30. Note that one of the two open arcs deﬁned by a
(non-diameter) chord AB will be within the angle ∠AOB. This will
be called a minor arc. This is arc a1 in Figure 2.28. The arc that
is exterior to this angle is called a major arc. This is arc a2 in the
ﬁgure.
O
A
c
B
a1
a2
P
Figure 2.28
2.6.2
Inscribed Angles and Figures
Deﬁnition 2.31. A central angle of a circle is one that has its
vertex at the center of the circle. For example, ∠AOB in Figure 2.28
is a central angle of the circle c. An inscribed angle of a circle within
a major arc is one that has its vertex on the circle at a point on
the major arc and has its sides intercepting the endpoints of the arc
(∠APB in the ﬁgure).

Euclidean Geometry
■97
Let’s look at some basic properties of inscribed angles.
Theorem 2.31. The measure of an angle inscribed in a circle is
half that of its intercepted central angle.
Proof: Let ∠APB be inscribed in circle c having center O. Let −→
PO
intersect circle c at Q. Then, either A and B are on opposite sides of
←→
PO (as shown in Figure 2.29), or A is on the diameter through OP, or
A and B are on the same side of ←→
PO. We will prove the result in the
ﬁrst case and leave the remaining cases as an exercise.
O
A
c
B
P
Q
Figure 2.29
Now, OP ∼= OB ∼= OA and ∆POB and ∆POA are isosceles. Thus,
the base angles are congruent (Theorem 2.14). Let α = m∠PBO and
β = m∠PAO. Then, m∠POB = 180 −2α and m∠POA = 180 −2β.
Also, m∠QOB = 2α and m∠QOA = 2β.
Clearly, the measure of the angle at P, which is α + β, is half the
measure of the angle at O, which is 2α + 2β. 2
The following two results are immediate consequences of this theo-
rem.
Corollary 2.32. If two angles are inscribed in a circle such that
they share the same arc, then the angles are congruent.

98
■Exploring Geometry
Corollary 2.33. An inscribed angle in a semi-circle is always a
right angle.
Deﬁnition 2.32. A polygon is inscribed in a circle if its vertices lie
on the circle. We also say that the circle circumscribes the polygon
in this case.
Corollary 2.34. If quadrilateral ABCD is inscribed in a circle,
then the opposite angles of the quadrilateral are supplementary.
The proof is left as an exercise.
Theorem 2.35. (Converse to Corollary 2.33) If an inscribed angle
in a circle is a right angle, then the endpoints of the arc of the angle
are on a diameter.
Proof (refer to Figure 2.30): Let ∠BAC be a right angle inscribed in
a circle c. We need to show that BC is a diameter of the circle.
A
B
C
D
c
E
Figure 2.30
Let D and E be the midpoints of segments BC and AC. Then, since
BD and AE are both in the same proportion to BC and AC, we have

Euclidean Geometry
■99
by Theorem 2.27 that ←→
DE is parallel to ←→
AB and thus the angle at E is
a right angle. Then, ∆AED ∼= ∆CED by SAS and DC ∼= DA.
Similarly, BD ∼= DA. Thus, the circle with center D and radius equal
to DA passes through A, B, C. But, c is the unique circle through these
points and thus DA is the radius for the circle and BC is a diameter. 2
2.6.3
Tangent Lines
Among all lines that pass through a circle, we will single out for special
consideration those lines that intersect the circle only once.
Deﬁnition 2.33. A line l is said to be tangent to a circle c if l
intersects the circle at a single point T, called the point of tangency.
What properties do tangents have?
Theorem 2.36. Given a circle c with center O and radius OT, a
line l is tangent to c at T if and only if l is perpendicular to ←→
OT at
T.
Proof (refer to Figure 2.31): First, suppose that l is tangent to c at
T. If l is not perpendicular to ←→
OT at T, then let P be the point on l
where ←→
OP is perpendicular to l.
O
c
T
l
P
Q
Figure 2.31
On l we can construct a point Q opposite of T from P such that

100
■Exploring Geometry
PQ ∼= PT. Then, by SAS ∆OPT ∼= ∆OPQ. Then, OT ∼= OQ. But,
this would imply that Q is on the circle, which contradicts T being the
point of tangency.
On the other hand, suppose that l is perpendicular to ←→
OT at T. Let
P be any other point on l. By the exterior angle theorem, the angle at
P in ∆OPT is smaller than the right angle at T. Thus, since in any
triangle the greater angle lies opposite the greater side and vice versa
(Propositions 18 and 19 of Book I), we have that OP > OT and P is
not on the circle. Thus, l is tangent at T. 2
Do tangents always exist? Theorem 2.36 shows us how to construct
the tangent to a circle from a point on the circle. What if we want the
tangent to a circle from a point outside the circle?
Theorem 2.37. Given a circle c with center O and radius OA and
given a point P outside of the circle, there are exactly two tangent
lines to the circle passing through P.
Proof (refer to Figure 2.32): Let M be the midpoint of OP and let
c′ be the circle centered at M with radius OM. Then, since P is outside
circle c and O is inside, we know that c′ and c will intersect at two points,
T1 and T2. Since ∠PT1O is inscribed in a semi-circle of c′, then it must
be a right angle. Thus, ←→
PT1 is perpendicular to OT1 at T1 and by the
previous theorem T1 is a point of tangency. Likewise, T2 is a point of
tangency.
O
c
P
M
c’
T1
T2
Figure 2.32

Euclidean Geometry
■101
Can there be any more points of tangency passing through P? Sup-
pose that W is another point of tangency on c such that the tangent
line at W passes through P. Then, ∠PWO is a right angle. Let c′′ be
the circle through P, W, O. Then, by Corollary 2.33 we know that OP is
a diameter of c′′. But, then M would be the center of c′′ and the radius
of c′′ would be OM. This implies that c′ and c′′ are the same circle and
that W must be one of T1 or T2. 2
2.6.4
General Intercepted Arcs
Given an arc on a circle and two (non-parallel) lines that intercept that
arc, there are three diﬀerent possible conﬁgurations for the lines in rela-
tion to the circle. Let P be the point of intersection for the lines.
Then, P is either outside, on, or inside the circle.
Figure 2.33
To analyze these three possibilities we need to distinguish between
secant and tangent lines.
Deﬁnition 2.34. A line l is said to be secant to a circle c if l
intersects the circle at two points.
Theorem 2.38. Suppose two non-parallel secant lines ←→
PA and ←→
PB
intersect the arc
⌢
AB of circle c, with P outside c. Let O be the center
of the circle. Let C and D be the other points of intersection of the
secant lines. Then, the angle created by the two secant lines is equal
to the diﬀerence in the central angles to the two intercepted arcs.
That is, m∠BPA = 1
2(m∠BOA −m∠COD).
Proof: Construct AD.

102
■Exploring Geometry
By Euclid’s Proposition 32, the
measure of the exterior angle
of a triangle is equal to the
sum
of
the
measures
of
the
opposite interior angles. Thus,
m∠BDA = m∠CAD+m∠BPA,
or
m∠BPA
=
m∠BDA −
m∠CAD.
By Theorem 2.31, we know that m∠BDA = 1
2m∠BOA. Likewise,
m∠CAD = 1
2m∠COD. Thus, m∠BPA = 1
2m∠BOA −1
2m∠COD. 2
Theorem 2.39. Suppose that a tangent line ←→
PA and a secant
line ←→
PB intersect the arc
⌢
AB of circle c (center O), with P out-
side c. Let D be the other point of intersection of the secant line.
Then, the angle created by the two lines is equal to the diﬀer-
ence in the central angles to the two intercepted arcs. That is,
m∠BPA = 1
2(m∠BOA −m∠AOD).
Proof: Construct AD.
As in the proof of the previous
theorem, we have m∠BDA
=
m∠PAD+m∠BPA, or m∠BPA =
m∠BDA −m∠PAD. By Theo-
rem 2.31, we know that m∠BDA =
1
2m∠BOA. By Exercise 2.6.10
we
know
that
m∠PAD
=
1
2m∠AOD. Thus, m∠BPA
=
1
2m∠BOA −1
2m∠AOD.2
Theorem 2.40. Suppose that lines ←→
PT and ←→
PU are tangent to
circle c (center O), with P outside c. Then, the angle created by
the two lines is equal to the diﬀerence in the central angles to the
two intercepted arcs. That is, m∠UPT = 1
2(m∠UOT −m∠TOU).
(Here, ∠UOT will be the angle deﬁned by major arc
⌢
UT.)
Proof: Construct UT. Let Q be a point on the other of side of U from
P on ←→
PU.

Euclidean Geometry
■103
As in the proof of the previous
theorems, we have m∠QUT
=
m∠PTU+m∠UPT, or m∠UPT =
m∠QUT −m∠PTU.
By Exercise 2.6.10 we know that m∠QUT
=
1
2m∠UOT and
m∠PTU = 1
2m∠TOU. The result follows immediately. 2
These three theorems completely characterize the situation where
two lines, intersecting at a point P, intercept an arc of a circle c. What
about the case where P is inside the circle? One might think that there
are again three cases to consider, but in the exercises it is shown that
neither line can be a tangent line to the circle if P is inside c.
Theorem 2.41. Suppose two intersecting secant lines ←→
PA and ←→
PB
intersect the arc
⌢
AB of circle c, with P inside c. Let O be the center
of the circle. Let C and D be the other points of intersection of the
lines. Then, the angle created by the two lines is equal to the sum of
the central angles to the two intercepted arcs. That is, m∠BPA =
1
2(m∠BOA + m∠COD).
Proof: Construct AD.
By using similar reasoning as
was used in the three preceding
proofs, one can show the result.
The proof is left as an exercise.
2
We end this section with a nice result which is essentially the converse
to Theorem 2.31.

104
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 2.42. Let c be a circle with center O. Let ←→
PA and ←→
PB
intersect c at A and B. If the measure of the angle made by the
lines at P is always half the measure of the intercepted arc’s central
angle, then P is on c.
Proof: We are given that m∠APB = 1
2m∠AOB. Suppose P is outside
c. There are three cases to consider:
If the two lines are secant lines,
then by Theorem 2.31 we have
m∠ADB
=
1
2m∠AOB. Thus,
m∠APB = m∠ADB. But this
contradicts the Exterior Angle
Theorem as applied to ∠ADB
and ∆ADP.
If one of the lines, say ←→
PB is
a tangent line and the other line
is a secant line, then as in the
previous case we get m∠APB =
m∠ACB. But this contradicts the
Exterior Angle Theorem as ap-
plied to ∠ACB and ∆BCP.
If both lines are tangent lines,
let Q and R be the intersec-
tions of ←→
OP with c. Since OA ∼=
OB, then by Exercise 2.3.5 −→
PO
will bisect ∠APB and also bi-
sect ∠AOB. Thus, m∠APO =
1
2m∠AOR. But this conﬁguration
was already shown to lead to a
contradiction in the previous case.
The proof for P inside c is similar and is left as an exercise. We
conclude that P must be on c. 2
Exercise 2.6.1. Finish the proof for the remaining two cases in Theorem
2.31. That is, prove the result for the case where A is on the diameter through
OP and for where A and B are on the same side of ←→
PO.

Euclidean Geometry
■105
Exercise 2.6.2. Prove Corollary 2.34.
Exercise 2.6.3. Two circles meet
at points P and Q. Let AP and BP
be diameters of the circles. Show that
AB passes through the other inter-
section Q.
Q
B
A
P
Exercise 2.6.4. Let c be the cir-
cumscribed circle of ∆ABC and let
P be the point on c where the bisec-
tor of ∠ABC meets c. Let O be the
center of c. Prove that the radius OP
meets AC at right angles.
B
A
C
O
c
P
Exercise 2.6.5. Show that the line passing through the center of a circle
and the midpoint of a chord is perpendicular to that chord, provided the chord
is not a diameter.
Exercise 2.6.6. Let AD and BC
be two chords of a circle that inter-
sect at P. Show that (AP)(PD) =
(BP)(PC). [Hint: Use similar trian-
gles.]
A
B
D
C
P
Exercise 2.6.7. In the last project we saw that every triangle can be cir-
cumscribed. Show that every rectangle can be circumscribed.

106
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 2.6.8. Prove Theorem 2.41.
Exercise 2.6.9. Finish the proof of Theorem 2.42. That is, show that the
case where P is inside c is impossible.
Exercise 2.6.10. Let line ←→
PT be
tangent to circle c at T. Let O be the
center of c. Let TA be a chord of c. If
∠PTA is an acute angle, show that
m∠PTA = 1
2m∠TOA.
[Hint: Let QT be the diameter through T. Then, ∠PTA = 90 −∠ATO.
Use isosceles triangle ∆OTA and the fact that the angle sum of a triangle is
180 degrees.]
Deﬁnition 2.35. Two distinct circles c1 ̸= c2 are mutually tangent
at a point T if the same line through T is tangent to both circles.
Exercise 2.6.11. Show that two
circles that are mutually tangent
must have the line connecting their
centers passing through the point of
tangency.
A
T
c
B
c’
l
Exercise 2.6.12. Show that mutually tangent circles intersect in only one
point. [Hint: Suppose they intersected at another point P. Use the previous
exercise and isosceles triangles to yield a contradiction.]

Euclidean Geometry
■107
Exercise 2.6.13. Show that two circles that are mutually tangent at T must
either be
1. on opposite sides of the common tangent line at T, in which case we
will call the circles externally tangent, or
2. on the same side of the tangent line, with one inside the other, in which
case we will call the circles internally tangent.
Exercise 2.6.14. Given two cir-
cles externally tangent at a point T,
let AB and CD be segments passing
through T with A, C on c1 and B,
D on c2. Show that ←→
AC and ←→
BD are
parallel. [Hint: Show that the alter-
nate interior angles at C and D are
congruent.]
T
c2
c1
A
C
B
D
Exercise 2.6.15. Show
that
the
line from the center of a circle to an
outside point bisects the angle made
by the two tangents from that outside
point to the circle. [Hint: Use Exer-
cise 2.2.11.]
O
P
B
A
Exercise 2.6.16. Show the converse to the preceding exercise, that is, that
the bisector of the angle made by two tangents from a point outside a circle
to the circle must pass through the center of the circle. [Hint: Try a proof by
contradiction.]
Exercise 2.6.17. Let c and c′ be externally tangent at T. Show that there are
two lines that are tangent to both circles (at points other than T). [Hint: Let m
be the line through the centers. Consider the two radii that are perpendicular
to m. Let l be the line through the endpoints of these radii on their respective
circles. If l and m are parallel, show that l is a common line of tangency for
both circles. If l and m intersect at P, let n be a tangent from P to one of the
circles. Show n is tangent to the other circle.]

108
■Exploring Geometry
2.7
PROJECT 4 - CIRCLE INVERSION AND ORTHOGONALITY
In this project we will explore the idea of inversion through circles.
Circle inversion will be a critical component of our construction of non-
Euclidean geometry in Chapter 7.
We will be using dynamic geometry software for this project. Notes
on how to use particular software packages for this project can be found
at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text.
We start out with the notion of the power of a point with respect to
a given circle.
Start up your geometry software
and create a circle c with center
O and radius point A, and create
a point P not on c.
O
A
c
P
Now create two lines originat-
ing at P that pass through the
circle. Find the two intersection
points of the ﬁrst line with the cir-
cle (call them P1 and P2) and the
two intersection points of the sec-
ond line with the circle (call them
Q1 and Q2).
O
A
c
P
P2
P1
Q2
Q1
Now we will compare the product of PP1 and PP2 to the product of
PQ1 and PQ2.

Euclidean Geometry
■109
To do this, ﬁrst measure the four
distances PP1, PP2, PQ1, and
PQ2. Next, use the Calculator
tool which is a component of your
geometry software to compute the
product of PP1 and PP2 and the
product of PQ1 and PQ2. Here
we see the measurements as dis-
played when using the Geometry
Explorer software.
O
A
c
P
P2
P1
Q2
Q1
Dist(P,P1) = 1.83
Dist(P,P2) = 6.00
Dist(P,Q1) = 1.82
Dist(P,Q2) = 6.01
Dist(P,P1) *Dist(P,P2)  = 10.95
Dist(P,Q1) *Dist(P,Q2)  = 10.95
Interesting! It appears that these two products are the same. Drag
point P around and see if this conjecture is supported.
Exercise 2.7.1. Our ﬁrst task in this project is to prove that these two
products are always the same. [Hint: Consider some of the inscribed angles
formed by P1, P2, Q1, Q2. Use Corollary 2.32 to show that ∆PP1Q2 is similar
to ∆PQ1P2 and thus show the result.]
Exercise 2.7.2. Show that the product of PP1 and PP2 (or PQ1 and PQ2)
can be expressed as PO2 −r2, where r is the radius of the circle.
Deﬁnition 2.36. Given a circle c with center O and radius r and
given a point P, we deﬁne the Power of P with respect to c as:
Power of P = PO2 −r2.
Note that by Exercise 2.7.2 the Power of P is also equal to the
product of PP1 and PP2 for any line l from P, with P1 and P2 the
intersections of l with the circle c.
Also note that the Power of P can be used to classify whether P is
inside (Power < 0), on (Power = 0), or outside (Power > 0) the circle.
Now we are ready to deﬁne circle inversion.
Deﬁnition 2.37. The inverse of P with respect to c is the unique
point P ′ on ray −→
OP such that OP ′ =
r2
OP (or (OP ′)(OP) = r2).

110
■Exploring Geometry
Note that if the circle had unit radius (r = 1), and if we considered
O as the origin in Cartesian coordinates with OP = x, then the inverse
P ′ of P can be interpreted as the usual multiplicative inverse; that is,
we would have OP ′ = 1
x.
How do we construct the inverse point?
Clear the screen and create a cir-
cle c with center O and radius
point A and then create a point
P inside c. Create the ray −→
OP.
At P construct the perpendicular
to −→
OP and ﬁnd the intersection
points (T and U) of this perpen-
dicular with the circle. Create seg-
ment OT and ﬁnd the perpendic-
ular to OT at T. Let P ′ be the
point where this second perpen-
dicular intersects −→
OP.
O
A
c
P
T
U
P’
Measure the distances for seg-
ments OP and OP ′ and measure
the radius of the circle. Use the
Calculator to compute the prod-
uct of OP and OP ′ and the square
of the radius as shown in the ﬁg-
ure.
O
A
c
P
T
U
P’
Dist(O,P) = 1.24
Dist(O,P’) = 5.10
Radius(c) = 2.52
Dist(O,P) *Dist(O,P’) = 6.33
Radius(c) ^2 = 6.33
It appears that we have constructed the inverse!
Exercise 2.7.3. Prove that this construction actually gives the inverse of
P. That is, show that (OP)(OP ′) = r2.
In the last part of this lab, we will use the notion of circle inversion
to construct a circle that meets a given circle at right angles.

Euclidean Geometry
■111
Deﬁnition 2.38. Two circles c and c′ that intersect at distinct
points A and B are called orthogonal if the tangents to the circles
at each of these points are perpendicular.
Suppose we have a circle c and two points P and Q inside c, with
P not equal to Q and neither point equal to the center O of the circle.
The goal is to construct a circle through P and Q that meets c at right
angles.
Using the ideas covered earlier in this project, construct the inverse
P ′ of P with respect to c. Then, use the Circle tool in your geometry
program to construct the unique circle c′ through the three points P,
P ′, and Q. The claim is that c′ is orthogonal to c.
To see if this is the case, let’s ﬁrst ﬁnd the center of c′. Let R be the
intersection of ←→
TP with circle c′ (Fig 2.34).
O
c
P
T
P’
Q
c’
S1
S2
R
O’
Angle(O’,S1,O) = 90.00 degrees
Angle(O,S2,O’) = 90.00 degrees
Figure 2.34
Then ∠RPP ′ is a right angle in circle c′ as ∠OPT is a right angle.
Thus, by Theorem 2.33 RP ′ is a diameter of c′. The midpoint O′ of RP ′
will be the center of c′. Let S1 and S2 be the intersection points of c
with c′. Measure ∠O′S1O and ∠OS2O′ and check that they are right
angles. Since the tangents to c and c′ are orthogonal to OS1, OS2, O′S1,
and O′S2, then the tangents to the circles at S1 and S2 must also be

112
■Exploring Geometry
orthogonal and the circles are orthogonal. Note that this evidence of
the orthogonality of c and c′ is not a rigorous proof. The proof will be
covered when we get to Theorem 2.43.
Exercise 2.7.4. What do you think will happen to circle c′ as one of the
points P or Q approaches the center O of circle c? Try this out and then
explain why this happens.
Project Report
The ability to construct orthogonal pairs of circles is crucial to developing
a model of Hyperbolic geometry, where parallels to a line through a point
are “abundant.” We will look at this model in detail in Chapter 7.
For the project report, provide a detailed analysis of the construc-
tions used in this project and all answers to the exercises.
2.7.1
Orthogonal Circles Redux
Here is a proof of orthogonality of the circles constructed in the text
preceding Exercise 2.7.4.
Theorem 2.43. Given a circle c with center O and radius OA
and given two points P and Q inside c, with P not equal to Q and
neither point equal to O, there exists a unique circle c′ (or line)
that passes through P and Q that is orthogonal to the given circle
(Figure 2.35).
O
A
c
P
P’
Q
c’
T
l
Figure 2.35

Euclidean Geometry
■113
Proof: It is clear that if P and Q lie on a diameter of c, then there is
a unique line (coincident with the diameter) that is orthogonal to c. So,
in the rest of this proof we assume that P and Q are not on a diameter
of c.
Suppose that one or the other of P or Q, say P, is strictly inside c. As
above construct the inverse P ′ to P and let c′ be the unique circle passing
through Q, P, P ′. Construct a tangent l to circle c′ that passes through
O. Let l be tangent to c′ at T. (To construct l, use the construction
discussed in Theorem 2.37.) We claim that T is also on circle c. To see
this, consider the power of O with respect to circle c′:
Power of O = (OP)(OP ′) = (OT)2
But, (OP)(OP ′) = r2 (r being the radius of c) since P ′ is the inverse
point to P with respect to c. Thus, (OT)2 = r2 and T is on circle c, and
the circles are orthogonal at T.
To see that this circle is unique, suppose there was another circle
c′′ through P and Q that was orthogonal to c. Let P ′′ be the intersec-
tion of −→
OP with c′′. Let T ′′ be a point where c and c′′ intersect. Then
(OP)(OP ′′) = (OT ′′)2. But, (OT ′′)2 = r2 and thus, P ′′ must be the
inverse P ′ to P, and c′′ must then pass through Q, P, P ′ and must be
the circle c.
The ﬁnal case to consider is when both P and Q are on the boundary
of c (Figure 2.36). Then, any circle through P and Q that is orthogonal
to c must have its tangents at P and Q lying along OP and OQ. Thus,
the diameters of this circle must lie along tangent lines to c at P and Q.
Thus, the center of the orthogonal circle must lie at the intersection of
these tangents, which is a unique point. 2
O
c
P
Q
O’
c’
Figure 2.36

114
■Exploring Geometry
We conclude this section on orthogonal circles with two results that
will prove useful when we study non-Euclidean geometry in Chapter 7.
Theorem 2.44. Let c and c′ be two circles and let P be a point
that is not on c and is not the center O of c. Suppose that c′ passes
through P. Then, the two circles are orthogonal if and only if c′
passes through the inverse point P ′ to P with respect to c.
Proof: First, suppose that c′ passes through the inverse point P ′
(refer to Figure 2.37). We know from the proof of Theorem 2.30 that the
center O′ of c′ lies on the perpendicular bisector of PP ′. Since P and P ′
are inverses with respect to c, then they both lie on the same side of ray
−→
OP. Thus, O is not between P and P ′ and we have that O′O > O′P.
Thus, O is outside of c′. We then can construct two tangents from O to
c′ at points T1 and T2 on c′. Using the idea of the power of points with
respect to c′, we have (OT1)2 = (OP)(OP ′). But, (OP)(OP ′) = r2 by
assumption, where r is the radius of c. Therefore, (OT1)2 = r2, and T1
is on c. A similar argument shows that T2 is also on c. This implies that
the two circles are orthogonal.
O
c
T1
T2
O’
c’
P
P’
Figure 2.37
Conversely, suppose that c and c′ are orthogonal at points T1 and
T2. The tangent lines to c′ at these points then pass through O, which
implies that O is outside c′. Thus, −→
OP must intersect c′ at another point
P ′. Using the power of points, we have r2 = (OT1)2 = (OP)(OP ′), and
thus P ′ is the inverse point to P with respect to circle c. 2

Euclidean Geometry
■115
Corollary 2.45. Suppose circles c and c′ intersect. Then c′ is or-
thogonal to c if and only if the circle c′ is mapped to itself by inver-
sion in the circle c.
Proof: Suppose the circles are orthogonal, and let P be a point on
c′. If P is also on c, then it is ﬁxed by inversion through c. If P is not
on c, then by the proof of Theorem 2.44, we know that P is also not
the center O of c. Thus, Theorem 2.44 implies that the inverse P ′ of P
with respect to c is on c′. Thus, for all points P on c′, we have that the
inverse point to P is again on c′.
Conversely, suppose c′ is mapped to itself by inversion in the circle
c. Let P be a point on c′ that is not on c and which is not the center
O of c. Then, the inverse point P ′ with respect to c is again on c′. By
Theorem 2.44, the circles are orthogonal. 2


C H A P T E R 3
Analytic Geometry
There once was a very brilliant horse who mastered arith-
metic, plane geometry, and trigonometry. When presented
with problems in analytic geometry, however, the horse
would kick, neigh, and struggle desperately. One just
couldn’t put Descartes before the horse.
– Anonymous
In 1637 Réne Descartes (1596–1650) published the work La Geome-
trie, in which he laid out the foundations for one of the most impor-
tant inventions of modern mathematics—the Cartesian coordinate sys-
tem and analytic geometry.
In classical Euclidean geometry, points, lines, and circles exist as
idealized objects independent of any concrete context. In this strict syn-
thetic geometry, algebraic relations can be discussed, but only in relation
to underlying geometric ﬁgures.
For example, the Pythagorean Theorem, in Euclid’s geometry, reads
as follows: “The square on the hypotenuse equals the squares on the two
sides.” This statement literally means that the square constructed on
the hypotenuse equals the other two squares, and Euclid’s proof of the
Pythagorean Theorem amounts to showing how one can rearrange the
square ﬁgures to make this equivalence possible.
From the time of Euclid until Descartes, there was always this in-
sistence on tying algebraic expressions precisely to geometric ﬁgures.
The Arabs were the ﬁrst to introduce symbols, such as x2, for algebraic
quantities, but they too insisted on strict geometric interpretations of
algebraic variables—x2 literally meant the square constructed on a seg-
ment of length x.
117

118
■Exploring Geometry
Descartes was the ﬁrst person to assume that algebraic relationships
need not be tied to geometric ﬁgures. For Descartes, expressions like
x2, x3, xy, and the like, were all numbers, or lengths of segments, and al-
gebraic expressions could be thought of as either arithmetic or geometric
expressions.
This was a great leap forward in the level of mathematical abstrac-
tion, in that it opened up mathematical avenues of study that were
artiﬁcially closed. For example, equations involving arbitrary powers of
x were now possible, since one was no longer restricted to segments (x),
squares (x2), and cubes (x3).
Descartes’ geometry was groundbreaking, although by no means
what we think of today as Cartesian geometry. There were no coor-
dinate axes, and Descartes did not have algebraic expressions for such
simple ﬁgures as straight lines.
A much more modern-looking attempt to merge algebra with ge-
ometry was that of Pierre de Fermat (1601–1655), a contemporary of
Descartes working in Toulouse, who had a system of perpendicular axes
and coordinate equations describing lines, quadratics, cubics, and the
conic sections. Fermat also developed a general method for ﬁnding tan-
gents and areas enclosed by such algebraic expressions. In this regard, his
work foreshadowed the development of calculus by Newton and Leibniz.
The great insight of Descartes and Fermat was to embed the study
of geometric ﬁgures in a grid system, where a point is precisely located
by its distances from two ﬁxed lines that are perpendicular to one an-
other. These two distances are called the coordinates of a point and are
customarily labeled “x” and “y.”
By studying the set of coordinates for a geometric ﬁgure, one can
identify patterns in these coordinates. For example, a line is a set of
points (x, y) where x and y have a relationship of the form ax+by+c = 0,
with a, b, and c constants. Similarly, the points making up a circle have
their own x-y relationship.
The coordinate geometry of Descartes and Fermat ultimately led to
the notion of functions and to the creation of calculus by Newton and
Leibniz toward the end of the seventeenth century. The great achieve-
ment of analytic geometry is that it allows one to enrich the traditional
synthetic geometry of ﬁgures by the study of the equations of the x-y
relationships for those ﬁgures.
In this chapter we will construct analytic geometry from ﬁrst princi-
ples. Initially, we will develop this geometry from a synthetic geometric
base, similar to the development of Descartes and Fermat. Later in the

Analytic Geometry
■119
chapter, we will develop analytic geometry from a modern axiomatic
basis. In the chapters following, we will make optimum use of both syn-
thetic and analytic geometry, using whichever approach to Euclidean
geometry is most transparent in devising proofs.
3.1
THE CARTESIAN COORDINATE SYSTEM
In analytic geometry we create a coordinate system in the plane so that
we can have a way of uniquely referencing points by numerical values.
The simplest such coordinate system is the rectangular coordinate system
(Figure 3.1).
Let l be a line in the plane and let O be a point on that line. Let m
be a perpendicular to l through O. We will call these two lines the axes
of our coordinate system, with O being the origin.
By the continuity properties of the line, we know that for every real
number x there is a unique point X on l such that the length of OX
is x. We pick one side (ray) of l from O to be the positive side where
the length of OX is x ≥0 and let -x be the coordinate of OX′ on the
opposite ray such that the length of OX′ is also x. Likewise, there is
a similar correspondence on m. We call x and y the coordinates of the
points on the axes.
O
X
l
m
Y
X’
P (x,y)
Figure 3.1
Now, let P be any other point in the plane, not on l or m. We can
drop (unique) perpendiculars down to l and m at points X and Y , rep-
resented by coordinates x and y. The lines will form a rectangle OXPY .
Conversely, given coordinates x and y, we can construct perpendiculars
that meet at P. Thus, there is a one-to-one correspondence between
pairs of coordinates (x, y) and points in the plane. This system of iden-

120
■Exploring Geometry
tiﬁcation of points in the plane is called the rectangular (or Cartesian)
coordinate system.
To see the power of this method, let’s look at the equation of a circle,
that is, the algebraic relationship between the x and y coordinates of
points on a circle. The circle is deﬁned by starting with two points O, R
and consists of points P such that OP ∼= OR.
Let’s create a coordinate system with origin at O and x-axis along
OR. Let r be the length of OR. Given any point P on the circle, let (x, y)
be its coordinates (Figure 3.2). The angle ∠OXP is a right angle. By
the Pythagorean Theorem the length of OP is
p
x2 + y2, and this must
equal the length of OR, which is r. Thus, the circle is the set of points
(x, y) such that x2 + y2 = r2, a familiar equation from basic analysis.
O
X(x,0)
Y(0,y)
P(x,y)
R(r,0)
Figure 3.2
In the preceding discussion on the equation of a circle, we saw that
the length between a point (x, y) on a circle and the center of the circle
is given by
p
x2 + y2, assuming the origin of the coordinate system is at
the center of the circle. If the coordinate system is instead constructed
so that the center of the circle is at (x0, y0), then clearly the new length
formula will be given by
q
(x −x0)2 + (y −y0)2
In general this will give the distance between the points (x, y) and
(x0, y0) and is called the distance formula in the plane.

Analytic Geometry
■121
Here are some other useful algebraic-geometric facts.
Theorem 3.1. Let A = (x, y) and B = (−x, −y). Then, the line
through A, B passes through the origin (0, 0) with A and B on op-
posite sides of the origin on this line.
O = (0, 0)
A = (x, y)
P
B = (-x, -y)
Q
Figure 3.3
Proof (refer to Figure 3.3): If A is on either of the two axes, then
so is B, and the result is true by the deﬁnition of positive and negative
coordinates on the axes.
Otherwise, we can assume that A (and thus B) is not on either axis.
Drop perpendiculars from A and B to the y-axis at P and Q. Then, the
distance from P to the origin will be y as is the distance from Q to the
origin. By the distance formula PA ∼= QB and AO ∼= BO. Thus, by SSS
∆AOP ∼= ∆BOQ and the angles at O in these triangles are congruent.
Since ∠BOQ and ∠BOP are supplementary, then so are ∠AOP and
∠BOP. Thus, A, O, and B lie on a line.
If A and B were on the same side of O on the line through A,B, then
since this line intersects the x-axis only at O, they must be on the same
side of the x-axis. But, then P and Q would have to be on the same side
of the x-axis, which is not the case. 2

122
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 3.2. Let A = (x, y) and k be a number. Then, B =
(kx, ky) is on the line through A and the origin, and the distance
from B to the origin is equal to k times the distance from A to the
origin.
Proof: This can be proved using similar triangles and is left as an exercise.
2
Theorem 3.3. If A = (x, y) ̸= (0, 0) and B = (x1, y1) are points
on the same line through the origin, then (x1, y1) = k(x, y) for some
number k.
The proof of this theorem is left as an exercise.
Theorem 3.4. If A = (x, y) and B = (x1, y1) are not collinear
with the origin, then the point C = (x + x1, y + y1) forms, with
O, A, B, a parallelogram where OC is the diagonal.
O
B(x1,y1)
A(x,y)
C
Figure 3.4
Proof: First we have that AC =
p(x + x1 −x)2 + (y + y1 −y)2
(refer to Figure 3.4). Thus, AC =
p(x1)2 + (y1)2 = BO. Similarly,
AO = BC. A simple triangle congruence argument shows that OACB
is a parallelogram and OC is the diagonal. 2
The choice of a coordinate system will divide the set of non-axes
points into four groups, called quadrants. Quadrant I consists of points
with both coordinates positive. Quadrant II is the set of points where
x < 0 and y > 0. Quandrant III has x < 0 and y < 0, and quadrant IV

Analytic Geometry
■123
has x > 0 and y < 0. Thus, all points are either on an axis or in one of
the four quadrants.
3.2
VECTOR GEOMETRY
Analytic geometry has been incredibly useful in modeling natural sys-
tems such as gravity and temperature ﬂow. One reason for analytic ge-
ometry’s eﬀectiveness is the ease of representing physical properties us-
ing coordinates. Many physical systems are governed by variables such
as force, velocity, electric charge, and so forth, that are uniquely deter-
mined by their size and direction of action. Such variables are called
vectors.
The concept of a vector can be traced back to the work of William
Rowan Hamilton (1805–1865) and his eﬀorts to treat complex numbers
both as ordered pairs and as algebraic quantities. His investigations into
the algebraic properties of vector systems led to one of the greatest
discoveries of the nineteenth century, that of quaternions. While trying
to create an algebra of multiplication for three-dimensional vectors (a
task at which he repeatedly failed), he realized that by extending his
vector space by one dimension, into four dimensions, he could deﬁne an
operation of multiplication on vectors.
In 1843, as he was walking along the Royal Canal in Dublin, Hamilton
came to a realization:
And here there dawned on me the notion that we must admit,
in some sense, a fourth dimension of space for the purpose
of calculating with triples . . . An electric circuit seemed to
close, and a spark ﬂashed forth. [39]
This realization had such a profound eﬀect on Hamilton that he
stopped by a bridge on the canal and carved into the stone this famous
formula:
i2 = j2 = k2 = ijk = −1
Here i, j, and k are unit length vectors along the y, z, and w axes
in four dimensions. Other important ﬁgures in the development of vec-
tor algebra include Arthur Cayley (1821–1895) and Hermann Grassman
(1809–1877). Vector methods have come to dominate ﬁelds such as math-
ematical physics. We will cover the basics of vector methods and then
use vectors to study geometric properties.

124
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 3.1. A vector is a quantity having a length and a direc-
tion. Geometrically, we represent a vector in the plane by a directed
line segment or arrow. The starting point of the vector is called the
tail and the point of direction is called the head. Two parallel di-
rected segments with the same length and direction will represent
the same vector. Thus, a vector is really a set of equivalent directed
segments in the plane.
What is the coordinate representation of a vector? Let the vector be
represented by the segment from (h, k) to (x, y) as shown in Figure 3.5.
(h,k)
(x,y)
(h,0)
(x, y-k)
(0,0)
(x-h,y-k)
(0,k)
Figure 3.5
If we consider the vector from (h, 0) to (x, y−k), which has its tail on
the x-axis, then, the quadrilateral formed by the heads and tails of these
two vectors forms a parallelogram, since by the distance formula the sides
will be congruent in pairs. These two directed segments are equivalent
as vectors since they have the same length and direction. Similarly, the
directed segment from (0, 0) to (x−h, y −k) represents the same vector.
Thus, given any vector in the plane, there is a unique way of iden-
tifying that vector as a directed segment from the origin. The vector
from A = (h, k) to B = (x, y) can be represented as the ordered pair
(x −h, y −k) if we assume that the vector’s tail is at the origin. This is
the standard way to represent vectors.

Analytic Geometry
■125
Deﬁnition 3.2. Let v be a vector represented by the ordered pair
(x, y). The norm of v will be deﬁned as the length of the directed
segment v and will be denoted by ∥v∥. Thus,
∥v∥=
q
x2 + y2
It will be convenient to deﬁne certain algebraic operations with vec-
tors.
Deﬁnition 3.3. Let u, v be vectors and k a positive number. Then
• The vector u + v is the vector representing the diagonal of
the parallelogram determined by u and v, if u, v are not on
the same line through the origin. If u, v are on the same line
through the origin, then u + v is the vector representing the
sum of the x and y coordinates of the vectors.
• The vector -v is the vector having the same length but opposite
direction from v.
• The vector ku is the vector in the same direction as u whose
length is k times the length of u.
It follows from the deﬁnitions that the vector u−v, which is u+(-v),
is the vector from v to u (Figure 3.6).
O
v
u
u-v
-v
u+(-v)
Figure 3.6

126
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 3.5. Let u = (a, b), v = (s, t) be two vectors in a coordi-
nate system and k be a number. Then
• The vector u + v has coordinates (a + s, b + t).
• The vector -v has coordinates (-s, -t).
• The vector ku has coordinates (ka, kb).
Proof: Since vectors can be represented by segments from the origin
to points in the plane, then this theorem is basically a restatement of
the algebraic-geometric properties discussed earlier in our discussion of
coordinate systems. 2
Vectors can be used to give some very elegant geometric proofs. For
example, consider the following theorem about the medians of a triangle.
Theorem 3.6. The medians of a triangle intersect at a common
point that lies two-thirds of the way along each median.
Let’s see how we can use vectors to prove this theorem (Figure 3.7).
A
C
B
D
F
E
G
Figure 3.7
Proof: First, it is left as an exercise to show that we can represent
the line through A and B by the set of all ⃗A + t( ⃗B −⃗A), where t is
real. ( ⃗A stands for the vector from the origin to A.) The midpoint of the
segment AB will then be 1
2( ⃗A + ⃗B) (the proof of this fact is left as an
exercise).
Similarly, the midpoints of AB, AC, and BC are given by the three

Analytic Geometry
■127
vectors
⃗D
=
1
2( ⃗A + ⃗B)
⃗E
=
1
2( ⃗B + ⃗C)
⃗F
=
1
2( ⃗A + ⃗C)
(3.1)
Consider the median AE. Let G be the point two-thirds along this
segment from A to E. Then
⃗G−⃗A = ⃗
AG = 2
3
⃗
AE = 2
3( ⃗E−⃗A) = 2
3(1
2( ⃗B+ ⃗C)−⃗A) = (1
3
⃗B+ 1
3
⃗C−2
3
⃗A)
Adding ⃗A to both sides yields
⃗G = 1
3( ⃗A + ⃗B + ⃗C)
A similar argument shows that the point that is two-thirds along the
other two medians is also 1
3( ⃗A + ⃗B + ⃗C). Thus, these three points can
be represented by the same vector, and thus the three medians meet at
the point represented by this vector. 2
Exercise 3.2.1. Prove Theorem 3.2.
Exercise 3.2.2. Prove Theorem 3.3.
Exercise 3.2.3. Let l be the line through a point P = (a, b) and parallel
to vector v = (v1, v2). Show that if Q = (x, y) is another point on l, then
(x, y) = (a, b) + t(v1, v2) for some t. [Hint: Consider the vector from P to Q.]
Exercise 3.2.4. Use the previous exercise to show that given a line l, there
are constants A, B, and C such that Ax + By + C = 0, for any point (x, y)
on l.
Exercise 3.2.5. Given a segment AB, show that the midpoint is represented
as the vector 1
2( ⃗A + ⃗B).
Exercise 3.2.6. Given a quadrilateral ABCD, let W, X, Y, Z be the mid-
points of sides AB, BC, CD, DA, respectively. Use vectors to prove that
WXY Z is a parallelogram.

128
■Exploring Geometry
3.3
PROJECT 5 - BÉZIER CURVES
So far we have considered fairly simple geometric ﬁgures such as lines
and circles, for which we have correspondingly simple equations in x and
y. While these have incredibly useful features for the design of many
everyday objects, they are not so useful for describing complex shapes
such as the curves one ﬁnds in automobile designs or in the outlines of
the letters of a font.
For such non-linear and non-circular curves it is very diﬃcult to
derive simple polynomial functions of x and y that completely represent
the curve. In general, the more a curve oscillates, the higher the degree
of polynomial we need to represent the curve. For a designer, having to
calculate high-order polynomials in order to sketch curves such as the
fender of a car is not a pleasant or eﬃcient prospect.
In the 1950s and 1960s the problem of mathematically describing
curves of arbitrary shape was a primary area of research for engineers
and mathematicians in the aircraft and automobile industries. As com-
putational tools for design became more and more widely used, the need
for eﬃcient mathematical algorithms for modeling such curves became
one of the highest priorities for researchers.
To image a curve on a computer screen, one has to plot each indi-
vidual screen pixel that makes up the curve. If one pre-computes all the
(x, y) points needed for accurately representing the curve to the reso-
lution of the screen, then this will consume signiﬁcant portions of the
computer’s system memory. A better solution would be to have an algo-
rithm for computing the curve that stored just a few special points and
then computed the rest of the points “on the ﬂy.”
In this project we will look at a clever method of computing smooth
curves by using a simple set of “control” points in the plane. This method
is due to two automobile designers: Pierre Bézier (1910–1999), who
worked for the French automaker Rénault, and Paul de Casteljau, who
also worked for a French automaker—Citroën. The curves which these
engineers discovered have become known as Bézier curves, whereas the
algorithm we will consider for computing them has become known as
de Casteljau’s algorithm. A complete review of Bézier curves, and other

Analytic Geometry
■129
curves used in computer-aided design, can be found in textbooks on
computer graphics such as [24] or [14].
To start our discussion, let’s consider how we would create a curved
path in the plane by using a small number of deﬁning points. Clearly,
one point cannot deﬁne a two-dimensional curve and two points uniquely
deﬁne a line. Thus, to have any hope of deﬁning a truly curved path in
the plane, we need at least three points.
We will be using dynamic geometry software for this project. Notes
on how to use particular software packages for this project can be found
at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text.
Start up your geometry software
and create three (non-collinear)
points A, B, and C joined by two
segments as shown.
A
B
C
Let’s imagine a curve that passes through points A and C and that
is pulled toward B like a magnet. We will deﬁne such a curve para-
metrically. That is, the curve will be given as a vector function ⃗c(t)
where t will be a parameter running from 0 to 1. We want ⃗c(0) = A
and ⃗c(1) = C, and for each 0 < t < 1 we want ⃗c(t) to be a point on a
smooth curve bending toward B. By smooth we mean a curve that has
no sharp corners, that is, one whose derivative is everywhere deﬁned and
continuous.
So, our task is to ﬁnd a way to associate the parameter t with points
⃗c(t) on the curve we want to create.
Bézier’s solution to this problem
was to successively linearly inter-
polate points on the segments to
deﬁne ⃗c(t). Attach a point A′ on
the segment AB as shown and
measure the ratio of AA′ to AB.
A
B
C
A’
Ratio((A’, A), (A,B)) = 0.71
The value of this ratio is the value of t that would appear as the
parameter value for the point A′ in a parametric equation for AB. This
parametric equation is given by ⃗l1(t) = ⃗A + t( ⃗B −⃗A), with 0 ≤t ≤1.
(Refer to Exercise 3.2.3.) We will use this ratio parameter as the deﬁning

130
■Exploring Geometry
parameter for the curve ⃗c(t) we are trying to create. Note that when t = 0
we are at A, which is what we want. But when t = 1, we are only at B
and not at C.
We will now interpolate a point between B and C that has the same
ratio as the point A′ did along the segment AB. To do this, we will use
the dilating (or scaling) capability of your geometry software. A dilation
is deﬁned by a center point and a numerical ratio. If you are unfamiliar
with how to deﬁne dilations is your geometry software, consult the notes
on this project at at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text.
To deﬁne the dilation that will
create the desired point between
B and C, set point B as the cen-
ter of the dilation and use the pre-
ceding ratio measurement as the
dilation ratio.
A
B
C
A’
Ratio((A’, A), (A,B)) = 0.71
Once the dilation is deﬁned we
select point C and dilate it to-
wards B by this dilation. A new
point B′ will be created on BC
with the same relative parameter
value as A′ has on AB. To con-
vince yourself of this, measure the
ratio of B′B to BC as shown.
A
B
C
A’
Ratio((A’, A), (A,B)) = 0.71
B’
Ratio((B’, B), (B,C)) = 0.71
We now have parameterized both segments with two vector functions
⃗l1(t) = ⃗A + t( ⃗B −⃗A) and ⃗l2(t) = ⃗B + t(⃗C −⃗B), where the parameter
t represents the relative distance points are along their respective seg-
ments.
Since
linear
interpolation
has
worked nicely so far, we carry it
one step further on the new seg-
ment A′B′. Create this segment
and set A′ as a new center of dila-
tion. Using the same dilation ra-
tio as before, select B′ and dilate
it towards A′ by this ratio.
A
B
C
A’
Ratio((A’, A), (A,B)) = 0.71
B’
Ratio((B’, B), (B,C)) = 0.71
c(t)

Analytic Geometry
■131
This new point is the point we will use for our deﬁnition of ⃗c(t). Let’s
calculate the precise form for ⃗c(t).
Since ⃗c(t) is the interpolated point along A′B′, then it will have
equation
⃗c(t) = ⃗A′ + t( ⃗B′ −⃗A′)
We also know that ⃗A′ = ⃗l1(t) = ⃗A + t( ⃗B −⃗A) and ⃗B′ = ⃗l2(t) =
⃗B + t(⃗C −⃗B). Substituting these values into ⃗c(t) we get
⃗c(t)
=
⃗A + t( ⃗B −⃗A) + t(( ⃗B + t(⃗C −⃗B)) −( ⃗A + t( ⃗B −⃗A)))
=
⃗A + t(2 ⃗B −2 ⃗A) + t2(⃗C −2 ⃗B + ⃗A)
We note that ⃗c(0) = ⃗A = A and ⃗c(1) = ⃗C = C, which is exactly
what we wanted! Also, this function is a simple quadratic function in t
and thus is perfectly smooth. But, what does ⃗c(t) really look like?
To answer this question, hide the
two measurements, and hide the
label for ⃗c(t), to unclutter our
ﬁgure. Then, select ⃗c(t) and set
your program to trace this point.
This will cause your program to
draw copies of the point as it
moves. Drag point A′ back and
forth along AB and see how ⃗c(t)
traces out the curve we have just
calculated.
A
B
C
A’
B’
Exercise 3.3.1. It appears from our picture that the curve ⃗c(t) is actually
tangent to the vector ⃗B −⃗A at ⃗c(0) and to the vector ⃗C −⃗B at ⃗c(1). Calculate
the derivative of ⃗c(t) and prove that this is actually the case.
By controlling the positions of A, B, and C we can create curves that
are of varying shapes, but that have only one “bump.” As we discussed
earlier, for more oscillatory behavior, we will need higher order functions.
A simple way to do this is to have more control points.

132
■Exploring Geometry
Clear the screen and draw four
points connected with segments
as shown. Attach a point A′ to
AB and then measure the ratio of
A′A to AB.
A
B
C
D
A’
Ratio((A’, A), (A,B)) = 0.65
Now, review our methods of
the previous construction, and
construct B′ and C′ on BC and
CD with the same parameter as
A′ has on AB. (In your project
write-up, describe the steps you
take to accomplish this step and
the next set of steps.)
A
B
C
D
A’
Ratio((A’, A), (A,B)) = 0.65
B’
C’
Next,
construct
A′B′
and
B′C′. Now, we have just three
points, as we did at the start of
the previous construction. Con-
struct points A′′ and B′′ on A′B′
and B′C′ using the same parame-
ter.
A
B
C
D
A’
Ratio((A’, A), (A,B)) = 0.65
B’
C’
A’’
B’’
Finally, carry out the interpo-
lation process one more time to
get ⃗c(t).
A
B
C
D
A’
Ratio((A’, A), (A,B)) = 0.65
B’
C’
A’’
B’’
c(t)
If we now trace ⃗c(t) we again
get a nice smooth curve that
passes through the endpoints A
and D.
A
B
C
D
A’
B’
C’
A’’
B’’
c(t)

Analytic Geometry
■133
If we move C to the other side
of ←→
AD we get an oscillation in
the curve. (Make sure to clear the
tracing and then re-start the trac-
ing after you move C.)
A
B
C
D
A’
B’
C’
A’’
B’’
c(t)
c(t)
What is the equation for this new four-point Bézier curve? Clearly,
the parametric form for ⃗c(t) will be
⃗c(t) = ⃗A′′ + t( ⃗B′′ −⃗A′′)
From our previous work we know that ⃗A′′ = ⃗A+t(2 ⃗B −2 ⃗A)+t2(⃗C −
2 ⃗B + ⃗A) and ⃗B′′ = ⃗B + t(2⃗C −2 ⃗B) + t2( ⃗D −2⃗C + ⃗B).
Exercise 3.3.2. Substitute these values of ⃗
A′′ and ⃗
B′′ into the equation of
⃗c(t) and show that
⃗c(t) = ⃗A + t(3 ⃗B −3 ⃗A) + t2(3⃗C −6 ⃗B + 3 ⃗A) + t3( ⃗D −3⃗C + 3 ⃗B −⃗A)
Bézier curves generated from four points are called cubic Bézier
curves due to the t3 term in ⃗c(t). Bézier curves generated from three
points are called quadratic Bézier curves.
Exercise 3.3.3. Show that ⃗c(t) has the same tangent properties as the
quadratic Bézier curve. That is, show that the tangent at t = 0 is in the
direction of ⃗B −⃗A and the tangent at t = 1 is in the direction of ⃗D −⃗C.
We could continue this type of construction of Bézier curves for ﬁve
control points, or six control points, or as many control points as we wish,
in order to represent more and more complex curves. However, as we add
more points, the degree of our parametric Bézier curve increases as well.
As the number of operations to compute a point increases, so too does
the numerical instability inherent in ﬁnite precision computer algebra.
Also, the oscillatory behavior of higher order curves is not always easy
to control. Altering one control point to achieve a bump in one part of
the curve can have unwanted ripple eﬀects on other parts of the curve.
In practice, quadratic and cubic Bézier curves are the most widely

134
■Exploring Geometry
used curves for computer graphics. They are easy to calculate, relatively
easy to control as to shape, and can model highly complex ﬁgures by
joining together separately deﬁned curves to form one continuous curve.
As an example, let’s look at one of the most important uses of Bézier
curves in computer graphics—the representation of fonts. Suppose we
want to represent the letter “S”.
Here we have deﬁned two four-
point (cubic) Bézier curves to ap-
proximate the two bumps in the
“S” shape. One curve is controlled
by A, B, C, and D, with A1 the
initial parameter point and c1 the
curve point. The other curve is
controlled by D, E, F, and G with
A2 the parameter point and c2
the curve point. By “doubling up”
on the point D we make the two
curve pieces join together, and by
making C, D, and E lie along
a line, we make the curve look
smooth across the joining region
(the curves’ tangents line up).
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
A1
A2
c1
c2
c1
c2
Exercise 3.3.4. Use cubic (or quadratic) Bézier curves to design your own
version of the letter “b.” Describe your construction in detail and provide a
printout of the curves used, similar to that in the preceding example.
In the actual design of a font, we would need to deﬁne more than
a simple curve representing the shape. Fonts are not made of one-
dimensional curves, but are made of ﬁlled-in areas that are bounded
by curves. For example, look closely at the bold letter G of this sen-
tence. Notice how the vertical bulge on the left side of the shape is much
thicker than the top and bottom parts. When designing a font, what we
actually design is the outline of each letter shape; that is, the curve that
surrounds the shape. Once this is deﬁned, we ﬁll in the outline to form
the completed shape.

Analytic Geometry
■135
Project Report
The ability to model complex geometric ﬁgures is a critical component of
modern computer graphics systems. Computational geometry methods,
like the ones explored in this project, are at the heart of computer-aided
design and also appear in the computer-generated images we see on
television and in ﬁlm.
For your project report, provide detailed answers to each of the ques-
tions, along with an explanation of the steps you took to construct the
four-point cubic Bézier curve.
3.4
ANGLES IN COORDINATE GEOMETRY
As mentioned in the previous chapter, angles have a very precise deﬁ-
nition in classical Euclidean geometry, a deﬁnition that is independent
of questions of orientation. In this section we will expand the notion of
angle in coordinate geometry to include the idea of orientation. We start
oﬀby deﬁning two familiar functions.
Deﬁnition 3.4. Let θ = ∠CAB
be an acute angle in the plane.
Let c be the circle centered at
A of radius equal to AB. Let
l be the perpendicular to ←→
AC
through B, intersecting ←→
AC at
D.
A
B
C
l
D
Then
cos(θ) = AD
AB
sin(θ) = BD
AB
These are the standard trig formulas everyone learns to love in high
school trigonometry. Note that this deﬁnition is consistent with the def-
inition presented in Exercise 2.5.5 of Chapter 2.

136
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 3.7. Let (x, y) be a point in the plane making an acute
angle of θ with the x-axis. Let r be the distance from (x, y) to the
origin. Then
x = r cos(θ), y = r sin(θ)
Proof: This is an immediate consequence of the deﬁnition of sine and
cosine. 2
Corollary 3.8. If (x, y) is a point on the unit circle (in the ﬁrst
quadrant) making an angle of θ with the x-axis, then x = cos(θ)
and y = sin(θ).
We now want to extend the deﬁnition of sine and cosine to obtuse
angles. If 90 < θ ≤180, we deﬁne
cos(θ)
=
−cos(180 −θ)
sin(θ)
=
sin(180 −θ)
It is a simple exercise to show that this new deﬁnition still has x = cos(θ)
and y = sin(θ), where (x, y) is a point on the unit circle making an obtuse
angle of θ with the x-axis.
To extend this correspondence between angles and points on the
unit circle into the third and fourth quadrants, we need to expand our
deﬁnition of angle measure. Note that for angles whose initial side is on
the x-axis, and whose measures are between 0 and 180 degrees, there
is a one-to-one correspondence between the set of such angles and the
lengths of arcs on the unit circle. This correspondence is given by the
length of the arc subtended by the angle. Thus, it makes sense to identify
an angle by the arclength swept out by the angle on the unit circle. We
call this arclength the radian measure of the angle.
Deﬁnition 3.5. An angle has radian measure θ if the angle sub-
tends an arc of length θ on the unit circle. If θ is positive, then the
arclength is swept out in a counterclockwise fashion. If θ is negative,
the arc is swept out in a clockwise fashion.
Thus, an angle of π radians corresponds to an angle of 180 degrees
swept out in the counterclockwise direction from the x-axis along the unit

Analytic Geometry
■137
circle. Likewise, an angle of 2π would be the entire circle, or 360 degrees,
while an angle of - π
2 would correspond to sweeping out an angle of 90
degrees clockwise from the x-axis. In this deﬁnition of angle, the direction
or orientation of the angle is measured by the positive or negative nature
of the radian measure.
Consistent with this extension of the deﬁnition of angle measure, we
extend the deﬁnitions of sine and cosine in the usual fashion consistent
with the x, y values on the unit circle.
The next result is a generalization of the Pythagorean Theorem.
Theorem 3.9. (The Law of Cosines) Let ABC be a triangle with
sides of lengths a, b, c, with a opposite A, b opposite B, and c oppo-
site C. Then
c2 = a2 + b2 −2ab cos(∠ACB).
Proof: Let AD be the altitude to side BC at D. There are four cases
to consider.
First, suppose that D = B or D = C. If D = B, then cos(∠ACB) =
a
b and we would have c2 = a2 + b2 −2a2 = b2 −a2, which is just a
restatement of the Pythagorean Theorem. If D = C, we again have a
restatement of the Pythagorean Theorem.
If D is not B or C, then either D is between B and C, or D is on one
or the other of the sides of BC on ←→
BC. In all three cases (Figure 3.8) we
have
DB2 + AD2 = c2
and
DC2 + AD2 = b2
Solving for AD2, we get
b2 −DC2 = c2 −DB2
Suppose that D is between B and C. Then
a2 = DB2 + 2(DB)(DC) + DC2

138
■Exploring Geometry
A
B
c
C
a
b
A
B
c
C
a
b
A
B
c
C
a
b
D
D
D
Figure 3.8
Solving for DB2 and substituting into the equation above, we get
c2 −a2 + 2(DB)(DC) + DC2 = b2 −DC2
or
c2 = a2 + b2 −2(DB + DC)DC = a2 + b2 −2a(DC)
Since cos(∠ACB) = DC
b , we have
c2 = a2 + b2 −2ab cos(∠ACB)
A similar argument can be used to show the result in the other two
cases. 2
Another very useful result connecting angles and triangles is the Law
of Sines.
Theorem 3.10. (Law of Sines) Let ABC be a triangle with sides
of lengths a, b, c, with a opposite A, b opposite B, and c opposite C.
Then
a
sin(∠A) =
b
sin(∠B) =
c
sin(∠C) = d
(3.2)
where d is the diameter of the circle that circumscribes the triangle.

Analytic Geometry
■139
Proof: Let σ be the circumscribing circle, which can be constructed
using the techniques from Project 2.2 of Chapter 2. Let O be the center
of σ (Figure 3.9).
O
A
σ
B
C
b
a
c
D
Figure 3.9
Let D be the intersection of −−→
BO with σ. If A and D are on the
same side of ←→
BC, then ∠BAC and ∠BDC are congruent, as they share
the same arc (refer to Corollary 2.32 in Chapter 2). Thus, sin(∠A) =
sin(∠D), and since △DCB is a right triangle (refer to Corollary 2.33),
we have a = sin(∠D)(BD) = sin(∠A)d.
If A and D are on opposite sides of ←→
BC, as illustrated in Figure 3.10,
it is left as an exercise to show that sin(∠A) = sin(∠D) and thus a =
sin(∠A)d. Similar arguments can be used to show b = sin(∠B)d and
c = sin(∠C)d.2
O
A
σ
B
C
b
a
c
D
Figure 3.10

140
■Exploring Geometry
We can connect vectors and angles via the following results.
Deﬁnition 3.6. The dot product of two vectors v = (v1, v2) and
w = (w1, w2) is deﬁned as
v • w = v1w1 + v2w2
Theorem 3.11. Let v, w be two vectors with tails at the origin in a
coordinate system, as illustrated in Figure 3.11. Let θ be the angle
between these two vectors. Then
v • w = ∥v∥∥w∥cos(θ)
O
v
w
θ
Figure 3.11
Proof: Let v = (v1, v2) and w = (w1, w2). The vector from v to w will
be the vector w −v. Let θ be the angle between v and w. By the Law of
Cosines, we have that
∥v −w∥2 = ∥v∥2 + ∥w∥2 −2∥v∥∥w∥cos(θ)
Also, since ∥v∥2 = v • v, we have that
∥v −w∥2 = (v −w) • (v −w) = v • v −2v • w + w • w
and, thus,
∥v −w∥2 = ∥v∥2 + ∥w∥2 −2v • w
Clearly, v • w = ∥v∥∥w∥cos(θ). 2
We list here some of the useful identities from trigonometry. The
proof of the ﬁrst identity is clear from the deﬁnition of cosine and sine
and the fact that the point (cos(α), sin(α)) lies on the unit circle. The
proofs of the other two identities are left as exercises.

Analytic Geometry
■141
Theorem 3.12. For any angles α, β,
• sin2(α) + cos2(α) = 1
• sin(α + β) = sin(α) cos(β) + sin(β) cos(α)
• cos(α + β) = cos(α) cos(β) −sin(β) sin(α)
Exercise 3.4.1. Let A = (cos(α), sin(α))
and B = (cos(β), sin(β)). Use the
deﬁnition of the dot product, and the
preceding result connecting the dot
product to the angle between vec-
tors, to prove that cos(α −β) =
cos(α) cos(β) + sin(β) sin(α).
α
β
Exercise 3.4.2. Use the previous exercise to show that
cos(α + β) = cos(α) cos(β) −sin(β) sin(α)
Exercise 3.4.3. Show that
sin(α + β) = cos(π
2 −(α + β))
and then use this to prove that
sin(α + β) = sin(α) cos(β) + sin(β) cos(α)
Exercise 3.4.4. Finish the proof of the Law of Sines in the case where the
points A and D are on opposite sides of ←→
BC.
3.5
THE COMPLEX PLANE
Complex numbers were created to extend the real numbers to a system
where the equation x2+1 = 0 has a solution. This requires the deﬁnition
of a new number (symbol), √−1. The Swiss mathematician Leonhard
Euler (1707–1783) introduced the notation i for this new number in the
late 1700s.
By adding this number to the reals, we get a new number system
consisting of real numbers and products of real numbers with powers of

142
■Exploring Geometry
i. Since i2 = −1, these combinations can be simpliﬁed to numbers of the
form
α = a + ib
where a and b are real. The set of all possible numbers of this form
will be called the set of complex numbers and the plane containing these
numbers will be called the complex plane.
Historically, complex numbers were created strictly for solving alge-
braic equations, such as x2 + 1 = 0. In the early part of the nineteenth
century, Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) and Augustin Louis Cauchy
(1789–1857) began working with complex numbers in a geometric fash-
ion, treating them as points in the plane.
Thus, a complex number has an interesting dual nature. It can be
thought of geometrically as a vector (i.e., an ordered pair of numbers), or
it can be thought of algebraically as a single (complex) number having
real components.
Deﬁnition 3.7. If z = x+iy is a complex number, then x is called
the real part of z, denoted Re(z), and y is called the imaginary part,
denoted Im(z).
Given a complex number z = x + iy, or two complex numbers z1 =
x1+iy1 and z2 = x2+iy2, we deﬁne basic algebraic operations as follows:
Addition-Subtraction
z1 ± z2 = (x1 ± x2) + i(y1 ± y2)
Multiplication by Real Scalar
kz = kx + iky, for k a real number
Multiplication
z1z2 = (x1x2 −y1y2) + i(x1y2 + x2y1)
Complex Conjugate
z = x −iy
Modulus
|z| =
√
zz =
p
x2 + y2
Note that complex addition (subtraction) is deﬁned so that this op-
eration satisﬁes the deﬁnition of vector addition (subtraction). In par-
ticular, complex addition satisﬁes the parallelogram property described
earlier in this chapter.
The modulus of z is the same as the norm (length) of the vector that
z represents. The conjugate of z yields a number that is the reﬂection of
z (considered as a vector) across the x-axis.

Analytic Geometry
■143
3.5.1
Polar Form
The x and y coordinates of a complex number z can be written as
x = r cos(θ), y = r sin(θ)
where r is the length of v = (x, y) and θ is the angle that v makes with
the x-axis. Since r = |z|, then
z = x + iy = |z|(cos(θ) + i sin(θ))
The term (cos(θ) + i sin(θ)) can be written in a simpler form using
the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 3.8. The complex exponential function ez is deﬁned as
ez = ex+iy = ex(cos(y) + i sin(y))
From this deﬁnition we can derive Euler’s Formula:
eiθ = cos(θ) + i sin(θ)
Thus, the polar form for a complex number z can be written as
z = |z|eiθ
All of the usual power properties of the real exponential hold for ez,
for example, ez1+z2 = ez1ez2. Thus,
eiθeiφ = ei(θ+φ)
We also note that if z = |z|eiθ, then
z = |z|e−iθ
The angle coordinate for z will be identiﬁed as follows:
Deﬁnition 3.9. Given z = |z|eiθ, the argument or arg of z is a
value between 0 and 2π deﬁned by
arg(z) = θ (mod 2π)

144
■Exploring Geometry
We use here the modular arithmetic deﬁnition that a mod n repre-
sents the remainder (in [0, n)) left when a is divided by n. For example,
24 mod 10 is 4.
From the deﬁnition of arg, and using the properties of the complex
exponential, we see that if z and w are complex numbers, then
arg(zw) = (arg(z) + arg(w))(mod 2π)
The proof is left as an exercise. Also, if z = |z|eiθ and w = |w|eiφ,
then wz = |w||z|ei(φ+θ).
Exercise 3.5.1. Prove that eiθeiφ = ei(θ+φ) using Euler’s Formula and the
trigonometric properties from section 3.4.
Exercise 3.5.2. Use Euler’s Formula to prove the remarkable identity eiπ +
1 = 0, relating ﬁve of the most important constants in mathematics.
Exercise 3.5.3. Show that arg(zw) = (arg(z) + arg(w))(mod 2π), where z
and w are complex.
Exercise 3.5.4. Use the polar form of a complex number to show that every
non-zero complex number has a multiplicative inverse.
Exercise 3.5.5. Express these fractions as complex numbers by rationalizing
the denominator, namely, by multiplying the numerator and denominator by
the conjugate of the denominator.
1
2i, 1 + i
1 −i,
1
2 + 4i
3.6
BIRKHOFF’S AXIOMATIC SYSTEM FOR ANALYTIC
GEOMETRY
In this last section of the chapter, we will consider Birkhoﬀ’s axiomatic
system, a system that is quite diﬀerent from Euclid’s original axiomatic
system. Euclid’s set of axioms is somewhat cumbersome in developing
analytic geometry. One has to construct the set of real numbers and also
to develop the machinery necessary for computing distance and working
with angle measure. Birkhoﬀ’s system, on the other hand, assumes the
existence of the reals and gives four axioms for angles and distances
directly.
Birkhoﬀ’s system starts with two undeﬁned terms (point and line)
and assumes the existence of two real-valued functions—a distance func-
tion, d(A, B), which takes two points and returns a non-negative real
number, and an angle function, m(∠A, O, B), which takes an ordered

Analytic Geometry
■145
triple of points ({A, O, B} with A ̸= O and B ̸= O) and returns a
number between 0 and 2π.
Birkhoﬀ’s Axioms are as follows:
The Ruler Postulate The points of any line can be put into one-
to-one correspondence with the real numbers x so that if xA
corresponds to A and xB corresponds to B, then |xA −xB| =
d(A, B) for all points A, B on the line.
The Euclidean Postulate One and only one line contains any
two distinct points.
The Protractor Postulate Given any point O, the rays emanat-
ing from O can be put into one-to-one correspondence with the
set of real numbers (mod 2π) so that if am corresponds to ray m
and an corresponds to ray n and if A, B are points (other than
O) on m, n, respectively, then m(∠AOB) = am −an (mod 2π).
Furthermore, if the point B varies continuously along a line n
not containing O, then an varies continuously also.
The SAS Similarity Postulate If in two triangles ABC and
A′B′C′, and for some real number k
>
0, we have
d(A′, B′) = k d(A, B), d(A′, C′) = k d(A, C), and m(∠BAC) =
m(∠B′A′C′), then the remaining angles are pair-wise equal in
measure and d(B′, C′) = k d(B, C).
With these four axioms and the assumed structure of the real num-
bers, Birkhoﬀwas able to derive the standard set of results found in
planar Euclidean geometry [6].
For example, given three distinct points A, B, and C, Birkhoﬀde-
ﬁnes betweenness as follows: B is between A and C if d(A, B)+d(B, C) =
d(A, C). From this deﬁnition, Birkhoﬀdeﬁnes a segment AB as the
points A and B along with all points between them. Birkhoﬀthen de-
ﬁnes rays, triangles, and so on, and shows the standard set of results
concerning betweenness in the plane.
The protractor postulate allows us to deﬁne right angles as follows:
two rays m,n from a point O form a right angle if m(∠AOB) = ± π
2,
where A, B are points on m, n. In this case, we say the rays are perpen-
dicular. Parallel lines are deﬁned in the usual way—as lines that never
meet.
Let’s see how analytic geometry can be treated as a model for

146
■Exploring Geometry
Birkhoﬀ’s system. That is, we will see that Birkhoﬀ’s postulates can
be satisﬁed by the properties of analytic geometry.
Deﬁne a point as an ordered pair (x, y) of numbers and deﬁne the
distance function as
d((x1, y1), (x2, y2)) =
q
(x1 −x2)2 + (y1 −y2)2
Note that this deﬁnition does not suppose any geometric properties of
points. All we are assuming is that points are ordered pairs of numbers.
Deﬁne a line as the set of points (x, y) satisfying an equation of the
form ax + by + c = 0, where a, b, c are real constants, uniquely given up
to a common scale factor.
We next deﬁne vectors as ordered pairs and deﬁne the angle deter-
mined by two vectors by
cos(θ) =
v • w
∥v∥∥w∥
where the dot product and norm of vectors is deﬁned algebraically as
before, and the cosine function can be deﬁned as a Taylor series, thus
avoiding any geometric interpretation. The angle determined by two rays
emanating from a point will be deﬁned as the angle determined by two
vectors along these rays.
Does this deﬁnition of angles satisfy Birkhoﬀ’s Protractor Postulate?
First of all, given any point O we can identify a ray from O with a
direction vector w = (x, y), with w ̸= (0, 0). To create a correspondence
between angles and numbers, we will ﬁx a particular direction given by
v = (1, 0) and measure the angle determined by w and v:
cos(θ) =
v • w
∥v∥∥w∥=
x
∥w∥
We then deﬁne the sine function by
sin(θ) =
y
∥w∥
If we divide w by its length, we still have a vector in the same
direction as w and thus we can assume w = (x,
√
1 −x2), or w =
(x, −
√
1 −x2) with −1 ≤x ≤1. If w = (x,
√
1 −x2) we get from
the above equation that −1 ≤cos(θ) ≤1, and thus 0 ≤θ ≤π. We can
extend this correspondence to angles between π and 2π in the usual way
by identifying those angles between π and 2π with values of w, where
w = (x, −
√
1 −x2).

Analytic Geometry
■147
Thus, we have created a correspondence between rays from O (and
thus angles) and real numbers between 0 and 2π. Now, to check whether
the second part of the Protractor Postulate holds, we suppose m, n
are two rays from O, with direction vectors w1 = (x1, y1) and w2 =
(x2, y2). If θ1, θ2 are the angles made by w1, w2 under the correspondence
described, then
cos(θ1)
=
x1
∥w1∥
cos(θ2)
=
x2
∥w2∥
Also, using the deﬁnitions of sine and cosine, we can show alge-
braically that
cos(θ1 −θ2) = cos(θ1) cos(θ2) + sin(θ1) sin(θ2)
(Review the exercises at the end of section 3.3 to convince yourself
that this formula can be proved using only the dot product and cosine
expression above and the algebraic properties of sine and cosine.)
Now, by deﬁnition, if θ is the angle formed by m,n, then
cos(θ)
=
w1 • w2
∥w1∥∥w2∥= x1x2 + y1y2
∥w1∥∥w2∥
=
x1
∥w1∥
x2
∥w2∥+
y1
∥w1∥
y2
∥w2∥
=
cos(θ1) cos(θ2) + sin(θ1) sin(θ2)
=
cos(θ1 −θ2)
Thus, under the correspondence described above between rays and
numbers, am = θ1 and an = θ2 are the “angles” assigned to m and n,
and then m(∠AOB) = an −am(mod 2π), where A, B are points on n
and m.
The analytic geometry model also satisﬁes Birkhoﬀ’s Euclidean Pos-
tulate. Let (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) be two distinct points. To ﬁnd the “line”
these points are on, we need to ﬁnd the constants a, b, c in the line equa-
tion ax + by + c = 0.
Since (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) are on this line, we have
ax1 + by1 + c = 0
ax2 + by2 + c = 0

148
■Exploring Geometry
Subtracting, we get a(x1 −x2) + b(y1 −y2) = 0. Since (x1, y1) and
(x2, y2) are distinct, we know that one of x1 −x2 or y1 −y2 are non-zero.
Suppose y1 −y2 ̸= 0. Then
b = −ax1 −x2
y1 −y2
and
c = −ax1 −by1
Since the constants need only be deﬁned up to a constant multiple, we
can choose a = 1, and the line through the two points is now well deﬁned
and, in fact, uniquely determined (up to the constant scale factor).
The Ruler Postulate follows from ﬁrst choosing a point O = (x0, y0)
on a given line l to serve as the origin. Let (x1, y1) be a second point on
l. Let ∆x = x1 −x0 and ∆y = y1 −y0. Then
a(∆x) = −b(∆y)
If (x, y) is any other point on l, then
a(x −x0) = −b(y −y0)
If x −x0 = t(∆x), then clearly, y −y0 = t(∆y), in order for the
preceding equations to hold. Thus, we can write the line’s equation in
vector form as
(x, y) = (x0, y0) + t(∆x, ∆y)
For the correspondence required in the Ruler Postulate, simply as-
sociate the point (x, y) with the value of t
p(∆x)2 + (∆y)2. It is left as
an exercise to check that |xA −xB| = d(A, B) for all points A, B on l.
Finally, does the analytic geometry model satisfy the last postulate,
the SAS condition for similar triangles?
Consider the Law of Cosines, described earlier in this chapter. Given
a triangle ABC with side lengths a = BC, b = AC, and c = AB and
angles α = m(∠BAC), β = m(∠ABC), and γ = m(∠ACB), then
c2 = a2 + b2 −2a b cos(γ)
It is clear that if two pairs of sides in two triangles are proportional
and if the included angles are equal, then by the Law of Cosines the third
pair of sides must have the same constant of proportionality. Then, using
the Law of Cosines again with all three sides proportional, it is clear that
the other angles must be equal.

Analytic Geometry
■149
It is left as an exercise to show that the Law of Cosines can be proven
from within the Birkhoﬀmodel.
We have thus proved that Birkhoﬀ’s Postulates are satisﬁed within
the model of analytic geometry. Since Birkhoﬀshowed that classical
Euclidean geometry can be derived from his set of postulates, we see
that Euclidean geometry can be derived from within an analytic model,
just by using the properties of ordered pairs of numbers and analytic
equations of lines and angles. Birkhoﬀ’s system does not suﬀer the foun-
dational problems of Euclid’s original axiomatic system. For example,
there is no need to axiomatize the idea of “betweeness” since it can
be analytically deﬁned. However, the system derives its power and ele-
gance at a price—the assumption of the existence of the real numbers.
To be complete, we would have to develop the real numbers before us-
ing Birkhoﬀ’s system, by axiomatically creating the reals from within
another system.
Exercise 3.6.1. Finish the veriﬁcation that the Ruler Postulate is satisﬁed
by the analytic geometry model. That is, show that |xA −xB| = d(A, B) for
all points A, B on l, where l is represented as (x, y) = (x0, y0) + t(dx, dy).
Exercise 3.6.2. We have to take care when using a result, such as the Law
of Cosines, to prove that Birkhoﬀ’s SAS Similarity Postulate holds for the
analytic geometry model. We have to ensure that the Law of Cosines can be
proved solely within the model itself. Derive the Law of Cosines by using the
vector equation for the cosine of an angle and by using general properties of
vectors. [Hint: c2 = ∥⃗B −⃗A∥2 = ∥( ⃗B −⃗C) −( ⃗A −⃗C)∥2.]
Exercise 3.6.3. Using the vector deﬁnition of sine and cosine, prove that
sin2(θ) + cos2(θ) = 1.
Exercise 3.6.4. We have seen in this chapter two approaches to constructing
analytic geometry. In the ﬁrst approach, we construct analytic geometry from a
basis of synthetic Euclidean geometry, building it from prior work on triangles,
parallels, perpendiculars, angles, and so on, in the style of Euclid and Hilbert.
In the second approach, we start with Birkhoﬀ’s axioms for geometry and then
consider analytic geometry as a model for this axiom set. Which approach do
you think is better pedagogically?
Exercise 3.6.5. The invention of analytic geometry has often been described
as the “arithmetization” of geometry. What is meant by this?


C H A P T E R 4
Constructions
Geometry is the science of correct reasoning on incorrect
ﬁgures. – George Pólya (1887–1985) (from [35, page 208])
4.1
EUCLIDEAN CONSTRUCTIONS
The quote by Pólya is somewhat tongue-in-cheek, but contains an im-
portant nugget of wisdom that is at the heart of how the Greeks viewed
geometric constructions. For Euclid a geometric ﬁgure drawn on paper
was only an approximate representation of the abstract, exact geometric
relationship described by the ﬁgure and established through the use of
axioms, deﬁnitions, and theorems.
When we think of drawing a geometric ﬁgure, we typically imag-
ine using some kind of straightedge (perhaps a ruler) to draw segments
and a compass to draw circles. Euclid, in his ﬁrst three axioms for pla-
nar Euclidean geometry, stipulates that there are exact, ideal versions
of these two tools that can be used to construct perfect segments and
circles. Euclid is making an abstraction of the concrete process of draw-
ing geometric ﬁgures so that he can provide logically rigorous proofs of
geometric results.
But Euclid was paradoxically quite concrete in his notions of what
constituted a proof of a geometric result. It was not enough to show
that a ﬁgure or result could be constructed—the actual construction had
to be demonstrated, using an ideal straightedge and compass or other
constructions that had already been proved valid.
In this section we will follow Euclid and assume the ability to con-
struct a segment connecting two given points and the ability to construct
a circle with a given point as the center and a constructed segment as
151

152
■Exploring Geometry
the radius. From these two basic constructions, we will develop some of
the more useful constructions that appear in Euclidean geometry.
Many of these constructions are well known from high school geom-
etry and proofs of validity will be developed in the exercises.
Construction 4.1. (Copying an Angle) To copy the angle deﬁned
by two rays −→
AB and −→
AC to ray −−→
DE, we
• Construct the circle at A of radius AB. This will intersect
−→
AC at point F.
• Copy segment AB to −−→
DE, getting segment DG.
• Copy a circle centered at B of radius BF to point G. Let H
be an intersection of this circle with the arc used in part 2.
Then ∠HDG will have the same angle measure as ∠BAC
(Figure 4.1).
A
B
F
D
E
G
C
H
Figure 4.1 Copying an angle
Proof: The proof is left as an exercise. 2
Note in this construction the implied ability to copy a segment from
one place to another. This assumes the existence of a non-collapsing
compass, that is, a compass that perfectly holds the relative position of
its dividers as you move it from one place to another.
Euclid, in the second proposition of Book I of The Elements, proves
that one can copy the length of a given segment to another point, using
only the two axiomatic constructions and Proposition 1 (the construction

Constructions
■153
of an equilateral triangle). It can be inferred that Euclid does not assume
that a compass preserves its position as it is moved, for if he did, then
there would be no need for the second proposition.
Why would Euclid make the assumption of a collapsing compass?
Just as he strove to make his set of axioms as simple and economical
as possible, so too he sought to make the ideal tools of construction as
simple and free of ambiguity as possible. Thus, if one could not guarantee
that the dividers of a compass would stay perfectly ﬁxed when lifted from
a drawing, then Euclid did not want to assume this property for his ideal
compass.
It is interesting to note, however, that Proposition 2 implies that one
can assume either a collapsing compass or a non-collapsing compass with
equivalent results. For Proposition 2 implies that a collapsing compass
and straightedge allow one to copy segment lengths from one position
to another. Because of this equivalence, we will assume compasses are
non-collapsing for the rest of this chapter.
Two quite elegant and simple constructions are those of bisecting a
segment and bisecting an angle.
Construction 4.2. (Perpendicular Bisector of a Segment) To bi-
sect segment AB we set the compass center at A and construct a
circle of radius AB. Likewise we set the compass center at B and
draw a circle of radius AB. These two circles will intersect at two
points C, D. The line through C, D will be a perpendicular bisector
of AB and will intersect AB at the midpoint M of AB (Figure 4.2).
A
B
C
D
M
Figure 4.2 Perpendicular bisector of a segment
Proof: The proof is left as an exercise. 2

154
■Exploring Geometry
Construction 4.3. (Bisecting an Angle) To bisect the angle deﬁned
by rays −→
AB and −→
AC:
• At A construct a circle of radius AB, intersecting −→
AC at D.
• At B construct a circle of radius BD and at D construct a
circle of radius BD. These will intersect at E.
• Construct ray −→
AE. This will be the bisector of the angle (Fig-
ure 4.3).
A
C
B
D
E
Figure 4.3 Bisector of an angle
Proof: The proof is left as an exercise. 2
To construct a line perpendicular to a given line l at a point A, there
are two possible constructions, depending on whether A is on l or oﬀl.
Construction 4.4. (Perpendicular to a Line through a Point on
the Line) To construct a perpendicular to line l at a point A on l, we
ﬁrst set our compass center at A and draw a circle of some positive
radius. This creates a segment BC where the circle intersects l.
Then do the construction for the perpendicular bisector (Figure 4.4).

Constructions
■155
A
B
C
D
Figure 4.4 Perpendicular to a line through a point on the line
Proof: The proof is similar to that of the perpendicular bisector. 2
Construction 4.5. (Perpendicular to a Line through a Point Not
on the Line) To construct a perpendicular to line l at a point A
that is not on l, we ﬁrst select a point B on l and set our compass
center at A and draw a circle of some radius AB. Either l will be
tangent to the circle at B (in which case AB will be perpendicular
to l) or the circle will intersect l at two points B, C. If the circle
intersects at two points, construct the angle bisector to ∠BAC. This
will intersect BC at right angles (Figure 4.5).
B
l
A
C
D
Figure 4.5 Perpendicular to a line through a point not on the line
Proof: The proof is left as an exercise. 2

156
■Exploring Geometry
We have already mentioned Euclid’s construction of an equilateral
triangle. We include it here for completeness.
Construction 4.6. (Equilateral Triangle)
To construct an equilateral tri-
angle on a segment AB, we
construct two circles, one with
center A and one with cen-
ter B, with both having radius
AB. Let C be an intersection
of these circles. Then ∆ABC is
equilateral.
A
B
C
Proof: The proof is left as an exercise. 2
For the next set of constructions, we will not include all of the helping
marks from earlier constructions but will instead just outline the major
construction steps. The proofs of the correctness of these constructions
can be found in Project 2.2 from Chapter 2.
Construction 4.7. (Circumcenter) To construct the circumcenter
P of ∆ABC, we ﬁnd the intersection of two perpendicular bisectors
of the triangle’s sides (Figure 4.6).
A
B
C
P
Figure 4.6 Triangle circumcenter

Constructions
■157
Construction 4.8. (Orthocenter) To construct the orthocenter O
of ∆ABC, we ﬁnd the intersection of two altitudes of the triangle.
An altitude is a perpendicular to a side of the triangle that passes
through the opposite vertex (Figure 4.7).
A
B
C
O
Figure 4.7 Triangle orthocenter
Construction 4.9. (Incenter) To construct the incenter I of
∆ABC, we ﬁnd the intersection of two angle bisectors of the angles
of the triangle (Figure 4.8).
A
B
C
I
Figure 4.8 Triangle incenter

158
■Exploring Geometry
Construction 4.10. (Centroid) To construct the centroid Q of
∆ABC, we ﬁnd the intersection of two medians of the triangle. A
median is a segment from the midpoint of a side to the opposite
vertex (Figure 4.9).
A
B
C
Q
Figure 4.9 Triangle centroid
We will now look at some circle constructions. Again we will not put
in all of the helping construction marks that are based on constructions
covered earlier. The proofs of the correctness of these constructions can
be found in the section on circle geometry in Chapter 2.
Construction 4.11. (Tangent to a Circle at a Point on Circle)
To construct the tangent to a circle c at a point P on the circle, we
construct the line through the center O of the circle and P and then
ﬁnd the perpendicular to this line at P (Figure 4.10).
O
c
P
Figure 4.10 Tangent to a circle at a point on circle

Constructions
■159
Construction 4.12. (Tangent to a Circle at a Point Not on Circle)
To construct the two tangents to a circle c, with center O, at a point
P not on the circle, we
• Construct segment OP and ﬁnd the midpoint M of OP.
• Construct the circle at M of radius OM.
• Let T1 and T2 be the two intersections of this new circle with
c.
• Construct two lines: one through P and T1 and the other
through P and T2. These will be tangents to c through P (Fig-
ure 4.11).
O
c
P
M
T2
T1
Figure 4.11 Tangent to a circle at a point not on circle
We note here that all of the preceding constructions are independent
of the parallel postulate; that is, the proof of their validity does not
depend on any result derived from Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate.
Here are three Euclidean circle constructions that do rely on the
parallel property of Euclidean geometry.

160
■Exploring Geometry
Construction 4.13. (Circle through Three Points) To construct
the circle through three non-collinear points A, B, C, we
• Construct the segments AB and BC.
• Construct the perpendicular bisectors of these segments. Let
O be the intersection of these bisectors.
• Construct the circle with center O and radius OA. This is the
desired circle (Figure 4.12).
A
O
B
C
Figure 4.12 Circle through three points
Construction 4.14. (Inversion of a Point through a Circle) To
construct the inverse of a point P inside a circle c, we
• Construct the ray −→
OP, where O is the center of c.
• Construct the perpendicular to this ray at P. Let T be an
intersection of this ray with the circle.
• At T, construct the tangent to the circle. The intersection P ′
of this tangent with −→
OP will be the inverse point to P through
c (Figure 4.13).

Constructions
■161
O
c
P
T
P’
Figure 4.13 Inversion of a point through a circle
Construction 4.15. (Orthogonal Circles) To construct a circle or-
thogonal to a circle c through two points P, Q inside c, we
• Construct the inverse point P ′ to P through c.
• Construct the circle through the three points P, P ′, and Q
(Figure 4.14).
O
c
P
P’
Q
Figure 4.14 Orthogonal circles
This concludes our review of some of the most basic Euclidean con-
structions. Other basic constructions involving parallels and triangles
are covered in the exercises of this section.
Exercise 4.1.1. Prove that Construction 4.1 creates a new angle congruent
to the original angle.

162
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 4.1.2. Prove that Construction 4.2 produces the perpendicular bi-
sector of a segment.
Exercise 4.1.3. Prove that Construction 4.3 produces the angle bisector of
an angle.
Exercise 4.1.4. Prove that Construction 4.5 produces the perpendicular to
a line through a point not on the line.
Exercise 4.1.5. Prove that Construction 4.6 produces an equilateral trian-
gle.
Exercise 4.1.6. In this exercise we will investigate a construction that will
allow us to copy a circle with a collapsing compass. Given a circle c with
center O and radius point A and another point B, we wish to construct a circle
centered at B of radius OA. It suﬃces to prove the result for the case where
B is outside c. (Why?) First, construct a circle centered at O of radius OB.
Then construct a circle at B of radius OB. Let C and D be the intersection
points of these circles. Let E be an intersection of the circle centered at B
with the original circle c.
O
A
c
B
b
C
D
F
E
H
G
Figure 4.15 Copying a circle
At intersection point C, construct a circle of radius CE. This circle will
intersect the circle at B of radius OB at a point G. Show that the circle with
center B and radius point G is the desired circle. [Hint: Show that ∆CGO
and ∆CEB are congruent, and then consider ∆GBO and ∆EOB.] Why is
this construction valid for a collapsing compass?

Constructions
■163
Exercise 4.1.7. Using the perpendicular construction, show how one can
construct a line parallel to a given line through a point not on the line.
Exercise 4.1.8. Draw a segment AB and devise a construction of the isosce-
les right triangle with AB as a base.
Exercise 4.1.9. Show how to construct a triangle given two segments a and
b and an angle ∠ABC that will be the included angle of the triangle. To what
triangle congruence result is this construction related?
Exercise 4.1.10. Given a segment AB and a positive integer n, devise a
construction for dividing AB into n congruent sub-segments.
4.2
PROJECT 6 - EUCLIDEAN EGGS
So far we have looked at constructions of fairly traditional geometric
ﬁgures—lines, circles, parallels, perpendiculars, tangents, and so on. In
this project we will look at a way of joining circular arcs together in a
smooth fashion to make interesting shapes.
The idea of joining curves together so that they look “smooth” across
the point of attachment can be traced back to at least the time of the
ancient Romans and their construction of arches and oval tracks. The
ﬁfteenth-century artist Albrecht D¨urer makes great use of this technique
in his design of alphabets for the printing press.
In his book Mathographics [11], Robert Dixon describes how to make
a variety of curves and oval shapes using a simple method of smoothly
joining circular arcs.
To see how this method works, we’ll try a little experiment. (Notes
on how to use particular dynamic geometry software packages for this
experiment can be found at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text.)
Start up your geometry software
and create a segment AB. Attach
a point C to the segment and cre-
ate a circle c1 with center A and
radius point C, and a circle c2
with center B and radius point C.
A
B
C
c1
c2

164
■Exploring Geometry
Now attach two points D and
E on circle c1 and two points F
and G on c2 as shown.
A
B
C
c1
c2
D
F
E
G
Hide the two circles and con-
struct an arc through the three
points C, D, and E. Similarly,
construct the arc on C, F, and G.
A
B
C
D
F
E
G
Note how smoothly these two diﬀerent arcs join together at C, even
though they are constructed from circles of diﬀerent radii.
Exercise 4.2.1. Show that two circular arcs joined together in this fash-
ion will always be smooth across the join point (that is, their tangents will
coincide) if the following condition holds: a straight line drawn through the
centers of the two arcs passes through the point where they are joined. (In the
preceding ﬁgure, this would refer to ←→
AB passing through point C.)
We will use this idea to construct an oval, or more precisely an egg.
Clear the screen and create segment AB. Construct the midpoint M
of AB and construct a perpendicular to AB at M (refer to Figure 4.16).
Next create three circles: c1 with center M and radius point A, c2 with
center A and radius point B, and c3 with center B and radius point A.

Constructions
■165
A
B
M
c1
c2
c3
Figure 4.16
Next construct the intersection points I1 and I2 of the perpendicular
with c1, and then create two rays, one from B through I1, and one from
A through I1 (refer to Figure 4.17). Construct the intersection points
C and D of these rays with circles c2 and c3. Then create a circle with
center I1 and radius point C. Can you see an egg emerging from the
ﬁgure?
A
B
M
c1
c2
c3
I1
I2
C
D
Figure 4.17
To ﬁnish oﬀthe construction, construct the points I3 and I4 of the
intersection of the circle with center I1 and the perpendicular to AB

166
■Exploring Geometry
(refer to Figure 4.18). Construct two rays: one through A and I4 and
the other though B and I4. Then construct the intersection points E
and F of these rays with c2 and c3.
A
B
M
c1
c2
c3
I1
I2
C
D
I3
I4
E
F
Figure 4.18
The four arcs {A, E, C}, {C, I3, D},
{D, F, B}, and {B, I2, A}, will de-
ﬁne our egg. Construct these arcs
and hide all helper circles and
lines.
A
B
I2
C
D
I3
E
F
Exercise 4.2.2. Verify that these four arcs meet smoothly across the join
points, using the smoothness deﬁnition discussed in the last exercise (coinci-
dent tangent lines).
Exercise 4.2.3. Here is another interesting oval shape from Dixon’s book. It
is made of four circular arcs. Study Figure 4.19 and describe the construction
steps necessary to construct this oval.

Constructions
■167
Figure 4.19
The ability to construct complex ﬁgures from simple curves, such as
circular arcs, is one of the most signiﬁcant practical uses for geometry.
Everything from the fonts used on a computer screen to the shapes of
airframes depends on the ability to smoothly join together simple curves.
In Project 3.2 we saw how quadratic and cubic Bézier curves could be
used to model curved shapes. Interestingly enough, it is not possible to
perfectly model a circle using Bézier curves, although we can construct
approximations that will fool the eye. Thus, for shapes that require the
properties of a circle (at least in small sections), we can use the joining
method above to create such shapes.
In your project report you should include a discussion of the con-
struction steps you used to create the preceding egg shapes and also
include complete answers to each of the exercises.
4.3
CONSTRUCTIBILITY
In the last two sections we looked at some of the basic construction
techniques of Euclidean geometry. Constructions were fundamental to
Euclid’s axiomatic approach to geometry, as is evident by the fact that

168
■Exploring Geometry
the ﬁrst two Propositions of Book I of Elements deal with the construc-
tion of equilateral triangles and the transferring of segment lengths (the
question of collapsing versus non-collapsing compasses).
The notion of constructibility was also fundamental to the way Eu-
clid viewed numbers. To Euclid a number existed only in relation to
a particular geometric ﬁgure—the length of a constructed segment. A
number was the end result of a series of straightedge and compass con-
structions, starting with a given segment that was assumed to be of unit
length.
Euclid did allow the independent existence of some numbers—the
positive integers. The number theory found in the Elements can be traced
back to the mystical beliefs of the Pythagoreans. Integers could be “per-
fect” or “prime.” Euclid also allowed the consideration of the ratio of
integers independent of any geometric context.
However, any other number not expressible as a ratio of positive
integers (that is, irrational) could only be discussed as a purely geometric
quantity—the end product of a sequence of geometric constructions. For
example, the irrational number
√
2 is constructible, as it is possible to
construct a right triangle with two base sides of unit length, given an
existing segment of unit length. The hypotenuse of this triangle would
be a segment of length
√
2.
Deﬁnition 4.1. A number α is constructible if a segment of length
α can be constructed by a ﬁnite sequence of straightedge and compass
constructions, starting with a given segment of unit length.
Given Euclid’s insistence on the construction of numbers, it is not
surprising that constructibility puzzles—riddles asking whether certain
numbers could be constructed—came to be a celebrated, almost mythic,
aspect of Euclidean geometry.
Three of these puzzles have occupied the attention of mathematicians
from the time of Euclid (300 BC) until the work of Niels Henrik Abel
(1802–1829) and Evariste Galois (1811–1832) in the early 1800s:
Doubling the Cube
Given an already constructed cube, construct
another cube with twice the volume of the given cube.
Angle Trisection
Given an arbitrary constructed angle, construct
an angle that divides the given angle into three congruent parts.

Constructions
■169
Squaring the Circle
Given an already constructed circle, construct
a square of area equal to the area of the circle.
The solution of these puzzles involves a deeper understanding of how
constructibility relates to solutions of algebraic equations. The connec-
tion with algebra comes from embedding the construction of geometric
ﬁgures within the context of analytic geometry.
As was mentioned previously, all constructions start with a segment
assumed to be of unit length. Let OI be this segment. We know by the
constructions of the ﬁrst section of this chapter that we can construct a
perpendicular to the line ←→
OI at O, and thus we can construct a Carte-
sian coordinate system with origin O and with x = 1 at the point I
(Figure 4.20).
O
I
x-axis
y-axis
Figure 4.20
One of the great insights of Descartes was that straightedge and com-
pass constructions were equivalent to the solution of linear and quadratic
equations.
Theorem 4.1. Let P1 = (x1, y1), P2 = (x2, y2), . . . , Pn = (xn, yn)
be a set of points that have been constructed from the initial segment
OI. Then a point Q = (α, β) can be constructed from these points
if and only if the numbers α and β can be obtained from x1, x2, .
. . , xn and y1, y2, . . . , yn by simple arithmetic operations of +,
−, ·, and ÷ and the solution of a ﬁnite set of linear and quadratic
equations.
Proof: Since straightedge and compass constructions involve the con-

170
■Exploring Geometry
struction of segments (and lines by extension) and circles, then a point
in the plane is constructible if and only if it is either the intersection of
two lines, a line and a circle, or two circles. (Or, it could be one of the
two initial points O or I.)
From our work in Chapter 3, we know that a line through two con-
structed points, say P1 and P2, has the equation
(y −b1)(a2 −a1) = (x −a1)(b2 −b1)
This can be transformed into the form
Ay + Bx + C = 0
where A, B, and C are simple arithmetic combinations of the numbers
a1, a2, b1, and b2 of the type described in the statement of the theorem.
A circle through a constructed point, say P1, of radius equal to the
length of a constructible segment, say P1P2, will have the equation
(x −a1)2 + (y −b1)2 = ((a2 −a1)2 + (b2 −b1)2)
where ((a2 −a1)2 + (b2 −b1)2) = r2, r being the radius of the circle.
Again, this can be written as
x2 + Bx + y2 + Cy + D = 0
where the coeﬃcients are again simple arithmetic combinations of the x
and y coordinates of the constructed points.
If we are given two lines, say A1y+B1x+C1 = 0 and A2y+B2x+C2 =
0, then the intersection of these two lines will be given by a simple
formula involving the addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division
of the coeﬃcients (proved as an exercise).
If we are given a line Ay+Bx+C = 0 and a circle x2+Dx+y2+Ey+
F = 0, then if the lines intersect, we know from elementary algebra that
the solution will involve solving the quadratic formula for an expression
involving simple arithmetic combinations of the coeﬃcients. However, a
new operation, the square root, will be introduced in the solution.
To ﬁnd the point of intersection of two circles, say x2 + B1x + y2 +
C1y+D1 = 0 and x2+B2x+y2+C2y+D2 = 0, we ﬁrst subtract the two
equations yielding (B2 −B1)x + (C2 −C1)y + (D2 −D1) = 0. We solve
this for x or y (depending on which terms are non-zero) and substitute
into one of the original equations to get a quadratic equation in a single
variable. The solution then follows from the quadratic formula.

Constructions
■171
Thus, we have proved that if a point can be constructed by a se-
quence of straightedge and compass constructions on a given set of al-
ready constructed points, then the coordinates of the new point can be
obtained from simple arithmetic operations of +, −, ·, ÷, and √used
in combination on the coordinates of the existing points.
The converse is also true. That is, any combination of using +, −,
·, ÷, and √on the coordinates of a set of already constructed points,
that results in a pair of numbers α and β, can be realized as the coordi-
nates of a point that arises from a sequence of straightedge and compass
constructions on the given points.
To show this, it is enough to show that if a ̸= 0 and b ̸= 0 are given
constructible numbers, then the numbers
a + b, a −b, ab, a
b , √a
are also constructible.
It is fairly trivial to show that the numbers a + b and a −b are
constructible. For a + b we lay out a segment OA of length a on the
x-axis and extend OA to a point B such that AB = b (this is possible
since we can transfer segment lengths). Then OB has length a + b. For
a −b we just lay oﬀa segment for b in the negative direction from A on
the x-axis.
For the product of two numbers, ab, consider the following construc-
tion:
On the x-axis, lay oﬀthe length
a so that OA = a. Likewise, on
the y-axis, lay oﬀthe unit length
and b to get points Iy and B, with
OB = b. Construct the segment
from Iy to A and construct a par-
allel to this line through B, cut-
ting the x-axis at C. Let c = OC.
O
A
Iy
B
C
a
1
b
c
By similar triangles we have that
a
1 = c
b

172
■Exploring Geometry
Clearly, c = ab and we have constructed the product of a and b.
The construction of the ratio of two numbers is left as an exercise,
as is the construction of the square root of a positive number. 2
Starting with a unit length segment, what kinds of numbers are con-
structible? Clearly, all non-zero integers can be constructed. Using the
construction of the ratio of two numbers, we see that all rational num-
bers are constructible, a rational number being a fraction of two integers.
In fact, if we restrict our constructions to those that involve only the in-
tersection of lines, it is clear that the set of rational numbers contains
all such constructed numbers (if we include 0).
The set K of all constructible numbers (together with 0) forms a
special type of algebraic structure called a ﬁeld. A ﬁeld is a set of elements
having two operations (like + and ·) that satisﬁes a set of properties
such as associativity and commutativity for the operations. A ﬁeld also
satisﬁes the distributive property for the two operations and is closed
under the operations and their inverses.
The prime example of a ﬁeld is perhaps the set of real numbers
with ordinary addition and multiplication. Given two (non-zero) real
numbers, a and b, the sum a+b is again a real number, as is the additive
inverse -a, the product ab, and the multiplicative inverse 1
a. This shows
that the real numbers are closed under each of these operations.
By Theorem 4.1 we know that the set of constructible numbers K is
a ﬁeld, as this set is closed under the algebraic operations +, −, ·, and
÷.
What about the taking of square roots? How does this operation
aﬀect the algebraic structure of a given set of constructible numbers? Let
F be the ﬁeld of rational numbers. Suppose we construct the number
√
2
and then consider all possible algebraic combinations of rational numbers
with this new number, for example,
√
2 + 1,
1+
√
2
10−
√
2, and so on.
It turns out that all such combinations can be written in a simpler
form, as we will see next.
Deﬁnition 4.2. Let F be a ﬁeld contained in the real numbers and
let k be a positive number in F. Suppose that
√
k does not belong
to F. Then the set
F(k) = {x + y
√
k |x, y ∈F}
is called a quadratic extension of F.

Constructions
■173
Theorem 4.2. Let F be a ﬁeld contained in the real numbers, let
k be an element of F, and suppose
√
k does not belong to F. Then
the set F ′ of all possible simple algebraic combinations (ones using
+, −, ·, and ÷) of elements of F and the number
√
k is a ﬁeld and
is equal to F(k).
Proof: We ﬁrst note that F ′ contains F(k) by deﬁnition. Let z be an
element of F ′. Then z is obtained by algebraic operations using elements
of F and the number
√
k. If we can show that each of these operations
can be represented in F(k), then we will have shown that F(k) contains
F ′ (which implies F(k) = F ′), and we will also have shown that F(k) is
a ﬁeld, as it will be closed under the basic operations and their inverses.
Clearly, any sum or diﬀerence of elements of F or
√
k can be
represented in F(k). What about products? Any product of elements
in F is again in F, as F is a ﬁeld. Also, if a, b, c are in F, then
a(b + c
√
k) = ab + ac
√
k is an element in F(k), as is a(c
√
k).
In fact, the only algebraic operation that is not obviously represented
in F(k) is division. Suppose a and b are in F and suppose a + b
√
k ̸= 0.
Then
1
a + b
√
k
=
1
a + b
√
k
 
a −b
√
k
a −b
√
k
!
=
a −b
√
k
a2 −b2k
which is again an element in F(k). 2
As an application of this notion of ﬁeld extensions, we will consider
cubic polynomials.
Theorem 4.3. Given a cubic polynomial
p(z) = z3 + az2 + bz + c = 0
with coeﬃcients in a ﬁeld F (contained in the reals), if p(w) = 0,
where w is an element of a quadratic extension F(k) but not an
element of F, then the polynomial has another root in F.
Proof: We know that every polynomial with real coeﬃcients can be

174
■Exploring Geometry
factored into p(z) = (z −z1)(z −z2)(z −z3) with possibly some of the
zi being complex numbers. Equivalently, we have
p(z) = z3 −(z1 + z2 + z3)z2 + (z1z2 + z1z3 + z2z3)z −z1z2z3 = 0
The coeﬃcients for a polynomial can only be represented one way,
and so
−(z1 + z2 + z3) = a
Now suppose the root w of p(z) is represented by z1 = x + y
√
k,
with x and y in F. Then x −y
√
k is also a root. This can be proved by
showing that x −y
√
k acts like the complex conjugate when compared
to x + y
√
k. Then we use the fact that roots come in conjugate pairs.
We can assume that z2 = x −y
√
k. Then
−((x + y
√
k) + (x −y
√
k) + z3) = a
which implies that z3 = −(a + 2x) is in F. 2
Corollary 4.4. Let F be a ﬁeld contained in the reals. If a cubic
polynomial has a root w that is in a ﬁeld Fn that is the result of a
series of quadratic extensions
F = F0, F1, F2, . . . , Fn
where each Fi is a quadratic extension of the previous Fi−1, then
the polynomial must have a root in F.
Proof: The proof of this result is just a repeated application of the
preceding theorem. 2
We are now in a position to tackle two of the classic constructibility
puzzles.
Duplication of the Cube
Given a cube constructed from a segment AB, is it possible to construct
another segment CD such that the cube on CD has volume double that
of the cube on AB?
If it is possible, then we have the algebraic relationship
(CD)3 = 2(AB)3
Or

Constructions
■175
CD
AB
3
= 2
This implies that if it is possible to double the original volume of
the cube, then it must be possible to construct CD and thus it must
be possible to construct the fraction CD
AB . This fraction is then a root of
the cubic polynomial z3 −2 = 0. Thus, if we can carry out a sequence
of straightedge and compass constructions that yield CD
AB , then this con-
struction sequence would be mirrored in an algebraic sequence of larger
and larger quadratic extensions of the rational numbers. By Corollary
4.4, letting F be the rationals, we would have that z3 −2 = 0 has a
root in the rationals. But from algebra we know that the only possible
rational roots of this polynomial are 1, −1, 2, and −2. Since none of
these are actually roots, then no element in a quadratic extension can
be a root, and the construction is impossible.
Trisection of an Angle
Given an arbitrary angle, is it always possible to construct an angle that
is 1
3 the measure of the given angle?
Note that a solution to this problem would imply that all angles can
be trisected and, in particular, a 60 degree angle. We will show that it
is impossible to construct a 20 degree angle and thus that the trisection
puzzle has no solution.
If it is possible to construct a 20 degree angle, then it must be possible
to construct the number cos(20o), as this will be the base of a right
triangle with angle of 20 degrees and hypotenuse equal to 1.
We make use of several of the trigonometric formulas from Chapter
3 to consider the formula for the cosine of 3θ for a given angle θ:
cos(3θ)
=
cos(2θ + θ)
=
cos(2θ) cos(θ) −sin(2θ) sin(θ)
=
(cos2(θ) −sin2(θ)) cos(θ) −2 sin(θ) cos(θ) sin(θ)
=
(2 cos2(θ) −1) cos(θ) −2(1 −cos2(θ)) cos(θ)
=
4 cos3(θ) −3 cos(θ)
Letting θ = 20o and using the fact that cos(60o) = 1
2, we have
1
2 = 4 cos3(20o) −3 cos(20o)

176
■Exploring Geometry
which is equivalent to 8 cos3(20o) −6 cos(20o) −1 = 0.
We conclude that if we can construct cos(20o), then it must be a
root of the polynomial 8z3 −6z −1 = 0. We will simplify the analysis of
this polynomial by using the observation that a construction of cos(20o)
would imply the construction of 2 cos(20o). Making the substitution x =
2z in the polynomial 8z3 −6z −1, we get that 2 cos(20o) is a root of
x3 −3x−1 = 0. The only possible rational roots of this polynomial are 1
and −1, and neither are actually roots. So the number 2 cos(20o) is not
constructible, and general angle trisection is impossible.
Squaring the Circle
Given a circle of radius r, can we construct a square whose area is equal
to the area of the circle? Since the area of the circle is πr2, then we
are looking for a segment whose length is √πr. Since r is assumed con-
structible, then if √πr is constructible, we would be able to divide by r
and have a construction for √π. Multiplying this number by itself, we
would have a construction for π.
The proof of the impossibility of the construction of π is beyond
the level of this text. While the previous two puzzles could be resolved
by considering roots of polynomials with rational coeﬃcients, no such
analysis will prove the impossibility of squaring the circle. This is because
the number π is transcendental; that is, it is not the root of a polynomial
with rational coeﬃcients. This was ﬁrst proved by Carl Louis Ferdinand
von Lindemann (1852–1939) in 1882. An interesting historical note about
Lindemann is that David Hilbert was one of his doctoral students in
Germany.
In this section we have just scratched the surface as to the connection
between constructibility and the algebraic theory of ﬁelds. For a more
detailed review of this connection, see Chapter 19 of Moise’s text [32] or
the excellent book by Robin Hartshorne [19].
Exercise 4.3.1. Prove that if two lines A1y + B1x + C1 = 0 and A2y +
B2x + C2 = 0 intersect, then the coordinates of the intersection point will be
given by a simple formula involving the addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and division of the coeﬃcients of the lines.
Exercise 4.3.2. Show that the number sin(22 1
2
o) is constructible. [Hint: Use
a trigonometric formula for 45o.]
Exercise 4.3.3. Devise a construction for the ratio of two numbers.
Exercise 4.3.4. In this exercise we see how to construct square roots of

Constructions
■177
positive numbers. Let AB be a segment representing a length a (Figure 4.21).
Extend −−→
AB beyond B by the unit length to a point C. Let M be the midpoint
of AC and construct a circle centered at M of radius AM. Construct the per-
pendicular to AC at B and let D be an intersection point of this perpendicular
with the circle. Show that BD = √a. [Hint: Use right triangles.]
A
B
C
1
a
M
D
Figure 4.21 Square root
Exercise 4.3.5. Devise constructions for the numbers
√
3 and
√
5 that are
diﬀerent than the one given in the previous exercise.
Exercise 4.3.6. Show that there are an inﬁnite number of non-constructible
numbers.
Exercise 4.3.7. Show that there is at least one non-constructible number in
every interval [0, a] for a > 0.
Exercise 4.3.8. Show that every circle centered at the origin contains at
least two points which are not constructible. [Hint: Use the preceding exercise.]
Exercise 4.3.9. Show that every circle contains at least two points which
are not constructible. [Hint: Use the preceding exercise.]
Exercise 4.3.10. Galois was one of the more colorful ﬁgures in the history
of mathematics. His work on the solvability of equations revolutionized algebra.
Research this area and prepare a short report on the signiﬁcance of Galois’s
work.
4.3.1
Mini-Project - Origami Construction

178
■Exploring Geometry
So far we have looked at constructions where the constructing tools
are primarily a straightedge and a (collapsing) compass. We have seen
that a non-collapsing compass can be substituted for a collapsing one,
with equivalent capabilities for Euclidean construction. We have also dis-
cussed the issue of constructibility of numbers and of certain geometric
ﬁgures such as the trisection of an angle. We showed that the trisection
of a general angle was impossible with straightedge and compass. Inter-
estingly enough, the trisection of a general angle is possible with a ruler
(marked straightedge) and compass. (For the proof see [19, page 260].)
The question of constructibility is thus dependent on the tool set
that one is permitted to use. Over the years, mathematicians have ex-
perimented with using other types of tools; for example, rusty compasses
(ones where the divider length is permanently ﬁxed).
One method of construction that has become popular in recent years
is that of paper folding, or origami. The seemingly simple practice of
folding paper can produce quite complex geometric conﬁgurations. In
this project we will investigate the geometric constructions possible in
origami by setting up a set of axioms for “perfect” paper folding. This is
similar to the ﬁrst few axioms of Euclid’s geometry, where he postulates
the ability to do perfect straightedge and compass constructions.
The axioms we will use for paper folding were ﬁrst formulated by
Humiaki Huzita in 1992 [26]. Huzita postulates six axioms for paper
folding:
(Axiom
O1)
Given
two
con-
structed points P and Q, we can
construct (fold) a line through
them.
P
Q
(Axiom O2) Given two con-
structed points P and Q, we can
fold P onto Q.
P
Q

Constructions
■179
(Axiom O3) Given two con-
structed lines l1 and l2, we can
fold line l1 onto l2.
l1
l2
(Axiom O4) Given a con-
structed point P
and a con-
structed
line
l,
we
can
con-
struct a perpendicular to l passing
through P.
P
l
(Axiom O5) Given two con-
structed points P and Q and a
constructed line l, then when-
ever possible, the line through Q,
which reﬂects P onto l, can be
constructed.
Q
P
l
(Axiom O6) Given two con-
structed points P and Q and two
constructed lines l1 and l2, then
whenever possible, a line that re-
ﬂects P onto l1 and also reﬂects
Q onto l2 can be constructed.
P
Q
l1
l2
In the illustrations for the axioms, a fold line created by the axiom
is indicated by a dotted line, and the direction of the fold is indicated
by a curved arrow.
We are assuming in the statement of these axioms that a constructed
line is either one of the original four edge lines of a square piece of origami

180
■Exploring Geometry
paper or is a line created by using one or more of the folding axioms. A
constructed point is either one of the original four vertices of the square
paper or a point created by using one or more of the folding axioms.
We will also assume that folds take lines to lines and preserve segment
lengths and angles. We will prove this fact carefully in Chapter 5, where
we will see that a fold is essentially a Euclidean reﬂection across the fold
crease line. For now we will take this fact as a rule of reasoning, assumed
without proof—thus the references to reﬂections in the axioms will be
assumed without explanation or proof.
Another rather strange property of Axioms O5 and O6 is the phrase
“whenever possible.” All of the axiomatic systems we have studied up to
this point have been quite deﬁnitive. For example, Euclid’s third postu-
late states that circles are always constructible.
Before continuing on with this project, practice each of the six ax-
iomatic foldings using a square sheet of paper, preferably origami paper
or waxed paper.
Exercise 4.3.11. Using the six axiomatic foldings, devise a construction for
the perpendicular bisector of a segment.
Exercise 4.3.12. Devise a folding construction for the parallel to a given
line through a point not on the line.
Many of the axioms for paper folding are quite similar to the con-
structions of Euclidean geometry. Axiom O1 is essentially equivalent to
Euclid’s ﬁrst axiom on the construction of a line joining two points.
Axiom O2 mimics the construction of the perpendicular bisector of a
segment. For the third axiom, if the given pair of lines intersect, then
the axiom gives the angle bisector construction for the angle formed by
the lines. If the lines are parallel, the construction is slightly more com-
plicated but still possible (convince yourself of this fact). Axiom O4 is
equivalent to the perpendicular to a line through a point.
What straightedge and compass construction has the equivalent ef-
fect of Axiom O5? After carrying out this construction, it must be the
case that PQ = P ′Q, where P ′ is the folding (reﬂection) of P onto l..
Thus, we are looking for an intersection point of a circle, centered at Q
of radius PQ, with the line l, as depicted in Figure 4.22.

Constructions
■181
l
Q
P
P’
P’
Figure 4.22
It is clear that there are three possibilities: either the circle has no
intersections with the line (in which case the construction is impossible),
or there is one intersection (at a point of tangency), or there are two
diﬀerent intersections. (The third case is illustrated in Figure 4.22, with
the two diﬀerent lines of reﬂection shown as dotted lines.)
In fact, Axiom O5 allows us to construct a parabola with focus P and
directrix l. Recall that a parabola is the set of points that are equidistant
from a given point (the focus) and a given line (the directrix).
Exercise 4.3.13. Show that Axiom O5 can be used to construct a parabola
with focus P and directrix l by referring to Figure 4.23. In this ﬁgure ←−→
P ′R is
the perpendicular to l at the constructed point P ′ and R is the intersection of
this perpendicular with the line of reﬂection t taking P to P ′. [Hint: Use the
distance-preserving properties of a folding (reﬂection).]
l
Q
P
P’
t
R
Figure 4.23

182
■Exploring Geometry
The creation of point R involves the solution of a quadratic equation
and thus allows for the construction of square roots. In fact, the set
of constructible numbers using Axioms O1–O5 is the same as the set
of constructible numbers using straightedge and compass (allowing for
arbitrary large initial squares of paper). A proof of this can be found in
[2].
We see, then, that almost all of the folding axioms can be carried
out by simple straightedge and compass constructions. How about the
last axiom? It turns out that the last axiom is not constructible using a
straightedge and a compass. In fact, using the last axiom we can actually
trisect a general angle.
Let’s see how this is done.
Let the given angle (∠A) be de-
ﬁned in the lower left corner of
the paper square by line m as
shown. Construct two lines l1 and
l2 that are parallel to the bot-
tom edge lb with the property that
l1 is equidistant from l2 and lb.
(What is an easy way to construct
l2 given just the initial four lines
and four points?)
lb
m
l2
l1
A
Let P be the lower left corner
vertex of the square, and let Q be
the intersection of l2 with the left
edge of the square. Then carry out
the fold in Axiom O6 to place P
on l1 at P ′ and Q on m at Q′.
P
lb
Q
l2
l1
A
P’
Q’
m

Constructions
■183
Leaving the paper folded, fold
the paper once again along the
folded-over portion of l1. This will
create line l3. Unfold the paper.
The claim is that line l3 will make
an angle with lb of 2
3 the angle A.
lb
m
l2
l1
A
P’
Q’
l3
Exercise 4.3.14. Prove that the preceding construction actually does give
an angle that is 2
3 the angle A. [Hint: Prove that the three triangles ∆PQ′R,
∆PP ′R, and ∆PP ′S are congruent in Figure 4.24.]
P
m
lb
Q
l2
l1
P’
Q’
l3
R
S
Figure 4.24 Origami trisection
Since we have constructed an angle that is 2
3 of angle A, we can easily
bisect this new angle to get the trisection of angle A. It is clear that
the new folding axiom construction (Axiom O6) cannot be equivalent
to a series of straightedge and compass constructions since we know it
is impossible to trisect a general angle with straightedge and compass
alone.

184
■Exploring Geometry
How can Axiom O6 solve the trisection problem? Since Axiom O6
is essentially a simultaneous solution to two Axiom O5 constructions,
then what we are really looking for is a reﬂection line that is simulta-
neously tangent to two parabolas (see the “Hint” at the end of Exercise
4.3.13). The solution of this simultaneous tangent problem leads to a
cubic equation of the form developed in the last section when we looked
at the trisection puzzle in detail. Thus, Axiom O6 guarantees that such
cubic equations are solvable, and therefore angle trisection is possible.
For complete details on the connection between Axiom O6 and cubic
polynomials, see [2].

C H A P T E R 5
Transformational
Geometry
Geometry is the study of those properties of a set which are
preserved under a group of transformations on that set.
– Felix Klein (1849–1925)
Classical Euclidean geometry, such as the material covered in Chap-
ter 2, is primarily concerned with static properties of objects. To expand
this static geometry to a more dynamic geometry, we need to explore
what it means to transform objects.
A transformation will be some function on points in the plane. That
is, it will be some process whereby points are transformed to other points.
This process could be the simple movement of points or could be a more
complex alteration of the points.
Transformations are basic to both a practical and theoretical under-
standing of geometry. Object permanence, the idea that we can move an
object to a diﬀerent position, but the object itself remains the same, is
one of the ﬁrst ideas that we learn as infants.
Felix Klein, one of the great geometers of the late nineteenth century,
gave an address at Erlanger, Germany, in 1872, in which he proposed
that geometry should be deﬁned as the study of transformations and
of the objects that transformations leave unchanged, or invariant. This
view has come to be known as the Erlanger Program.
If we apply the Erlanger Program to Euclidean geometry, what kinds
of transformations characterize this geometry? That is, what are the
transformations that leave basic Euclidean ﬁgures, such as lines, seg-
ments, triangles, and circles, invariant? Since segments are the basic
185

186
■Exploring Geometry
building blocks of many geometric ﬁgures, Euclidean transformations
must, at least, preserve the “size” of segments; that is, they must pre-
serve length.
5.1
EUCLIDEAN ISOMETRIES
Deﬁnition 5.1. A function f on the plane is called a Euclidean
isometry (or a Euclidean motion) if f has the property that for
all points A and B the segment AB and the transformed segment
f(A)f(B) have the same length.
This simple deﬁnition has important implications.
Theorem 5.1. Let f be a Euclidean isometry. Then
(i) f is one-to-one. That is, if f(A) = f(B), then A = B.
(ii) If f(A) = A′ and f(B) = B′, then f maps all points
between A and B to points between A′ and B′. That is,
f(AB) = A′B′.
(iii) f maps lines to lines.
(iv) f preserves angles.
(v) f is onto the plane. That is, for all points P ′, there is a
point P such that f(P) = P ′.
(vi) f preserves parallel lines.
Proof: (i) Suppose f(A) = f(B). Then, f(A)f(B) = 0 and by the
deﬁnition of an isometry, AB = 0. Then, A = B and f is one-to-one.
(ii) Let C be a point between A and B and let C′ = f(C). We need to
show that C′ is on the line through A′, B′ and that C′ is between A′ and
B′. Since f is one-to-one, C′ cannot be A′ or B′. Now, AB = AC + CB.
Since f is an isometry we have that
A′B′ = A′C′ + C′B′
This implies that C′ is on the line through A′, B′. For if it were not on this
line, then the triangle inequality would imply that A′B′ < A′C′ + C′B′.

Transformational Geometry
■187
Now either A′ is between B′ and C′, or B′ is between A′ and C′, or
C′ is between A′ and B′. In the ﬁrst case, we would get
B′C′ = B′A′ + A′C′
If we subtract this from the equation above, we would get
A′B′ −B′C′ = C′B′ −B′A′
and
2A′B′ −2B′C′ = 0
So A′B′ = B′C′, which would contradict the fact that A′B′ < B′C′ if
A′ is between B′, C′. Likewise, we cannot have B′ between A′, C′, and
so C′ must be between A′, B′.
(iii) Let A, B be points on a line l. By part (ii) of this theorem, we
know that segment AB gets mapped to segment f(A)f(B). Let D be a
point on the ray −→
AB not on segment AB. Then B is between A, D on
−→
AB and since f preserves betweenness, f(B) will be between f(A) and
f(D) and so will be on the ray −−−−−−→
f(A)f(B). Thus, we have that ray −→
AB
gets mapped to ray −−−−−−→
f(A)f(B) and similarly ray −→
BA gets mapped to ray
−−−−−−→
f(B)f(A). This implies that the line through A, B gets mapped to the
line through f(A), f(B).
(iv) Let ∠ABC be an angle with vertex B. Since f preserves length,
by SSS triangle congruence, ∆ABC and ∆f(A)f(B)f(C) will be con-
gruent and their angles will be congruent.
(v) We know that f is one-to-one. Thus, given P ′ we can ﬁnd two
points A, B such that f(A) ̸= f(B) ̸= P ′. Let f(A) = A′ and f(B) = B′.
There are two cases for A′, B′, P ′: either they lie on the same line or not.
If A′, B′, P ′ are collinear, then P ′ is either on the ray −−→
A′B′ or on the
opposite ray. Suppose P ′ is on −−→
A′B′. Let P be a point on −→
AB such that
AP = A′P ′. Since AP = f(A)f(P) = A′f(P) and since P ′ and f(P)
are on the same ray −−→
A′B′, then P ′ = f(P). If P ′ is on the opposite ray
to −−→
A′B′, we would get a similar result.
If A′, B′, P ′ are not collinear, then consider ∠P ′A′B′. On either
side of the ray through A, B, we can ﬁnd two points P, Q such that
∠P ′A′B′ ∼= ∠PAB ∼= ∠QAB (Figure 5.1).

188
■Exploring Geometry
A
B
A’
B’
P’
P
Q
Figure 5.1
We can also choose these points such that AP = AQ = A′P ′. Since
f preserves betweenness (proved in statement (ii)) we know that one
of A′f(P) or A′f(Q) will be on the same side as A′P ′. We can assume
that A′f(P) is on this same side. Then, since f preserves angles, we
have that ∠P ′A′B′ ∼= ∠f(P)A′B′ and thus −−→
A′P ′ ∼= −−−−→
A′f(P). Since f
preserves lengths, we have that A′P ′ = AP = f(A)f(P) = A′f(P) and
thus P ′ = f(P).
(vi) Let l, m be parallel lines. Suppose that f(l), f(m) were not par-
allel. Then, for some P on l and Q on m, we would have f(P) = f(Q).
But, we know that PQ ̸= 0 as l and m are parallel. As f is an isom-
etry, we then have that f(P)f(Q) ̸= 0. Thus, it cannot be true that
f(P) = f(Q), and f(l), f(m) must be parallel. 2
We have shown that isometries are
• Length-preserving
• One-to-one
• Onto
Isometries are a special type of transformation, but we have not
yet explicitly deﬁned what we mean by a “transformation.” We have
said that a transformation is a function on points in the plane, but
this deﬁnition is too general. In the spirit of Klein’s Erlanger Program,
we want to consider “reasonable” functions that leave Euclidean ﬁgures
invariant. Functions that map lines to points, or areas to segments, are
not reasonable geometric equivalences. However, functions that are one-
to-one and onto do not have such pathological behavior. Thus, we will
deﬁne transformations as follows:

Transformational Geometry
■189
Deﬁnition 5.2. A function f on the plane is a transformation of
the plane if f is a one-to-one function that is also onto the plane.
An isometry is then a length-preserving transformation. One impor-
tant property of any transformation is that it is invertible.
Deﬁnition 5.3. Let f, g be functions on a set S. We say that g is
the inverse of f if f(g(s)) = s and g(f(s)) = s for all s in S. That
is, the composition of g and f (f and g) is the identity function on
S. We denote the inverse by f −1.
It is left as an exercise to show that a function that is one-to-one and
onto must have a unique inverse. Thus, all transformations have unique
inverses.
A nice way to classify transformations (isometries) is by the nature
of their ﬁxed points.
Deﬁnition 5.4. Let f be a transformation. P is a ﬁxed point of f if
f(P) = P.
How many ﬁxed points can an isometry have?
Theorem 5.2. If points A, B are ﬁxed by an isometry f, then the
line through A, B is also ﬁxed by f.
Proof: We know that f will map the line ←→
AB to the line ←−−−−−→
f(A)f(B).
Since A, B are ﬁxed points, then ←→
AB gets mapped back to itself.
Suppose that P is between A and B. Then, since f preserves be-
tweenness, we know that f(P) will be between A and B. Also
AP = f(A)f(P) = Af(P)
This implies that P = f(P).
A similar argument can be used in the case where P lies elsewhere
on ←→
AB. 2

190
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 5.5. The isometry that ﬁxes all points in the plane will
be called the identity and will be denoted as id.
Theorem 5.3. An isometry f having three non-collinear ﬁxed
points must be the identity.
A
B
C
P
Q
R
Figure 5.2
Proof: Let A, B, C be the three non-collinear ﬁxed points. From the
previous theorem we know that f will ﬁx lines ←→
AB, ←→
AC, and ←→
BC.
Let P be a point not on one of these lines. Let Q be a point between
A, B (Figure 5.2). Consider the line through P, Q. By Pasch’s axiom, this
line will intersect one of AC or BC at some point R. By the previous
theorem, f ﬁxes the line ←→
QR and thus ﬁxes P. Since P was chosen
arbitrarily, then f ﬁxes all points in the plane and is the identity. 2
Corollary 5.4. If two isometries f, g agree on any three non-
collinear points, then the two isometries must agree everywhere, that
is, f = g.
The proof of this result is left as an exercise.
It is clear from this theorem that we can classify isometries into three
non-trivial (non-identity) types: those with two ﬁxed points, those with
one ﬁxed point, and those with no ﬁxed points. In the following sections
we will study the properties of isometries with two, one, or zero ﬁxed
points. We will make extensive use of techniques from both synthetic
and analytic geometry in our proofs and development.

Transformational Geometry
■191
It is interesting to note that the preceding results on isometries do
not depend on Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate, the parallel postulate. They are
part of neutral geometry (or absolute geometry). We will make use of this
fact in Chapter 7, where we explore a non-Euclidean geometry called
Hyperbolic geometry.
For future reference, we will also note that many of the results in
this section depend on the notion of betweenness. As was mentioned in
Chapter 2, the notion of betweenness is one that must be axiomatically
developed, and this is done in the on-line chapter covering Hilbert’s
axioms. The axioms of betweenness guarantee that given three distinct
points on a line, exactly one of the points is between the other two. This
is reasonable for Euclidean and Hyperbolic geometries, but is not true in
another non-Euclidean geometry – Elliptic geometry – where lines have
ﬁnite length and circle back on themselves.
Elliptic geometry is developed in Chapter 8. In the on-line chapter on
Hilbert’s axioms, we develop a new axiomatic basis for betweenness in
Elliptic geometry. We show that Euclid’s ﬁrst 15 propositions (up to the
Exterior Angle Theorem) hold with this new deﬁnition of betweenness.
Thus, the results of Theorem 5.1 that do not ultimately rely on the Exte-
rior Angle Theorem will hold in Elliptic geometry. The proof of statement
(ii) of the Theorem relies on the Triangle Inequality, which is Euclid’s
Proposition 20, and thus is based on the Exterior Angle Theorem. In
Chapter 8 we will resolve this problem with the proof of statement (ii)
by assuming that elliptic isometries are deﬁned to be transformations
that preserve elliptic betweenness.
Exercise 5.1.1. Prove that every function f on a set S that is one-to-one
and onto has a unique inverse. [Hint: First, deﬁne f −1 using f and show that
it is a valid function. Then, show that f ◦f −1 = id and f −1 ◦f = id, where
id is the identity on S. Finally, show that the inverse is unique.]
Exercise 5.1.2. Prove that the inverse of an isometry is again an isometry.
(This implies that the set of isometries is closed under the inverse operation.)
Exercise 5.1.3. Let f, g be two invertible functions from a set S to itself. Let
h = f ◦g; that is, h is the composition of f and g. Show that h−1 = g−1 ◦f −1.
Exercise 5.1.4. Let f, g be two isometries. Show that the composition f ◦g
is again an isometry. (This says the set of isometries is closed under compo-
sition.)
Exercise 5.1.5. Show that isometries map circles of radius r to circles of
radius r. That is, isometries preserve circles.

192
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 5.1.6. Prove that the image of a triangle under an isometry is a
new triangle congruent to the original.
Exercise 5.1.7. Given an equilateral triangle ABC, show that there are
exactly six isometries that map the triangle back to itself. [Hint: Consider how
the isometry acts on the vertices of the triangle.]
Exercise 5.1.8. Prove Corollary 5.4.
Exercise 5.1.9. Consider points in the plane as ordered pairs (x, y) and
consider the function f on the plane deﬁned by f(x, y) = (kx + a, ky + b),
where k, a, b are real constants, and k ̸= 0. Is f a transformation? Is f an
isometry?
Exercise 5.1.10. Deﬁne a similarity to be a transformation on the plane
that preserves the betweenness property of points and preserves angle measure.
Prove that under a similarity, a triangle is mapped to a similar triangle.
Exercise 5.1.11. Use the previous exercise to show that if f is a similarity,
then there is a positive constant k such that
f(A)f(B) = k AB
for all segments AB.
Exercise 5.1.12. Consider points in the plane as ordered pairs (x, y) and
consider the function f on the plane deﬁned by f(x, y) = (kx, ky), where k is
a non-zero constant. Show that f is a similarity.
5.2
REFLECTIONS
Deﬁnition 5.6. An isometry with two diﬀerent ﬁxed points, and
that is not the identity, is called a reﬂection.
What can we say about a reﬂection? By Theorem 5.2 if A, B are the
ﬁxed points of a reﬂection, then the reﬂection also ﬁxes the line through
A, B. This line will turn out to be the equivalent of a “mirror” through
which the isometry reﬂects points.
Theorem 5.5. Let r be a reﬂection ﬁxing A and B. If P is not
collinear with A, B, then the line through A and B will be a perpen-
dicular bisector of the segment connecting P and r(P).

Transformational Geometry
■193
Proof: Drop a perpendicular from P to ←→
AB, intersecting at Q (Fig-
ure 5.3). At least one of A or B will not be coincident with Q; suppose
B is not. Consider ∆PQB and ∆r(P)QB.
A
B
P
Q
r(P)
Figure 5.3
Since we know that Q and B are ﬁxed points of r, then PQ = r(P)Q,
BP = Br(P), and the two triangles are congruent by SSS. Since the two
congruent angles at Q make up a straight line, ∠r(P)QB will be a right
angle and ←→
AB will be a perpendicular bisector of the segment Pr(P). 2
We call the line through A, B the line of reﬂection for r.
Theorem 5.6. Let P, P ′ be two points. Then there is a unique
reﬂection taking P to P ′. The line of reﬂection will be the perpen-
dicular bisector of PP ′.
Proof: Let ←→
AB be the perpendicular bisector of PP ′ (Figure 5.4).
Deﬁne a function r on the plane as follows: If a point C is on ←→
AB, let
r(C) = C. If C is not on this line, drop a perpendicular from C to ←→
AB
intersecting at Q, and let r(C) be the unique point on this perpendicular
such that r(C) ̸= C, Q is between C and r(C), and r(C)Q ∼= CQ.

194
■Exploring Geometry
A
B
P
Q
C
D
R
P’
r(C)
r(D)
Figure 5.4
Will r be an isometry? We need to show that for all C ̸= D,
r(C)r(D) = CD. Let C be a point not on ←→
AB and D a point on the same
side of ←→
AB as C. Consider Figure 5.4. By SAS, ∆QRD ∼= ∆QR r(D).
Again using SAS congruence, we have ∆CQD ∼= ∆r(C) Q r(D). Thus,
CD = r(C) r(D). Similar arguments using congruent triangles can be
used if D is on ←→
AB or on the other side of ←→
AB as C. (The proof is left
as an exercise.)
If C is a point on ←→
AB and if D is also on ←→
AB, then clearly CD =
r(C) r(D). If D is not on ←→
AB, then a simple SAS argument will show
that CD = r(C) r(D).
Thus, r is an isometry. Is the reﬂection r unique? Suppose there was
another reﬂection r′ taking P to P ′. By the previous theorem we know
that the ﬁxed points of r′ are on the perpendicular bisector of PP ′. Since
the perpendicular bisector is unique, we have that the ﬁxed points of r′
are on ←→
AB. Thus, r and r′ have the same values on three non-collinear
points P, P ′, and B and so r = r′. 2
5.2.1
Mini-Project - Isometries through Reﬂection
In the ﬁrst part of this chapter, we discussed Felix Klein’s idea of
looking at geometry as the study of ﬁgures that are invariant under sets
of transformations. In the case of transformations that are isometries,
invariance means that lengths and angles are preserved, and lines get

Transformational Geometry
■195
mapped to lines. Thus, isometries must not only map triangles to trian-
gles, but must map triangles to congruent triangles.
Recall that ∆ABC ∼= ∆PQR if and only if
AB ∼= PQ, AC ∼= PR, BC ∼= QR
and
∠BAC ∼= ∠QPR, ∠CBA ∼= ∠RQP, ∠ACB ∼= ∠PRQ
In other words, there is an ordering to the vertex listing for two
congruent triangles. It will be important to keep this in mind during the
rest of this project.
We know that an isometry f maps a triangle ∆ABC to a triangle
∆PQR, with ∆ABC ∼= ∆PQR. We can conversely ask whether, given
two congruent triangles, there is an isometry that maps one to the other.
We will start with an easy case. Clearly, if two triangles are identical,
then the identity isometry will map the triangle to itself. What if the
triangles are not identical?
Exercise 5.2.1. Suppose you have
two congruent triangles ∆ABC and
∆PQR with A = P and B = Q.
Show that either the triangles are the
same or that there is a reﬂection that
takes ∆ABC to ∆PQR.
Exercise 5.2.2. Now suppose you
have two congruent triangles that
share only one point in common. Let
∆ABC ∼= ∆PQR with A = P. Let
l1 be the angle bisector of ∠BAQ and
r1 the reﬂection across l1.
A (=P)
B
C
Q = r1(B)
R
l 1
Show that r1(B) = Q. Then, use the preceding exercise to argue that there
is a sequence of at most two reﬂections that will take ∆ABC to ∆PQR, if
the two triangles share one point in common.
Finally, suppose two congruent triangles share no point in common.
Exercise 5.2.3. Show that there is a sequence of at most three reﬂections
that will take ∆ABC to ∆PQR in this case.

196
■Exploring Geometry
We have now proved the following theorem:
Theorem 5.7. Let ∆ABC ∼= ∆PQR. Then there is an isometry
composed of at most three reﬂections that takes ∆ABC to ∆PQR.
This theorem has the following amazing corollary:
Corollary 5.8. Every isometry can be written as the product of at
most three reﬂections.
Proof: Let f be an isometry and consider any triangle ∆ABC. Then
∆f(A) f(B) f(C) is a triangle congruent to ∆ABC and, by the preced-
ing theorem, there is an isometry g composed of at most three reﬂections
taking ∆ABC to ∆f(A) f(B) f(C). Since two isometries that agree on
three non-collinear points must agree everywhere, then f must be equal
to g. 2
Exercise 5.2.4. Let two triangles be deﬁned by coordinates as follows:
∆ABC with A = (−3, 2), B = (−3, 6), C = (−6, 2) and ∆DEF with
D = (1, −4), E = (4, −4), F = (1, −8). Verify that these two triangles are
congruent and then ﬁnd a sequence of three (or fewer) reﬂection lines such
that ∆ABC can be transformed to ∆DEF. [Hint: The reﬂections need not
be those deﬁned by the ﬁrst three exercises of this section. Try to ﬁnd simple
reﬂections to accomplish the transformation.]
We note here that the results in this project, and in the preceding
section on reﬂections, are neutral—they do not depend on Euclid’s ﬁfth
postulate, the parallel postulate. We will make use of this fact in Chapter
7.
Also, all of the results of this section, except for the uniqueness part
of Theorem 5.6 will hold in Elliptic geometry. The uniqueness of the
reﬂection in Theorem 5.6 depends on the uniqueness of the perpendic-
ular bisector to a segment. In Elliptic geometry, there are possibly two
segments deﬁned by two points, and thus possibly two perpendicular
bisectors.
5.2.2
Reﬂection and Symmetry
The word symmetry is usually used to refer to objects that are in balance.
Symmetric objects have the property that parts of the object look similar

Transformational Geometry
■197
to other parts. The symmetric parts can be interchanged, thus creating
a visual balance to the entire ﬁgure. How can we use transformations to
mathematically describe symmetry?
Perhaps the simplest deﬁnition of mathematical symmetry is the one
that most dictionaries give: an arrangement of parts equally on either
side of a dividing line. While this type of symmetry is not the only one
possible, it is perhaps the most basic in that such symmetry pervades
the natural world. We will call this kind of symmetry bilateral symmetry.
Deﬁnition 5.7. A ﬁgure F in
the plane is said to have a line
of symmetry or bilateral sym-
metry if there is a reﬂection r
that maps the ﬁgure back to it-
self having the line as the line of
reﬂection. For example, in this
ﬁgure line l is a line of sym-
metry for ∆ABC since if we
reﬂect the triangle across this
line, we get the exact same tri-
angle back again.
C
l
A
B
Where is bilateral symmetry found in nature? Consider the insect
body types in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5 Insect symmetry, Manual of Vegetable-Garden Insects, Cyrus
R. Crosby and Mortimer D. Leonard, Macmillan, New York, 1918

198
■Exploring Geometry
All of the body types exhibit bilateral symmetry. In fact, most ani-
mals, insects, and plants have bilateral symmetry. Why is this the case?
Living creatures need bilateral symmetry for stability. Consider an ani-
mal that needs to be mobile, that needs to move forward and backward.
To move with the least expenditure of energy, it is necessary that a body
shape be balanced from side to side so that the creature does not waste
energy keeping itself upright. Likewise, an immobile living creature, such
as a tall pine tree, needs to be bilaterally symmetric in order to keep
itself in a vertical equilibrium position.
We know that a reﬂection will map its line of symmetry back to the
same line of symmetry. Lines perpendicular to the line of symmetry are
also mapped back to themselves. (The proof is one of the exercises that
follow.) These lines are perhaps the simplest ﬁgures that are bilaterally
symmetric.
In general, we can ask which lines are preserved under the action of
an arbitrary transformation.
Deﬁnition 5.8. Lines that are mapped back to themselves by a
transformation f are called invariant lines of f.
Note that we do not require that points on the line get mapped back
to themselves, only that the line as a set of points gets mapped back to
itself. Thus, a line may be invariant under f, but the points on the line
need not be ﬁxed by f.
In the next chapter we will use invariant lines extensively to classify
diﬀerent sets of symmetries in the plane.
Exercise 5.2.5. Find examples of ﬁve objects in nature that have two or
more lines of bilateral symmetry. Draw sketches of these along with their lines
of symmetry.
Deﬁnition 5.9. A polygon is a regular polygon if it has all sides
congruent and all interior angles congruent.
Exercise 5.2.6. Show that the angle bisectors of a regular pentagon are lines
of symmetry. Would your proof be extendable to show that the angle bisectors
of any regular polygon are lines of symmetry?
Exercise 5.2.7. Show that the perpendicular bisector of a side of a regular
pentagon is a line of symmetry. Would your proof be extendable to show that

Transformational Geometry
■199
the perpendicular bisectors of the sides of any regular polygon are lines of
symmetry?
Exercise 5.2.8. Show that if a parallelogram has a diagonal as a line of
symmetry, then the parallelogram must be a rhombus (i.e., have all sides con-
gruent).
Exercise 5.2.9. Show that if a parallelogram has a line of symmetry parallel
to a side, then the parallelogram must be a rectangle.
Exercise 5.2.10. Finish the proof of Theorem 5.6. That is, prove that the
function r deﬁned in the proof is length-preserving for the case where C is not
on ←→
AB and D is either on ←→
AB or on the other side of ←→
AB.
Exercise 5.2.11. Prove that the composition of a reﬂection with itself is
always the identity. Thus, a reﬂection is its own inverse.
Exercise 5.2.12. Show that the lines invariant under a reﬂection rm, where
m is the line of reﬂection for rm, consist of the line m and all lines perpen-
dicular to m.
Exercise 5.2.13. Let rl and rm be two reﬂections with lines of reﬂection l
and m, respectively. Show that the composition rm ◦rl ◦rm = rl′, where l′ is
the reﬂection of l across m. [Hint: Let A, B be distinct points on l. Show that
rm(A) and rm(B) are ﬁxed points of rm ◦rl ◦rm.]
Exercise 5.2.14. An object at point
O is visible in a mirror from a viewer
at point V . What path will the light
take from O to the mirror to V ?
Light always travels through a ho-
mogeneous medium to minimize to-
tal travel distance. Consider a possi-
ble light ray path from the object that
hits the mirror at P and then trav-
els to V . Show that the total length of
this path is the same as the path from
O′ to P to V , where O′ is the reﬂec-
tion of O across the mirror. Use this
to ﬁnd the shortest path for the light
ray from O to the mirror to V . De-
scribe this path in terms of the two
angles made at P by the light ray.
O
V
P
O’

200
■Exploring Geometry
5.3
TRANSLATIONS
Deﬁnition 5.10. An isometry that is made up of two reﬂections,
where the lines of reﬂection are parallel, or identical, is called a
translation.
What can we say about a translation?
Theorem 5.9. Let T be a translation that is not the identity. Then,
for all points A ̸= B, if A, B, T(A), and T(B) form a quadrilateral,
then that quadrilateral is a parallelogram.
Proof: Let r1, r2 be the two reﬂections comprising T and let l1, l2 be the
two lines of reﬂection. Since T is not the identity, we know that l1 is
parallel to l2. If we set up a coordinate system where l1 is the x-axis,
then r1(x, y) = (x, −y).
Since l1 is parallel to l2, we can assume l2 is the line at y = −K,
K ̸= 0 (Figure 5.6).
l2
l1
(0,-K)
(0,0)
y-axis
A
B
r1
r1
(A)
(= x-axis)
(B)
T(A)=r (r (A))
2 1
T(B)=r (r (B))
2
1
Figure 5.6
A point (x, y) reﬂected across l2 must be transformed to a point at a

Transformational Geometry
■201
distance y + K below l2. Thus, the y-coordinate must be −K −(y + K)
and r2(x, y) = (x, −2K −y). Note that K is the distance between l1, l2.
Now, if A = (x, y), then A T(A) = A r2(r1(A)) will be just the
diﬀerence in the y values of A and r2(r1(A)); that is, y−(−2K−(−y)) =
2K.
So, A T(A) = 2K and B T(B) = 2K. Since T is an isometry, we also
have that T(A) T(B) = AB ̸= 0, as A ̸= B. Thus, the sides of quadri-
lateral A B T(B) T(A) are pair-wise congruent. Also, since
←→
A T(A) is
perpendicular to l1 and
←→
B T(B) is perpendicular to l1, then these two
sides of the quadrilateral are parallel. By constructing the diagonal of
the quadrilateral, and using a triangle congruence argument, we see that
the other pair of sides in the quadrilateral are also parallel, and thus the
quadrilateral must be a parallelogram. 2
From this theorem we see that for every point A in the plane, a
translation T (not equal to the identity) will map A to T(A) in such a
way that the length of the segment from A to T(A) will be constant and
the direction of this segment will also be constant. Thus, a translation
is determined by a vector, the vector from A to T(A) for any A. This
will be called the displacement vector of the translation.
Since the displacement vector is the vector from A to T(A), this
vector is given by T(A) −A (considering the points as vectors from
the origin). Thus, if A = (x, y), then a translation T with displacement
vector v = T(A) −A = (v1, v2) will have the coordinate equation
T(x, y) = (x, y) + (v1, v2)
On the other hand, suppose that we are given a function deﬁned by
the coordinate equation T(x, y) = (x, y) + (v1, v2).
Let l1 be a line through the origin
that is perpendicular to the vector
v and l2 a line parallel to l1, but
passing through the midpoint of
the segment along vector v.
v
l1
l2
Then the translation T ′ deﬁned by successive reﬂection across l1 and
l2 will map the origin to the head of v and thus will have a translation
vector equal to v. The coordinate equation for T ′ will then be T ′(x, y) =
(x, y)+(v1, v2). Thus, the translation T ′ and the function T must be the
same function.

202
■Exploring Geometry
Corollary 5.10. Every translation T can be expressed in rectan-
gular coordinates as a function T(x, y) = (x, y) + (v1, v2) and, con-
versely, every coordinate function of this form represents a transla-
tion.
We also have the following result that expresses the translation vector
in terms of the original lines of reﬂection.
Corollary 5.11. Let a translation be deﬁned by reﬂection across
two parallel lines l1, l2 (in that order). Let m be a line perpendicular
to both lines at A on l1 and B on l2. Then the displacement vector
is given by 2−→
AB.
A
l1
l2
m
B
2AB
Figure 5.7
Proof: Set up a coordinate system with the x-axis on l1 (Figure 5.7).
Then, as in the proof of the last theorem, the translation will move
a point a distance of twice the distance between the lines l1, l2. The
direction will be perpendicular to the lines. Thus, the vector will be
2−→
AB, as this vector has the right length and direction. 2
How many ﬁxed points will a translation have? If the two lines of
reﬂection deﬁning the translation are not coincident, then the translation
always moves points a ﬁnite distance and thus there are no ﬁxed points.
On the other hand, if the two lines are the same, then the translation is
the identity. Thus, a non-trivial translation (one that is not the identity)
has no ﬁxed points.

Transformational Geometry
■203
5.3.1
Translational Symmetry
When we discussed bilateral symmetry in the last section, we saw that
many objects in nature exhibited bilateral symmetry. Such objects, when
reﬂected across a line of symmetry, remain unchanged or invariant. Bi-
lateral symmetry is a property that a single, ﬁnite object can exhibit.
What can we say about an object that is invariant under translation,
that is, an object that has translational symmetry? To remain unchanged
under translation, an object must repeat its form at regular intervals,
deﬁned by the translation vector. When we take a portion of the object
and translate it, we must overlap the exact same shape at the new po-
sition. Thus, an object that is invariant under translation is necessarily
inﬁnite in extent. As Hermann Weyl stated in his foundational work on
symmetry:
A ﬁgure which is invariant under a translation t shows what
in the art of ornament is called “inﬁnite rapport,” i.e., repe-
tition in a regular spatial rhythm [41, page 47].
Translational symmetry, being inﬁnite in extent, cannot be exhibited
by ﬁnite living creatures. However, we can ﬁnd evidence of a limited form
of translation symmetry in some animals and plants. For example, the
millipede has leg sections that are essentially invariant under translation
(Figure 5.8).
Figure 5.8 Millipede, National Park Service, Petroglyph National Mon-
ument
Also, many plants have trunks (stems) and branching systems that
are translation invariant.
Whereas translational symmetry is hard to ﬁnd in nature, it is ex-
tremely common in human ornamentation. For example, wallpaper must
have translational symmetry in the horizontal and vertical directions so
that when you hang two sections of wallpaper next to each other the
seam is not noticeable. Trim patterns called friezes, which often run
horizontally along tops of walls, also have translational invariance (Fig-
ure 5.9).

204
■Exploring Geometry
Figure 5.9 Frieze patterns
Exercise 5.3.1. Find and sketch two examples of translational symmetry in
nature.
Exercise 5.3.2. Find and sketch three examples of wallpaper or frieze pat-
terns that have translational invariance. Indicate on your sketch the transla-
tion vector(s) for each pattern.
Exercise 5.3.3. Given a translation T = r1 ◦r2 deﬁned by two reﬂections
r1, r2 and with displacement vector v, show that the inverse of T is the trans-
lation T −1 = r2 ◦r1 having displacement vector −v.
Exercise 5.3.4. Show that the composition of two translations T1 and T2 is
again a translation. Find the translation vector for T1 ◦T2.
Exercise 5.3.5. Show that the composition of translations is a commutative
operation. That is, if T1 and T2 are translations, then T1 ◦T2 = T2 ◦T1.
Exercise 5.3.6. Given a reﬂection r across a line l and a translation T in
the same direction as l, show that r ◦T = T ◦r. [Hint: Choose a “nice” setting
in which to analyze r and T.] Will this result hold if T is not in the direction
of l?
Exercise 5.3.7. In the section on reﬂections, we saw that a simple reﬂection
across the x-axis, which we will denote by rx, could be expressed as rx(x, y) =
(x, −y). Let r be the reﬂection across the line y = K. Let T be the translation
with displacement vector of v = (0, −K). Show that the function T −1◦rx◦T is
equal to r and ﬁnd the coordinate equation for r. [Hint: Show that T −1 ◦rx ◦T
has the right set of ﬁxed points.]
Exercise 5.3.8. Let T be a (non-identity) translation. Show that the set of
invariant lines for T are all pair-wise parallel and that each is parallel to the
displacement vector of T. [Hint: Use Theorem 5.9.]

Transformational Geometry
■205
Exercise 5.3.9. Let T be a translation with (non-zero) displacement vector
parallel to a line l. Let m be any line perpendicular to l. Show that there is a
line n perpendicular to l such that T = rn ◦rm. [Hint: Suppose m intersects l
at P. Choose n to be the perpendicular bisector of P T(P). Show that rn ◦T
ﬁxes m.]
5.4
ROTATIONS
Deﬁnition 5.11. An isometry that is made up of two reﬂections
where the lines of reﬂection are not parallel will be called a rotation.
To analyze rotations we will make use of the following lemma.
Lemma 5.12. If two non-coincident lines l1, l2 intersect at O, and
if m is the bisector of ∠Q1OQ2, with Q1 on l1 and Q2 on l2, then
rm(l1) = l2 and rm ◦rl1 = rrm(l1) ◦rm = rl2 ◦rm. (rm(l1) = {rm(A)|
A is on l1})
Proof: We can assume that Q1, Q2 were chosen such that OQ1 = OQ2
(Fig 5.10). Let P be the intersection of the bisector m with Q1Q2.
O
Q1
l1
l2
Q2
m
P
Figure 5.10
Then, by SAS we know that P is the midpoint of Q1Q2 and m is the
perpendicular bisector of Q1Q2. Thus, rm(Q1) = Q2. Since rm(O) = O,
the line l1 (deﬁned by O and Q1) must get mapped to l2 (deﬁned by O
and Q2), or rm(l1) = l2.
For the second part of the lemma, we know by Exercise 5.2.13 that
rm ◦rl1 ◦rm = rrm(l1) = rl2. Thus, rm ◦rl1 = rl2 ◦rm. 2

206
■Exploring Geometry
Rotations are characterized by the fact that they have a single ﬁxed
point.
Theorem 5.13. An isometry R ̸= id is a rotation iﬀR has exactly
one ﬁxed point.
Proof: Suppose R has a single ﬁxed point, call it O (Figure 5.11).
Let A be another point with A ̸= O.
Let l be the line through O and A and let m be the bisector of
∠AOR(A) (or the perpendicular bisector of A R(A) if the three points
are collinear).
O
A
l
R(A)
m
P
Figure 5.11
If A, O, R(A) are non-collinear, we know from the previous lemma
that rm ◦R will ﬁx point A. If they are collinear, rm ◦R will also ﬁx
A, as m is the perpendicular bisector of A R(A). Since rm ◦R also ﬁxes
O, rm ◦R is either the identity or a reﬂection. If it is the identity, then
R = rm. But, then R would have more than one ﬁxed point. Thus, rm◦R
must be a reﬂection ﬁxing O and A, and thus rm◦R = rl and R = rm◦rl.
Conversely, let R = rm ◦rl for lines l, m intersecting at O. If R
had a second ﬁxed point, say B ̸= O, then rm(B) = rl(B). Clearly,
B cannot be on m or l. But, then the segment joining B to rm(B) is
perpendicular to m, and this same segment would also be perpendicular
to l, as rm(B) = rl(B). This is impossible. 2
The next lemma describes triples of reﬂections about coincident lines.

Transformational Geometry
■207
Lemma 5.14. Let l, m, n be three lines intersecting at a point O.
Then, rl ◦rm ◦rn is a reﬂection about a line p passing through O.
Also, rl ◦rm ◦rn = rn ◦rm ◦rl.
Proof: Let f = rl ◦rm ◦rn, and let A be a point on n not equal to O
(Figure 5.12). For A′ = f(A), either A′ ̸= A or A′ = A.
O
l
m
A
n
A’
p
Figure 5.12
If A′ ̸= A, let line p be the angle bisector of ∠AOA′. A simple triangle
argument shows that p is also the perpendicular bisector of AA′ and thus
rp maps A to A′. If A′ = A choose p = n.
In either case, rp ◦f will ﬁx both A and O and thus ﬁxes n. Thus,
rp◦f is either equal to rn or is the identity. If rp◦f = rp◦rl◦rm◦rn = rn,
then rp ◦rl ◦rm = id and rp = rm ◦rl. Since m and l intersect, then
rp would be either a rotation or the identity. Clearly, rp cannot be a
rotation or the identity, and thus rp ◦f = id; that is, rp = f.
We conclude that f is a reﬂection about a line p passing through O,
and rp = f = rl ◦rm ◦rn.
For the second part of the theorem, we note that (rp)−1 = (rn)−1 ◦
(rm)−1 ◦(rl)−1. Since reﬂections are their own inverses, we have rp =
rn ◦rm ◦rl.
2
The next theorem tells us how rotations transform points through a
ﬁxed angle.

208
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 5.15. Let R ̸= id be a rotation about a ﬁxed point O.
For any point A ̸= O, there is a unique line m passing through O
such that R = rm ◦rl, where l is the line through O and A. Also,
if m∠AOR(A) is θ degrees, then for any point B ̸= O, we have
m∠BOR(B) is also θ degrees.
Proof: Let m be the angle bisector of ∠AOR(A). By the ﬁrst part of
the proof of Theorem 5.13, we know that R = rm ◦rl.
O
A
R(A)
m
B
R(B)
t
l
Figure 5.13
For the second part of the theorem, note that if m∠BOR(B) is θ,
then m∠B′OR(B′) is θ for all points B′ on ←→
OB. So, we can assume B
has the property that OA ∼= OB ∼= O R(B)
Let t be the angle bisector of ∠R(B) OA. Then, rt(A) = R(B) =
rm(rl(B)). Thus, A = rt(rm(rl(B))) and B = rl(rm(rt(A))). By the
previous lemma we also have B = rt(rm(rl(A))). Since rm(rl(A)) =
R(A), then B = rt(R(A)).
Since R(B) = rt(A) and B = rt(R(A)), then A R(A) ∼= B R(B). If
A, O, and R(A) are collinear, then A and R(A) are on opposite sides
of O on ←→
OA. Also, B, O, and R(B) must be collinear because rt maps
A to R(B), O to O and R(A) to B, and reﬂections map lines to lines.
Also, B and R(B) are on opposite sides of O as reﬂections preserve
betweenness. If A, O and R(A) are non-collinear, then by SSS congruence
∆AOR(A) ∼= ∆BOR(B). In either case, ∠AOR(A) ∼= ∠BOR(B). Thus,
the two angles have the same measure. 2
From this theorem we can see that the construction of a rotation

Transformational Geometry
■209
about O of a speciﬁc angle θ requires the choice of two lines that meet
at O and make an angle of θ
2.
We note here that the preceding theorems on rotations do not depend
on Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate and are thus part of neutral geometry. We will
use this fact to consider non-Euclidean rotations in Chapter 7.
Also, all of the results of this section hold in Elliptic geometry, except
for the converse implication of Theorem 5.13 (That a rotation has exactly
one ﬁxed point). The proof that a rotation has exactly one ﬁxed point
depends on the Neutral geometry fact that two distinct, but intersecting,
lines cannot have a common perpendicular. In Elliptic geometry, pairs
of intersecting lines can have a common perpendicular and there are
rotations having more than one ﬁxed point.
Deﬁnition 5.12. The point O of intersection of the reﬂection lines
of a rotation R is called the center of rotation. The angle φ deﬁned
by ∠AO R(A) for A ̸= O is called the angle of rotation.
Now let’s consider the coordinate form of a rotation R.
Given a point (x, y) in a coordinate system, we know that we can
represent the point as (r cos(θ), r sin(θ)). A rotation of (x, y) through
an angle of φ about the origin O = (0, 0) is given by
Rotφ(x, y) = (r cos(θ + φ), r sin(θ + φ))
From the trigonometric formulas covered in Chapter 3, we know that
the right side of this equation can be written as
(r cos(θ) cos(φ) −r sin(θ) sin(φ), r sin(θ) cos(φ) + r cos(θ) sin(φ))
Therefore,
Rotφ(x, y) = (x cos(φ) −y sin(φ), x sin(φ) + y cos(φ))
This is the coordinate form for a rotation about the origin by an
angle of φ.
We note for future reference that a rotation about a point O of 180
degrees is called a half-turn about O.

210
■Exploring Geometry
5.4.1
Rotational Symmetry
Deﬁnition 5.13. A ﬁgure is said to have rotational symmetry (or
cyclic symmetry) of angle φ if the ﬁgure is preserved under a rota-
tion about some center of rotation with angle φ.
Rotational symmetry is perhaps the most widespread symmetry in
nature.
Rotational
symmetry
can
be
found in the very small, such
as this radiolarian illustrated by
Ernst Haeckel in his book Art
Forms in Nature [17], to the very
large, as exhibited by the rota-
tionally symmetric shapes of stars
and planets.
Many ﬂowers exhibit ﬁve-fold symmetry, the rotational symmetry of
the regular pentagon. Let’s prove that the regular pentagon has ﬁve-fold
symmetry.
Theorem 5.16. The regular pentagon has rotational symmetry of
72 degrees.
Proof: In earlier exercises it was shown that the angle bisectors of the
pentagon are lines of symmetry and the perpendicular bisectors of the
sides are also lines of symmetry. Let l1 be the angle bisector of ∠CAB
and l2 be the perpendicular bisector of side AB at M in the pentagon
shown in Figure 5.14.

Transformational Geometry
■211
D
C
A
B
E
M
l2
l1
O
Figure 5.14
Then l1 and l2 must intersect. For, suppose that they were parallel.
Then ∠CAB must be a straight angle, that is, C, A, and B are collinear,
which is clearly impossible.
Let O be the intersection of l1, l2 and φ be the measure of ∠AOB.
The composition R of the reﬂections through l1, l2 is a rotation through
an angle of 2∠AOM = φ. We know that the pentagon is invariant under
R, since it is invariant under the component reﬂections. If C, D, E are the
other vertices, we have that iterated application of the rotation R on A
will cycle through these other vertices, and thus OC = OA = OD = OE,
making all of the interior triangles ∆AOB, ∆COA, and so on, congruent.
Since there are ﬁve angles at O of these triangles, then φ = 360
5 = 72. 2
In a similar fashion, we could show that the regular n-gon has rota-
tional symmetry of 360
n degrees.
Exercise 5.4.1. Suppose we are given a coordinate system centered at a
point O. Let Rotφ be a rotation about O of angle φ. Let C = (x, y) be a point
not equal to O and let T be the translation with vector v = (−x, −y). Show
that T −1 ◦Rotφ ◦T is a rotation about C of angle φ.
Exercise 5.4.2. Given a coordinate system centered at a point O and a line
l that does not pass through O, ﬁnd an expression for reﬂection across l, by
using translations, rotations, and a reﬂection across the x-axis.
Exercise 5.4.3. Find three examples in nature of each of the following rota-
tional symmetries: 90 degrees (square), 72 degrees (pentagon), and 60 degrees
(hexagon). Sketch your examples and label the symmetries of each.
Exercise 5.4.4. Show that if R is a rotation of θ degrees about O, with
R ̸= id, and l is a line not passing through O, then R(l) ̸= l. That is, if a

212
■Exploring Geometry
(non-identity) rotation has an invariant line, it must pass through the center
of rotation. [Hint: Drop a perpendicular from O to l at A. If θ < 180 consider
the triangle AO R(A). If θ = 180 use a diﬀerent argument.]
Exercise 5.4.5. Show that if a rotation R ̸= id has an invariant line, then it
must be a rotation of 180 degrees. Also, the invariant lines for such a rotation
are all lines passing through the center of rotation O. [Hint: Use the preceding
exercise.]
Exercise 5.4.6. Let R be a rotation about a point O and m be a line. Show
that if R(m) ∥m, then the rotation angle for R is 180 degrees. [Hint: Suppose
the angle is less than 180 and consider ∆AO R(A) where A is a point on m.]
Exercise 5.4.7. Let R be a rotation about a point O that is not the identity
or a half-turn. Let m be a line. Show that R(m) and m must intersect and
that if P is the point of intersection, then the angle made by m and R(m) at
P is equal to the rotation angle of R. [Hint: Show that you get a contradiction
if m and R(M) intersect and then drop perpendiculars to the two lines from
P. Consider the quadrilateral thus created.]
Exercise 5.4.8. Show, using reﬂections, that the inverse to a rotation about
a point of φ degrees is a rotation about the same point of −φ degrees.
Exercise 5.4.9. Show that the composition of two rotations centered at the
same point is again a rotation centered at that point.
Exercise 5.4.10. Suppose that two rotations R, R′ centered at O have the
same eﬀect on a point A ̸= O. Show that R = R′.
Exercise 5.4.11. Suppose that the composition of a rotation R ̸= id with a
reﬂection r1 is again a reﬂection r2. That is, suppose that r1 ◦R = r2. Show
that r1 and r2 must pass through the center of rotation for R.
Exercise 5.4.12. Let l be perpendicular to m at a point A on l (or m). Let
H = rl ◦rm. Show that H is a rotation about A of 180 degrees; that is, a
half-turn about A.
Exercise 5.4.13. Let A, B be distinct points. Let HA,HB be half-turns about
A, B, respectively. Show that HB ◦HA is a translation in the direction of the
vector from A to B.
Exercise 5.4.14. Let f be any isometry and HA a half-turn about a point
A. Show that f ◦HA ◦f −1 is a half-turn. [Hint: Show it is a rotation and that
it maps lines through a point back to themselves.]

Transformational Geometry
■213
5.5
PROJECT 7 - QUILTS AND TRANSFORMATIONS
Before we look at the last type of isometries, those composed of three
reﬂections, we will take a break to have a little fun with our current
toolbox of isometries (reﬂections, translations, and rotations).
One of the uniquely American craft forms is that of quilting. In
making a quilt, we start with a basic block, usually a square, made up
of various pieces of cloth. This basic block is then copied to form a set
of identical blocks that are sewn together to make a quilt.
For example, here is a quilt block
we’ll call “square-in-square” that
is made up of a piece of white
cloth on top of a black back-
ground.
If
we
translate
this
block
up and down (equivalently, sew
copies of this block together), we
will get the quilt shown here.
Note that the square-in-square
block can be built up from a sim-
pler shape, that of the triangular-
divided square found in the bot-
tom left corner of the square-
in-square block. The square-in-
square block is built of four copies
of this basic shape, using various
reﬂections.

214
■Exploring Geometry
In the ﬁrst part of this project, we will see how we can
use the transformation capability of dynamic geometry software
to construct the triangular-divided square. We will then use this
square to build the square-in-square block, which will then be
used to construct a quilt. (Notes on how to use transformations
in particular dynamic geometry software packages can be found at
http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text.)
We note here that when we refer to a “block” of a quilt, we are
referring to a square region of the quilt that can cover the entire quilt
when repeatedly transformed via reﬂections, rotations, and translations.
Thus, in the quilt shown in the middle ﬁgure in the preceding series
of ﬁgures, either the square-in-square shape, or the triangular-divided
square, or the entire quilt itself, could be considered basic quilting blocks.
Start up your geometry software
and create a segment AB. Set
point A to be a center of rotation.
Then, rotate point B 90 degrees
about point A.
A
B
C
Now, set C as the center of ro-
tation and rotate point A by 90
degrees to get point D. Then, con-
nect the vertices with segments to
form the square shown.
A
B
C
D
To construct the triangular-
divided square, we will construct
the ﬁgure shown. Select points A,
B, and C, and construct a ﬁlled-
polygon area.
A
B
C
D

Transformational Geometry
■215
We can ﬁnish the creation of
the square-in-square block either
by reﬂection or rotation about D.
Carry out whichever transforma-
tions you wish to get the block
shown. (We will ignore the extra
lines and points for now.)
A
B
C
D
E
F
To create a larger quilt from this block, we will translate the block
vertically and horizontally. For example, to translate horizontally, we
will want to shift the block to the right by the vector −→
AE.
Deﬁne the translation from A to
E and then translate the entire
block to get the image shown.
A
B
C
D
E
F
We can likewise set −→
AF as a
vector and translate the previous
ﬁgure in a vertical direction mul-
tiple times.
A
B
C
D
E
F

216
■Exploring Geometry
Finally, let’s hide all the seg-
ments and points used in the con-
struction.
Exercise 5.5.1. Using the same
triangular-divided square and appro-
priate transformations, construct the
Yankee Puzzle shown here. Feel free
to use diﬀerent colors for the vari-
ous shapes in the quilt. Describe the
steps (i.e., sequence of transforma-
tions) that you took to build the quilt.
Exercise 5.5.2. Design your own pattern, based on triangular-divided
squares or simple squares, and use it to build a quilt. Below are a few quilts
you can use for ideas.

Transformational Geometry
■217
Star Puzzle 
Dutch Man’s Puzzle
25-Patch Star
Flower Basket
Exercise 5.5.3. Which of the four quilt patterns in the previous exercise
have
• Bilateral symmetry (Specify the lines of reﬂection.)
• Rotational symmetry (Specify the rotation angle and center of rotation.)
• Both rotational and bilateral symmetry
Exercise 5.5.4. Why must a quilt having two perpendicular lines of reﬂec-
tion have a rotational symmetry? What is the rotation angle?
The quilt patterns in this project, and many other intriguing quilt
patterns, can be found in [5, pages 305–311] and also in [36].

218
■Exploring Geometry
5.6
GLIDE REFLECTIONS
Now we are ready to look at the last class of isometries—those made
up of three reﬂections. Such isometries will turn out to be equivalent to
either a reﬂection or a glide reﬂection.
Deﬁnition 5.14. An isometry that is made up of a reﬂection and
a translation parallel to the line of the reﬂection is called a glide
reﬂection.
A glide reﬂection is essentially a ﬂip across a line and then a glide
(or translate) along that line. If −→
AB is a vector with TAB translation by
this vector and if l is a line parallel to −→
AB with rl reﬂection across l,
then the glide reﬂection deﬁned by these isometries is
Gl,AB = TAB ◦rl
Our ﬁrst theorem about glide reﬂections says that it doesn’t matter
if you glide and then reﬂect or reﬂect and then glide. You always end up
at the same place.
Theorem 5.17. Let l be a line and −→
AB a vector parallel to l.
• Gl,AB = TAB ◦rl = rl ◦TAB
• G−1
l,AB = TBA ◦rl
A
B
l
P
P’
P’’
G,H
Figure 5.15

Transformational Geometry
■219
Proof: For the ﬁrst statement of the theorem, let P be a point not on
l. Let P ′ = rl(P) and P ′′ = TAB(P) (Figure 5.15). Let G = TAB(rl(P))
and H = rl(TAB(P)). We know that PP ′ is perpendicular to l. We also
know that APP ′′B and AP ′GB will be parallelograms, by Theorem 5.9.
Thus, ∠P ′PP ′′ and ∠PP ′G are right angles, as PP ′′ and P ′G are both
parallel to l and PP ′ crosses l at right angles. The angles at P ′′ and G
in quadrilateral PP ′′GP ′ are also right angles, as translation preserves
angles. Thus, PP ′′GP ′ is a rectangle.
A similar argument will show that PP ′′HP ′ is also a rectangle and
thus G = H, or TAB(rl(P)) = rl(TAB(P)).
If P lies on l, then since translation of TAB(P) will still lie on l, we
have that rl(TAB(P)) = TAB(P) = TAB(rl(P)).
For the second statement we reference one of the earlier exercises of
the chapter, which said that if a function h was the composition of f
and g (h = f ◦g), then h−1 = g−1 ◦f −1. So
G−1
l,AB = r−1
l
◦T −1
AB
Since the inverse of a reﬂection is the reﬂection itself and the inverse of
a translation from A to B is the reverse translation from B to A, we get
that
G−1
l,AB = rl ◦TBA = TBA ◦rl
2
Now we are ready to begin the classiﬁcation of isometries that consist
of three reﬂections.
Theorem 5.18. Let l1, l2, l3 be three lines such that exactly two
of them meet at a single point. Then the composition of reﬂections
across these three lines (r3 ◦r2 ◦r1) is a glide reﬂection.
Proof: Let r1, r2, r3 be the reﬂections across l1, l2, l3. There are two cases
to consider. Either the ﬁrst two lines l1, l2 intersect or they are parallel.
Suppose that l1, l2 intersect at P (Figure 5.16). Drop a perpendicular
from P to l3 intersecting at Q.

220
■Exploring Geometry
P
l2
l1
l3
Q
S
−φ
P’
S’
Figure 5.16
We know that the composition of r1 and r2 will be a rotation about
P of some non-zero angle, say φ degrees. Let S be the rotation of Q
about P of −φ degrees. Since r2(r1(S)) = Q and r3(Q) = Q, we have
Q = r3(r2(r1(S)))
Now, let P ′ be the reﬂection of P across l3. Let S′ = r3(r2(r1(Q))).
We know that S′ ̸= S as S′ must be Q rotated about P by φ and
then reﬂected across l3 and thus must be on the other side of ←→
QP from
S. Since r3 ◦r2 ◦r1 is an isometry and since this composition maps
∆PSQ to ∆P ′QS′, we know that these two triangles are congruent.
Thus, ∠PQS ∼= ∠P ′S′Q. But, both triangles must also be isosceles
(PS ∼= PQ). Thus, ∠PQS ∼= ∠P ′QS′. This means that S, Q, S′ must lie
on a line. Since isometries take lines to lines then r3 ◦r2 ◦r1 must map
←→
QS back to itself, with a shift via the vector from S to Q.
Let G = TSQ ◦rSQ, where rSQ is reﬂection across ←→
QS and TSQ is
translation from S to Q. It is left as an exercise to show that G(P) = P ′.
Then, G and r3 ◦r2 ◦r1 match on three non-collinear points P, S, Q and
so G = r3◦r2◦r1, and thus the composition r3◦r2◦r1 is a glide reﬂection.
Now, what about the second case, where l1, l2 are parallel? Then it
must be the case that l2 and l3 intersect at a single point. Then, by the
argument above, r1 ◦r2 ◦r3 is a glide reﬂection. But, r1 ◦r2 ◦r3 = (r3 ◦
r2 ◦r1)−1. We know that the inverse of a glide reﬂection is again a glide
reﬂection by the previous theorem. Thus, ((r3 ◦r2 ◦r1)−1)−1 = r3 ◦r2 ◦r1
is a glide reﬂection. 2
We can now give a complete classiﬁcation of isometries that consist
of three reﬂections.

Transformational Geometry
■221
Theorem 5.19. The composition of three diﬀerent reﬂections is
either a reﬂection or a glide reﬂection.
Proof: There are three cases.
First, suppose that the three lines l1, l2, l3 of reﬂection are parallel.
We can suppose that there is a coordinate system set up so that each
line is parallel to the x-axis. Then, as was discussed in the section on
reﬂections, we know that the three reﬂections r1, r2, r3 associated with
l1, l2, l3 can be given by
r1(x, y) = (x, −y−2K1), r2(x, y) = (x, −y−2K2), r3(x, y) = (x, −y−2K3)
for some non-negative constants K1, K2, K3. Then
r3(r2(r1(x, y))) = (x, −y −2K1 + 2K2 −2K3)
This clearly ﬁxes the line at y = −K1 +K2 −K3 and thus is a reﬂection.
Secondly, suppose that only two of the lines meet at exactly one
point. By the previous theorem we have that r3◦r2◦r1 is a glide reﬂection.
Finally, suppose that all three meet at a single point P. Then, by
Lemma 5.14 we have that r3 ◦r2 ◦r1 is a reﬂection about some line
through the common intersection point. 2
5.6.1
Glide Reﬂection Symmetry
Deﬁnition 5.15. A ﬁgure is said to have glide symmetry if the
ﬁgure is preserved under a glide reﬂection.
Where does glide symmetry ap-
pear in nature? You may be sur-
prised to discover that your feet
are creators of glide symmetric
patterns! For example, if you walk
in a straight line on a sandy
beach, your footprints will create
a pattern that is invariant under
glide reﬂection (footsteps created
by Preston Nichols).

222
■Exploring Geometry
Many plants also exhibit glide
symmetry in the alternating struc-
ture of leaves or branches on a
stem.
Exercise 5.6.1. Find examples of two objects in nature that exhibit symme-
tries of a glide reﬂection (other than the ones we have given). Draw sketches
of these and illustrate the glide reﬂection for each object on your sketch.
Exercise 5.6.2. Finish the proof of Theorem 5.18; that is, show in the proof
that G(P) = P ′. [Hint: Let P ′′ be the reﬂection of P across ←→
QS. Show that
∆P ′P ′′Q ∼= ∆QSP and use this to show the result.]
Exercise 5.6.3. Show that the only invariant line under a glide reﬂection
TAB ◦rl (with −−→
AB ̸= (0, 0)) is the line of reﬂection l. [Hint: If m is invariant,
then it is also invariant under the glide reﬂection squared.]
Exercise 5.6.4. Show that if a glide reﬂection has a ﬁxed point, then it is a
pure reﬂection—it is composed of a reﬂection and a translation by the vector
v = (0, 0). [Hint: Use a coordinate argument.]
Exercise 5.6.5. Show that the composition of a glide reﬂection with itself
is a translation and ﬁnd the translation vector in terms of the original glide
reﬂection.
A group of symmetries is a set of Euclidean isometries that have the
following properties:
1. Given any two elements of the set, the composition of the two
elements is again a member of the set.
2. The composition of elements is an associative operation.
3. The identity is a member of the set.

Transformational Geometry
■223
4. Given any element of the set, its inverse exists and is an element
of the set.
Note: Since function composition is associative, the second condition is
true for all collections of isometries.
Exercise 5.6.6. Does the set of glide reﬂections form a group of symmetries?
Why or why not?
Exercise 5.6.7. Show that the set of all reﬂections does not form a group
of symmetries.
Exercise 5.6.8. Show that the set of all rotations does not form a group of
symmetries. [Hint: Use half-turns and exercise 5.4.13.]
Exercise 5.6.9. Show that the set of rotations about a ﬁxed center of rotation
O does form a group of symmetries.
Exercise 5.6.10. Show that the set of translations forms a group of symme-
tries.
Deﬁnition 5.16. An isometry is called direct (or orientation-
preserving) if it is a product of two reﬂections or is the identity.
It is called opposite (or orientation-reversing) if it is a reﬂection or
a glide.
Exercise 5.6.11. Given
∆ABC,
the ordering A, B, C is called a
“clockwise” ordering of the vertices,
whereas A,C,B would be a “coun-
terclockwise” ordering. Describe, by
example, how direct isometries pre-
serve
such
orderings
(i.e.,
map
clockwise to clockwise and counter-
clockwise to counterclockwise) and
how opposite isometries switch this
ordering.
A
B
C
Exercise 5.6.12. Show that every isometry is either direct or opposite, but
not both.

224
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 5.17. An isometry f will be called even if it can be
written as the product of an even number of reﬂections. An isometry
will be called odd if it can be written as the product of an odd number
of isometries.
Exercise 5.6.13. Show that an isometry is even if and only if it is direct,
and that it is odd if and only if it is opposite.
5.7
STRUCTURE AND REPRESENTATION OF ISOMETRIES
We have now completely classiﬁed the possible isometries of the Eu-
clidean plane. We can classify isometries in two ways—by the number
of ﬁxed points they have or by the number of reﬂections that make up
isometries.
In Table 5.1 we classify isometries by the number of ﬁxed points they
have.
TABLE 5.1 Isometry Classiﬁcation by Fixed Points
Fixed Points
Isometry
0
translation, glide reﬂection
1
rotation
2
reﬂection
3 (not collinear)
identity
In Table 5.2 we classify an isometry by the number of reﬂections that
comprise the isometry.
TABLE 5.2 Isometry Classiﬁcation by Reﬂections
Number of Reﬂections
Isometry
1
reﬂection
2
identity, rotation, translation
3
glide reﬂection, reﬂection
We know how an individual isometry behaves, but how do isometries
work when combined together? From Exercise 5.4.9 we know that the
composition of two rotations about the same center is again a rotation

Transformational Geometry
■225
about that center. But, what can we say about the composition of two
rotations about diﬀerent centers? We know that the composition of such
rotations will again be an isometry, but what type? To answer such ques-
tions we will need a uniform way to represent all Euclidean isometries.
This will be done through the use of matrices.
5.7.1
Matrix Form of Isometries
Recall that a rotation Rφ of a point (x, y) through an angle of φ degrees
about the origin can be written as
Rφ(x, y) = (x cos(φ) −y sin(φ), x sin(φ) + y cos(φ))
Note that this is equivalent to the matrix equation
Rφ(x, y) =
"
cos(φ)
−sin(φ)
sin(φ)
cos(φ)
# x
y

where

x
y

is the column vector representing the point (x, y). Thus, the
action of Rφ on points in the plane is the same as matrix multiplica-
tion (on the left) of the vector representing the point by the matrix
"
cos(φ)
−sin(φ)
sin(φ)
cos(φ)
#
. We see, then, that any rotation about the origin
can be identiﬁed with a 2×2 matrix of the form above, and conversely
any matrix of this form will give rise to a rotation about the origin.
Can we ﬁnd a matrix form for a translation? Let T be a translation
with vector v = (v1, v2). Then
T(x, y) = (x, y) + (v1, v2) = (x + v1, y + v2)
Unfortunately, this cannot be written as the product of a 2x2 matrix
with

x
y

. However, consider the following matrix equation:


1
0
v1
0
1
v2
0
0
1





x
y
1


=



x + v1
y + v2
1



The vector (x, y, 1) gets mapped to the vector (x + v1, v + v2, 1). In
the x and y coordinates, this is exactly what translation by v would
produce. But, how can we use this fact about three-dimensional vectors
in planar geometry?

226
■Exploring Geometry
Recall the discussion on models in the ﬁrst chapter. If we can ﬁnd a
setting where the axioms of a geometry hold, then that setting will serve
as a model for the geometry, and all theorems will hold equally well
in that model. The normal model for planar geometry is the Euclidean
(x, y) plane, which we can interpret as the plane at height 0 in three
dimensions. But, the axioms of planar geometry work just as well for
the set of points at height z = 1, that is, the set of points (x, y, 1).
Whatever operation we do on points in this new plane will be equal in
eﬀect to the corresponding operation in the abstract Euclidean plane, as
long as we ensure that the third coordinate stays equal to 1.
For the rest of this section we will switch to this new model of planar
geometry.
Deﬁnition 5.18. A point will be a vector (x, y, 1). Distance and
angle will be deﬁned as the standard distance and angle of the x and
y components.
In our new model the third coordinate does not carry any geometric
signiﬁcance. It is there just to make our representation of isometries
easier.
We will deﬁne vector addition of two points (x1, y1, 1) and (x2, y3, 1)
as (x1, y1, 1) + (x2, y3, 1) = (x1 + x2, y1 + y2, 1). With this deﬁnition,
vector addition carries the same geometric meaning as standard vector
addition for points in the (x, y) plane. Also, if A is a matrix and v1, v2
are two vectors, then A(v1 + v2) = Av1 + Av2. This property of linearity
will come in handy.
We have the following classiﬁcation of “elementary” isometries.
• A rotation about the origin by an angle of φ is represented by


cos(φ)
−sin(φ)
0
sin(φ)
cos(φ)
0
0
0
1


• A translation by a vector of v = (v1, v2) is represented by


1
0
v1
0
1
v2
0
0
1



Transformational Geometry
■227
• A reﬂection about the x-axis is represented by


1
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
1


• A reﬂection about the y-axis is represented by


−1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1


Any other reﬂection, translation, rotation, or glide reﬂection can be
built from these elementary isometries, as was shown in the exercises at
the end of the last few sections. Thus, any isometry is equivalent to the
product of 3×3 matrices of the form above.
But, how exactly do compositions of isometries form new isometries?
We know that the composition of two translations is again a translation,
that two reﬂections form either a translation or rotation, and that two
rotations about the same center form another rotation about that center.
What about the composition of two rotations with diﬀerent centers? Or
the composition of a rotation and translation?
5.7.2
Compositions of Rotations and Translations
In the next two theorems, we will assume that any angle mentioned has
been normalized to lie between 0 and 360.
Theorem 5.20. Let Ra,α be rotation about point a by an angle
α ̸= 0. Let Rb,β be rotation about point b ̸= a by β ̸= 0. Let Tv be
translation by the vector v = (v1, v2). Then
(i) Ra,α ◦Tv = TRa,α(v) ◦Ra,α.
(ii) Ra,α ◦Rb,β is a translation iﬀα + β = 0(mod 360).
(iii) Ra,α ◦Tv (or Tv ◦Ra,α) is a rotation of angle α.
(iv) Ra,α ◦Rb,β is a rotation of angle α + β iﬀα + β ̸=
0(mod 360).

228
■Exploring Geometry
Proof: For the ﬁrst statement of the theorem, we can set our coordi-
nate system so that a is the origin. Using the matrix forms for Ra,α and
Tv, we get
Ra,α ◦Tv
=


cos(α)
−sin(α)
0
sin(α)
cos(α)
0
0
0
1




1
0
v1
0
1
v2
0
0
1


=


cos(α)
−sin(α)
cos(α)v1 −sin(α)v2
sin(α)
cos(α)
sin(α)v1 + cos(α)v2
0
0
1


The x and y components of the third column of this product are
precisely the x and y components of Ra,α(v). Let Ra,α(v) = (c, d). Then
TRa,α(v) ◦Ra,α
=


1
0
c
0
1
d
0
0
1




cos(α)
−sin(α)
0
sin(α)
cos(α)
0
0
0
1


=


cos(α)
−sin(α)
c
sin(α)
cos(α)
d
0
0
1


This ﬁnishes the proof of the ﬁrst part of the theorem.
For the second part of the theorem, suppose that Ra,α ◦Rb,β is a
translation Tv. We can assume that b is the origin. Let Rθ represent
rotation about the origin by θ. We know that Ra,α = Ta ◦Rα ◦T−a.
Thus, using statement (i), we get that
Tv
=
Ra,α ◦Rb,β
=
Ta ◦Rα ◦T−a ◦Rβ
=
Ta ◦TRα(−a) ◦Rα ◦Rβ
=
Ta+Rα(−a) ◦Rα+β
Thus, T−a−Rα(−a) ◦Tv is a rotation (Rα+β) and must have a ﬁxed
point. But, the only translation with a ﬁxed point is the identity, and
thus Rα+β must be the identity, and α + β must be a multiple of 360
degrees.
Conversely, if α+β is a multiple of 360, then Ra,α◦Rb,β = Ta+Rα(−a).
For the third statement of the theorem, we can assume that a is the
origin and thus Ra,α = Rα. Consider the ﬁxed points P of Rα ◦Tv. Using
the matrix form of these isometries, we get that if P is a ﬁxed point,
then

Transformational Geometry
■229


cos(α)
−sin(α)
0
sin(α)
cos(α)
0
0
0
1




1
0
v1
0
1
v2
0
0
1

P = P =


1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1

P
Set Rα(v) = (e, f). After multiplying out the left side of the previous
equation, we get


cos(α)
−sin(α)
e
sin(α)
cos(α)
f
0
0
1

P =


1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1

P
If we subtract the term on the right from both sides, we get


cos(α) −1
−sin(α)
e
sin(α)
cos(α) −1
f
0
0
0

P = O
where O is the origin (0, 0, 0). This equation has a unique solution iﬀthe
determinant of the 2×2 matrix in the upper left corner is non-zero. (Re-
member that the third component is not signiﬁcant.) This determinant
is
(cos(α)−1)2 +sin(α)2 = cos(α)2 −2 cos(α)+1+sin(α)2 = 2(1−cos(α))
Since α is not a multiple of 360, then cos(α) ̸= 1 and there is a unique
ﬁxed point. Thus, the composition is a rotation, say Rg,γ. Then R−α◦Rg,γ
is a translation and by statement (ii) we have that γ+(−α) = 0(mod 360)
and thus γ = α(mod 360). A similar argument shows that Tv ◦Rα is a
rotation of angle α.
For the fourth statement of the theorem, we know from the work
above that Ra,α ◦Rβ = Ta+Rα(−a) ◦Rα+β. Since α + β ̸= 0(mod 360),
by statement (iii) of the theorem, we know that the composition on the
right is a rotation by an angle of α + β. 2
The only compositions left to consider are those involving reﬂections
or glide reﬂections.

230
■Exploring Geometry
5.7.3
Compositions of Reﬂections and Glide Reﬂections
Theorem 5.21. Let rl be a reﬂection with line of symmetry l, Gm,v
a glide reﬂection along a line m with the vector v parallel to m, Ra,α
a rotation with center a and angle α ̸= 0, and Tw translation along
a non-zero vector w. Then
(i) rl ◦Ra,α (or Ra,α ◦rl) is a reﬂection iﬀl passes through
a. If l does not pass through a, then the composition is a
glide reﬂection.
(ii) rl ◦Tw (or Tw ◦rl) is a reﬂection iﬀthe vector w is per-
pendicular to l. If w is not perpendicular to l, then the
composition is a glide reﬂection.
(iii) Gm,v ◦Ra,α (or Ra,α ◦Gm,v) is a reﬂection iﬀm passes
through the center of the rotation deﬁned by Tv ◦Ra,α (or
Ra,α ◦Tv). If m does not pass through this center, then the
composition is a glide reﬂection.
(iv) Gm,v ◦Tw (or Tw ◦Gm,v) is a reﬂection iﬀthe vector v +w
is perpendicular to m. If v + w is not perpendicular to m,
then the composition is a glide reﬂection.
(v) rl ◦Gm,v (or Gm,v ◦rl) is a translation iﬀl is parallel to
m. The composition is a rotation otherwise.
(vi) The composition of two diﬀerent glide reﬂections is a
translation iﬀthe reﬂection lines for both are parallel. The
composition is a rotation otherwise.
Proof: For the ﬁrst two statements we note that the composition of a
reﬂection and either a rotation or a translation will be equivalent to the
composition of three reﬂections, and thus must be either a reﬂection or
a glide reﬂection. Statements (i) and (ii) then follow immediately from
Theorems 5.18 and 5.19 and their proofs.
For statement (iii) we note that Gm,v = rm ◦Tv and so Gm,v ◦Ra,α =
rm ◦Tv ◦Ra,α. The result follows from statement (iii) of the previous
theorem and statement (i) of this theorem.
For statement (iv) we note that Gm,v ◦Tw = rm◦Tv ◦Tw = rm◦Tv+w.
The result follows from statement (ii).

Transformational Geometry
■231
For statement (v) we note that rl ◦Gm,v = rl ◦rm ◦Tv. If rl ◦Gm,v
is a translation, say Tu, then rl ◦rm = Tu−v and l ∥m. Conversely, if
l ∥m, then rl ◦rm is a translation and thus rl ◦Gm,v is a translation. If
l ̸∥m, then rl ◦rm is a rotation and rl ◦Gm,v is also a rotation.
The last statement of the theorem follows immediately from looking
at the structure of two glide reﬂections and is left as an exercise. 2
We now have a complete characterization of how pairs of isometries
act to form new isometries. In principle, any complex motion involv-
ing rotations, translations, and reﬂections can be broken down into a
sequence of compositions of basic isometries. This fact is used to great
eﬀect by computer animators.
5.7.4
Isometries in Computer Graphics
Just as we can represent a point (x, y) as a point (x, y, 1) on the plane at
height 1 in three dimensions, we can represent a point in space (x, y, z)
as a point (x, y, z, 1) at “hyper” height 1 in four dimensions. Then, trans-
lations, rotations, and reﬂections in three dimensions can be represented
as 4×4 matrices acting on these points.
For example, to translate a point (x, y, z) by the vector v = (a, b, c),
we use the translation matrix


1
0
0
a
0
1
0
b
0
0
1
c
0
0
0
1


and multiply this matrix (on the left) by the vector


x
y
z
1


To animate an object on the computer screen, we need to do two
things: represent the object in the computer and then carry out trans-
formations on this representation. We can represent an object as a col-
lection of polygonal patches that are deﬁned by sets of vertices. To move
an object we need only move the vertices deﬁning the object and then
redraw the polygons making up the object.
To realize movement of an object on the screen, we need to repeat-
edly carry out a sequence of rotations, reﬂections, and translations on the

232
■Exploring Geometry
points deﬁning the object. All of these isometries can be implemented us-
ing 4×4 matrices as described above. Thus, a computer graphics system
basically consists of point sets (objects) and sequences of 4×4 matrices
(motions) that can be applied to point sets.
One of the most popular graphics systems in use today is the OpenGL
system [33]. OpenGL uses the notion of a graphics pipeline to organize
how motions are carried out. For example, to rotate and then translate
an object using OpenGL, you would deﬁne the rotation and then the
translation and put these two 4×4 matrices into a virtual pipeline. The
graphics system then multiplies all the matrices in the pipeline together
(in order) and applies the resulting matrix to any vertices that deﬁne
the object. In a very real sense, computer graphics comes down to being
able to quickly multiply 4×4 matrices, that is, to quickly compose three-
dimensional transformations.
5.7.5
Summary of Isometry Compositions
We summarize the theorems on compositions of isometries in Table 5.3
for future reference. (The table lists only non-trivial compositions; that
is, ones where l ̸= m, a ̸= b, v ̸= w.)
TABLE 5.3 Isometry Composition
◦
rl
Ra,α
Tv
Gl,v
rm
T (l∥m)
R (l̸∥m)
r (a∈m)
G (a̸∈m)
r (v⊥m)
G (v̸⊥m)
T (l∥m)
R (l̸∥m)
Rb,β
r (b∈l)
G (b̸∈l)
Rc,α+β (α+β̸=0 (mod 360))
T (α+β=0 (mod 360))
Rc,β
r (c1∈l)
G (c1̸∈l)
Tw
r (w⊥l)
G (w̸⊥l)
Rc,α
Tw+v
r ((w+v)⊥l)
G ((w+v)̸⊥l)
Gm,w
T (l∥m)
R (l̸∥m)
r (c2∈m)
G (c2̸∈m)
r ((w+v)⊥m)
G ((w+v)̸⊥m)
T (l∥m)
R (l̸∥m)
In the table, c stands for an arbitrary center of rotation, c1 is the
center of rotation for Rb,β◦Tv, and c2 is the center of rotation for Tw◦Ra,α.
Exercise 5.7.1. Prove statement (vi) of Theorem 5.21. That is, show that
the composition of two diﬀerent glide reﬂections is a translation if the reﬂec-
tion lines for both are parallel and is a rotation otherwise.
An important algebraic operation on invertible functions is the idea
of the conjugate of a function by another function. Given two invertible

Transformational Geometry
■233
functions f, g, we construct the conjugate of g by f as f ◦g ◦f −1. In
the next ﬁve exercises, we look at how conjugation acts on types of
isometries.
Exercise 5.7.2. Let f be an isometry and HO a half-turn about point O
(rotation by 180 degrees). Show that conjugation of HO by f, that is f ◦HO ◦
f −1, is equal to Hf(O), a half-turn about f(O).
Exercise 5.7.3. Let f be an isometry and rm a reﬂection about line m.
Show that f ◦rm ◦f −1 = rf(m) (reﬂection about f(m)).
Exercise 5.7.4. Let f be an isometry and TAB a translation with vector
−−→
AB. Show that f ◦TAB ◦f −1 = Tf(A)f(B) (translation with vector −−−−−−→
f(A)f(B)).
Exercise 5.7.5. Let f be an isometry and g = rm ◦TAB a glide reﬂection
along m with translation vector −−→
AB. Show that f ◦g ◦f −1 = rf(m) ◦Tf(A)f(B)
(glide reﬂection along f(m) with vector −−−−−−→
f(A)f(B)).
Exercise 5.7.6. Let f be an isometry and RA,α a rotation about point A by
an angle of α. Show that f ◦RA,α ◦f −1 = Rf(A),α if f is a direct isometry
(rotation or translation) and f ◦RA,α ◦f −1 = Rf(A),−α if f is an indirect
isometry (reﬂection or glide reﬂection).
Exercise 5.7.7. Another model we can use for the Euclidean plane is the
complex plane, where a point (x, y) is represented by a complex number z =
x+iy with i = √−1. Show that a rotation of a point (x, y) about the origin by
an angle φ is equivalent to multiplication of x + iy by eiφ. [Hint: Recall that
eiφ = cos(φ)+i sin(φ).] Show that translation of (x, y) by a vector v = (v1, v2)
is equivalent to adding v = v1 + iv2 to x + iy. Finally, show that reﬂection
across the x-axis is the same as complex conjugation.
Exercise 5.7.8. Let Ra,α be rotation about a of angle α and Rβ be rotation
about the origin of β. Show that the center of Ra,α ◦Rβ is the complex number
c = a
1−eiα
1−ei(α+β) .
Exercise 5.7.9. Let Tv be translation by v and Rβ rotation about the origin
by an angle of β. Show that the center of Tv ◦Rβ is the complex number
c =
v
1−eiβ .
Exercise 5.7.10. You are a computer game designer who is designing a
two-dimensional space battle on the screen. You have set up your coordinate
system so that the screen is a virtual world with visible coordinates running
from −5 to 5 in the x direction and likewise in the y direction. Suppose that
you want to have your ship start at the origin, move to the position (2, 3),
rotate 45 degrees there, and then move to the position (−2, 3). Find the 3×3
matrices that will realize this motion, and then describe the order in which you
would put these matrices into a graphics pipeline to carry out the movement.

234
■Exploring Geometry
5.8
PROJECT 8 - CONSTRUCTING COMPOSITIONS
At ﬁrst glance the title of this project may seem a bit strange. We
have been talking about compositions of isometries, which are essen-
tially compositions of functions. How can you construct the composition
of two functions? Function composition would seem to be primarily an
algebraic concept. But composition of geometric transformations should
have some geometric interpretation as well. In this project we will ex-
plore the construction of the composition of rotations and discover some
beautiful geometry along the way.
Notes on how to use particular dynamic geometry software packages
for this project can be found at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-
text.
Start up your geometry software
and create a segment AB. Then,
create two rays −→
AC and −−→
BD from
A and B and construct the inter-
section point E of these two rays.
Create a circle with center F and
radius point G.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
The two rotations we will compose are the rotation about A by
∠EAB, which we will denote by RA,∠EAB, and the rotation about B
by ∠ABE, denoted by RB,∠ABE. Both angles will be oriented angles.
That is, ∠EAB will be directed clockwise, moving −→
AE to −→
AB. ∠ABE
will also be directed clockwise.

Transformational Geometry
■235
Set A as a center of rotation and
deﬁne a rotation of ∠EAB. Use
this rotation to rotate the circle to
a new circle, shown at right with
center H.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Now we will rotate the cir-
cle with center H by the rotation
RB,∠ABE. As you did above, set
∠ABE as a new angle of rotation
and set B as the new center of ro-
tation. Then, rotate the circle cen-
tered at H to get a new circle cen-
tered at J.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
The circle at J is the result
of applying RB,∠ABE ◦RA,∠EAB
to the original circle at F. To
better analyze this composition,
construct the angle bisector for
∠BAE b Likewise, construct the
angle bisector of ∠EBA. Label
these bisectors “m” and “n.”
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
n
m
Exercise 5.8.1. Show that rotation RA,∠EAB is equivalent to r←→
AB ◦rn and
RB,∠ABE is equivalent to rm ◦r←→
AB.

236
■Exploring Geometry
Find the intersection point O of
m and n and note that O appears
to be equidistant from the original
circle at F and the twice trans-
formed circle at J. Move point D
around, thus changing the angles
of rotation, and observe how O
always seems to have this prop-
erty. To convince ourselves that
this holds true, let’s measure the
distance from O to F and from O
to J.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
n
m
O
Dist(O,F) = 2.17
Dist(O,J) = 2.17
Exercise 5.8.2. From what you have discovered so far, prove that RB,∠ABE◦
RA,∠EAB = rm ◦rn and thus RB,∠ABE ◦RA,∠EAB is a rotation of some angle
γ, with center O.
Exercise 5.8.3. What theorem in section 5.7 can be used to show that γ =
(∠EAB + ∠ABE)(mod 360)? (as long as (∠EAB + ∠ABE) ̸= 0(mod 360).)
We have shown that the composition of two rotations about diﬀer-
ent centers is again a rotation, with new rotation angle the sum of the
component angles of rotation (mod 360). This was also shown in the last
section, but that proof was algebraic in nature. Here we have shown that
the composition can be completely described by a geometric construc-
tion. Transformational geometry has this interesting two-sided nature
in that one can almost always explain a result either by algebraic ma-
nipulation or by geometric construction. This dual nature is what gives
transformational geometry its great utility and power.
For what rotations will the preceding construction be valid? From
Exercise 5.8.3 the construction gives a rotation if (∠EAB + ∠ABE) ̸=
0(mod 360).
What happens if (∠EAB + ∠ABE) = 0(mod 360)?
Clear the screen and create AB
and −→
AC at some angle as shown.
Create a circle centered at some
point D.
A
B
C
D

Transformational Geometry
■237
Deﬁne
a
rotation
through
∠CAB, with center at A, and ro-
tate the circle, yielding a new cir-
cle at F.
A
B
C
D
F
Now, we will rotate the cir-
cle at F through an angle β such
that ∠CAB + β is a multiple of
360. The simplest way to do this
is merely to reverse the angle just
deﬁned. Deﬁne a rotation through
∠BAC with center at B. (Note
that the two angles of rotation to-
gether must be 360.) Rotate the
circle at F to get a new circle at
H.
A
B
C
D
F
H
Move the original circle at D
about the screen and note that
the twice transformed circle at H
is always the same distance and
direction from the original circle.
That is, the circle at H seems to
be a translation of the circle at D.
A
B
C
D
F
H
We proved in the last section that this composition must be a trans-
lation if the angles of rotation added up to 360. But can we give a more
geometric argument for this?

238
■Exploring Geometry
Undo your construction back to
the original angle and bisector.
Place a point L on the bisector
to ∠BAC and extend AB to M.
Then, rotate point M about B by
an angle equal to ∠BAL, yielding
point N. Construct ray −−→
BN.
A
B
C
M
L
N
Exercise 5.8.4. Show that the original rotation about A can be written in
terms of the reﬂections r←→
AL, r←→
AB and that the rotation about B can be written
in terms of r←−→
BM, r←→
BN. Use this to prove geometrically that the composition of
the two rotations about A and B is a translation by twice the vector between
←→
AL and ←→
BN.
For the project report, provide detailed analysis of the constructions
used in this project and complete answers to the exercises.

C H A P T E R 6
Symmetry
Tyger, Tyger, burning bright,
In the forests of the night;
What immortal hand or eye,
Could frame thy fearful symmetry?
– “The Tyger” by William Blake
In Chapter 1 we saw how our axiomatic and abstract understanding
of geometry had its origins with the Greeks’ desire for perfection of rea-
soning. This goal of the “ideal” permeated all aspects of Greek culture,
as evidenced by their love of the golden ratio—the perfect harmony of
proportion. Western cultures have embraced this love of harmony and
balance, as evidenced by a focus on symmetry in art, music, architecture,
and design.
In the preceding chapter, isometries were used to deﬁne several types
of symmetry. Symmetry is a common property of both natural and man-
made objects.
In general, given a geometric ﬁgure F, we will call a transformation
f a symmetry of F if f maps F back to itself. That is, f(F) = F. We
say that F is invariant (or unchanged) under f. Note that this does not
mean that every point of F remains unchanged, only that the total set
of points making up F is unchanged.
Given a ﬁgure such as a ﬂower, or snail shell, or triangle, the set of
all symmetries of that ﬁgure is not just a random collection of functions.
The set of symmetries of an object has a very nice algebraic structure.
239

240
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 6.1. The set of symmetries of a ﬁgure F forms a group.
Proof: Recall that a group is a set of elements satisfying four prop-
erties (refer to the discussion preceding Exercise 1.4.6). For a set of
functions, these properties would be:
1. Given any two functions in the set, the composition of the two
functions is again in the set.
2. The composition of functions is an associative operation.
3. The identity function is a member of the set.
4. Given any function in the set, its inverse exists and is an element
of the set.
To prove that the set S of symmetries of F forms a group, we need to
verify that S has all four of these properties. Since the composition of
isometries is associative, the second condition is automatically true.
The third condition is true since the identity is clearly a symmetry
of any ﬁgure.
Let f, g be two symmetries of F. Since f(F) = F and g(F) = F,
then g(f(F)) = g(F) = F and g ◦f is a symmetry of F, and the ﬁrst
condition holds.
Since a symmetry f is a transformation, then it must have an inverse
f −1. Since f(F) = F, then F = f −1(F) and the inverse is a symmetry.
2
Why is it important that the symmetries of a ﬁgure form a group?
Groups are a fundamental concept in abstract algebra and would seem to
have little relation to geometry. In fact, there is a very deep connection
between algebra and geometry. As M. A. Armstrong states in the preface
to Groups and Symmetry, “groups measure symmetry” [3]. Groups reveal
to us the algebraic structure of the symmetries of an object, whether
those symmetries are the geometric transformations of a pentagon, or the
permutations of the letters in a word, or the conﬁgurations of a molecule.
By studying this algebraic structure, we can gain deeper insight into the
geometry of the ﬁgures under consideration.
To completely delve into this beautiful connection between algebra
and geometry would take us far aﬁeld of this brief survey of geometry.
We will, however, try to classify some special types of symmetries that
often appear in art and nature, symmetries which are also isometries. In

Symmetry
■241
the following sections, we will assume that the symmetries under study
are Euclidean isometries—reﬂections, translations, rotations, and glide
reﬂections.
6.1
FINITE PLANE SYMMETRY GROUPS
We will ﬁrst look at those symmetry groups of an object that are ﬁnite,
that is, those groups of symmetries that have a ﬁnite number of elements.
What can be said about symmetries in a ﬁnite group? Suppose that f is
a symmetry in a ﬁnite symmetry group and consider the repeated com-
positions of f with itself, f, f 2 = f ◦f, f 3, . . . This set cannot contain all
diﬀerent elements, as then the group would be inﬁnite. Thus, for some
i ̸= j, we have f i = f j and f i ◦f −j = id, where f −j = (f −1)j and id is
the identity function. We can assume that i > j.
Deﬁnition 6.1. We say that a symmetry f has ﬁnite order in a
symmetry group G if for some positive integer n, we have f n = id.
We then have the following:
Lemma 6.2. All of the symmetries in a ﬁnite symmetry group are
of ﬁnite order.
What are the symmetries of ﬁnite order? Consider a translation given
by T(x, y) = (x + v1, y + v2), with (v1, v2) ̸= (0, 0). Clearly, T n(x, y) =
(x + nv1, y + nv2), and thus T n(x, y) = (x, y) iﬀ(v1, v2) = (0, 0). So, the
only translations of ﬁnite order are the identity translations. Similarly,
we can show that a non-trivial glide reﬂection must have inﬁnite order.
Thus, the symmetries of ﬁnite order consist solely of reﬂections and
rotations. But, which reﬂections and rotations?
Before we answer that question, let’s consider the symmetry group
of a simple geometric ﬁgure, an equilateral triangle. Which rotations and
reﬂections will preserve the triangle?

242
■Exploring Geometry
A rotation R by 120 degrees clock-
wise about the centroid of the tri-
angle will map the triangle back
to itself, permuting the labels on
the vertices. R2 will be a rota-
tion of 240 degrees and will also
leave the triangle invariant. The
rotation R3 will yield the iden-
tity isometry. The eﬀects of apply-
ing R, R2, and R3 are shown at
right, with R(∆ABC) the right-
most triangle and R2(∆ABC) the
left-most triangle.
A
B
C
C
A
B
C
B
A
What about reﬂections? If we
construct the perpendicular bisec-
tor for a side of the triangle, then
that bisector will pass through the
opposite vertex. Reﬂection across
the bisector will just interchange
the other two vertices and thus
will preserve the triangle. There
are three such reﬂections.
B
A
C
A
C
B
B
C
A
Are there any other possible isometries? To answer this question,
let’s consider the eﬀect of an isometry on the labels A, B, C of the origi-
nal triangle. An isometry must preserve the conﬁguration of the triangle,
so it must move the labels of the vertices around, leaving the shape of
the triangle unchanged. How many labellings of the triangle are there?
Pick one of the vertices to label. We have three possible labels for that
vertex. After labeling this vertex, pick another to label. There are two
possible labels for that vertex, leaving just one choice for the last vertex.
Thus, there is a maximum of six labellings for the triangle, and there-
fore a maximum of six isometries. Since we have exhibited six diﬀerent
isometries (three rotations and three reﬂections), these must form the
complete symmetry group for the triangle.
Let’s note several interesting things about this symmetry group.
First, the rotations by themselves form a group, G = {id = R3, R120 =
R, R240 = R2}, and all the rotations in this group have the same center.
Second, the reﬂections all have lines of symmetry passing through the

Symmetry
■243
center of the rotations, and there are exactly as many reﬂections as ro-
tations. We will now show that these properties are shared by all ﬁnite
symmetry groups.
Theorem 6.3. Let R1, R2 be two rotations in a ﬁnite symmetry
group G. Then R1, R2 must have the same center of rotation.
Proof: Let a, b be the centers of rotation for R1, R2. Suppose that
a ̸= b. Then we know that R1 ◦R2 is either a rotation or translation (see
Table 5.3 in Chapter 5). Clearly, it cannot be a non-identity translation,
as a ﬁnite symmetry group has no non-trivial translations. If R1◦R2 = id,
then R1 = R−1
2
and both have the same center.
Let α, β be the angles of rotation for R1, R2. Then we know that
R1 ◦R2 = Ra,α ◦Rb,β = Rc,α+β
for some point c ̸= a or b. Now R−1
2
= Rb,−β is also in G and so Rb,−β ◦
Rc,α+β = Rd,α is in G for some point d.
We claim that d ̸= a. For if d = a, then
Rb,−β ◦Rc,α+β = Ra,α
Or, equivalently,
Rb,−β ◦Ra,α ◦Rb,β = Ra,α
Then
Ra,α ◦Rb,β = Rb,β ◦Ra,α
Applying both sides to the point b, we get
Ra,α(b) = Rb,β ◦Ra,α(b)
Thus, Ra,α(b) would be a ﬁxed point of Rb,β. But, the only ﬁxed
point of a rotation is its center, and so Ra,α(b) = b. But, this implies
that a = b, which is a contradiction.
Since d ̸= a, then Rd,α ◦Ra,−α is in G, but this composition is a
translation.
Thus, it must be that both rotations have the same center. 2

244
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 6.4. Among all rotations in a ﬁnite symmetry group
G, let Ra,α be the one with the smallest positive angle α. Then α
divides 360, and if Ra,β is another rotation in G, then β = nα for
some integer n. That is, all rotations are multiples of some minimal
angle.
Proof: Since Ra,α is of ﬁnite order, then Rn
a,α = Ra,nα = id for some
n. Thus, nα = 360k for some integer k. If nα ̸= 360, then let i be the
largest integer such that iα < 360. Then 0 < 360 −iα < α. But, then
Ra,360 ◦Ra,−iα = Ra,360−iα must be in G, which would mean that there
was a smaller rotation angle than α in G. Thus, nα = 360.
Now suppose Ra,β is another rotation in G, diﬀerent from Ra,α. We
know that α < β. Let j be the largest integer such that jα ≤β. Suppose
jα ̸= β. Then, 0 < β −jα < α. Therefore, β −jα will be a rotation
angle in G smaller than α and again we get a contradiction. 2
We conclude that all rotations in a ﬁnite symmetry group are gener-
ated from a particular rotation having the smallest angle. Groups gen-
erated from a single element are called cyclic groups.
Deﬁnition 6.2. A group G is called cyclic if all of its members can
be written as compositions of a single member with itself. That is,
G = {id, f, f 2, f 3, . . .}.
Corollary 6.5. The set of rotations in a ﬁnite symmetry group
form a cyclic group.
Now, let’s consider how rotations and reﬂections interact in a ﬁnite
symmetry group.
Theorem 6.6. If a ﬁnite symmetry group G contains a rotation
and a reﬂection, then the line of symmetry for the reﬂection must
pass through the center of the rotation.
Proof: Let rl and Ra,α be the reﬂection and rotation. We know that
the composition of these is either a reﬂection or glide reﬂection. Since
G cannot contain glide reﬂections, then rl ◦Ra,α is a reﬂection, say rm.
Then rl ◦rm = Ra,α and l, m must pass through a. 2

Symmetry
■245
Theorem 6.7. Let G be a ﬁnite symmetry group with n rotations
(counting the identity as a rotation). If G has at least one reﬂection,
say rl, then it has exactly n reﬂections, which can be represented as
rl ◦Ra,iα, i = 0, . . . , n −1, where Ra,α generates the rotations of G.
Proof: Consider the set rl ◦Ra,iα, with i = 0, . . . , n −1. Clearly, all
of the elements of this set are reﬂections. Also, no two elements of this
set can be equivalent. Finally, all reﬂections in G are represented in this
set, since if rm is in G, then rl ◦rm is a rotation and so must be some
Ra,iα. It follows that rm = rl ◦Ra,iα. 2
Deﬁnition 6.3. A ﬁnite symmetry group generated by a rotation
and a reﬂection is called a dihedral group. If the group has n distinct
rotations it will be denoted by Dn.
A ﬁnite symmetry group is thus either a cyclic group or a dihedral
group. This result has been known historically as Leonardo’s Theorem in
honor of Leonardo Da Vinci (1452–1519). According to Hermann Weyl in
his book Symmetry [41, page 66], Leonardo was perhaps the ﬁrst person
to systematically study the symmetries of a ﬁgure in his architectural
design of central buildings with symmetric attachments.
Exercise 6.1.1. Find three examples in nature that have diﬀerent ﬁnite
symmetry groups. Sketch these and give the speciﬁc elements in their symmetry
groups.
Exercise 6.1.2. Find the symmetry group for a square.
Exercise 6.1.3. Find the symmetry group for a regular pentagon.
Exercise 6.1.4. Show that the symmetry group for a regular n-gon must be
ﬁnite.
Exercise 6.1.5. Show that the symmetry group for a regular n-gon must be
the dihedral group Dn.
Exercise 6.1.6. Show that the dihedral group Dn can be generated by two
reﬂections, that is, any element of the group can be expressed as a product of
terms involving only these two reﬂections.
Exercise 6.1.7. Show that the number of symmetries of a regular n-gon is
equal to the product of the number of symmetries ﬁxing a side of the n-gon
times the number of sides to which that particular side can be switched.

246
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 6.1.8. Find a formula for the number of symmetries of a regular
polyhedron by generalizing the result of the last exercise. Use this to ﬁnd the
number of symmetries for a regular tetrahedron (four faces and four vertices)
and a cube.
6.2
FRIEZE GROUPS
Planar symmetry groups that are inﬁnite must necessarily contain trans-
lations and/or glide reﬂections. In this section we will consider symmetry
groups having translations in just one direction.
Deﬁnition 6.4. A frieze group G is a planar symmetry group with
all translations in the same direction. Also, there exists a transla-
tion Tv in G such that v is of minimal (non-zero) length among all
translations of G.
It turns out that all translations in a frieze group G will be generated
from a single translation T ∈G, which we will call the fundamental
translation for G.
Lemma 6.8. Let G be a frieze group. Then there exists a transla-
tion T in G such that if T ′ is any (non-identity) translation in G,
then T ′ = T n for some non-zero integer n.
Proof: The deﬁnition of frieze groups guarantees that there is a trans-
lation T in G, with translation vector v of minimal length. We claim
that T is the fundamental translation of G. For if T ′ is any other (non-
identity) translation in G, with translation vector v′, then v′ ∥v and so
v′ = nv for some (non-zero) real number n.
If n is not an integer, let k be the nearest integer to n. Then T −k =
(T −1)k must be in G and since T −k ◦T ′ = T −k ◦T n = T n−k, then T n−k
is in G. But T n−k has translation vector of length | (n −k) | ∥v∥, which
is less than the length of v, as | (n −k) |< 1.
Thus, n is an integer and all translations are integer powers of T. 2
A frieze pattern is a pattern that is invariant under a frieze group.
Such a pattern is generally composed of repetitions of a single pattern,
or motif, in a horizontal direction as in Figure 6.1.

Symmetry
■247
Figure 6.1
Frieze groups have translations generated by a single translation T.
By Exercise 5.3.8, frieze groups have invariant lines that are all pair-wise
parallel, and also each is parallel to the translation vector of T. What
else can be said of the invariant lines of a frieze group?
Theorem 6.9. Let G be a frieze group with fundamental translation
T. If l is invariant under T, then S(l) is parallel (or equal) to l for
all symmetries S in G.
Proof: Consider the conjugation of T by S: S◦T ◦S−1. By Exercise 5.7.4,
we know that S ◦T ◦S−1 is a translation and so S ◦T ◦S−1 = T k for
some positive integer k. In particular, S ◦T = T k ◦S.
Let v be the translation vector for T. Then since S ◦T = T k ◦S, the
direction of the line through S(P) and S(T(P)) will be the same as that
of the line through S(P) and T k(S(P)). This direction is given by the
vector kv. Also, the direction for the line through P and T(P) is given by
the vector v. Thus, for any point P, we have either S(←−−−→
P T(P)) ∥←−−−→
P T(P),
or these two lines are coincident.
For a line l invariant under T, let P be a point on l. Using the results
of the last paragraph, we see that S(l) ∥l or S(l) = l. 2
The next three results specify the types of non-translational symme-
tries that are possible in a frieze group.
Corollary 6.10. Let G be a frieze group with fundamental transla-
tion Tv. The only reﬂections possible in G are reﬂections along lines
that are either parallel to v or perpendicular to v. Additionally, G
can have at most one reﬂection rn along a line parallel to v. The
line of reﬂection for rn is thus the unique invariant line of Tv and
rn.
Proof: We know by Exercise 5.3.8 that the invariant lines for Tv are
parallel to the displacement vector v of Tv. Let l be one such invariant

248
■Exploring Geometry
line and let r be a reﬂection in G. Then, by Theorem 6.9, r(l) is parallel
to l or r(l) = l.
If r(l) = l, then l is an invariant line for a reﬂection and r = rl or
r = ru, where u is perpendicular to l (Exercise 5.2.12).
If r(l)||l then r = rn for some n parallel to l (thus parallel to v). To
see this, let A be on l. Then, the reﬂection line for r is the perpendicular
bisector of Ar(A), which must be perpendicular to l.
Suppose there were two reﬂections rn and r′
n with both n and n′
parallel to v. Then, by Corollary 5.11, rn ◦r′
n = Tw, with w ⊥v. This is
impossible, as all translations in G are a multiple of v. 2
Corollary 6.11. Let G be a frieze group with fundamental transla-
tion Tv. The only rotations possible in G are half-turns about points
on a single invariant line of Tv. This line is thus the unique invari-
ant line of Tv and all half-turns in G.
Proof: As with the previous proof, let l be an invariant line of Tv and let
R be a rotation in G. By Theorem 6.9, R(l) is parallel to l or R(l) = l.
In either case, we see from Exercises 5.4.5 and 5.4.6 in section 5.4 that
R must be a rotation of 180 degrees.
Suppose there were two half-turns RA and RB about points A ̸=
B. By Exercise 5.4.13 we know that the composition Ra · Rb = Tw, a
translation with vector w from A to B. This translation vector must be
in the direction of v. Since this is true for all possible rotations RB, then
the centers of all half-turns lie on a line in the direction of v. Such a line
is invariant under Tv. 2
Corollary 6.12. Let G be a frieze group with fundamental trans-
lation Tv. The only glide reﬂections possible in G are glides along
a single invariant line of Tv. This line is thus the unique invariant
line of Tv and all glides in G.
Proof Let l be an invariant line of Tv and let g be a glide reﬂection in G.
By Theorem 6.9, g(l) is parallel to l or g(l) = l. We know that g = r · T ′
for some reﬂection r and translation T ′. Since g2 is a translation, then
g = r · T kv
2 . Now, g(l) = r · T kv
2 (l) = r(l). So, r(l) = l or r(l)||l. As in the
proof of Corollary 6.10 we conclude that r = rn for n||l or r = ru for u
perpendicular to l.
If r = ru with u perpendicular to l (and thus to v), then g = ru · T kv
2

Symmetry
■249
is a reﬂection by Theorem 5.21. This contradicts the fact that g is a glide
reﬂection. So, g = rn · T kv
2 where n is parallel to l.
Suppose there were two glides g1 and g2 about two diﬀerent lines
n1 ̸= n2. By the previous paragraph, both lines must be parallel to l.
Then g1 · g2 = rn1 · T k1v
2 · rn2 · T k2v
2 . We can switch the order of reﬂection
and translation to get g1 ·g2 = T k1v
2 ·rn1 ·rn2 ·T k2v
2 . Since the composition
of two reﬂections along parallel lines is a translation perpendicular to the
lines, we have g1 · g2 = T k1v
2 · Tw · T k2v
2 , where w is perpendicular to v.
Thus, there is a translation in G with vector cv + w. This is impossible,
as this vector is not in the direction of v. 2
The next result tells us that the “special” invariant lines of the pre-
ceding three corollaries are actually a single, unique invariant line.
Theorem 6.13. Let G be a frieze group with fundamental transla-
tion Tv. The unique invariant lines described in the preceding corol-
laries are all coincident, i.e., they are the same line.
Proof: Suppose that G had a half-turn HA about point A on invariant
line nH, and suppose G also had a reﬂection rn with n parallel to v.
Then, by Exercise 5.7.2 we have rn · HA · rn = Hrn(A). Then, rn(A) must
lie on nH. Now, n and nH are either parallel or the same. If they are
parallel, rn(A) cannot lie on nH. Thus, n = nH.
Suppose that G had a half-turn HA about point A on invariant line
nH, and suppose G also had a glide g along a line n parallel to v. Then,
by Exercise 5.7.2 we have g · HA · g−1 = Hg(A). By similar reasoning as
above, we have that n = nH.
Suppose that G had a reﬂection rn with n parallel to v , and suppose
G also had a glide g = rn′ · Tkv along a line n′ parallel to v. Then,
rn ·g = rn ·rn′ ·Tkv. If n ̸= n′ then, n||n′ and rn ·rn′ = Tw. Then, Tw ·Tkv
is in G with w perpendicular to v. This is impossible. So, n = n′. 2
We thus conclude that if a frieze group G has either a half-turn, or a
glide, or a reﬂection along a line parallel to the fundamental translation
vector, then the group has a unique line that is ﬁxed by all symmetries
of the group.

250
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 6.5. If the frieze group G has exactly one line invariant
under all the elements of G, we call that line the midline for G (or
any pattern invariant under G).
We summarize the work above as follows:
Theorem 6.14. For a frieze group G, the only symmetries possible
are those generated by the fundamental translation T (with vector
v), a unique reﬂection about the midline, reﬂections perpendicular
to v, half-turns (180-degree rotations) about points on the midline,
and glide reﬂections along the midline.
The non-translational isometries in a frieze group can all be gener-
ated using the fundamental translation, as follows.
Theorem 6.15. Let G be a frieze group. Then
(i) All half-turns in G are generated by a single half-turn in
G and powers (repeated compositions) of T.
(ii) All perpendicular reﬂections are generated from a single
perpendicular reﬂection in G and powers of T.
(iii) All glide reﬂections are generated by a single reﬂection (or
glide reﬂection) in G that is parallel to the direction of
translation, together with powers of T. Also, if v is the
translation vector for T, then a glide reﬂection must have
a glide vector equal to kv or half of kv for some positive
integer k.
Proof: For statement (i), let HA, HB be two half-turns in G. Then by
Exercise 5.4.13, we know that HB ◦HA is a translation, thus HB ◦HA =
T k for some positive integer k. Since H−1
A = HA, then HB = T k ◦HA.
The proofs of statements (ii) and (iii) are left as exercises. 2
Thus, all frieze groups (of non-trivial translational symmetry) are
generated by a translation τ = Tv and one or more of the following
isometries: rm (reﬂection across the midline m), ru (with u perpendicular
to m), H (half-turn rotation about O on m), and γ (glide reﬂection along

Symmetry
■251
m with glide vector equal to v
2). We omit the case of glides with glide
vector v as these can be generated by τ and rm.
In principle, this would give us a total of 24 possible frieze groups,
each frieze group generated by τ and a subset of the four isometries
rm, ru, H, and γ. However, many of these combinations will generate the
same group. For example, we can choose u such that H ◦γ = ru and
ru ◦γ = H, and so the group generated by τ, γ, H must be the same as
the group generated by τ, γ, ru.
It turns out that there are only seven diﬀerent frieze groups. We
will list them by their generators. For example, the group listed as <
τ, rm > is the group generated by all possible compositions of these two
isometries (compositions such as τ 3, r5
m, r2
m ◦τ ◦r4
m, etc.).
1. < τ >
2. < τ, rm >
3. < τ, ru >
4. < τ, γ >=< γ >
5. < τ, H >
6. < τ, rm, H >
7. < τ, γ, H >=< γ, H >
(For a complete proof of this result see [31, page 392] or [38, page 190].)
Exercise 6.2.1. Show that the groups generated by τ, γ, H and γ, H are the
same. [Hint: To show two sets equivalent, show that each can be a subset of
the other.]
Exercise 6.2.2. Show that the groups generated by τ, rm, H and τ, ru, H are
the same, assuming we choose ru so that it intersects m at the center of H.
Exercise 6.2.3. Prove statement (ii) of Theorem 6.15. [Hint: Consider the
composition of reﬂections.]
Exercise 6.2.4. Prove statement (iii) of Theorem 6.15.
Exercise 6.2.5. Show that if a frieze group has glide reﬂections, then the
group must have a glide reﬂection g with glide vector of v or v
2, where v is the
translation vector for the group.

252
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 6.2.6. Show that if HA and HB are two half-turns of a frieze
group G, then AB = kv or AB = kv + v
2, where v is the translation vector for
T and k is a positive integer. [Hint: Consider the action of HB ◦HA on A.]
Exercise 6.2.7. Show that if ru and rv are two reﬂections of a frieze group
G that are perpendicular to the translation vector v of T, then AB = kv or
AB = kv+ v
2, where A, B are the intersection points of u, v, with an invariant
line of G and k is a positive integer. [Hint: Consider the action of rv ◦ru on
A.]
Deﬁnition 6.6. A subgroup K of a group G is a non-empty subset
of elements of G that is itself a group.
Exercise 6.2.8. Show that all elements of < T, ru > are either translations
or reﬂections perpendicular to m. Use this to show that none of < T, rm >,
< T, H >, or < T, γ > are subgroups of < T, ru >. [Hint: Use Table 5.3.]
Exercise 6.2.9. Show that all elements of < T, H > are either translations
or half-turns. Use this to show that none of < T, rm >, < T, ru >, or < T, γ >
are subgroups of < T, H >.
Exercise 6.2.10. Show that all elements of < T, γ > are either translations
or glide reﬂections (with a glide vector of kv + v
2). Use this to show that none
of < T, rm >, < T, ru >, or < T, H > are subgroups of < T, γ >.
Exercise 6.2.11. Show that all elements of < T, rm > are either transla-
tions, or rm, or glide reﬂections (with a glide vector of kv). Use this to show
that none of < T, γ >, < T, ru >, or < T, H > are subgroups of < T, rm >.
Exercise 6.2.12. Draw a diagram showing which of the seven frieze groups
are subgroups of the others. [Hint: Use the preceding exercises.]
Exercise 6.2.13. In the ﬁgure below, there are seven frieze patterns, one
for each of the seven frieze groups. Match each pattern to the frieze group that
is its symmetry group.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Symmetry
■253
(e)
(f)
(g)
Exercise 6.2.14. Design two frieze patterns having diﬀerent frieze groups
and list the group for each of your patterns.
6.3
WALLPAPER GROUPS
A second type of inﬁnite planar symmetry group is a generalization of
frieze groups into two dimensions.
Deﬁnition 6.7. A wallpaper group is a planar symmetry group
containing translations in two diﬀerent directions, that is, transla-
tions with non-parallel translation vectors. Also, there exists a trans-
lation Tv in G such that v is of minimal (non-zero) length among
all translations of G.
The condition on minimal length translations will ensure that all
rotations in G are of ﬁnite order.
Theorem 6.16. Let G be a group having a translation Tv such
that v has least length among all translation vectors in G. Then all
rotations of G must have ﬁnite order.
Proof: Suppose G contains a rotation Ra,α of inﬁnite order. Then for
all integers k > 0, we have that Rk
a,α ̸= id, and thus kα (mod 360) ̸= 0.
Consider the set of numbers S = {kα (mod 360)}. Since S is an
inﬁnite set, then α cannot be rational, and if we split the interval from
[0, 360] into n equal sub-intervals of length δ = 360
n , then one of these
sub-intervals must have an inﬁnite number of elements of S. Suppose the
interval [iδ, (i+1)δ] has an inﬁnite number of elements of S. In particular,
the interval has two elements k1α (mod 360) and k2α (mod 360), with
neither value equal to an endpoint of the interval, and k1α (mod 360) <
k2α (mod 360). Then (k2 −k1)α (mod 360) will be an element of S in
the interval [0, δ].

254
■Exploring Geometry
Thus, we can assume that for any δ close to 0, we can ﬁnd a k such
that kα (mod 360) < δ. So if a symmetry group G contains a rotation
Ra,α of inﬁnite order, then it must have rotations of arbitrarily small
angle Ra,δ.
We know that Tv has translation vector v of smallest length among
all possible translation vectors in G. Consider Ra,δ ◦Tv ◦Ra,−δ. This
must be an element of G. It is left as an exercise to show that Ra,δ ◦Tv ◦
Ra,−δ is the translation TRa,δ(v). Then the translation TRa,δ(v) ◦T−v =
TRa,δ(v)−v must be in G. However, for δ arbitrarily small, the length of
the vector Ra,δ(v) −v, which is the translation vector for TRa,δ(v)−v, will
be arbitrarily small, which contradicts the hypothesis of the theorem. 2
Deﬁnition 6.8. A discrete symmetry group is one that has trans-
lations of minimal (non-zero) length.
Thus, frieze groups and wallpaper groups are by deﬁnition discrete
groups of planar symmetries.
A wallpaper pattern is a pattern
that is invariant under a wallpa-
per group. Such a pattern is gen-
erally composed of repetitions of
a single pattern, or motif, in two
diﬀerent directions, as shown at
right.
Wallpaper groups are certainly not trivial to classify. However, we
can make a few important observations as to their structure.
First of all, every wallpaper group generates a lattice in the plane.

Symmetry
■255
Deﬁnition 6.9. A lattice L spanned by two vectors v, w in the
plane is the set of all integer combinations of v and w. That is,
L = {sv + tw|s, t ∈Z}, where Z is the set of integers.
Theorem 6.17. Let T be the set of all translations of a wallpaper
group G. Then, the set of all translations of the origin by elements
of T forms a lattice that is spanned by v and w, where v is a vector
of minimal length in T and w is a vector of minimal length in a
diﬀerent direction from v.
Proof: First, we note that all translations in T must be generated by
integer combinations of v and w. For suppose Tz was a translation with
z not an integer combination of v and w. The two vectors v, w deﬁne a
parallelogram in the plane and the set of all integer combinations of v, w
will divide up the plane into congruent parallelograms.
Let P = Tz(O) = Tz. Then P
must lie in one of these parallelo-
grams. Let Q be the corner of the
parallelogram containing P that
is closest to P. Then the vector
P −Q cannot be congruent to any
of the edges of the parallelogram,
since if it were, then P −Q =
Tz(O)−Ts1v+t1w(0) = Ts2v+t2w(0),
and z would be an integer combi-
nation of v and w.
Q
v
w
P
P - Q
Also, the length of P −Q must be less than the length of w.
To prove this we connect the mid-
points of the sides of the paral-
lelogram, yielding four congruent
sub-parallelograms. The length of
P −Q must be less than the max-
imum distance between points in
one of these sub-parallelograms,
which occurs between opposite
vertices. (The proof is left as an
exercise.)
C
v
w
Q
P

256
■Exploring Geometry
By the triangle inequality, the length of one side of a triangle is less than
the sum of the lengths of the other sides. Thus, the distance between
opposite vertices of one of the sub-parallelograms must be less than
∥v∥
2 + ∥w|
2
< 2 ∥w∥
2
= ∥w∥, and so the length of P −Q is also less than
∥w∥.
Now, if P is inside the parallelogram, or on any side other than that
parallel to v, we would get a translation vector that is smaller than w
and non-parallel with v, which contradicts the choice of w. Thus, P −Q
must lie along a side parallel to v. However, this contradicts the choice
of v.
So, all translations have the form Tz = Tsv+tw with s, t integers, and
the proof is complete. 2
What kinds of lattices are possible for a wallpaper group? In the
parallelogram spanned by v and w, we have that v −w and v + w are
the diagonals. By replacing w by −w we could switch the order of these
diagonals, which means we can assume ∥v −w∥≤∥v +w∥. Also, neither
of these diagonals can be smaller than w because of how w is deﬁned.
Thus, we know that
∥v∥≤∥w∥
And
∥w∥≤∥v −w∥
And
∥v −w∥≤∥v + w∥
Thus, ∥v∥≤∥w∥≤∥v −w∥≤∥v + w∥. Therefore, there are eight
possible lattices:
1. Oblique
∥v∥< ∥w∥< ∥v −w∥< ∥v +
w∥. The lattice is made of skew
parallelograms.
v
w

Symmetry
■257
2. Rectangular
∥v∥< ∥w∥< ∥v −w∥= ∥v + w∥.
If the diagonals of the parallelo-
gram are congruent, then the par-
allelogram must be a (non-square)
rectangle.
v
w
3. Centered Rectangular
∥v∥< ∥w∥= ∥v −w∥< ∥v + w∥.
If ∥w∥= ∥v−w∥, then these sides
form an isosceles triangle and the
head of w will be the center of a
rectangle built on every other row
of the lattice, as shown.
v
w
4. Rhombal
∥v∥= ∥w∥< ∥v −w∥< ∥v + w∥.
Again, we get an isosceles trian-
gle, this time with sides being v
and w. This case is essentially the
same as the centered rectangle,
with the rectangular sides built on
the vectors v −w and v + w, and
the center of the rectangle at a lat-
tice point.
v
w
5. ∥v∥< ∥w∥= ∥v −w∥=
∥v + w∥. This is not a possible
conﬁguration for a lattice. Since
∥v −w∥2 = (v −w) • (v −w) =
v•v−2v•w+w•w, and ∥v+w∥2 =
v • v + 2v • w + w • w, then we
would have that v • w = 0. Then,
∥w∥= ∥v −w∥would imply that
∥v∥= 0, which is impossible.

258
■Exploring Geometry
6. Square
∥v∥= ∥w∥< ∥v −w∥= ∥v + w∥.
v
w
7. Hexagonal
∥v∥= ∥w∥= ∥v −w∥< ∥v + w∥.
v
w
8. ∥v∥= ∥w∥= ∥v −w∥=
∥v+w∥. This is not a possible con-
ﬁguration for a lattice.
Thus, from eight possible lattice types, we see that there are really
only ﬁve diﬀerent lattices possible for a wallpaper group.
Theorem 6.18. If L is a lattice in the plane, then it is either
oblique, rectangular, centered rectangular (which includes rhombal),
square, or hexagonal.
Just as in the case of frieze groups, the possible rotational symmetries
of a wallpaper group are restricted to speciﬁc values.
Theorem 6.19. The rotations in a wallpaper group G must map
elements of the lattice of the group back to the lattice. Furthermore,
angles of rotation in a wallpaper group can only be 60, 90, 120, or
180 degrees.
Proof: Let sv + tw be a point in the lattice. Then Tsv+tw is in G.
Let Ra,α be a rotation in G. Consider Ra,α ◦Tsv+tw ◦Ra,−α. In Exer-
cise 5.7.6, we showed that this composition is the same as TRa,α(sv+tw).

Symmetry
■259
Since the composition of elements in G must yield an element of G,
then TRa,α(sv+tw) is in G, and if O is the origin, then TRa,α(sv+tw)(O) =
Ra,α(sv + tw) is in the lattice. Thus, the rotation maps points of the
lattice to other points of the lattice. Also, since there are only a ﬁnite
number of lattice points to which the rotation can map a given lattice
point, then the order of the rotation must be ﬁnite.
Let v be the minimal length translation vector among all translations
and let P be a point in the lattice. Consider Ra,α(P) (labeled “R(P)”
in Figure 6.2).
a
v
R(v)
R(P)
P
Figure 6.2
The vector P −Ra,α(P) will be a translation vector in G (diﬀerence
of two lattice vectors must be a translation vector). If the rotation angle
α is less than 60 degrees, then this vector will have shorter length than v.
This is impossible due to how v was chosen. The only possible rotation
angles are then angles α with 60 ≤α < 360. (We will ignore the trivial
case of rotation by 360.)
In our discussion of ﬁnite symmetry groups, we proved that if a
rotation has ﬁnite order, then the angle of rotation must evenly divide
360. Then the only possible angles for a wallpaper rotation are 60 =
360
6 , 72 = 360
5 , 90 = 360
4 , 120 = 360
3 , and 180 = 360
2 .
Rotations by 60 and 120 are possible in hexagonal lattices. Rotations
by 90 and 180 degrees are possible in square and rectangular lattices. It
is left as an exercise to show that rotations of 72 degrees are impossible.
2
This theorem has become known as the “Crystallographic Restric-
tion.” Many crystals have the property that if you slice them along a
plane, the atoms of the crystal along that plane form a wallpaper pattern.

260
■Exploring Geometry
Thus, the possible crystals having wallpaper symmetry is “restricted” to
those generated by wallpaper groups.
How many wallpaper groups are there? It turns out that there are
exactly 17 wallpaper groups. A careful proof of this result can be carried
out by examining the ﬁve lattice types we have discussed and ﬁnding the
symmetry groups that preserve each type. For details see [3, Chapter 26].
The 17 groups have traditionally been listed with a special notation
consisting of the symbols p, c, m, and g, and the integers 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6.
This is the crystallographic notation adopted by the International Union
of Crystallography (IUC) in 1952.
In the IUC system the letter p stands for primitive. A lattice is
generated from a polygonal cell that is translated to form the complete
lattice. In the case of oblique, rectangular, square, and hexagonal lattices,
the cell is precisely the original parallelogram formed by the vectors
v and w and is, in this sense, a “primitive” cell. In the case of the
centered-rectangle lattice, the cell is a rectangle, together with its center
point, with the rectangle larger than the original parallelogram and not
primitive. Thus, lattice types can be divided into two classes: primitive
ones designated by the letter p and non-primitive ones designated by the
letter c.
Other symmetries for a general wallpaper group will include reﬂec-
tions, rotations, and glide reﬂections. The letter m is used to symbolize
a reﬂection and g symbolizes a glide reﬂection. The numbers 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 6 are used to represent the orders of rotation for a group (e.g., 3
would signify a rotation of 360
3 = 120).
In the IUC system, a wallpaper group is designated by a string of
letters and numbers. First, there is the letter p (for oblique, rectangular,
square, or hexagonal lattices) or c (for centered-rectangular lattices).
Then a set of non-translational generators for the group will be listed.
These generators include reﬂections, glide reﬂections, and/or rotations.
The two fundamental translations are not listed, but are understood to
also be generators for the group.
For example, “p1” would symbol-
ize the simplest wallpaper group,
where the lattice is oblique and
there
are
no
non-translational
symmetries.

Symmetry
■261
What would “p2mm” symbolize? The lattice is primitive; there is a
rotational symmetry of 180 degrees; and there are two reﬂection symme-
tries. Since the reﬂections are listed separately, neither can be generated
from the other by combining with the fundamental translations.
Thus, the reﬂection lines of sym-
metry cannot be parallel and the
two reﬂections will generate a ro-
tation, which must be of 180 de-
grees. The two reﬂection lines will
then be in perpendicular direc-
tions and the lattice must be rect-
angular, centered-rectangular, or
square. In fact, the lattice must
be rectangular. (The proof is left
as an exercise.)
In Appendix E there is a complete listing of all 17 wallpaper groups.
Exercise 6.3.1. Sketch the lattices spanned by the following pairs of vectors,
and specify which of the ﬁve types of lattices each pair will generate.
(a) ⃗v = (2, 0), ⃗w = (2, 4)
(b) ⃗v = (1,
√
3), ⃗w = (1, −
√
3)
(c) ⃗v = (−1, 1), ⃗w = (1, 1)
Exercise 6.3.2. Show that the transformation f(x, y) = (−x, y + 1) is a
glide reﬂection and that a symmetry group generated by f and the translation
T(x, y) = (x + 1, y + 1) must be a wallpaper group. Which lattice type will this
group have?
Exercise 6.3.3. Show that the symmetry group generated by the glide f,
deﬁned in the previous exercise, and the translation T(x, y) = (x, y + 1) will
not be a wallpaper group.
Exercise 6.3.4. Let G be a wallpaper group, and let H be the subset of
all symmetries ﬁxing a point of the lattice for G. If H is a subgroup of G of
order 4 and all elements of H are of order 2, show that H must be the group
generated by a half-turn and two reﬂections about perpendicular lines.
Exercise 6.3.5. With the same assumptions about G and H as in the pre-
ceding exercise, show that the lattice for G must be rectangular, centered-
rectangular, or square.

262
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 6.3.6. Show that the lattice for the wallpaper group p2mm must
be rectangular. [Hint: Use the previous two exercises.]
Exercise 6.3.7. For the wallpaper group p2mm, with mm representing gen-
erating reﬂections along the two translation vectors, prove that there are also
reﬂections along lines through the midpoints of the lattice segments, and ﬁnd
formulas for these reﬂections in terms of the generators of p2mm.
Exercise 6.3.8. Show that the wallpaper group p2mm, with mm representing
generating reﬂections along the two translation vectors, is the same group as
pm’m’, where m’m’ represents two reﬂections through midpoints of the trans-
lation vectors. [Hint: Use the preceding exercise.]
Exercise 6.3.9. Show that a wall-
paper pattern with translation sym-
metry given by two perpendicular
vectors v, w, and wallpaper group
p2mm, can be generated by applying
the symmetries of the group to the
shaded area of the rectangle spanned
by v and w shown. Thus, this area
can be thought of as a generating
area for the pattern. [Hint: Use the
previous exercise.]
w
v
Exercise 6.3.10. (This problem assumes familiarity with the process of ﬁnd-
ing the matrix representation of a transformation with respect to a basis.) Let
L be a lattice spanned by vectors ⃗v and ⃗w. Let RA,α be an element of a wall-
paper group G for L. By Theorem 6.16, RA,α has ﬁnite order, say n. Using
the idea of conjugation, show that RO,α is also in G. The matrix for RO,α, in
the standard basis, is then
"
cos( 360
n )
−sin( 360
n )
sin( 360
n )
cos( 360
n )
#
Show that the matrix for RO,α with respect to the basis {⃗v, ⃗w} will have integer
entries. Then, use the fact that the trace of a matrix is invariant under change
of bases to give an alternate proof of the second part of Theorem 6.19.
Exercise 6.3.11. Show that in a parallelogram, the maximum distance be-
tween any two points on or inside the parallelogram occurs between opposite
vertices of the parallelogram. [Hint: Let A = lv + mw and B = sv + tw be
two points in the parallelogram. Show that these are farthest apart when s, t,
l, and m are all 0 or 1.]
Exercise 6.3.12. Show that a wallpaper group cannot have rotations of 72
degrees about a point. [Hint: Use an argument similar to that used in Theorem
6.19 and consider the angle between the vector −v and a double rotation of v
by Ra,72.]

Symmetry
■263
Exercise 6.3.13. Sketch a planar pattern that has a symmetry group that
is not discrete. (Blank or completely ﬁlled sheets of paper are not allowed.)
6.4
TILING THE PLANE
A long time ago, I chanced upon this domain [of regular
division of the plane] in one of my wanderings; I saw a high
wall and as I had a premonition of an enigma, something that
might be hidden behind the wall, I climbed over with some
diﬃculty. However, on the other side I landed in a wilderness
and had to cut my way through with great eﬀort until—by
a circuitous route—I came to the open gate, the open gate
of mathematics.
—Maurits Cornelis (M. C.) Escher (1898–1972)
6.4.1
Escher
Much of the renewed interest in geometric design and analysis in the
modern era can be traced to the artistic creations of M. C. Escher. While
he did not prove new theorems in geometry, he did use geometric insights
to create fascinating periodic designs like the design in Figure 6.3.
A beautiful book that describes Escher’s artwork and the mathemat-
ics that underlies it is M. C. Escher: Visions of Symmetry [37], by Doris
Schattschneider.
One of Escher’s favorite themes was that of a tessellation of the plane
by geometric shapes. A tessellation or tiling is a covering of the plane
by repeated copies of a shape such that there are no gaps left uncovered
and the copied shapes never overlap. In Figure 6.3 we see the beginnings
of a tessellation of the plane by a three-sided shape.
A tessellation is produced by repeating a basic ﬁgure, or set of ﬁgures,
throughout the plane. Repetitions of the basic tile(s) are carried out
by isometries of the plane. Thus, every tiling has associated with it a
group of symmetries that map the tiling back to itself. For example,
in Figure 6.3 we see that this tiling is invariant under a rotation of 60
degrees and, thus, it must have a symmetry group equal to one of the
two wallpaper groups p6 or p6m (see Appendix E). Since the tiling is
not invariant under a reﬂection, then it must have a symmetry group of
p6.
Escher received inspiration for his tiling designs from two sources:

264
■Exploring Geometry
the intricate designs of Arab artists and the work of mathematicians on
classifying planar symmetry groups.
Figure 6.3 A tiling in the spirit of Escher
At the age of 24, Escher made his ﬁrst trip to the Alhambra, a
fourteenth century palace in Grenada, Spain. He found almost every
wall, ﬂoor, and ceiling surface covered with abstract geometric tilings.
In Figure 6.4 we see reproductions of the tilings that Escher saw during
his visit to the Alhambra.
Figure 6.4 Alhambra tilings, created by Lawrence D’Oliveiro <ldo@geek-
central.gen.nz> (Creative Commons License)

Symmetry
■265
Note that the pattern in the upper-left corner of Figure 6.4 is essen-
tially the same as the pattern in Figure 6.3.
The wide variety of tiling patterns and tile shapes exhibited at the
Alhambra inspired Escher to investigate the diﬀerent ways that one could
tile the plane in a systematic fashion. Escher found the answer to this
question through the work of the mathematician George Pólya. Pólya,
in a 1924 article in the journal Zeitschrift für Kristallographie, gave a
complete classiﬁcation of the discrete symmetry patterns of the plane,
with patterns repeated in two directions, namely, the wallpaper patterns.
All 17 patterns were exhibited in the Alhambra tilings. This mathemat-
ical revelation was the “open gate” through which Escher was able to
carefully design and produce his famous and imaginative tilings.
6.4.2
Regular Tessellations of the Plane
The simplest tessellations of the plane are made with a single tile that
has the shape of a regular polygon. A regular polygon has the property
that all the sides have the same length and all interior angles created by
adjacent sides are congruent. We will call a regular polygon with n sides
a regular n-gon.
A regular 3-gon is an equilateral triangle, a regular 4-gon is a square,
and so on. Which regular polygons tile the plane?
Let’s consider the simplest n-gon tile, the equilateral triangle.
In the ﬁgure at the right, we have
a tiling by equilateral triangles in
which all triangles meet at com-
mon vertices.
In the new tiling at the right,
we have shifted the top row of
triangles a bit. This conﬁgura-
tion will still lead to a tiling of
the plane, although triangles no
longer share common vertices.

266
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 6.10. We will call a tessellation regular if it is made
from copies of a single regular n-gon with all n-gons meeting at
common vertices.
The second triangular tiling above is not a regular tiling. How many
regular tilings are there? Clearly, the example above shows that there is
a regular tiling with triangles. We can easily create a regular tiling with
squares. The triangle tiling also shows that regular hexagonal tilings are
possible. In fact, these three are the only regular tilings.
It is not hard to see why this is the
case. At a common vertex of a reg-
ular tiling, suppose that there are
k regular n-gons meeting at the
vertex. Then, an angle of 360 de-
grees will be split into k parts by
the edges coming out of this ver-
tex. Thus, the interior angle of the
n-gon must be 360
k . On the other
hand, suppose we take a regular
n-gon, ﬁnd its central point and
draw edges from this point to the
vertices of the n-gon. In the exam-
ple at the right, we have done this
for the regular hexagon. The point
labeled “A” is the central point of
the hexagon.
A
B
C
For a regular n-gon, this triangulation will yield n isosceles triangles,
each with angle sum of 180 degrees. If we add up the sum of the angles
in all of the triangles in the ﬁgure, we get a total angle sum of 180n.
On the other hand, if we add up only those triangle angles deﬁned
at the central point, then the sum of these will have to be 360. For each
of our isosceles triangles, the other two angles at the base of the triangle
will be congruent (the angles at B and C in the hexagon example). Let’s
call these angles α. Then, equating the total triangle sum of 180n with
the sum of the angles at the center and the sum of the base angles of

Symmetry
■267
each isosceles triangle, we get
180n = 360 + 2nα
and thus,
2α = 180 −360
n
Now, 2α is also the interior angle of each n-gon meeting at a vertex
of a regular tessellation. We know that this interior angle must be 360
k ,
for k n-gons meeting at a vertex of the tessellation. Thus, we have that
360
k
= 180 −360
n
If we divide both sides by 180 and multiply by nk, we get
nk −2k −2n = 0
If we add 4 to both sides, we can factor this as
(n −2)(k −2) = 4
There are only three integer possibilities for n and k, namely 6, 4,
and 3. These three possibilities directly correspond to the three regular
tessellations with equilateral triangles, squares, and regular hexagons.
6.5
PROJECT 9 - CONSTRUCTING TESSELLATIONS
Escher modeled many of his tilings after those he saw at the Alham-
bra. In this project we will look at how to create one of these Moorish
tilings, ﬁnd its symmetry group, and construct other tilings with a spec-
iﬁed symmetry group.
The tiling that we will construct is based on the dart-like shape
found in the tiling at the lower left in Figure 6.4. (Notes on how to use
particular dynamic geometry software packages for this project can be
found at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text.)
Start up your geometry software
and create a segment AB in the
Canvas. Attach a point C to the
segment.
A
B
C

268
■Exploring Geometry
To construct a square on CB,
ﬁrst set C as a center of rotation
with a rotation angle of 90 de-
grees. Then rotate B to get point
D.
A
B
C
D
Set point D as a new center
of rotation and rotate point C 90
degrees to get point E. Connect
segments as shown.
A
B
C
D
E
To make the point of our dart,
create a ray from point C verti-
cally through point D and attach
a point F to this ray.
A
B
C
D
E
F
Next, hide the ray, hide CD,
and connect segments as shown.
A
B
C
D
E
F
This completes the construc-
tion of half of the dart. Select
points A, B, E, D, and F and cre-
ate a ﬁlled polygon to color our
half-dart. Deﬁne a mirror reﬂec-
tion across AF. Select the half-
dart by clicking inside the ﬁlled
area and then reﬂect the half-dart
to get the entire dart.
A
B
C
D
E
F

Symmetry
■269
Now, set E as a center of rota-
tion of 90 degrees. Select the en-
tire dart and rotate it three times.
In the ﬁgure at the right, we have
changed the color of each com-
ponent dart so that we can see
the pieces better. Also, we have
rescaled the Canvas, since the im-
age can grow quite large.
A
B
C
D
E
F
To make this a valid tiling
(no gaps), we move point F (the
“point” of the dart) to a position
where it directly matches the base
of the dart to its right, as shown
in the ﬁgure.
A
B
C
D
E
F
Q
P
We have now constructed a basic “tile” that can be translated to
completely cover the plane.
To translate this basic tile we deﬁne a translation from P to Q. Then
we translate the whole 4-dart region by this translation. It is clear that
the 4-dart region will tile the plane if we continue to translate it vertically
and horizontally.

270
■Exploring Geometry
A
B
C
D
E
F
Q
P
Figure 6.5
Exercise 6.5.1. Determine the symmetry group for this ﬁgure. [Hint: It
must be one of the 17 wallpaper groups. Why? Use Figure 6.4 for a more
complete tiling picture.]
Exercise 6.5.2. Choose one of the wallpaper groups and construct a tiling
(other than a regular tiling) with this symmetry group. You can do this on the
computer or by using paper cutouts if you wish.
For the project report give a thorough answer to the ﬁrst question,
illustrating all symmetries on the dart tiling. For the second exercise,
describe your chosen symmetry group, illustrate the basic lattice cell for
this group, and describe the steps you took to construct your tiling.

C H A P T E R 7
Hyperbolic Geometry
I have discovered such wonderful things that I was amazed
. . . out of nothing I have created a strange new universe.
– János Bolyai (1802–1860), from a letter to his father, 1823
7.1
BACKGROUND AND HISTORY
Euclid’s development of planar geometry was based on ﬁve postulates
(or axioms):
1. Between any two distinct points, a segment can be constructed.
2. Segments can be extended indeﬁnitely.
3. Given a point and a distance, a circle can be constructed with the
point as center and the distance as radius.
4. All right angles are congruent.
5. Given two lines in the plane, if a third line l crosses the given lines
such that the two interior angles on one side of l are less than two
right angles, then the two lines if continued indeﬁnitely will meet
on that side of l where the angles are less than two right angles.
Postulates 1–4 seem very intuitive and self-evident. To construct ge-
ometric ﬁgures, one needs to construct segments, extend them, and con-
struct circles. Also, geometry should be uniform so that angles do not
change as objects are moved about.
The ﬁfth postulate, the so-called parallel postulate, seems overly com-
plex for an axiom. It is not at all self-evident or obvious and reads more
like a theorem.
271

272
■Exploring Geometry
In fact, many mathematicians tried to ﬁnd simpler postulates, ones
that were more intuitively believable, to replace Euclid’s ﬁfth, with the
hope that the ﬁfth postulate could then be proved from the ﬁrst four
postulates and the new postulate.
We have already considered one of these substitutes, Playfair’s Pos-
tulate:
Given a line and a point not on the line, it is possible to
construct exactly one line through the given point parallel
to the line.
This postulate is certainly simpler to state and easier to understand
when compared to Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate. However, in Chapter 2 we saw
that Playfair’s Postulate is logically equivalent to Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate,
and so replacing Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate with Playfair’s Postulate does
not really simplify Euclid’s axiomatic system.
Other mathematicians attempted to prove Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate as
a theorem solely on the basis of the ﬁrst four postulates. One popular
method of proof was to assume the logical opposite of Euclid’s ﬁfth
postulate (or Playfair’s Postulate). If one could show the logical opposite
to be false, or if one could obtain a contradiction to a known result
by using the opposite, then Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate would be true as a
theorem based on the ﬁrst four postulates.
Giovanni Girolamo Saccheri (1667–1773) and Johann Lambert
(1728–1777) both used this method of attack to prove Euclid’s ﬁfth pos-
tulate. Saccheri’s work focused on quadrilaterals whose base angles are
right angles and whose base-adjacent sides are congruent. In Euclidean
geometry, such quadrilaterals must be rectangles, that is, the top (or
summit) angles must be right angles. The proof of this result depends
on Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate. Saccheri supposed that the top angles were
either greater than or less than a right angle. He was able to show that
the hypothesis of the obtuse angle resulted in a contradiction to theorems
based on the ﬁrst four Euclidean postulates. However, he was unable to
derive any contradictions using the hypothesis of the acute angle. Lam-
bert, likewise, studied the hypothesis of the acute angle. In fact, Lambert
spent a good fraction of his life working on the problem of the parallel
postulate. Even though both men discovered many important results of
what has become known as non-Euclidean geometry, geometry based on
a negation of Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate, neither could accept the possibil-
ity of non-Euclidean geometry. Saccheri eventually resorted to simply
asserting that such a geometry was impossible:

Hyperbolic Geometry
■273
The hypothesis of the acute angle is absolutely false, because
[it is] repugnant to the nature of the straight line! [16, page
125]
In the 1800s several mathematicians experimented with negating
Playfair’s Postulate, assuming that a non-Euclidean ﬁfth postulate could
be consistent with the other four. This was a revolutionary idea in
the history of mathematics. János Bolyai (1802–1860), Carl Friedrich
Gauss (1777–1855), and Nikolai Lobachevsky (1792–1856) explored an
axiomatic geometry based on the ﬁrst four Euclidean postulates plus the
following postulate:
Given a line and a point not on the line, it is possible to
construct more than one line through the given point parallel
to the line.
This postulate has become known as the Bolyai–Lobachevskian Pos-
tulate. Felix Klein, who was instrumental in classifying non-Euclidean
geometries based on a surface with a particular conic section, called this
the hyperbolic postulate. A geometry constructed from the ﬁrst four Eu-
clidean postulates, plus the Bolyai–Lobachevskian Postulate, is known
as Bolyai–Lobachevskian geometry, or Hyperbolic geometry.
Gauss, one of the greatest mathematicians of all time, was perhaps
the ﬁrst to believe that Hyperbolic geometry could be consistent. Harold
Wolfe in Non-Euclidean Geometry describes how Gauss wrote a letter to
a friend about his work.
The theorems of this geometry appear to be paradoxical and,
to the uninitiated, absurd; but calm, steady reﬂection reveals
that they contain nothing at all impossible. For example, the
three angles of a triangle become as small as one wishes, if
only the sides are taken large enough; yet the area of the
triangle can never exceed a deﬁnite limit, regardless of how
great the sides are taken, nor indeed can it ever reach it.
All my eﬀorts to discover a contradiction, an inconsistency,
in this Non-Euclidean geometry have been without success.
[43, page 47]
In fact Gauss, Bolyai, and Lobachevsky developed the basic results
of Hyperbolic geometry at approximately the same time, though Gauss
developed his results before the other two, but refused to publish them.

274
■Exploring Geometry
What these three mathematicians constructed was a set of theorems
based on the ﬁrst four Euclidean postulates plus the hyperbolic postu-
late. This did not mean, however, that they showed Hyperbolic geometry
to be a consistent system. There was still the possibility that one of the
three just missed ﬁnding a theorem in Hyperbolic geometry that would
lead to a contradiction of a result based on the ﬁrst four Euclidean pos-
tulates.
The consistency of Hyperbolic geometry was demonstrated by Euge-
nio Beltrami (1835–1900), Felix Klein (1849–1925), and Henri Poincaré
(1854–1912) in the late 1800s to early 1900s. They created models of
Hyperbolic geometry inside Euclidean geometry, with perhaps strange
deﬁnitions of points, lines, circles, and angles, but models nonetheless. In
each of their models, they showed that Euclid’s ﬁrst four postulates were
true and that the hyperbolic postulate was true as well. Since each model
was created within Euclidean geometry, if Hyperbolic geometry had an
internal contradictory statement, then that statement, when translated
into its Euclidean environment, would be an internal contradiction in
Euclidean geometry! Thus, if one believed Euclidean geometry was con-
sistent, then Hyperbolic geometry was equally as consistent.
In the next section we will introduce two models of Hyperbolic ge-
ometry, the Poincaré model and the Klein model. Then, in the following
sections of the chapter, we will look at results that are true in any model
satisfying the ﬁve axioms of Hyperbolic geometry.
7.2
MODELS OF HYPERBOLIC GEOMETRY
7.2.1
Poincaré Model
In the Poincaré model for 2-dimensional Hyperbolic geometry, a point
is deﬁned to be any point interior to the unit disk. That is, any point
P = (x, y), with x2 + y2 < 1. The collection of all such points will be
called the Poincaré disk.
Deﬁnition 7.1. A hyperbolic line (or Poincaré line) is a Euclidean
arc, or Euclidean line segment, within the Poincaré disk that meets
the boundary circle at right angles.

Hyperbolic Geometry
■275
At right are two “lines” in the
Poincaré model.
P
Q
P
Q
To verify that this actually is a model for Hyperbolic geometry, we
need to show that Euclid’s ﬁrst four postulates, plus the hyperbolic
postulate, are satisﬁed in this model.
We will start with the ﬁrst two postulates of Euclid—that unique
segments can always be constructed through two points and that seg-
ments can always be extended. By segments we will mean subsets of the
Poincaré lines as deﬁned thus far.
Given two points P and Q, suppose they lie on a diameter of the
boundary circle in the Poincaré disk. Then, as shown in the ﬁgure above,
we can construct the Euclidean segment PQ along the diameter. Since
this diameter meets the boundary circle at right angles, then PQ will lie
on a Poincaré (hyperbolic) line and so will be a hyperbolic segment.
Now suppose that P and Q do not lie on a diameter. Then by the
work we did on orthogonal circles at the end of Chapter 2, there is a
unique circle through P and Q that meets the boundary circle at right
angles. We ﬁnd this circle by constructing the inverse point P ′ to P
with respect to the boundary circle. The circle through P, P ′, and Q
will then meet the boundary circle at right angles. The portion of this
circle within the unit disk will then be a hyperbolic segment through P
and Q.
To verify Euclid’s second postulate, that lines (hyperbolic) can al-
ways be extended, we ﬁrst note that the points of our geometry are not
allowed to be on the boundary circle, by the deﬁnition of the Poincaré
model. This allows us to extend any hyperbolic segment.

276
■Exploring Geometry
For example, let X be an inter-
section point (Euclidean point)
of the Poincaré line through two
hyperbolic points P and Q with
the boundary circle. Then, since
P cannot be on the boundary,
the distance along the circle arc
from P to X will always be posi-
tive, and thus we can ﬁnd another
point Y between these two points
with Y Q extending PQ.
P
Q
X
Y
Hyperbolic Distance
To deﬁne circles for the third postulate, we need a notion of distance.
Since the boundary of the Poincaré disk is not reachable in Hyperbolic
geometry, we want a deﬁnition of distance such that the distance goes
to inﬁnity as we approach the boundary of the Poincaré disk.
In the ﬁgure at the right, we
have two points P
and Q in
the Poincaré disk. There is a
unique hyperbolic line (Euclidean
arc RPQS) on which P and Q lie
that meets the boundary of the
disk at points R and S.
P
Q
R
S

Hyperbolic Geometry
■277
Deﬁnition 7.2. The hyperbolic distance from P to Q is
dP(P, Q)
=
ln( (PS)
(PR)
(QR)
(QS) )

(7.1)
where R and S are the points where the hyperbolic line through
P and Q meets the boundary circle, PS is the Euclidean distance
between P and S, and likewise for PR, QR, and QS.
This function satisﬁes the critical deﬁning properties of a distance
function. It is non-negative and equal to zero only when P = Q. It is
additive along lines, and it satisﬁes the triangle inequality (for triangles
constructed of hyperbolic segments). These properties will be proved in
detail in the last section of this chapter.
One thing that is clear from looking at the form of the distance
function is that as P or Q approach the points on the boundary (R or
S), the fraction inside the log function goes to ∞or 0, and thus the
distance function itself goes to inﬁnity.
We can now deﬁne hyperbolic circles.
Deﬁnition 7.3. A hyperbolic circle c of radius r centered at a point
O in the Poincaré disk is the set of points in the Poincaré disk whose
hyperbolic distance to O is r.
Here are some hyperbolic circles
with their associated hyperbolic
centers.
We must now verify that circles always exist. To construct the circle

278
■Exploring Geometry
of radius r at O, we note that through any line passing through O,
we can ﬁnd points that are r units away (measured in the hyperbolic
distance function). This is because no matter how close O might be to
the boundary points R or S, we can always ﬁnd points between O and
those boundary points whose distance to O will grow without bound.
For the fourth postulate, we will deﬁne angles just as they are deﬁned
in Euclidean geometry. We use the Euclidean tangent lines to Poincaré
lines (i.e., Euclidean arcs) in the Poincaré model to determine angles.
That is, the angle determined by two hyperbolic lines will be the angle
made by their Euclidean tangents. Since angles inherit their Euclidean
meaning, the fourth postulate is automatically true.
For the ﬁfth postulate (the hyper-
bolic postulate), consider a line l
and a point P not on l as shown
at right.
l
P
X
Y
Let X and Y be the intersection points of l with the boundary circle.
Then by Theorem 2.43 we know that there are two circular arcs, one
through P and X and one through P and Y , that are orthogonal to the
circle boundary. Also, neither of these can intersect l at a point inside the
boundary circle. For, suppose that the arc through P and X intersected
l at a point Q inside the circle. Then Q and X would be on l and also on
the arc through P and X. By the uniqueness part of Theorem 2.43, these
two arcs must be coincident. But, this is impossible as P was assumed
not to lie on l. Thus, the two arcs through P will be two hyperbolic lines
that do not intersect l inside the boundary circle and by deﬁnition are
parallel lines to l.
We see that all of the ﬁrst four Euclidean postulates hold in this
geometry and the hyperbolic parallel postulate holds as well. We con-
clude that this strange geometry in the Poincaré disk is just as logically

Hyperbolic Geometry
■279
consistent as Euclidean geometry based on Euclid’s postulates. If there
were contradictory results about lines, circles, and points in this new ge-
ometry, they would have to be equally contradictory in Euclid’s planar
geometry, in which this geometry is embedded.
Now, for Hyperbolic geometry to be truly consistent relative to Eu-
clidean Geometry, we must be a bit careful. It is not enough to show
that the Poincaré model satisﬁes the ﬁrst four Euclidean postulates. We
have already seen in earlier chapters that Euclid’s axiomatic system had
some problems. What we really need to verify is that the Poincaré model
satisﬁes the axioms of Hilbert, which are covered in the on-line chapter
on Hilbert’s geometry. For the sake of exposition, we will not go into
the details of that veriﬁcation here, but refer the reader instead to the
discussion on Hyperbolic and Elliptic geometry at the end of the on-line
chapter on Hilbert’s axioms.
We note that there is really nothing special about using the unit
disk in the Poincaré model. We could just as well have used any circle in
the plane and deﬁned lines as diameters or circular arcs that meet the
boundary circle at right angles.
7.2.2
Mini-Project - The Klein Model
The Poincaré model preserves the Euclidean notion of angle, but
at the expense of deﬁning lines in a fairly strange manner. Is there a
model of Hyperbolic geometry, built within Euclidean geometry, that
preserves both the Euclidean deﬁnition of lines and the Euclidean notion
of angle? Unfortunately, this is impossible. If we had such a model, and
∆ABC was any triangle, then the angle sum of the triangle would be 180
degrees, which is a property that is equivalent to the parallel postulate
of Euclidean geometry [Exercise 2.1.8 in Chapter 2].
A natural question to ask is whether it is possible to ﬁnd a model
of Hyperbolic geometry, built within Euclidean geometry, that preserves
just the Euclidean notion of lines.
In this project we will investigate a model ﬁrst put forward by Felix
Klein, where hyperbolic lines are segments of Euclidean lines. Klein’s
model starts out with the same set of points we used for the Poincaré
model, the set of points inside the unit disk.
However, lines will be deﬁned diﬀerently. A hyperbolic line (or Klein

280
■Exploring Geometry
line) in this model will be any chord of the boundary circle (minus its
points on the boundary circle).
Here is a collection of Klein lines.
Exercise 7.2.1. Show that Euclid’s ﬁrst two postulates are satisﬁed in this
model.
In order to verify Euclid’s third postulate, we will need to deﬁne a
distance function.
Deﬁnition 7.4. The hyperbolic distance from P to Q in the Klein
model is
dK(P, Q)
=
1
2
ln( (PS)
(PR)
(QR)
(QS) )

(7.2)
where R and S are the points where the hyperbolic line (chord of
the circle) through P and Q meets the boundary circle.
Note the similarity of this deﬁnition to the deﬁnition of distance in
the Poincaré model. We will show at the end of this chapter that the
Klein and Poincaré models are isomorphic. That is, there is a one-to-
one map between the models that preserves lines and angles and also
preserves the distance functions.
Just as we did in the Poincaré model, we now deﬁne a circle as the
set of points a given (hyperbolic) distance from a center point.
Exercise 7.2.2. Show that Euclid’s third postulate is satisifed with this def-
inition of circles. [Hint: Use the continuity of the logarithm function, as well
as the fact that the logarithm is an unbounded function.]

Hyperbolic Geometry
■281
Euclid’s fourth postulate deals with right angles. Let’s skip this pos-
tulate for now and consider the hyperbolic postulate. It is clear that
given a line and a point not on the line, there are many parallels (non-
intersecting lines) to the given line through the point. Draw some pic-
tures on a piece of paper to convince yourself of this fact.
Now, let’s return to the question of angles and, in particular, right
angles. What we need is a notion of perpendicularity of lines meeting at
a point. Let’s start with the simplest case, where one of the lines, say l,
is a diameter of the Klein disk. Suppose we deﬁne another line m to be
(hyperbolically) perpendicular to l at a point P if it is perpendicular to
l in the Euclidean sense.
Shown here are several Klein lines
perpendicular to the Klein line l,
which is a diameter of the bound-
ary circle.
O
l
It is clear that we cannot extend this deﬁnition to non-diameter
chords directly. If we did so, then right angles would have the same
meaning in the Klein model as they do in the Euclidean plane, which
would mean that parallels would have to satisfy the Euclidean parallel
postulate.
The best we can hope for is an extension of some property of perpen-
diculars to a diameter. If we consider the extended plane, with the point
at inﬁnity attached, then all the perpendicular lines to the diameter l
in the ﬁgure above meet at the point at inﬁnity. The point at inﬁnity
is the inverse point to the origin O, with respect to the unit circle (as
was discussed at the end of Chapter 2). Also, O has a unique position
on l—it is the Euclidean midpoint of the chord deﬁning l.
If we move l to a new position, say to line l′, so that l′ is no longer

282
■Exploring Geometry
a diameter, then it makes sense that the perpendiculars to l would also
move to new perpendiculars to l′, but in such a way that they still
intersected at the inverse point of the midpoint of the chord for l′. This
inverse point is called the pole of the chord.
Deﬁnition 7.5. The pole of chord AB in a circle c is the inverse
point of the midpoint of AB with respect to the circle.
From our work in Chapter 2, we know that the pole of chord AB is
also the intersection of the tangents at A and B to the circle.
Here we see a Klein line with Eu-
clidean midpoint M and tangents
at A and B (which are not ac-
tually points in the Klein model)
meeting at pole P. Notice that the
three chords (m1, m2, and m3) in-
side the circle have the property
that, when extended, they pass
through the pole. It makes sense
to extend our deﬁnition of perpen-
dicularity to state that these three
chords will be perpendicular (in
the hyperbolic sense) to the given
line (AB) at the points of inter-
section.
O
m1
m2
m3
B
A
P
M
Deﬁnition 7.6. A line m is perpendicular to a line l (in the Klein
model) if the Euclidean line for m passes through the pole P of l.
Exercise 7.2.3. Use this deﬁnition of perpendicularity to sketch some per-
pendicular lines in the Klein model. Then, use this deﬁnition to show that the
common perpendicular to two parallel Klein lines exists in most cases. That
is, show that there is a Klein line that meets two given parallel Klein lines at
right angles, except in one special case of parallels. Describe this special case.

Hyperbolic Geometry
■283
Given a Klein line l (deﬁned by
chord AB) and a point P not on
l, there are two chords BC and
AD, both passing through P and
parallel to l (only intersections are
on the boundary). These two par-
allels possess the interesting prop-
erty of dividing the set of all lines
through P into two subsets: those
that intersect l and those that are
parallel to l. These special paral-
lels (AD and BC) will be called
limiting parallels to l at P. (A pre-
cise deﬁnition of this property will
come later.)
B
A
l
P
C
D
From P drop a perpendicular
to l at Q as shown. Consider the
hyperbolic angle ∠QPT, where T
is a point on the hyperbolic ray
from P to B. This angle will be
called the angle of parallelism for
l at P.
B
A
l
P
C
D
Q
Pole(AB)
T
Exercise 7.2.4. Considering the ﬁgure above, explain why the angle made by
QPT (the angle of parallelism) cannot be a right angle. Then use this result,
and the fact that AD and BC are limiting parallels, to show that the angle of
parallelism cannot be greater than a right angle.

284
■Exploring Geometry
7.3
BASIC RESULTS IN HYPERBOLIC GEOMETRY
We will now look at some basic results concerning lines, triangles, circles,
and the like, that hold in all models of Hyperbolic geometry.
Just as we use diagrams to aid in understanding the proofs of results
in Euclidean geometry, we will use the Poincaré model (or the Klein
model) to draw diagrams to aid in understanding Hyperbolic geometry.
However, we must be careful. Too much reliance on ﬁgures and diagrams
can lead to hidden assumptions. We must be careful to argue solely from
the postulates or from theorems based on the postulates.
One aid in our study of Hyperbolic geometry will be the fact that all
results in Euclidean geometry that do not depend on the parallel postu-
late (those of neutral geometry) can be assumed in Hyperbolic geometry
immediately. For example, we can assume that results about congruence
of triangles, such as SAS, will hold in Hyperbolic geometry. In fact, we
can assume the ﬁrst 28 propositions in Book I of Euclid (see Appendix
B).
Also, we can assume results on isometries, including reﬂections and
rotations, found in sections 5.1, 5.2, and 5.4, as they do not depend on
the parallel postulate. These results will hold in Hyperbolic geometry,
assuming that we have a distance function that is well deﬁned. We also
assume basic properties of betweenness and continuity of distance and
angle. We saw earlier that these assumptions must be added to Euclid’s
axiomatic system to ensure completeness of that system, so it is reason-
able to assume these properties in Hyperbolic geometry as well.
We will start our study with the main area in which Hyperbolic
geometry distinguishes itself from Euclidean geometry—the area of par-
allels.
7.3.1
Parallels in Hyperbolic Geometry
As we saw in the Klein model in the last project, if we have a hyper-
bolic line l and a point P not on l, there are always two parallel lines
m, n through P with special properties. This is true in any model of
Hyperbolic geometry.

Hyperbolic Geometry
■285
Theorem 7.1. (Fundamental Theorem of Parallels in Hyperbolic
Geometry) Given a hyperbolic line l and a point P not on l, there
are exactly two parallel lines m, n through P that have the following
properties:
1. Every line through P lying within the angle made by one of the
parallels m, n and the perpendicular from P to l must intersect
l while all other lines through P are parallel to l.
2. m, n make equal acute angles with the perpendicular from P
to l.
Proof: Drop a perpendicular to l through P, intersecting l at Q.
Consider all angles with side PQ.
The set of these angles will be
divided into those angles ∠QPA
where −→
PA intersects l and those
where it does not. By continuity
of angle measure, there must be
an angle that separates the angles
where −→
PA intersects l from those
where it does not. Let ∠QPC be
this angle.
A
B
l
P
Q
C
D
Let −−→
PD be the reﬂection of −→
PC across ←→
PQ. Since reﬂections preserve
parallelism, we have that −−→
PD must separate intersecting lines from par-
allels. Also, reﬂections preserve angle, so ∠QPD must be congruent to
∠QPC. This ﬁnishes the proof of part (1) of the theorem.
We now show that both angles are less than 90 degrees. It suﬃces
to show that neither can be a right angle. Suppose that ∠QPC is a
right angle. Then by the preceding paragraph, we know that ∠QPD
must be a right angle. Points C, P, D are then collinear and make up
one parallel to l through P by Euclid’s Proposition 27, which does not
depend on Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate. By the hyperbolic parallel postulate,
there must be another line m′ through P parallel to l. But, m′ has to lie
within one of the two right angles ∠QPC or ∠QPD, which would be a
contradiction to what was just proved about angles ∠QPC and ∠QPD
separating intersecting and non-intersecting lines. 2

286
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 7.7. The two special parallels deﬁned in the previous
theorem are called limiting parallels (also called asymptotic parallels
or sensed parallels) to l through P. These will be lines through P
that separate intersecting and non-intersecting lines to l. There will
be a right and a left limiting parallel to l through P. Other lines
through P that do not intersect l will be called ultraparallels (or
divergent parallels) to l. The angle made by a limiting parallel with
the perpendicular from P to l is called the angle of parallelism at
P.
The properties of limiting parallels have no counterpart in Euclidean
geometry and thus it is hard to develop an intuition for them. In the
project on the Klein model, we saw how to construct limiting parallels to
a given Klein line. It may be helpful to review that construction to have
a concrete mental picture of how limiting parallels work in hyperbolic
geometry.
In the next few theorems, we will review some of the basic results on
limiting parallels. We will prove these results in a synthetic fashion, inde-
pendent of any model. The proofs will focus on the case of right-limiting
parallels. The proofs for left-limiting parallels follow by symmetry of the
arguments used.
Theorem 7.2. Let ←−→
PP ′ be the right-limiting parallel to a line l
through P. Then ←−→
PP ′ is also the right-limiting parallel to l through
P ′.
Proof: There are two cases to consider.
In the ﬁrst case point P ′ is to the right of P on ←−→
PP ′ (Figure 7.1).
Drop perpendiculars from P and P ′ to l at Q and Q′. Then by Euclid’s
Prop. 27, ←−→
P ′Q′ ∥←→
PQ, and we know that all points on ←−→
P ′Q′ will be on
the same side of ←→
PQ.
Let R be a point to the right of P ′ on ←−→
PP ′. We need to show that
every ray −−→
P ′S lying within ∠Q′P ′R will intersect l.
Since S is interior to ∠QPR, we know that ray −→
PS will intersect l
at some point T. −→
PS will also intersect P ′Q at a point U, since this ray
cannot intersect either of the other two sides of triangle ∆PQP ′.
Now, consider ∆QUT. −−→
P ′S intersects side UT and does not intersect

Hyperbolic Geometry
■287
side QU (S and U must be on opposite sides of P ′Q′). Thus, −−→
P ′S must
intersect side QT and thus intersects l.
l
P
P’
Q
Q’
R
S
T
U
Figure 7.1
In the second case, point P ′ is to the left of P on ←−→
PP ′. A similar
proof can be given in this case. 2
Note that in this proof we are using the fact that a line intersecting
a triangle at a side must intersect one of the other sides. This fact is
known as Pasch’s axiom and is independent of Euclid’s original set of ﬁve
postulates. Since we normally assume this axiom in Euclidean geometry,
and it does not depend on any parallel properties, we will likewise assume
it in Hyperbolic geometry.
The next theorem tells us that the property of being a limiting par-
allel is a symmetric property. That is, we can talk of a pair of lines being
limiting parallels to each other without any ambiguity.
Theorem 7.3. If line m is a right-limiting parallel to l, then l is
conversely a right-limiting parallel to m.
Proof: Let m = ←→
PD be the right-limiting parallel to l through P.
Drop a perpendicular from P to l at Q (Figure 7.2). Also, drop a per-
pendicular from Q to m at R. We know that R must be to the right of
P, since if it were to the left, then we would get a contradiction to the
exterior angle theorem for ∆QRP. Let B be a point on l that is on the
same side of PQ as D. To show that l is limiting parallel to m, we need
to show that any ray interior to ∠BQR must intersect m.
Let −−→
QE be interior to ∠BQR. We will show that −−→
QE must intersect
m. Drop a perpendicular from P to ←→
QE at F. By an exterior angle

288
■Exploring Geometry
theorem argument, we know that F will lie on the same side of Q on
←→
QE as E.
B
l
P
m
Q
R
E
F
D
Figure 7.2
Also, since in ∆PQF the greater side lies opposite the greater angle,
we know that PQ > PF.
Now, we can use the rotation results from Chapter 5 to rotate PF,
←→
PD, and ←→
FE about P by the angle θ = ∠FPQ, as shown in Figure 7.3.
Since PQ > PF, F will rotate to a point F ′ on PQ and ←→
FE will rotate
to a line ←−→
F ′E′ that is ultraparallel to l, because of the right angles at
Q and F ′. Also, ←→
PD will rotate to a line ←−→
PD′ that is interior to ∠QPR
and so will intersect l at some point G.
B
l
P
m
Q
R
F’
E’
D
D’
G
H
Figure 7.3

Hyperbolic Geometry
■289
Since ←−→
F ′E′ intersects ∆PQG and does not intersect QG, it must
intersect PG at some point H. Rotating ←−→
F ′E′ and ←−→
PD′ about P by −θ
shows that −−→
QE will intersect m at the rotated value of H. 2
The next theorem tells us that the property of being a limiting par-
allel is a transitive property. That is, if l is limiting parallel to m and m
is limiting parallel to n, then l is limiting parallel to n.
Theorem 7.4. If two lines are limiting parallel (in the same di-
rection) to a third line, then they must be limiting parallel to each
other.
Proof: There are two cases to consider.
In the ﬁrst case suppose ←→
AB and
←→
CD are both right-limiting paral-
lel to ←→
EF with points A and C
on opposite sides of ←→
EF. Then,
AC will intersect ←→
EF at some
point G. Let −−→
CH be any ray inte-
rior to ∠ACD. Then, since ←→
CD is
right-limiting parallel to ←→
EF, we
have that −−→
CH will intersect ←→
EF
at some point J.
A
B
E
F
C
D
G
H
J
K
Connect A and J. Since limiting parallelism is symmetric and ←→
AB is
right-limiting parallel to ←→
EF, then ←→
EF is right-limiting parallel to ←→
AB
and is limiting parallel at all points, including J. Thus, −→
CJ will intersect
←→
AB at some point K.
Since ←→
AB and ←→
CD do not intersect (they are on opposite sides of
←→
EF), and for all rays −−→
CH interior to ∠ACD we have that −−→
CH intersects
←→
AB, then ←→
CD is right-limiting parallel to ←→
AB.

290
■Exploring Geometry
For the second case we assume
that ←→
AB and ←→
CD are both on the
same side of ←→
EF. Suppose that
←→
AB and ←→
CD are not right-limiting
parallel to each other. Without
loss of generality, we may assume
that C and E are on opposite
sides of ←→
AB. Let ←→
CG be the right-
limiting parallel to ←→
AB.
E
F
A
B
C
D
G
By the ﬁrst part of this proof, ←→
CG and ←→
EF must be right-limiting
parallel. But, ←→
CD is already the right-limiting parallel to ←→
EF at C, and
thus G must be on ←→
CD and ←→
CD is right-limiting parallel to ←→
AB. 2
7.3.2
Omega Points and Triangles
In the previous section we saw that given a line l and a point P not on
l, there were two special lines called the right- and left-limiting parallels
to l through P. These separated the set of lines through P that intersect
l from those that did not intersect l.
In the Poincaré and Klein models, these limiting parallels actually
meet at points on the boundary circle. While these boundary points are
not actually valid points in the geometry, it is still useful to consider the
boundary points as representing the special relationship that limiting
parallels have with the given line.
We will call these special points omega points, or ideal points. Thus,
a given line will have in addition to its set of “ordinary” points a special
pair of omega points. All limiting parallels to the given line will pass
through these omega points.
Deﬁnition 7.8. Given a line l, the right [left] omega point to l
represents the set of all right- [left-] limiting parallels to l. We say
two lines intersect at an omega point if one is right- [left-] limiting
parallel to the other. If Ωis an omega point of l and P is an ordinary
point, then by the line through P and Ωwe will mean the line through
P that is right [left-] limiting parallel to l.

Hyperbolic Geometry
■291
Deﬁnition 7.9. Given two omega
lines ←→
PΩand ←→
QΩ, the omega
triangle deﬁned by P, Q, and Ω
is the set of points on PQ and
the two rays deﬁned by the lim-
iting parallels ←→
PΩand ←→
QΩ.
Q
P
Ω
It is interesting to note that these omega triangles, while not true
triangles, still share many important properties of ordinary triangles.
Theorem 7.5. (Pasch’s Axiom for Omega Triangles, Part I) If a
line passes through a vertex P or Q of an omega triangle PQΩ, and
passes through an interior point of the triangle, then it must inter-
sect the opposite side. If a line passes through Ω, and an interior
point, it must intersect side PQ.
Proof: The proof of the ﬁrst part of the theorem is a direct conse-
quence of the fact that ←→
PΩand ←→
QΩare limiting parallels and will be left
as an exercise.
For the proof of the second part, suppose that a line passes through
Ωand through a point X within the omega triangle.
By passing through Ωwe mean
that the line through X is a lim-
iting parallel to ←→
PΩ(or ←→
QΩ). By
the ﬁrst part of this proof, we
know that ←→
PX will intersect ←→
QΩ
at some point Y . By Pasch’s ax-
iom, we know that the line ←→
XΩ
will intersect side PQ of ∆PQY .
Q
P
X
Y

292
■Exploring Geometry
2
Theorem 7.6. (Pasch’s Axiom for Omega Triangles, Part II) If
a line intersects one of the sides of an omega triangle PQΩand
passes through an interior point of the triangle, but does not pass
through a vertex, then it will intersect exactly one of the other two
sides.
Proof: The proof of this theorem is left as a series of exercises below.
2
Theorem 7.7. (Exterior Angle Theorem for Omega Triangles) The
exterior angles of an omega triangle PQΩmade by extending PQ
are greater than their respective opposite interior angles.
Proof: Extend PQ to R. It suﬃces to show that ∠RQΩis greater
than ∠QPΩ.
We can ﬁnd a point X on the right
side of PQ such that ∠RQX ∼=
∠QPΩ. Suppose −−→
QX intersected
←→
PΩat S. Then ∠RQX would be
an exterior angle to ∆PQS and
would equal the opposite interior
angle in this triangle, which con-
tradicts the exterior angle theo-
rem for ordinary triangles.
Q
Ω
P
R
X
S
Could QX lie on ←→
QΩ? Suppose it does.

Hyperbolic Geometry
■293
Let M be the midpoint of PQ and
drop a perpendicular from M to
←→
QΩat N. Now, on the line ←→
PΩ,
we can ﬁnd a point L, on the
other side of QP from N, with
QN ∼= PL. If QX lies on ←→
QΩ,
then ∠NQM
∼= ∠LPM (both
are supplementary to congruent
angles). Thus, by SAS, ∆NQM
and ∆LPM are congruent and
∠MLP is a right angle. Since the
angles at M are congruent, L, M,
and N lie on a line. But, this
would imply that LN is perpen-
dicular to both ←→
PΩand ←→
QΩand
that the angle of parallelism is
90 degrees, which is impossible.
Q
Ω
P
R
X
M
N
L
Thus, ∠RQX is less than angle ∠RQΩand since ∠RQX ∼= ∠QPΩ,
we are ﬁnished with the proof. 2
Theorem 7.8. (Omega Triangle Congruence) If PQ and P ′Q′ are
congruent and ∠PQΩis congruent to ∠P ′Q′Ω′, then ∠QPΩis con-
gruent to ∠Q′P ′Ω′ (Figure 7.4).
Proof: Suppose one of the angles is greater, say ∠QPΩ. We can ﬁnd R
interior to ∠QPΩsuch that ∠QPR ∼= ∠Q′P ′Ω′. Then −→
PR will intersect
←→
QΩat some point S. On ←−→
Q′Ω′ we can ﬁnd S′ with QS ∼= Q′S′. Triangles
∆PQS and ∆P ′Q′S′ are then congruent by SAS and ∠Q′P ′S′ ∼= ∠QPS.
Also, ∠QPS ∼= ∠Q′P ′Ω′. Thus, ∠Q′P ′S′ ∼= ∠Q′P ′Ω′, which is impossi-
ble.

294
■Exploring Geometry
Q
P
Ω’
Q’
S’
P’
Ω
R
S
Figure 7.4
2
Exercise 7.3.1. Illustrate Theorem 7.3 in the Klein model and explain why
it must be true using the properties of that model.
Exercise 7.3.2. Illustrate Theorem 7.4 in the Klein model and explain why
it must be true using the properties of that model.
Exercise 7.3.3. Let l be a hyperbolic line and let rl be reﬂection across that
line. Use the parallelism properties of reﬂections to show that rl maps limiting
parallels of l to other limiting parallels of l. Use this to show that rl ﬁxes
omega points of l.
Exercise 7.3.4. Show that the omega points of a hyperbolic line l are the
only omega points ﬁxed by reﬂection across l. [Hint: If a reﬂection rl ﬁxes an
omega point of a line l′ ̸= l, show that rl must ﬁx l′ and get a contradiction.]
Exercise 7.3.5. Show that if a rotation R ﬁxes an omega point, then it must
be the identity rotation. [Hint: Use the preceding exercise.]
Exercise 7.3.6. Show that for an omega triangle PQΩ, the sum of the angles
∠PQΩand ∠QPΩis always less than 180 degrees.
Exercise 7.3.7. Show that if a line intersects an omega triangle PQΩat
one of the vertices P or Q, then it must intersect the opposite side.

Hyperbolic Geometry
■295
Exercise 7.3.8. (Partial Proof of Theorem 7.6)
Suppose a line intersects side ←→
PΩof
an omega triangle PQΩbut does not
pass through a vertex. Let R be the
point of intersection and connect R
to Q. Use Pasch’s axiom and Theo-
rem 7.5 to show that a line through
R that does not pass through P or Q
must intersect PQ or ←→
QΩ.
Q
P
R
Ω
Exercise 7.3.9. (Partial Proof of Theorem 7.6)
Suppose a line intersects side PQ of
an omega triangle PQΩbut does not
pass through a vertex. Let R be the
point of intersection. We can ﬁnd
the limiting parallel ←→
RΩ. Show that
a line through R must intersect ei-
ther ←→
PΩor ←→
QΩ. [Hint: Use Theorem
7.5.]
Q
P
Ω
R
Exercise 7.3.10. In this exercise we will prove Angle-Angle Congruence
for omega triangles. Suppose PQΩand P ′Q′Ω′ are two omega triangles with
∠PQΩ∼= ∠P ′Q′Ω′ and ∠QPΩ∼= ∠Q′P ′Ω′. Show that PQ ∼= P ′Q′. [Hint:
Suppose the segments are not congruent. See if you can derive a contradiction
to Exercise 7.3.6.]
Exercise 7.3.11. Let
PQ
be
a
segment of length h. Let l be a per-
pendicular to PQ at Q and ←→
PR the
limiting parallel to l at P. Deﬁne
the angle of parallelism to be a(h) =
∠QPR, where the angle is measured
in degrees. Use a theorem on omega
triangles to show this deﬁnition is
well deﬁned, that it depends only on
h.
l
P
Q
R
Exercise 7.3.12. Show that if h < h′, then a(h) > a(h′). That is, the
function a(h) is order-reversing.

296
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 7.3.13. Show that a(h) is a one-to-one function on the set of
positive real numbers h.
Exercise 7.3.14. In Euclidean and Hyperbolic geometry, angles are said
to be absolute. One can construct a particular right angle and from there all
other angles. In Euclidean geometry, however, length is not absolute. One must
choose a segment to be of unit length, and then other lengths can be measured.
Measures of length are thus arbitrary in Euclidean geometry. Assuming that
it is always possible to carry out the construction described in the deﬁnition of
a(h), use the preceding exercise to show that length is absolute in hyperbolic
geometry.
7.4
PROJECT 10 - THE SACCHERI QUADRILATERAL
Girolamo Saccheri was a Jesuit priest who, like Gauss and others
mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, tried to negate Playfair’s
Postulate and ﬁnd a contradiction to known results based on the ﬁrst four
Euclidean postulates. His goal in this work was not to study Hyperbolic
geometry, but rather to prove Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate as a theorem. Just
before he died in 1733, he published Euclides ab Omni Naevo Vindicatus
(“Euclid Freed of Every Flaw”), in which he summarized his work on
negating the parallel postulate by the “hypothesis of the acute angle.”
Saccheri’s idea was to study quadrilaterals whose base angles are
right angles and whose base-adjacent sides are congruent. Of course,
in Euclidean geometry, such quadrilaterals must be rectangles; that is,
the top (or summit) angles must be right angles. Saccheri negated the
parallel postulate by assuming the summit angles were less than 90 de-
grees. This was the “hypothesis of the acute angle.” Saccheri’s attempt
to prove the parallel postulate ultimately failed because he could not
ﬁnd a contradiction to the acute angle hypothesis.
To see why Saccheri was unable to ﬁnd a contradiction, let’s consider
his quadrilaterals in Hyperbolic geometry.
We will be using the Poincaré Disk model of hyperbolic geometry
for our exploration of the Saccheri quadrilateral. Before you start this
project, go to http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text for instructions
on how to download the hyperbolic geometry system for your particular
software environment.

Hyperbolic Geometry
■297
Start up your geometry software
and open a Poincaré Disk win-
dow. Create a segment AB on the
screen. This will be the base of our
quadrilateral.
A
B
Construct the perpendicular
to AB through point A. Like-
wise, construct the perpendicular
to AB through B.
A
B
Now, attach a point C along
the perpendicular at B as shown.
A
B
C

298
■Exploring Geometry
Now, hide the perpendicular
line at B and create segment BC.
A
B
C
Construct a circle with center
point A and radius given by seg-
ment BC. This will create a circle
centered at A of hyperbolic radius
the hyperbolic length of BC. Con-
struct the intersection of the circle
and the perpendicular at A.
A
B
C
The upper intersection point,
D, is all we need, so hide the
circle, the perpendicular, and the
lower intersection point. Then,
connect A to D and D to C to ﬁn-
ish the construction of a Saccheri
Quadrilateral.
A
B
C
D
At this point we can use our Saccheri Quadrilateral to study many
fascinating properties in Hyperbolic geometry. Let’s look at a couple.

Hyperbolic Geometry
■299
Measure the two angles at D
and C in the quadrilateral. For
this conﬁguration they are equal
and less than 90 degrees, which
is what they would be in Eu-
clidean geometry. It appears that
Saccheri’s acute angle hypothe-
sis holds in Hyperbolic geometry,
at least for this one case. Move
points A and B and check the
summit angles.
A
B
C
D
Angle(A,D,C) = 42.94 degrees
Angle(D,C,B) = 42.94 degrees
It appears that this result
holds for all conﬁgurations of
our Saccheri Quadrilateral (ex-
cept perhaps when orientations
switch, because our intersection
point switches from above the
rectangle to below it and the an-
gles become greater than 180 de-
grees). In fact, this is a theorem in
hyperbolic geometry. The summit
angles of a Saccheri Quadrilateral
are always equal and less than 90
degrees (i.e., are acute).
A
B
C
D
Angle(A,D,C) = 56.21 degrees
Angle(D,C,B) = 56.21 degrees
Saccheri could ﬁnd no contradiction in assuming that the summit
angles of this quadrilateral were acute, because in Hyperbolic geometry
(which can be modeled within Euclidean geometry), the summit angles
are always acute. If he had been able to ﬁnd a contradiction, then that
would also be a contradiction in Euclidean geometry. However, Saccheri
could not believe what his own work was telling him. As mentioned at
the beginning of this chapter, he found the hypothesis of the acute angle
“repugnant to the nature of the straight line.”
Exercise 7.4.1. Prove that the summit angles of a Saccheri Quadrilateral
are always congruent. [Hint: Start by showing the diagonals are congruent.]

300
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 7.4.2. Fill in the “Why?”
parts of the following proof that the
summit angles of a Saccheri Quad
are always acute. Refer to the ﬁgure
at right.
A
B
Ω
C
D
E
At C we can construct the right-limiting parallel ←→
CΩto AB. At D we
can also construct the right-limiting parallel ←→
DΩto AB. These two limiting
parallels will also be limiting parallel to each other. (Why?)
←→
DC must be an ultraparallel (non-intersecting line) to ←→
AB. (Why?) [Hint:
Construct midpoints to AB and CD and use triangles to show that the two
lines share a common perpendicular.]
Thus, the right-limiting parallels through D and C, respectively, must lie
within the angles ∠ADC and ∠BCE, where E is a point on −−→
DC to the right
of C. Now ∠ADΩand ∠BCΩare equal in measure. (Why?)
Furthermore, in omega triangle CDΩ, ∠ECΩmust be greater than inte-
rior angle ∠CDΩ. (Why?)
Finally, this proves that ∠ADC and ∠BCD are both less than 90 degrees.
(Why?)
For your report give a careful and complete summary of your work
done on this project.
7.5
LAMBERT QUADRILATERALS AND TRIANGLES
7.5.1
Lambert Quadrilaterals
In the last section we deﬁned a Saccheri Quadrilateral as a quadrilateral
ABCD, where the base angles ∠BAD and ∠CBA are right angles and
the side lengths AD and BC are congruent (Figure 7.5).

Hyperbolic Geometry
■301
A
B
D
C
E
F
Figure 7.5
Let E and F be the midpoints of the base and summit of a Saccheri
quadrilateral. By the results of the last section, we know that ∆ADF
and ∆BCF are congruent by SAS and thus AF ∼= BF. Thus, ∆AEF
and ∆BEF are congruent by SSS and the angle at E must be a right
angle. A similar argument will show that ∠DFE and ∠CFE are also
right angles. Thus,
Theorem 7.9. The segment joining the midpoints of the base and
summit of a Saccheri quadrilateral makes right angles with the base
and summit.
If we look at the two quadrilaterals AEFD and BEFC, they both
share the property of having three right angles.
Deﬁnition 7.10. A Lambert Quadrilateral is a quadrilateral hav-
ing three right angles.
The midpoint construction just described gives a natural way to as-
sociate a Lambert quadrilateral with a given Saccheri quadrilateral. We
can also create a Saccheri quadrilateral from a given Lambert quadrilat-
eral.
Theorem 7.10. Let ABDC be a Lambert quadrilateral with right
angles at A, B, and C. If we extend AB and CD, we can ﬁnd points
E and F such that AB ∼= AE and CD ∼= CF (Figure 7.6). Then
EBDF is a Saccheri quadrilateral.

302
■Exploring Geometry
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 7.6
Proof: The proof is left as an exercise. 2
Corollary 7.11. In a Lambert Quadrilateral the fourth angle (the
one not speciﬁed to be a right angle) must be acute.
Proof: By the preceding theorem, we can embed a given Lambert
quadrilateral in a Saccheri quadrilateral and we know the summit angles
of a Saccheri quadrilateral are acute. 2
Corollary 7.12. Rectangles do not exist in Hyperbolic geometry.
Proof: This is an immediate consequence of the preceding corollary. 2
Here is another interesting fact concerning Lambert Quads.
Theorem 7.13. In a Lambert quadrilateral the sides adjoining the
acute angle are greater than the opposite sides.
Proof: Given a Lambert quadrilateral ABDC with right angles at A,
B, and C, suppose that DB < AC (Figure 7.7). Then there is a point E
on the line through B, D with D between B and E such that BE ∼= AC.
It follows that ABEC is a Saccheri quadrilateral, and ∠ACE ∼= ∠BEC,
and both angles are acute.

Hyperbolic Geometry
■303
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 7.7
However, since A and E are on opposite sides of ←→
CD (A and B are on
the same side and B and E are on opposite sides), then CD lies within
∠ACE and thus ∠ACE contains ∠ACD. So, ∠ACE must be greater
than a right angle. This contradicts the fact that ∠ACE must be acute.
Thus, DB ≥AC. If DB = AC, then we would have a Saccheri
quadrilateral ABDC and the summit angles would be congruent, which
is impossible. We must have, then, that DB > AC. A similar argument
shows CD > AB. 2
7.5.2
Triangles in Hyperbolic Geometry
Here are two basic (but still amazing) facts about triangles in hyperbolic
geometry.
Theorem 7.14. The angle sum for any hyperbolic right triangle is
always less than 180 degrees.
Proof: Let ∆ABC be a right triangle with a right angle at A. Let D
be the midpoint of BC (Figure 7.8).
A
C
B
D
E
F
G
Figure 7.8

304
■Exploring Geometry
Drop a perpendicular from D to ←→
AC intersecting at E. Then E must
lie between A and C. For by Pasch’s Axiom we know that the perpen-
dicular must pass through one of the two sides AB or AC. Clearly, it
cannot pass through A, B, or C. Suppose it passed through AB at X.
Then ∆XEA would have two right angles, contradicting the absolute
geometry result that the sum of two angles in a triangle must be less
than two right angles (Euclid, Book I, Prop. 17).
Now, we can ﬁnd a point F such that ∠DCE is congruent to ∠DBF.
On −−→
BF we can ﬁnd a point G such that BG ∼= EC. By SAS we have
that ∆ECD ∼= ∆GBD. Thus, E, D, and G are collinear and ∠DGB is
a right angle.
Quadrilateral ABGE is thus a Lambert Quadrilateral and ∠ABG
must be acute. Since ∠DCE is congruent to ∠DBF, then m∠DCE +
m∠ABD = m∠DBF + m∠ABD < 90. Thus, the sum of the angles in
∆ABC is less than two right angles. 2
Theorem 7.15. The angle sum for any hyperbolic triangle is less
than 180 degrees.
A
B
C
D
Figure 7.9
Proof: Let ABC be a triangle (Figure 7.9). We have proved the result
if one of the angles is right. Thus, suppose none of the three angles are
right angles. Then two must be acute, as otherwise we would have the
sum of two angles being greater than or equal to 180 degrees.
Let the angles at B and C be acute. Drop a perpendicular from A
down to ←→
BC, intersecting at D. Then D is between B and C. (If it
intersected elsewhere on the line, we could construct a triangle with two
angles more than 180 degrees.)
Now, ∆ABC can be looked at as two right triangles ∆ABD and
∆ADC. Using the previous result, we know that the sum of the angles

Hyperbolic Geometry
■305
in ∆ABD is less than 180, as is the sum of the angles in ∆ADC. So
the sum of the angles in the two triangles together is less than 360. But
clearly, this sum is the same as the sum of the angles in ∆ABC plus
the two right angles at D. Thus, the sum of the angles in ∆ABC is less
than 360 −180 = 180. 2
Deﬁnition 7.11. Given ∆ABC we call the diﬀerence between 180
degrees and the angle sum of ∆ABC the defect of ∆ABC.
Corollary 7.16. The sum of the angles of any quadrilateral is less
than 360 degrees.
Proof: The proof is left as an exercise. 2
Deﬁnition 7.12. Given quadrilateral ABCD the defect is equal to
360 degrees minus the sum of the angles in the quadrilateral.
Theorem 7.17. Given ∆ABC let line l intersect sides AB and
AC at points D and E, respectively. Then the defect of ∆ABC is
equal to the sum of the defects of ∆AED and quadrilateral EDBC.
A
B
C
l
D
E
2
7
4
1
3
6
5
Figure 7.10
Proof: If l intersects at any of A, B, or C, the result is clear. Suppose
that D and E are interior to AB and AC. Label all interior angles as

306
■Exploring Geometry
shown in Figure 7.10. Then
defect(∆ABC) = 180 −(∠1 + ∠4 + ∠5)
And,
defect(∆ADE) + defect(DECB) = 180 −(∠1 + ∠2 + ∠7)
+ 360 −(∠3 + ∠4 + ∠5 + ∠6)
Since ∠2 + ∠3 = 180 and ∠6 + ∠7 = 180, the result follows. 2
We can use this result to prove one of the most amazing facts about
triangles in Hyperbolic geometry—similar triangles are congruent!
Theorem 7.18. (AAA Congruence) If two triangles have corre-
sponding angles congruent, then the triangles are congruent (Fig-
ure 7.11).
A
B
C
D
E
F
E’
F’
Figure 7.11
Proof: Let ∆ABC and ∆DEF be given with ∠ABC ∼= ∠DEF,
∠BCA ∼= ∠EFD, and ∠CAB ∼= ∠FDE.
If any pair of sides between the two is congruent, then by ASA the
triangles would be congruent.
So, either a pair of sides in ∆ABC is larger than the corresponding
pair in ∆DEF or is smaller than the corresponding pair. Without loss
of generality we can assume AB and AC are larger than DE and DF.
Then we can ﬁnd points E′ and F ′ on AB and AC so that AE′ ∼= DE
and AF ′ ∼= DF. By SAS, ∆AE′F ′ ∼= ∆DEF, and the two triangles have
the same defect.

Hyperbolic Geometry
■307
But, since ∆DEF and ∆ABC have the same defect, we have that
∆AE′F ′ and ∆ABC have the same defect. From the previous theorem,
the defect of quadrilateral E′F ′CB is then zero, which is impossible.
Thus, all pairs of sides are congruent. 2
Exercise 7.5.1. Prove Theorem 7.10.
Exercise 7.5.2. Prove Corollary 7.16.
Exercise 7.5.3. Prove that the summit is always larger than the base in a
Saccheri Quadrilateral.
Exercise 7.5.4. Show that two Saccheri Quadrilaterals with congruent sum-
mits and congruent summit angles must be congruent quadrilaterals; that is,
the bases must be congruent and the sides must be congruent. [Hint: Suppose
they were not congruent. Show that you can then construct a rectangle using
the quadrilateral with the longer sides.]
Exercise 7.5.5. Let l and m in-
tersect at O at an acute angle. Let
A, B ̸= O be points on l and drop
perpendiculars to m from A and B,
intersecting m at A′, B′. If OA <
OB, show that AA′ < BB′.
O
m
A
l
B
A’
B’
n
C
[Hint: Argue that the perpendicular to AA′ at A must intersect BB′ and use
Lambert Quadrilateral results.]
Exercise 7.5.6. Show that parallel lines cannot be everywhere equidistant
in Hyperbolic geometry. [Hint: Suppose l, m are two parallel lines and that at
points A, B, C on l, the distance to m (measured along a perpendicular to m)
is the same. Derive a contradiction using Saccheri Quadrilaterals.]
Exercise 7.5.7. Let l be a line and m a limiting parallel to l through a point
P. Show that the perpendicular distance from P to l decreases as you move
P along m in the direction of the omega point of l. [Hint: Use the angle of
parallelism results from Exercises 7.3.11 and 7.3.12.]
Exercise 7.5.8. Show that if l and m are limiting parallel, then they cannot
have a common perpendicular.
Exercise 7.5.9. Show that two hyperbolic lines cannot have more than one
common perpendicular.
Exercise 7.5.10. In the Poincaré model, show that two parallel lines that
are not limiting parallel must have a common perpendicular. [Hint: Argue that
you can assume one line is the x-axis, and then show that you can ﬁnd the
point on the other line (using Euclidean circle geometry) to form a common
perpendicular.] Note: This result is true for any model of Hyperbolic geometry.
For the proof, see [16, page 158].

308
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 7.5.11. Prove that two Saccheri Quadrilaterals with congruent
bases and congruent summit angles must be congruent. [Hint: Suppose they
were not congruent. Show that you can then construct a quadrilateral having
angle sum equal to 360.]
Exercise 7.5.12. Given ∆ABC let l be a cevian line (a line through a
vertex and an opposite side). The cevian line divides the triangle into two
sub-triangles. Show that the defect of ∆ABC is equal to the sum of the defects
of the component sub-triangles. (This result suggests that the defect works
much like the concept of area for a hyperbolic triangle.)
Exercise 7.5.13. Is it possible to construct scale models of a ﬁgure in Hy-
perbolic geometry? Brieﬂy explain your answer.
7.6
AREA IN HYPERBOLIC GEOMETRY
In Chapter 2 we saw that areas in Euclidean geometry were deﬁned in
terms of ﬁgures that were equivalent. Two ﬁgures are equivalent if the
ﬁgures can be split up (or subdivided) into a ﬁnite number of pieces so
that pairs of corresponding pieces are congruent. By using the notion of
equivalence, we were able to base all Euclidean area calculations on the
simple ﬁgure of a rectangle.
In Hyperbolic geometry this is unfortunately not possible, as rectan-
gles do not exist! Thus, we need to be a bit more careful in building up
a notion of area. We will start with some deﬁning axioms of how area
works.
Area Axiom I If A, B, C are distinct and not collinear, then the
area of triangle ABC is positive.
Area Axiom II The area of equivalent sets must be the same.
Area Axiom III The area of the union of disjoint sets is the sum
of the separate areas.
These are reasonable axioms for area in Hyperbolic geometry. Note
that Axiom II automatically implies that the area of congruent sets is
the same.
Since area is axiomatically based on triangles, we will need the fol-
lowing result.

Hyperbolic Geometry
■309
Theorem 7.19. Two triangles ABC and A′B′C′ that have two
sides congruent, and the same defect, are equivalent and thus have
the same area.
A
B
C
D
E
F
H
I
G
Figure 7.12
Proof: Suppose that BC ∼= B′C′. Let D, E, and F be the midpoints
of sides BC, AC, and AB, as shown in Figure 7.12. Construct the line
through F and E and drop perpendiculars to this line from A, B, and
C meeting the line at G, H, and I, respectively.
Now, right triangles ∆BHF and ∆AGF will be congruent by AAS.
Similarly, ∆AGE and ∆CIE will be congruent. Thus, BH ∼= AG ∼= CI
and BHIC is a Saccheri Quadrilateral. Also, it is clear that this quadri-
lateral is equivalent to the original triangle ∆ABC (move appropriate
pieces around).
Now, it might be the case that the positions of G, H, and I are
switched, as shown in Figure 7.13. However, one can easily check that in
all conﬁgurations, BHIC is a Saccheri Quadrilateral (with summit BC)
that is equivalent to ∆ABC.
A
B
C
D
E
F
H
I
G
Figure 7.13

310
■Exploring Geometry
Consider the summit angles of BHIC. The sum of these two summit
angles must equal the angle sum of ∆ABC, and thus the summit angles
are each half of the angle sum of ∆ABC.
Similarly, we can construct a Saccheri Quadrilateral for ∆A′B′C′
that is equivalent to ∆A′B′C′ and with summit B′C′.
Since BC ∼= B′C
′ and the summit angles for both quadrilaterals
are congruent (equal defects implies equal angle sums), then by Exer-
cise 7.5.4 we know that the two quadrilaterals are congruent. Thus, the
triangles are equivalent. 2
We can prove an even more general result.
Theorem 7.20. Any two triangles with the same defect are equiv-
alent and thus have the same area.
Proof: If one side of ∆ABC is congruent to a side of ∆A′B′C′, then
we can use the previous theorem to show the result. So, suppose no side
of one matches a side of the other. We can assume side A′C′ is greater
than AC (Figure 7.14). As in the last theorem, let E, F be midpoints
of AC and AB. Construct the perpendiculars from B and C to the line
through E and F, and construct the Saccheri Quadrilateral BHIC.
B
A
C
A’
C’
B’
E
F
I
H
E’’
A’’
J
Figure 7.14
Since A′C′ > AC, we can ﬁnd a point E′′ on ←→
EF such that the length
of CE′′ is half that of A′C′ and E′′ ̸= E. Extend CE′′ to a point A′′
such that A′′C ∼= A′C′.
Clearly, ←→
EF cuts A′′C at its midpoint E′′. It is left as an exercise to
show that ←→
EF cuts A′′B at its midpoint, point J. Then, as in the pre-
vious theorem, ∆A′′BC will be equivalent to the Saccheri Quadrilateral
BHIC and thus also equivalent to ∆ABC. Since triangles ∆A′′BC and

Hyperbolic Geometry
■311
∆A′B′C′ share a congruent side, they must be equivalent, and hence the
original two triangles are equivalent. 2
We have shown that any two triangles having the same defect can be
split into pieces that can be made congruent. Is the converse also true?
Suppose we have two equivalent triangles. That is, the two triangles can
be subdivided into sub-triangles with corresponding pairs congruent.
Then for each pair, the defect will be the same. Also, if a set of sub-
triangles forms a polygonal shape, it is easy to see that the defect of the
polygon is equal to the sum of the defects of the triangles of which it is
comprised. Thus, the defects of the original triangles will be the sum of
the defects of all sub-triangles, which match pair-wise. We summarize
this as follows.
Theorem 7.21. Any two triangles that are equivalent (and thus
have the same area) must have the same defect.
Our conclusion from this exploration of hyperbolic area is that the
defect and area share exactly the same properties. This tells us that
the area must be a function of the defect. Since the area and defect are
both linear functions in terms of triangle subdivisions, the area should
be a linear function of the defect, and it must be positive. Therefore,
area = k2defect + c, for some constants k and c. But, the area of the
empty set must be zero, and thus area = k2defect. We can ﬁx k by
choosing some triangle to have unit area. We summarize this discussion
in the following theorem.
Theorem 7.22. If we have deﬁned an area function for Hyperbolic
geometry satisfying Axioms I–III, then there is a positive constant
k such that for any triangle ∆ABC, we have
area(∆ABC) = k2 defect(∆ABC)
Note that our discussion does not give a complete proof of this result,
only an argument for the reasonableness of the theorem. For a complete,
rigorous proof see the on-line chapter on hyperbolic calculations found
at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text or look in [32, pages 351–
352].
Since the defect measures how much the angle sum of a triangle is

312
■Exploring Geometry
below 180 and the lowest the angle sum can be is zero, we have the
following corollary.
Corollary 7.23. In Hyperbolic geometry the area of a triangle is
at most 180k2 (or πk2, if we use radian measure for angles).
Exercise 7.6.1. Show that in Theorem 7.20 ←→
EF cuts A′′B at its midpoint
J. [Hint: Suppose that the intersection of ←→
EF with A′′B is not the midpoint.
Connect E′′ to the midpoint of A′′B; construct a second Saccheri quadrilateral;
and then show that you can use the perpendicular bisector of BC to construct
a triangle with more than 180 degrees.]
Exercise 7.6.2. Show that there is no ﬁnite triangle in Hyperbolic geometry
that achieves the maximum area bound.
Exercise 7.6.3. It is possible that our universe is hyperbolic in its geometry.
Could you use the measurements of triangle areas on earth to determine if the
universe were hyperbolic? Why or why not?
7.7
PROJECT 11 - TILING THE HYPERBOLIC PLANE
In Euclidean geometry there are just three diﬀerent regular tessella-
tions of the Euclidean plane—the ones generated by equilateral triangles,
by squares, and by regular hexagons. How many regular tilings are there
in Hyperbolic geometry?
We can argue in a similar fashion as we did in the Euclidean tilings
of Chapter 6. If we have k hyperbolic regular n-gons meeting at a com-
mon vertex of a tiling, then the interior angles of the n-gons would be
360
k . Also, we can ﬁnd a central point and triangulate each n-gon. The
triangles in the triangulation will consist of isosceles triangles with base
angles of α = 360
2k . The total angle sum of all the triangles in the trian-
gulation will be less than 180n. At the same time, this angle sum can
be split into the angles around the center point (which add to 360) plus
the base angles of the isosceles triangles (which add to 2nα). Thus, we
get that
360 + 2nα < 180n
Or,

Hyperbolic Geometry
■313
2α < 180 −360
n
Since the angle formed by adjacent edges of the n-gon is 2α = 360
k , we
get
360
k
< 180 −360
n
Dividing both sides by 360 and then rearranging, we get
1
n + 1
k < 1
2
If there is a regular tessellation by n-gons meeting k at a vertex
in Hyperbolic geometry, then
1
n + 1
k <
1
2. On the other hand, if this
inequality is true, then a tiling with n-gons meeting k at a vertex must
exist. Thus, this inequality completely characterizes regular hyperbolic
tilings. We will call a regular hyperbolic tessellation of n-gons meeting
k at a vertex a (n,k) tiling.
As an example, let’s see how to generate a (5, 4) tiling. In a (5,4)
tiling, we have regular pentagons meeting four at a vertex. How do we
construct regular pentagons of this kind? First of all, it is clear that the
interior angle of the pentagon must be 90 degrees ( 360
4 ). If we take such a
pentagon and triangulate it via triangles constructed to a central point,
the angles about the central point will be 72 degrees and the base angles
of the isosceles triangles will be 45 degrees (half the interior angle). Thus,
to build the pentagon we need to construct a hyperbolic triangle with
angles of 72, 45, and 45.
In Euclidean geometry, there are an inﬁnite number of triangles that
have a speciﬁed set of three angles, and these triangles are all similar to
each other. In Hyperbolic geometry, two triangles with congruent pairs
of angles must be congruent themselves!
Thus, we know that a hyperbolic triangle with angles of 72, 45, and 45
degrees must be unique. To start this project, you will need to download
a ﬁle which contains the construction of this triangle. Download this ﬁle,
built for your particular dynamic geometry software environment, from
http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text.

314
■Exploring Geometry
Start up your geometry software
and open the downloaded ﬁle. You
should see a set of three points A,
B, and C that are the vertices of
our desired triangle. To make sure
that this triangle is correct, let’s
measure the angles.
A
B
C
Angle(B,A,C) = 72.00 degrees
Angle(A,C,B) = 45.00 degrees
Angle(C,B,A) = 45.00 degrees
Looks good. Hide the angle
measurements and connect C and
B with a segment. We will con-
struct a pentagon using this seg-
ment as a side. Set A as a center of
rotation of 72 degrees and rotate
segment BC four times to get a
regular pentagon.
A
B
C
Finally, set point C as a center
of rotation of 90 degrees. Rotate
the pentagon three times, yielding
four pentagons meeting at right
angles!
A
B
C

Hyperbolic Geometry
■315
If we continue to rotate the
pentagon about exterior points in
this ﬁgure, we see that a tiling
of the hyperbolic plane is indeed
possible with regular pentagons
meeting at right angles.
A
B
C
However, if we move the point
at the origin, we see that the tiling
breaks up in a quite nasty way.
Why is this the case? The prob-
lem here is that by translating
the origin point, we have created
compound translations and rota-
tions for other parts of the ﬁgure.
In Hyperbolic geometry composi-
tions of translations are not nec-
essarily translations again as they
are in Euclidean geometry.
A
B
C
Exercise 7.7.1. In Elliptic geometry the sum of the angles in a triangle is
more than 180 degrees. Show that it is possible to have a (3, 3) tiling in Elliptic
geometry.
Exercise 7.7.2. There are only three regular tilings (up to scaling) in Eu-
clidean planar geometry. How many regular tilings are there in Hyperbolic
(two-dimensional) geometry?
Exercise 7.7.3. Describe and illustrate the steps you would take to construct
a (6,5) tiling in the Poincaré Plane.
For your report give a careful and complete summary of your work
done in this project.


C H A P T E R 8
Elliptic Geometry
To see a World in a Grain of Sand
And a Heaven in a Wild Flower,
Hold Inﬁnity in the palm of your hand
And Eternity in an hour.
– William Blake (1757–1827)
8.1
BACKGROUND AND HISTORY
Our discussion of non-Euclidean geometry in Chapter 7 started with a
review of Euclid’s axioms for planar geometry:
We noted that the ﬁfth postulate, the parallel postulate, seemed more
like a theorem —it did not seem self-evident or obvious. We can replace
the ﬁfth postulate with the logically equivalent statement called Play-
fair’s Postulate:
Given a line and a point not on the line, it is possible to
construct exactly one line through the given point parallel
to the line.
Historically, mathematicians have attempted to prove Euclid’s ﬁfth
postulate (or, equivalently, Playfair’s Axiom) as a theorem solely on the
basis of the ﬁrst four postulates. One mathematician, Girolamo Saccheri,
didn’t try to prove the ﬁfth postulate directly, but instead tried to prove
it by the method of contradiction. He looked at special ﬁgures in the
plane which we now call Saccheri Quadrilaterals. We studied these in
detail in Project 7.3.2 in Chapter 7. Saccheri quadrilaterals are quadri-
laterals whose base angles are right angles and whose base-adjacent sides
317

318
■Exploring Geometry
are congruent. In Exercise 2.2.14 of Chapter 2 we proved that the state-
ment “The summit angles of a Saccheri quadrilateral are right angles” is
logically equivalent to Playfair’s axiom, assuming the ﬁrst four Euclidean
axioms hold.
Saccheri tried to prove Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate by working with this
new equivalent statement about the summit angles of a Saccheri quadri-
lateral being right angles. His proof by contradiction assumed an ax-
iomatic basis of the ﬁrst four Euclidean axioms together with the logical
negation of the summit angles statement. There are two diﬀerent logical
negations to the assumption that the summit angles are right angles:
1. The summit angles of a Saccheri quadrilateral are acute angles.
2. The summit angles of a Saccheri quadrilateral are obtuse angles.
Saccheri was never able to reach a contradiction when assuming the
hypothesis of the acute angle. The hypothesis of the acute angle can be
developed into a logically consistent geometry —Hyperbolic geometry
—which was the focus of Chapter 7.
In the case of the obtuse angle hypothesis, Saccheri was able to
achieve a contradiction of a known result in Neutral geometry (the ge-
ometry which only depends on the ﬁrst four Euclidean axioms). If the
summit angles are obtuse, then the angle sum in a Saccheri quadrilateral
is more than 360 degrees. If one then divides the quadrilateral into two
triangles (by using one of the diagonals) one of the triangles must have
an angle sum of more than 180 degrees. This contradicts the neutral
geometry result that the sum of the angles in a triangle can be no more
than 180 degrees. It may appear that there is no hope for a consistent
geometry based on the obtuse angle hypothesis. But, let’s take a closer
look at the contradiction.
The proof of the neutral geometry result that the angle sum of a
triangle is no more than 180 degrees ultimately relies on Euclid’s Propo-
sition I-17, that the sum of any two angles in a triangle is less than 180
degrees. In turn, the proof of Proposition I-17 is a direct consequence
of Euclid’s Proposition I-16, the Exterior Angle Theorem. None of the
propositions preceding Euclid I-16 deal speciﬁcally with comparisons
of angle measure in triangles. If there is any chance of creating a ge-
ometry with the obtuse hypothesis, then, it must be built using only
those results that depend on the ﬁrst 15 Euclidean Propositions. Such a
geometry will be called “Elliptic” geometry.
In the rest of this chapter we will investigate Elliptic geometry as

Elliptic Geometry
■319
our second example of a Non-Euclidean geometry. We will develop this
geometry by using results from Neutral geometry that can be proven
without using the Exterior Angle Theorem, or propositions whose proofs
depend on this theorem. One property we will have to be careful about
is betweenness, as it is the betweenness properties of Neutral geometry
that one uses to prove the Exterior Angle Theorem. In particular, the
proof relies on the betweenness properties that ensure that lines can be
indeﬁnitely (inﬁnitely) extended.
We will also make use of reﬂections and rotations, found in sec-
tions 5.1, 5.2, and 5.4. The construction of reﬂections and rotations does
not depend on the parallel postulate, nor on results based on the Exte-
rior Angle Theorem. However, many results about these isometries are
proven using standard betweenness properties of Neutral geometry. For
example, the proof of Theorem 5.1 relies on such betweenness properties.
As was mentioned at the end of section 5.1, this betweenness issue can be
remedied by providing new axioms for betweenness in Elliptic geometry
(see the on-line chapter on Hilbert’s axioms). Refer to the discussions
at the end of sections 5.1, 5.2, and 5.4 for speciﬁc information on the
results concerning rotations and reﬂections that can be used in Elliptic
geometry.
We will assume Pasch’s Axiom and that there is a distance function
deﬁned for pairs of points. We will also assume there is an angle measure
function, and that distance and angle measure are continuous functions.
We saw earlier that these assumptions must be added to Euclid’s ax-
iomatic system (and to Hyperbolic geometry) to ensure completeness of
those systems, so it is reasonable to assume these properties in Elliptic
geometry as well.
Finally, we will assume the SAS, SSS, and ASA triangle congruence
theorems. As shown in the on-line chapter on Hilbert’s axioms, these
can be proven without using the Exterior Angle Theorem.
8.2
PERPENDICULARS AND POLES IN ELLIPTIC GEOMETRY
As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, the parallel postulate
has been the focus of mathematicians since the time of Euclid. A simple,
but logically equivalent, form of this postulate is Playfair’s Postulate:

320
■Exploring Geometry
Given a line and a point not on the line, it is possible to
construct exactly one line through the given point parallel
to the line.
In Chapter 7, we developed a consistent geometry (Hyperbolic ge-
ometry) based on the assumption that there are multiple lines through
a point parallel to a given line. In this chapter we will see that there
is a logically consistent third geometry where there are no parallels. In
this geometry, we replace the parallel postulate with the Elliptic Parallel
Axiom.
Given a line and a point not on the line, it is not possible
to construct any line through the given point parallel to the
line.
In developing Elliptic geometry, we will use as our axiomatic basis
the ﬁrst four Euclidean axioms plus the Elliptic Parallel axiom. We will
also assume the Euclidean Propositions before the Exterior Angle The-
orem and we will assume that segment length and angle measure are
continuous. Neutral results about reﬂections and rotations will be used,
as well as the SAS, SSS, and ASA triangle congruence properties. The
reasonableness of all of these assumptions was discussed in the introduc-
tion to this chapter.
We start our development of Elliptic geometry with a basic result
about perpendiculars to a line.
Theorem 8.1. Given a line l, if two perpendiculars to l (at points P
and Q) intersect at a point O, then all perpendiculars to l intersect
at O. Also, for every point P on l, the distance from P to O is
constant.
Proof: Let lines m and n be perpendicular to l at P and Q.
Using a ASA argument, we know
that triangles ∆PQO and ∆QPO
are congruent. Thus, OP ∼= OQ.
Let R be the midpoint of PQ. By
SSS, ∆PRO ∼= ∆QRO. Thus, the
angle at R is a right angle and
RO ∼= PO.

Elliptic Geometry
■321
Now, let R2 be the midpoint
of PR and R3 the midpoint of
QP. Then, by an argument anal-
ogous to that above, we can show
that OR2 and OR3 meet l at right
angles and both segments have
length equal to the length of PO.
It is clear that we can continue bisecting successive segments, gener-
ating a sequence of points R2, R3, R4, . . . such that at each point Rk we
have that ORk meets m at right angles. After we bisect segments suc-
cessively n times, the points R2, R3, R4, . . . will generate a sequence of
segments whose length is
1
2n of the original length of PQ. These dyadic
segments are used in the on-line chapter on Hilbert’s axioms to demon-
strate the continuity of segment length. A careful reading of this devel-
opment of segment length reveals that it uses betweenness properties.
However, it does not use the “inﬁnite extent” property referred to above
when we discussed the problems of using the Exterior Angle Theorem in
Elliptic geometry. We can thus safely assume the continuity of segment
length (and angle measure). Using a limiting process of dyadic segments
to approach closer and closer to points on PQ, we can assume that for
any point R on PQ, if we construct the segment OR then this segment
meets line l at right angles. Also, for all Rk we have that RkO ∼= PO.
What about other points on l?
Let Q′ be a point on l on the
other side of Q from P such that
PQ ∼= QQ′. Then, by SAS we
have ∆OPQ ∼= ∆OQ′Q, and thus
∠OQ′Q is a right angle. By the
argument above, for S any point
on QQ′, we have that OS meets l
at right angles and SO ∼= PO.
For any other point T on l, we know that we can reach T by success-
fully constructing new segments on l congruent to PQ until we reach
a segment that contains T. The argument above then shows that OS
meets l at right angles and TO ∼= PO. 2
The astute reader may have noticed something odd about this proof.
In the ﬁgures accompanying the proof we illustrated lines by curved
arcs. This was done for two reasons —to keep the reader from intuitively

322
■Exploring Geometry
reasoning about Elliptic geometry in Euclidean terms, and to foreshadow
the work we will do in ﬁnding a model for this geometry (in that model,
Elliptic lines are parts of Euclidean circles).
The point O in the preceding theorem is called a “pole” of the line l.
Deﬁnition 8.1. If the perpendiculars to a given line are concurrent
at a point O, then O is called the pole of the line.
The following result shows that the relationship of lines to poles is
homogeneous throughout Elliptic geometry.
Theorem 8.2. The distance (measured along a perpendicular) from
a line to its pole is the same for all lines.
Proof: Let ←→
AB and ←→
CD be two lines.
We can assume that AB and CD
have the same length. At A and
B construct the perpendiculars to
AB and at C and D construct the
perpendiculars to CD. Then, the
perpendiculars at A and B will in-
tersect at some point O and the
perpendiculars at C and D will
intersect at O′. By ASA congru-
ence, ∆ABO ∼= ∆CDO′. The re-
sult follows.
2
This theorem allows us to deﬁne a universal polar distance.
Deﬁnition 8.2. The polar distance in Elliptic geometry is the dis-
tance (measured along a perpendicular) from any line to its pole.
The next result explains why the Euclidean (and Neutral) assump-
tion of the inﬁnite extent of lines is not possible in Elliptic geometry.

Elliptic Geometry
■323
Theorem 8.3. All lines in Elliptic geometry have a ﬁnite length
equal to twice the polar distance.
Proof: Let l be a line and let A be a point on l. At A construct the
perpendicular m to l. Let B ̸= A be a point on m. At B construct the
perpendicular n to m. Then l and n meet at the polar point O of m.
However, extending rays −→
OA and
−−→
OB across m we also get the po-
lar point O′ at the same distance
from m. Since two lines can only
intersect in a single point, it must
be that O = O′ and the line l =
←→
OA consists of the points from O
to O′ = O. That is, the line re-
turns back on itself. Clearly the
length of l is twice the polar dis-
tance of m.
2
We started this chapter with a discussion of the historical importance
of Saccheri quadrilaterals in the development of non-Euclidean geometry.
In order to analyze Saccheri quadrilaterals in Elliptic geometry, we will
need the next result on right triangles.
Theorem 8.4. Let ∆ABC be a right triangle with right angle at
A. Let q be the polar distance. Then
1. Angle B (C) is less than 90 degrees if and only if the length
of AC (respectively AB) is less than q.
2. Angle B (C) is a right angle if and only if the length of AC
(respectively AB) is equal to q.
3. Angle B (C) is more than 90 degrees if and only if the length
of AC (respectively AB) is more than q.
Proof: We start with the ﬁrst part of the theorem.

324
■Exploring Geometry
Let O be the polar point of ←→
AB.
Construct OA and OB. Then,
∠OBA is a right angle. If ∠CBA
is less than a right angle, then ray
−−→
BC must intersect side OA in tri-
angle ∆OAB. So, AC < AO = q.
Conversely, if AC < q = AO, then, ray −−→
BC is interior to ∠OBA and
thus less than a right angle.
For the second part of the theorem, suppose that the angle at B is a
right angle. Then, O = C and the length of AC is q. Conversely, if the
length of AC is q, then O = C and the angle at B must be the same as
∠OBA which is a right angle.
The third claim of the theorem is immediate once the ﬁrst two claims
are proven. 2
We can now analyze Saccheri quadrilateral summit angles.
Theorem 8.5. The summit angles in a Saccheri quadrilateral are
obtuse.
Proof: Let ABCD be a Saccheri quadrilateral.
Assume the quadrilateral has base
right angles at A and B. Let M
and N be the midpoints of AB
and CD.
Then, ←−→
MN meets the base
and summit lines at right angles.
(Exercise) Now, construct lines
←→
NC and ←−→
MB. These will intersect
at the polar point O.
Also, segments MO and NO both have length q. So, BO has length less
than q and by the previous theorem, ∠BCO is less than 90, so ∠NCB,
which is a summit angle, must be more than 90. 2

Elliptic Geometry
■325
Exercise 8.2.1. Show that the line joining the midpoints of the base and
summit of a Saccheri Quadrilateral is perpendicular to the summit and base.
[Hint: use triangles]
Exercise 8.2.2. A Lambert Quadrilateral is a quadrilateral having three
right angles. Let ABDC be a Lambert quadrilateral with right angles at A,
B, and C. If we extend AB and CD, we can ﬁnd points E and F such that
AB ∼= AE and CD ∼= CF Show that EBDF is a Saccheri quadrilateral.
Exercise 8.2.3. Show that in a Lambert quadrilateral the fourth angle (the
one that is not a right angle) is always obtuse.
Exercise 8.2.4. Show that in a Lambert quadrilateral ABCD each side
adjacent to the fourth angle has length smaller than the opposite side. [Hint:
Look at the proof of Theorem 7.13]
Exercise 8.2.5. Let l and m be two distinct lines. Suppose that line n is a
common perpendicular to l and m, i.e., n meets l and m at right angles. Let
O be the intersection point of l and m. Show that O is the polar point of n.
8.3
PROJECT 12 - MODELS OF ELLIPTIC GEOMETRY
We have started to build up some basic results in Elliptic geometry.
Before we go further, we should stop and ask the question of consistency.
As was the case in Hyperbolic geometry, what we will be looking for is a
model for Elliptic geometry that is built within Euclidean geometry and
that satisﬁes the axioms of Elliptic geometry. We are looking for a model
that satisﬁes the ﬁrst four Euclidean axioms (but without the inﬁnite
extent property of lines) and the Elliptic Parallel Postulate —that there
are no parallels.
Since we know that all lines are bounded in Elliptic geometry, it is not
feasible to create a model that is built from the entire Euclidean plane
(unless we drastically change what distance means). So, we are looking
for another Euclidean space (or geometric object) that is bounded and
yet has no boundary. Why no boundary? We know from the previous
section that Elliptic lines, though ﬁnite, do not have boundaries —they
can be extended indeﬁnitely (think of a circle, for example).

326
■Exploring Geometry
8.3.1
Double Elliptic Model
What clues do we have to construct a model of Elliptic geometry? In the
proof of Theorem 8.3 we saw that if we reﬂected the polar construction
of a line across the line itself, we would get a second polar point. We
ruled this out at the time, based on the (axiomatic) assumption that two
lines intersect in a single point. But, as a matter of speculation, what
would a dual intersection property imply? If a model satisﬁes the dual
intersection property, it would have to be a two-dimensional shape that
has the property that there are two special points (poles) for each pair
of lines, depending on how we deﬁne lines. We call this Double Elliptic
geometry.
To model Double Elliptic geometry, we want a shape that is bounded,
has no boundary, and has double poles. A quick survey of common shapes
reveals a likely candidate —the sphere. We know that elliptic lines must
always intersect at poles that are a maximum distance away from each
other along the lines. Thus, the two poles, called antipodes must lie along
a diameter of the sphere. The deﬁnition of an elliptic line that ﬁts this
requirement is that an elliptic line is a great circle on the sphere. A great
circle is a circle on the sphere that results from slicing the sphere with
a plane through the origin. Clearly, any two such great circles (elliptic
lines) will always intersect at antipodal points (Figure 8.1).
Figure 8.1 Spherical great circles
We note here that this is the geometry we explored in Exercise 1.6.7
at the end of Chapter 1. In that exercise we called this geometry “Spher-

Elliptic Geometry
■327
ical geometry,” as it is based on the sphere. We can now see that this
geometry is closely related to Elliptic geometry. However, in the Elliptic
geometry model we are striving to create, two distinct lines can only
intersect at a single point. So, Spherical geometry cannot exactly model
Elliptic geometry.
Before we investigate how to modify the sphere model to make a valid
model for Elliptic geometry, let’s take a short excursion into Spherical
geometry, just for fun!
8.3.2
Spherical Lunes
In Euclidean and Hyperbolic geometry, one needs a minimum of three
non-collinear line segments to deﬁne a polygonal area. In Spherical ge-
ometry, two spherical lines can deﬁne an area called a lune (also called
a biangle).
To investigate this interesting shape we will make use of the
Spherical geometry capabilities of the software program Geome-
try Explorer. If you are not already using this program, go to
http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text for instructions on how to
download and use this software.
Start
Geometry
Explorer
and
open a Spherical geometry win-
dow. (Choose New (File menu)
and then choose “Spherical” in
the dialog box that pops up).
Create lines ←→
AB and ←→
CD on the
screen. Note that the two lines
meet at antipodal points and that
the two lines divide the sphere
into four areas. Each of these is
called a lune. Select the two lines
and click the Filled Polygon but-
ton in the Construct panel (third
button in third row).

328
■Exploring Geometry
One of the four lunes has been
created. The term lune comes
from the Latin word for moon –
luna. The crescent shape of the
moon at night is formed from the
shadow of the earth intersecting
with the boundary great circle of
the moon.
Click on point B and move it
around. As you move B the lune
will change in size, but will always
be deﬁned by the two spherical
“lines.”
If you move B too far, how-
ever, the lune will switch to an-
other of the four possible shapes
deﬁned by the two spherical lines.
This is due to the internal al-
gorithm that Geometry Explorer
uses to determine the orientation
and choice of lune.

Elliptic Geometry
■329
Lunes deﬁne areas in Spherical geometry. Let’s push a bit further
and calculate these lunar areas.
Undo the moves from the previous
example so that the lune looks like
it did originally. Then, click on the
inside of the lune to select it and
choose Area (Measure menu).
The area measurement should ap-
pear in the window. We will be
making another measurement, so
to give ourselves some room, click
the period key "." to zoom out a
bit.
The lunar area as a single number is not that impressive. We know
the lunar area is positive and that it must be less than the total area
of the sphere (4π, assuming a unit radius). But, is there any simple
way to connect the lunar area to other geometric quantities of the lune?
One natural geometric value deﬁned by a lune is the angle made by the
intersecting lines.
To calculate the angle made by
the intersection of our lines, se-
lect the two lines and click the
Intersect button in the Construct
Panel. Intersection points E and
F will be created. Select points
D, F, and A (in that order) and
choose Angle (Measure menu).
The new measurement will ap-
pear. Note that angles are mea-
sured in degrees.

330
■Exploring Geometry
In Spherical geometry a much
more
insightful
unit
for
an-
gle measurement is radians. To
change the angle unit to radi-
ans, right-click on the angle text
and choose Properties... from
the pop-up Menu. Once the Prop-
erties Dialog box comes up, se-
lect the Style tab and then se-
lect “Radians” from the Measure
Units selection box. Click “Okay”
to change the display of the an-
gle’s measure to radians.
If we move point B around
and look at the relationship be-
tween the area and the angle de-
ﬁned by the lune, a conjecture
might arise. Take a minute and
play with this conﬁguration and
see if you can guess the relation-
ship between the angle and the
area.
Exercise 8.3.1. Prove the result suggested by the activity above. That is,
show that if the sphere has radius of 1, then the area of a lune is always
twice the radian measure of the angle determined by the intersection of the
deﬁning spherical lines. [Hint: Start by considering the case where the angle
is π
2 , π
4 , 3π
4 , etc.]
Exercise 8.3.2. Write down the corresponding formula for the area of a
lune if the radius of the sphere is R.
While Spherical geometry is a fascinating subject, we must return to
the topic of this chapter —Elliptic geometry. The sphere model cannot
work as a model for Elliptic geometry due to the fact that lines meet

Elliptic Geometry
■331
at two points. But, can we modify the model so that we can have lines
meeting at only one point? As mentioned in the proof of Theorem 8.3, if
we require that lines meet at a single point, then it must be the case that
the two poles from the spherical geometry model must actually be the
same point. That is, we have to identify these two seemingly diﬀerent
points as representing the same Elliptic geometry point. The geometry
based on this model is called Single Elliptic geometry
8.3.3
Single Elliptic Geometry
Our ﬁrst true model of Elliptic geometry will be based on the sphere, but
with the modiﬁcations discussed above. We have the following deﬁnitions
for point and line.
Deﬁnition 8.3. An elliptic point will represent an antipodal pair
of points on the sphere. An elliptic line will be a great circle on the
sphere (with antipodal points identiﬁed). We say that point P lies
on line l if P (or its antipodal counterpart) lies on l.
The Elliptic geometry based on this model is called Single Elliptic
geometry, as it uses a single copy of each antipodal pair of points on the
sphere. To help visualize this model, we will use our Spherical geometry
computer environment.
Clear your previous work and con-
struct a line ←→
AB in the win-
dow. The line will be constructed
with two points A and B. To
see the antipodal points to these
two points, select A and B and
choose Antipodal Transforma-
tion (Misc menu). The antipodal
points C and D will be created.
In Elliptic geometry the two spherical points A and C represent
the same elliptic point. This may seem a bit strange, but we have seen
earlier in this chapter that this identiﬁcation is forced on us, if we want

332
■Exploring Geometry
to preserve the property that two elliptic lines meet in a single point.
Thus, in creating our model of Elliptic geometry, we only need to plot
one of each pair of antipodal points, and we only need to plot the front
half of an elliptic line.
The software program Geometry Explorer also has a built-in Ellip-
tic geometry environment. For the rest of this project we will use that
environment.
Open an Elliptic geometry win-
dow
by
choosing
New
(File
menu)
and
choose
Elliptic
in
the dialog box that pops up.
Geometry Explorer actually has
two models of Elliptic geome-
try, both based on the sphere.
We will ﬁrst explore the model
that is directly based on the an-
tipodal identiﬁcation of sphere
points discussed above. To set
this model as our working model,
choose Sphere X-Y Projection
(Model menu). Draw a line some-
where on the screen.
Note the similarity in the two ﬁgures above. In the spherical case,
we see the entire spherical line and all antipodal points. In the elliptic
model we see only one of each pair of antipodal points.
To verify that this model is actually a model for Elliptic geometry, we
need to show that Euclid’s ﬁrst four postulates, plus the elliptic parallel
axiom, are satisﬁed in this model.
We will start with the ﬁrst two postulates of Euclid—that unique
segments can always be constructed through two points and that seg-
ments can always be extended. By segments we will mean subsets of the
elliptic lines as deﬁned thus far. Since the only problem with deﬁning
a line between two points on the sphere is if the points are antipodal,
then clearly the ﬁrst Euclidean axiom holds. If we interpret “extension”
of a segment to mean continuing to move along the line beyond the seg-
ment, then clearly this can be done in our model, although one starts to
re-trace the same set of points after awhile.
For the construction of a circle at a point of a certain radius, we would
use distance as measured along great circles. For example, if we wanted to

Elliptic Geometry
■333
construct the circle at a point whose radius was π (half the circumference
of a unit circle), then that circle would ﬁll the entire Elliptic model, as the
circle on the sphere would cover a hemisphere. Thus, not every circle of
a given radius can be constructed, but if one restricts the set of possible
radii to be between 0 and the longest length of a line (the polar distance),
then all circles of those radii can be constructed.
Angles are deﬁned by the Euclidean angle on the sphere, so Euclid’s
fourth axiom holds. Finally, this model was built to satisfy the Elliptic
parallel axiom.
Thus, the single Elliptic model we have constructed is a valid model
for Elliptic geometry and this non-Euclidean geometry is equally as con-
sistent as Euclidean geometry.
Let’s look at one of Euclid’s “Neutral” results (independent of the
parallel postulate) —the construction of an equilateral triangle.
Clear the Elliptic geometry win-
dow and draw a segment some-
where on the screen. Then, draw
circles centered at each of A and
B with radius to the other point
as shown. Finally select the two
circles and construct the intersec-
tion points C and D.
Hide the circles and point
C and construct the other two
sides of triangle ABD. Then, se-
lect these three sides and measure
their lengths. Drag the vertices of
the triangle around the screen to
verify the equality of the three
lengths.

334
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 8.3.3. Measure the angles of the triangle. Is it possible to make a
triangle with all right angles? With all angles larger than 90 degrees? Is there
an upper bound on the angles? If so, what is it?
Exercise 8.3.4. Move the points of the triangle so that the three angles
become right angles. Look at the lengths of the sides. What conjecture would
you make as to the side length (in relation to the polar length) when the angles
are right angles? Give a brief argument for your conjecture, based on spherical
geometry.
For your report give a careful and complete summary of your work
on this project.
8.4
BASIC RESULTS IN ELLIPTIC GEOMETRY
We will now look at some basic results concerning lines, triangles, circles,
and the like, that hold in all models of Elliptic geometry. In studying any
new geometry, it is helpful to be able to draw diagrams. Such diagrams
are based on speciﬁc models. In the previous project we studied one
model of Elliptic geometry that was based on the sphere. That model is
appealing because it ties directly to the sphere —an object with which
we are familiar. However, the model has several drawbacks.
In Figure 8.2 we have several constructions in the sphere model of
Elliptic geometry.
Figure 8.2
The circle deﬁned by C and D looks fairly normal, but the circles
centered at A and E are near the edge of the sphere, so when they are

Elliptic Geometry
■335
projected onto the X-Y plane, they get scrunched into narrow ellipses.
Also, the line shown through I on GH is actually perpendicular to GH
at I. This would be apparent on the sphere, but in the model there is a
distortion of the angles when projecting onto the X-Y plane.
It would be nice to have a model where circles look like “normal”
circles and angles behave like Euclidean angles. Luckily, there is such a
model based on stereographic projection of the sphere onto the plane.
8.4.1
Stereographic Projection Model
Let S be the unit sphere, as shown in Figure 8.3.
O
S
N(0,0,1)
P(x,y,0)
P’(X,Y,Z)
Figure 8.3
Let N be the north pole of the sphere, the point at (0, 0, 1). The
sphere is cut into two equal hemispheres by the X-Y plane. Given a
point P = (x, y) in the plane, we map P onto the sphere by joining N
to P by a line and ﬁnding the intersection point P ′ of this line with the
sphere. Points (x, y) inside the unit disk in the X-Y plane will map to
the lower hemisphere, and points outside the unit disk will map to the
upper hemisphere.

336
■Exploring Geometry
The map π given by π(P ′) = P identiﬁes points on the sphere with
points in the X-Y plane. This map is called the stereographic projection
of S onto the complex plane.
It can be shown that stereographic projection maps circles on the
sphere to circles in the plane and it maps spherical lines (great circles) to
Euclidean lines in the plane. (Consult the on-line chapter on advanced
analytic geometry found at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text
for details.) Stereographic projection also has the property that it pre-
serves angles. This is true of any map of the extended complex plane
that takes circles and lines to circles and lines (see [9, page 90] or [23,
pages 248–254]).
Stereographic projection of the spherical conﬁguration shown in Fig-
ure 8.2 will result in the ﬁgure below.
Figure 8.4
Elliptic circles look like Euclidean circles and the right angle at I
is visually apparent. Because of the more intuitive nature of the stereo-
graphic model, we will use this model as the basis for our diagrams of
Elliptic geometry throughout the rest of this chapter. However, we must
be careful. As was pointed out when we discussed Hyperbolic geometry
in Chapter 7, too much reliance on diagrams can lead to hidden assump-
tions. We will be careful to argue solely from the postulates of Elliptic
geometry and the theorems based on those postulates.
In the rest of this section, we will discuss some of the basic results
concerning Elliptic geometry. We start with a review of already proven
results concerning the properties of poles and polar length:

Elliptic Geometry
■337
1. The perpendiculars to a given line are all concurrent at a point O
called the pole of the line. (Theorem 8.1)
2. The distance (measured along a perpendicular) from a line to its
pole is the same for all lines. (Theorem 8.2)
3. The polar distance is the distance (measured along a perpendicu-
lar) from any line to its pole. (Deﬁnition 8.2)
4. All lines in Elliptic geometry have a ﬁnite length equal to twice
the polar distance. (Theorem 8.3)
Here is a useful fact about lines and polar points:
Theorem 8.6. Let q be the polar distance and let l be a line with
polar point O. Let P be a point on l. Then P is the unique point on
←→
OP such that the length of OP is equal to q.
Proof: Suppose there were another point Q on ←→
OP such that length of
OQ is equal to q. Let R be a point not on l and not on ←→
OP. Consider
triangles ∆POR and ∆QOR. (Figure 8.5) These are congruent by SAS.
Thus, angle ∠ORP is congruent to angle ∠ORQ. This means Q must
be on ←→
PR. But this line intersects ←→
OP at a unique point, so P = Q.
Figure 8.5
2
One of the most important ﬁgures in Elliptic geometry is the Saccheri

338
■Exploring Geometry
quadrilateral. Let’s review some of the results about this ﬁgure (and a
related ﬁgure —the Lambert quadrilateral):
1. The line joining the midpoints of the base and summit of a Saccheri
Quadrilateral is perpendicular to the summit and base. (Exercise
8.2.1)
2. The summit angles in a Saccheri quadrilateral are obtuse. (Theo-
rem 8.5)
3. In a Lambert quadrilateral the fourth angle (the one that is not a
right angle) is always obtuse. (Exercise 8.2.3)
4. In a Lambert quadrilateral ABCD each side adjacent to the fourth
angle (the one that is not a right angle) has length smaller than
the opposite side. (Exercise 8.2.4)
Our ﬁrst result will extend what we know about Saccheri quadrilat-
erals.
Theorem 8.7. The length of the summit segment in a Saccheri
quadrilateral is always less than the length of the base segment. Also,
the length of the segment joining the midpoints of the summit and
base is always larger than either of the two sides of the quadrilateral.
Proof: Let ABCD be a Saccheri quadrilateral with base AB and summit
CD. Let E and F be the midpoints of the base and summit, respectively.
(Figure 8.6)
Figure 8.6
Then, AEFD and EBCF are both Lambert quadrilaterals (they
both have three right angles). Thus the length of CF is less than the
length of BE and the length of DF is less than the length of AE. Adding

Elliptic Geometry
■339
lengths shows that the length of the summit is less than the length of
the base. Also, we know that the lengths of BC and AD are less than
the length of EF. This ﬁnishes the proof of the theorem. 2
8.4.2
Segments and Triangle Congruence in Elliptic Geometry
In Theorem 8.4 we proved that if ∆ABC is a right triangle with right
angle at A, and q is the polar distance, then
1. Angle B (C) is less than 90 degrees if and only if the length of AC
(respectively AB) is less than q.
2. Angle B (C) is a right angle if and only if the length of AC (re-
spectively AB) is equal to q.
3. Angle B (C) is more than 90 degrees if and only if the length of
AC (respectively AB) is more than q.
When we proved this theorem, we assumed that we had a solid def-
inition of a triangle as consisting of three segments deﬁned by three
non-collinear points. We also assumed we had a well-deﬁned notion of
the length of a line segment. In both cases, the deﬁnitions in question
ultimately depended on a well-deﬁned notion of what a segment is in
Elliptic geometry.
Here is a line deﬁned by points A
and B. We have drawn in a solid
color the set of points we would
normally think of as the segment
AB. However, the set of points
on the dashed curve could also
be reasonably considered the seg-
ment from A to B. The problem
here is the deﬁnition of the unique
segment deﬁned by two points.
Since lines are ﬁnite in length and
return on themselves, then there
are really two diﬀerent possible
choices for the segment deﬁned by
A and B.
A
B
We will resolve this ambiguity by deﬁning a segment to be the smaller

340
■Exploring Geometry
of the two choices. The two possible segments must be deﬁned by a
modiﬁed version of betweenness in Elliptic geometry. This is covered in
the on-line chapter on Hilbert’s axioms. We assume that there are two
subsets of the line through A and B, and that both have endpoints A
and B.
Deﬁnition 8.4. The segment deﬁned by A ̸= B in the Elliptic
plane is deﬁned by the choice of the line subset deﬁned by A and B
having the smaller length. If both subsets have the same length, the
choice is arbitrary.
Note that this deﬁnition allows us to unambiguously deﬁne the length
of a segment. It also makes clear what the segments for a triangle are,
except in the ambiguous case mentioned in the deﬁnition.
In Figure 8.7 we have triangle ∆ABC. We have colored the interior
of the triangle gray, or at least this is what we expect the interior to
look like. However, the three sides of the triangle also deﬁne another
three-sided region —the region colored blue in the ﬁgure. The triangle
interior could reasonably be deﬁned as either the shape in gray or the
shape in blue; there is an ambiguity to the notion of the interior of a
triangle.
Figure 8.7

Elliptic Geometry
■341
We will ﬁx this problem by restricting the angles in a triangle to be
less than 180 degrees.
Now that we have a clear idea of what a segment is and what de-
ﬁnes a triangle, we can review triangle congruence. SAS congruence is
assumed as an axiom (as it was in Euclidean and Hyperbolic geometry).
SSS congruence and ASA congruence can be proven without using the
Exterior Angle Theorem, so those results are valid in Elliptic geometry,
and we have used these triangle congruences several times already.
It is interesting to note that AAS is not a triangle congruence in El-
liptic geometry. A counter-example is quite easy to construct. Construct
a line through two points A and B (Figure 8.8). At A and B construct
the perpendiculars to the line. These will meet at the polar point O. On
←→
AB construct a point C not on AB such that the length of AB does not
equal the length of BC. Then triangles ∆ABO and ∆BCO satisfy AAS
(right angles at A, B, C and equal sides to the polar point), but these
two triangles are clearly not congruent.
Figure 8.8
Exercise 8.4.1. Let q be the polar distance. We have shown that for all
points on a line l with polar point O the distance (measured along a perpen-
dicular) from a point P on l to O is always q. Show, conversely, that if a point
R is a distance q from O then R must be on l.
Exercise 8.4.2. Let O be a point. By the previous exercise, the set of points
which are a distance q away from O must lie on the line l for which O is the
polar point. The line l is called the polar of O. Prove that every line passing
through O must be a perpendicular to the polar of O and vice-versa.

342
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 8.4.3. Let l and m be two distinct lines. Show that their polar
points must be distinct and that the line through the two polar points must be
a common perpendicular to both l and m.
Exercise 8.4.4. A circle c of radius r and center C is deﬁned as the set
of points in the Elliptic plane that are a distance r from the center point C.
Show that if the radius of a circle is q, the polar distance, then the circle is
also an elliptic line.
Exercise 8.4.5. The interior of a circle with radius less than the polar dis-
tance is deﬁned as the set of points whose distance to the center of the circle
is less than the radius. What would be a logical deﬁnition for the exterior of a
circle? Is the interior of a circle well-deﬁned if the radius is equal to the polar
distance?
Exercise 8.4.6. In Euclidean geometry, given three collinear points there is
a unique way to label them as A, B, and C so that the equation AB+BC = AC
is true. Give an example to show that this is not always possible in Elliptic
geometry.
Exercise 8.4.7. Let R be a rotation about the polar point O to a line l.
Show that R maps l back to itself (but doesn’t necessarily ﬁx each point on
l). (Hint: use the fact that a rotation is built from two reﬂections through the
center of rotation.)
Exercise 8.4.8. Recall that a half-turn is a rotation about a point of 180
degrees. Let l be an elliptic line and let r be reﬂection across this line. Recall
that a reﬂection can be identiﬁed as a non-identity isometry that ﬁxes all points
on a line. Let H be the half-turn deﬁned about the polar point to l. Prove that
r = H. This amazing result says that in Elliptic geometry all reﬂections are
actually rotations, which means there are no orientation-preserving isometries
in planar Elliptic geometry. (Hint: Show that H ﬁxes all points on l.)
Exercise 8.4.9. Show that composition of two rotations in the Elliptic plane
must be another rotation. (Hint: write the rotations in terms of reﬂections)
Exercise 8.4.10. Recall that every isometry can be built from three reﬂec-
tions. Show that the only possible isometries in the elliptic plane are rotations.
8.5
TRIANGLES AND AREA IN ELLIPTIC GEOMETRY
We start this section with two basic results about triangles in Elliptic
geometry.

Elliptic Geometry
■343
Theorem 8.8. The angle sum for any elliptic right triangle is al-
ways greater than 180 degrees.
Proof:
Let ∆ABC be a right triangle
with a right angle at A. Let D be
the midpoint of BC
Drop a perpendicular from D
to ←→
AC. By Pasch’s Axiom we
know that the perpendicular must
pass through one of the two sides
AB or AC. Clearly, it cannot pass
through A, B, or C.
Suppose it passed through AB at X. Then we would have two per-
pendiculars from points on ←→
AC intersecting at X. This would mean that
X is the pole of ←→
AC, which is clearly impossible, as triangle sides have
maximal length equal to the polar distance. So, the perpendicular from
D to ←→
AC intersects AC at E.
We can ﬁnd a point F such that
∠DCE is congruent to ∠DBF.
On −−→
BF we can ﬁnd a point G
such that BG ∼= EC. By SAS
we have that ∆ECD ∼= ∆GBD.
Thus, E, D, and G are collinear
and ∠DGB is a right angle.
Quadrilateral ABGE is thus a Lambert Quadrilateral and ∠ABG
must be obtuse. Since ∠DCE is congruent to ∠DBF, then m∠DCE +
m∠ABD = m∠DBF + m∠ABD = m∠ABG > 90. Thus, the sum of
the angles in ∆ABC is greater than two right angles. 2

344
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 8.9. The angle sum for any elliptic triangle is greater
than 180 degrees.
Proof: Let ABC be a triangle. We have proved the result if one of the
angles is right. Thus, suppose none of the three angles are right angles.
If two are obtuse, then the result is clear. If two are not obtuse, then
two must be acute.
Let the angles at B and C be acute. Construct a perpendicular to
←→
BC at B and another perpendicular at C. (Figure 8.9). These will meet
at the polar point O. Since the angles at B and C in the triangle are
acute, then these angles lie within the right angles at B and C made by
the two perpendiculars. Since A is the intersection of the deﬁning rays
of these angles, then A lies within the triangle ∆BCO. Construct the
line ←→
OA. Since this is a line through the polar, it will intersect ←→
BC at
right angles, and by Pasch’s axiom, it must intersect side BC at some
point D.
Figure 8.9
Now, ∆ABC can be looked at as two right triangles ∆ABD and
∆ADC. Using the previous result, we know that the sum of the angles
in ∆ABD is greater than 180, as is the sum of the angles in ∆ADC. So
the sum of the angles in the two triangles together is greater than 360.
But clearly, this sum is the same as the sum of the angles in ∆ABC
plus the two right angles at D. Thus, the sum of the angles in ∆ABC
is greater than 360 −180 = 180. 2

Elliptic Geometry
■345
8.5.1
Triangle Excess and AAA
Deﬁnition 8.5. Given ∆ABC we call the diﬀerence between the
angle sum of ∆ABC and 180 degrees the excess of ∆ABC.
Corollary 8.10. The sum of the angles of any quadrilateral is
greater than 360 degrees.
Proof: The proof is left as an exercise. 2
Deﬁnition 8.6. Given quadrilateral ABCD the excess is equal to
the sum of the angles in the quadrilateral minus 360 degrees.
Theorem 8.11. Given ∆ABC let line l intersect sides AB and AC
at points D and E, respectively. Then the excess of ∆ABC is equal
to the sum of the excesses of ∆AED and quadrilateral EDBC.
Figure 8.10
Proof: Suppose that D and E are interior to AB and AC. Label all
interior angles as shown in Figure 8.10. Then
excess(∆ABC) = (∠1 + ∠4 + ∠5) −180
And,
excess(∆ADE) + excess(DECB) = (∠1 + ∠2 + ∠7) −180
+ (∠3 + ∠4 + ∠5 + ∠6) −360

346
■Exploring Geometry
Since ∠2 + ∠3 = 180 and ∠6 + ∠7 = 180, the result follows.
If l intersects at any of A, B, or C, a similar argument can be used
on the triangles deﬁned. 2
We can use this result to prove an amazing facts about triangles in
Elliptic geometry—similar triangles are congruent!
Theorem 8.12. (AAA Congruence) If two triangles have corre-
sponding angles congruent, then the triangles are congruent.
Proof: Let ∆ABC and ∆DEF be given with ∠ABC ∼= ∠DEF,
∠BCA ∼= ∠EFD, and ∠CAB ∼= ∠FDE.
If any pair of sides between the two is congruent, then by ASA the
triangles are congruent.
So, either a pair of sides in ∆ABC is larger than the corresponding
pair in ∆DEF or is smaller than the corresponding pair. Without loss
of generality we can assume AB and AC are larger than DE and DF.
Figure 8.11
Then we can ﬁnd points E′ and F ′ on AB and AC so that AE′ ∼= DE
and AF ′ ∼= DF(Figure 8.11). By SAS, ∆AE′F ′ ∼= ∆DEF, and the two
triangles have the same excess.
But, since ∆DEF and ∆ABC have the same excess, we have that
∆AE′F ′ and ∆ABC have the same excess. From the previous theorem,
the excess of quadrilateral E′F ′CB is then zero, which is impossible.
Thus, all pairs of sides are congruent. 2
8.5.2
Area in Elliptic Geometry
Areas in Euclidean geometry were deﬁned in terms of ﬁgures that are
equivalent. Two ﬁgures are equivalent if the ﬁgures can be split up (or
subdivided) into a ﬁnite number of pieces so that pairs of corresponding
pieces are congruent.

Elliptic Geometry
■347
We need to be careful in building up a notion of area in Elliptic
geometry in that we cannot assume a basis of rectangles for deﬁning
area. We start with some deﬁning axioms of how area works. These
axioms are identical to the ones we used in deﬁning area for Hyperbolic
geometry.
Area Axiom I If A, B, C are distinct and not collinear, then the
area of triangle ABC is positive.
Area Axiom II The area of equivalent sets must be the same.
Area Axiom III The area of the union of disjoint sets is the sum
of the separate areas.
Note that Axiom II automatically implies that the area of congruent
sets is the same.
Since area is axiomatically based on triangles, we will need the fol-
lowing result.
Theorem 8.13. Two triangles ABC and A′B′C′ that have two
sides congruent, and the same excesses, are equivalent and thus have
the same area.
Proof: Suppose that BC ∼= B′C′. Let D, E, and F be the midpoints
of sides BC, AC, and AB, as shown in Figure 8.12. Construct the line
through F and E and drop perpendiculars to this line from A, B, and
C meeting the line at G, H, and I, respectively.
We will now show that FH ∼= FG. Let R be a half-turn rotation
about point F. Then, R will map B to A and H to a point G′ on the
line through F and G. If G and G′ are diﬀerent points, then this implies
that there are two perpendiculars from A to ←→
FG (at points G and G′),
and so A must be the pole of ←→
FG.
Figure 8.12

348
■Exploring Geometry
But, this implies that side AB of triangle ∆ABC has length larger
than the polar distance q. This contradicts the deﬁnition of segment in
Elliptic geometry. Thus, G′ = G and FH ∼= FG. A similar argument
shows that GE ∼= EI.
Thus, right triangles ∆BHF and ∆AGF are congruent by SAS and
∆AGE and ∆CIE and congruent. This implies that BH ∼= AG ∼= CI,
so BHIC is a Saccheri Quadrilateral with base HI. Also, it is clear that
this quadrilateral is equivalent to the original triangle ∆ABC (move
appropriate pieces around).
Now, it might be the case that the positions of G, H, and I are
switched, as shown in Figure 8.13. However, one can easily check that in
all conﬁgurations, BHIC is a Saccheri Quadrilateral (with summit BC)
that is equivalent to ∆ABC.
Figure 8.13
Consider the summit angles of BHIC. The sum of these two summit
angles must equal the angle sum of ∆ABC, and thus the summit angles
are each half of the angle sum of ∆ABC.
Similarly, we can construct a Saccheri Quadrilateral for ∆A′B′C′
that is equivalent to ∆A′B′C′ and with summit B′C′.
Since BC ∼= B′C
′ and the summit angles for both quadrilaterals
are congruent (equal excess values implies equal angle sums), then by
Exercise 8.5.2 we know that the two quadrilaterals are congruent. Thus,
the triangles are equivalent. 2
We can prove an even more general result.
Theorem 8.14. Any two triangles with the same excesses are equiv-
alent and thus have the same area.
Proof: If one side of ∆ABC is congruent to a side of ∆A′B′C′, then
we can use the previous theorem to show the result. So, suppose no side

Elliptic Geometry
■349
of one matches a side of the other. We can assume side A′C′ is greater
than AC
As in the last theorem, let E, F be
midpoints of AC and AB. Con-
struct the perpendiculars from B
and C to the line through E
and F, and construct the Saccheri
Quadrilateral BIHC.
Since A′C′ > AC, we can ﬁnd
a point A′′ along ←→
CA from A such
that the length of A′′C is equal to
the length of A′C′ and A′′ ̸= A.
Let E′′ be the midpoint of A′′C.
We note here that we are not assuming that lines can be extended
indeﬁnitely to ﬁnd the point A′′. Rather, we are using the fact that we
can extend a segment until we hit its maximum length, which is the
polar distance. Since the length of ←−→
A′C′ is less than or equal to this
polar distance, we can always extend a smaller segment to match the
length of ←−→
A′C′.
Now, construct a circle centered
at C of radius CE′′. Since point
E on ←→
HI is inside this circle, then
←→
HI must intersect this circle at a
point G. (We are assuming conti-
nuity of intersections of lines and
circles, just as we did in Euclidean
and Hyperbolic geometry).
Construct CG and extend this
segment to a point Aˆ such that
G is the midpoint of AˆC. Then,
AˆC ∼= A′C′. Clearly, ←→
EF cuts
AˆC at its midpoint G. It is left as
an exercise to show that ←→
EF cuts
AˆB at its midpoint, point J.

350
■Exploring Geometry
Then, as in the previous theorem, ∆AˆBC will be equivalent to the
Saccheri Quadrilateral BHIC, which is in turn equivalent to ∆ABC.
Since triangles ∆AˆBC and ∆A′B′C′ share a congruent side, they must
be equivalent, and hence the original two triangles are equivalent. 2
We have shown that any two triangles having the same excess values
can be split into pieces that can be made congruent. Is the converse
also true? Suppose we have two equivalent triangles. That is, the two
triangles can be subdivided into sub-triangles with corresponding pairs
congruent. Then for each pair, the excess will be the same. Also, if a
set of sub-triangles forms a polygonal shape, it is easy to see that the
excess of the polygon is equal to the sum of the excesses of the triangles
of which it is comprised. Thus, the excesses of the original triangles will
be the sum of the excesses of all sub-triangles, which match pair-wise.
We summarize this as follows.
Theorem 8.15. Any two triangles that are equivalent (and thus
have the same area) must have the same excesses.
Our conclusion from this exploration of elliptic area is that the excess
and area share exactly the same properties. This tells us that the area
must be a function of the excess. Since the area and excess are both
linear functions in terms of triangle subdivisions, the area should be a
linear function of the excess, and it must be positive. Therefore, area =
k2excess + c, for some constants k and c. But, the area of the empty set
must be zero, and thus area = k2excess. We can ﬁx k by choosing some
triangle to have unit area. We summarize this discussion in the following
theorem.
Theorem 8.16. If we have deﬁned an area function for Elliptic
geometry satisfying Axioms I–III, then there is a positive constant
k such that for any triangle ∆ABC, we have
area(∆ABC) = k2 excess(∆ABC)
Note that our discussion does not give a complete proof of this result,
only an argument for the reasonableness of the theorem.
Exercise 8.5.1. Prove Corollary 8.10.
Exercise 8.5.2. Show that two Saccheri Quadrilaterals with congruent sum-
mits and congruent summit angles must be congruent quadrilaterals; that is,

Elliptic Geometry
■351
the bases must be congruent and the sides must be congruent. [Hint: Suppose
they were not congruent. Show that you can then construct a rectangle using
the quadrilateral with the longer sides.]
Exercise 8.5.3. Show that two distinct elliptic lines cannot have more than
one common perpendicular.
Exercise 8.5.4. Prove that two Saccheri Quadrilaterals with congruent bases
and congruent summit angles must be congruent.
Exercise 8.5.5. Show that in Theorem 8.14 ←→
EF cuts AˆB at its midpoint
J. [Hint: Suppose that the intersection of ←→
EF with AˆB is not the midpoint.
Connect G to the midpoint of AˆB and construct a second Saccheri quadri-
lateral. Let M be the midpoint of BC. We know that the perpendicular at M
will be perpendicular to both Saccheri quadrilateral bases. (Exercise 8.2.1) Use
a polar point argument to reach a contradiction.]
Exercise 8.5.6. Is it possible to construct scale models of a ﬁgure in Elliptic
geometry? Brieﬂy explain your answer.
8.6
PROJECT 13 - ELLIPTIC TILING
In this project we will investigate regular tilings in Elliptic geometry.
We saw in section 6.4 that there are just three types of regular tilings
of the Euclidean plane—the ones generated by equilateral triangles, by
squares, and by regular hexagons. In Project 7.6 we saw that in hyper-
bolic geometry there was a regular tiling of n-gons meeting k at a vertex
if and only if 1
n + 1
k < 1
2.
We can investigate Elliptic tilings in a similar manner to how we
studied hyperbolic tilings in Project 7.6. Suppose we have k elliptic reg-
ular n-gons meeting at a common vertex of a tiling. Then the interior
angles of the n-gons would be 360
k . Also, we can ﬁnd a central point and
triangulate each n-gon. The triangles in the triangulation will consist of
isosceles triangles with base angles of α = 360
2k . The total angle sum of
all the triangles in the triangulation will be greater than 180n. At the
same time, this angle sum can be split into the angles around the center
point (which add to 360) plus the base angles of the isosceles triangles
(which add to 2nα). Thus, we get that
360 + 2nα > 180n

352
■Exploring Geometry
Or,
2α > 180 −360
n
Since the angle formed by adjacent edges of the n-gon is 2α = 360
k , we
get
360
k
> 180 −360
n
Dividing both sides by 360 and then rearranging, we get
1
n + 1
k > 1
2
Thus, if there is a regular tiling by n-gons meeting k at a vertex in
Elliptic geometry, then 1
n + 1
k > 1
2. On the other hand, if this inequality
is true, then a tiling with n-gons meeting k at a vertex must exist. Thus,
this inequality completely characterizes regular elliptic tilings. We will
call a regular elliptic tiling of n-gons meeting k at a vertex a (n,k) tiling.
Which such tilings are possible?
Clearly, n, k > 2. If n = 3, then the only possible values for k are
k = 3, 4, 5. If k = 3, the only possible values for n are n = 3, 4, 5. If k = 4
or k = 5, the only possible values for n are n = 3. If n = 4 or n = 5,
the only possible values for k are k = 3. If n > 5 or k > 5, there are
no tilings possible. Thus, there are exactly ﬁve possible regular elliptic
tilings: (3, 3), (3, 4), (3, 5), (4, 3), (5, 3).
As an example, let’s see how to generate a (4, 3) tiling. In a (4, 3)
tiling, we have squares meeting three at a vertex. How do we construct
squares of this kind? First of all, it is clear that the interior angle of the
square must be 120 degrees ( 360
3 ). If we take a square and triangulate it
via triangles constructed to a central point, the angles about the central
point will be 90 degrees and the base angles of the isosceles triangles will
be 60 degrees (half the interior angle). Thus, to build the pentagon we
need to construct an elliptic triangle with angles of 90, 60, and 60.
In Euclidean geometry, there are an inﬁnite number of triangles that
have a speciﬁed set of three angles, and these triangles are all similar to
each other. In Elliptic geometry, two triangles with congruent pairs of
angles must be congruent themselves!
Thus, we know that an elliptic triangle with angles of 90, 60, and 60
degrees must be unique.
In this project we will be using the Geometry Explorer software to

Elliptic Geometry
■353
create tilings of the Elliptic plane. If you are not already using this pro-
gram, go to http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text for instructions
on how to download and use this software.
To begin this project, start up Geometry Explorer and open an El-
liptic geometry window. (Choose New (File menu) and then choose
“Elliptic” in the dialog box that pops up).
In order to create a (4, 3) tiling, we need to create a 90,60,60 triangle.
We begin the construction of this triangle by constructing a point at the
origin of our Elliptic model.
Choose Point At Origin (Misc
menu) to create a point at the ori-
gin in the Elliptic plane.
To create our triangle, we will ﬁrst create the base segment of a
triangle with angles of 90, 60, and 60.
Select the point at the origin and
choose Base
Pt
of
Triangle
with Angles...(Misc menu). A
dialog box will pop up as shown.
Note how the angles α, β, and γ
are designated. In our example we
want α = 90 and the other two
angles to be 60. Type these val-
ues in and hit “Okay.”

354
■Exploring Geometry
In the Canvas, a new point
will be created that corresponds
to point B in the dialog box just
discussed. To ﬁnd the third point
of our triangle, we need to rotate
point B about point A by an an-
gle of 90 degrees. Carry out this
rotation to get point C.
Let’s measure the three angles
just to verify that we have the tri-
angle we want.
Looks good. Next, hide the
angle measurements and select A
as a center of rotation and deﬁne
a custom rotation of 90 degrees.
Rotate C two times to get points
D and E. Then, connect the outer
points to form a square.

Elliptic Geometry
■355
Finally, select point C as a
center of rotation and deﬁne a
new custom rotation of 120 de-
grees. Then, rotate the square
(and point A) two times, yield-
ing three squares meeting at C at
angles of 120 degrees! You may
want to hide some of the inter-
mediate points that get rotated.
Use the Manage Properties...
(Edit menu) to help with this.
We have now created a tiling
of the elliptic plane by squares.
Try moving the point at the ori-
gin, point A. We see that the
tiling breaks up in a quite nasty
way. Why is this the case? The
problem here is that by translat-
ing the origin point, we have cre-
ated compound translations and
rotations for other parts of the ﬁg-
ure. In Elliptic geometry compo-
sitions of translations are not nec-
essarily translations again as they
are in Euclidean geometry.
Looking at our tiling construction, it is not immediately clear how
this construction creates a tiling.

356
■Exploring Geometry
In Elliptic geometry once we cross
the “boundary” circle at a point,
we immediately appear at the
antipodal point on the opposite
side. Thus, segment BC gets ro-
tated to become segments CE
and BD and point A rotates to
points F and G. Thus, this tiling
of the Elliptic plane consists of
just three squares —BCDE (in-
ner point A), BCDE (inner point
F), and BCDE (inner point G).
Let’s recall that the elliptic plane is built from the sphere by identify-
ing antipodal points. How does our tiling relate to the spherical model?
The standard elliptic model is
built by stereographic projection
from the sphere. We can get a
sense of how our tiling looks
on the sphere by switching our
model to the direct projection
of the sphere into the x −y
plane. To switch to this model,
choose Sphere X-Y Projection
(Model menu). Note how points
F and G seem to have moved, but
they really haven’t —they have
just switched to their antipodal
counterpart.
Now, we can imagine how the elliptic tiling will extend to the sphere.
Each of the three squares will have to be doubled to undo the antipodal
identiﬁcation from the sphere to the elliptic plane. Thus, we would have
six congruent squares on the sphere that divide the sphere into congruent
parts. What other common 3-D shape consists of six congruent squares?
The cube!
In Figure 8.14 we see how the cube can be “blown up” to form a
tiling of the sphere.

Elliptic Geometry
■357
Figure 8.14 Projection of the cube onto the sphere
Exercise 8.6.1. In Elliptic geometry there are exactly ﬁve possible regu-
lar elliptic tilings: (3, 3), (3, 4), (3, 5), (4, 3), (5, 3). There are also ﬁve Platonic
solids in Euclidean geometry. These are the tetrahedron, the cube, the octa-
hedron, the dodecahedron, and the icosahedron. Each of these will generate
a spherical tiling by projection onto a sphere, just as the cube generated the
spherical tiling above. Thus, by antipodal identiﬁcation, each of the Platonic
solids will generate a tiling of the Elliptic plane. Match each Platonic solid
with the elliptic tiling it will generate.
Figure 8.15 Platonic solids

358
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 8.6.2. The Platonic Solids were the basis of the Greeks’ view of
the structure of the universe. Each solid was associated with some form of
matter. For example, air was associated with the octahedron. Research this
aspect of Greek philosophy and write a short report of their philosophical use
of the Platonic solids.
Exercise 8.6.3. Describe and illustrate the steps you would take to construct
a (3,5) tiling of the Elliptic Plane.
For your report give a careful and complete summary of your work
on this project.

C H A P T E R 9
Projective Geometry
Metrical geometry is thus a part of descriptive geometry, and
descriptive geometry is all geometry.
– Arthur Cayley (1821–1895)
9.1
UNIVERSAL THEMES
We have explored three diﬀerent geometries so far in this text —Eu-
clidean, Hyperbolic, and Elliptic. In all cases we have started from a
basis of the ﬁrst four Euclidean axioms:
1. Between any two distinct points, a segment can be constructed.
2. Segments can be extended indeﬁnitely.
3. Given a point and a distance, a circle can be constructed with the
point as center and the distance as radius.
4. All right angles are congruent.
We have frequently pointed out that these four axioms are not, by
themselves, suﬃciently strong to completely develop any of the geome-
tries we have considered. In particular, variations on the ﬁfth axiom,
the Parallel Axiom are needed for each geometry. Also, we need to add
axioms such as Pasch’s axiom and axioms concerning continuity and be-
tweenness to ﬁll in various axiomatic gaps. That being said, the four
original Euclidean axioms serve as a simple basis from which we can
compare and contrast the geometries we have considered.
In our discussion of Hyperbolic and Elliptic geometry, in Chapters
7 and 8, we carefully developed those geometries from the ﬁrst four
359

360
■Exploring Geometry
Euclidean axioms plus modiﬁcations of the ﬁfth axiom. A careful reading
of the proofs and theorems of those two chapters yields a surprisingly
similar set of theorems and proof techniques. Many of the proofs for
results in Hyperbolic geometry can work (with some slight modiﬁcation)
in Elliptic geometry. (For example, compare the proof of Theorem 7.15
to Theorem 8.9. )
In the nineteenth century, not long after the discovery of Hyper-
bolic and Elliptic geometry, this similarity became a focus of study.
Arthur Cayley in
[8] and Felix Klein in
[27] showed that all three
geometries (Euclidean, Hyperbolic, and Elliptic) could be considered as
sub-geometries of another, more abstract, geometry called Projective ge-
ometry.
Before we dive into the axiomatic details of Projective geometry, let’s
consider the commonalities between the three geometries we have studied
so far. Referring to Euclid’s axioms,we see that all three geometries have
lines and points, with two points determining a unique line, and line
segments extendable (perhaps not indeﬁnitely, but they can always be
extended). Linear properties of incidence are thus universally shared
by all three geometries and will turn out to be a deﬁning property of
Projective geometry.
The third and fourth axioms deal with metric properties of each ge-
ometry. Metric properties deal with measurement, whether that be radii
of circles (third axiom) or the congruence of right angles (fourth ax-
iom). While all three geometries satisfy the third and fourth axioms, the
nature of the measurement of distance and angle is vastly diﬀerent in
each geometry. Thus, a universal geometry that encompasses Euclidean,
Hyperbolic, and Elliptic geometry as sub-geometries, must avoid speci-
ﬁcation of metric properties in its axiomatic basis.
Likewise, it is not possible to universalize the ﬁfth axiom, or its hy-
perbolic and elliptic counterparts, as they are mutually exclusive state-
ments.
A common theme for for Hyperbolic and Elliptic geometry was that
both had circle models. A natural question to ask is whether this theme
is universal —whether there is a circle model for Euclidean geometry.
The answer is, surprisingly, yes! We will take a short excursion into the
development of this model, as it will provide a concrete framework for
our development of Projective geometry.

Projective Geometry
■361
9.1.1
Central Projection Model of Euclidean Geometry
In the central projection model of Euclidean geometry, we project the
Euclidean plane to points on the lower hemisphere of the unit sphere
(Figure 9.1). Let C be the center of the sphere and let P be a point on the
plane. Assume the sphere is situated so that the south pole (point O in
Figure 9.1) is on the plane. Construct ←→
CP and let P ′ be the intersection
of this line with the lower hemisphere. Clearly, for every point in the
plane there is a unique point associated on the hemisphere. Also, the
line x shown passing through O will project to a great circle arc x′ on
the sphere and any other line l that is parallel to x will project to a great
circle arc l′ with the same diameter endpoints as x′.
l
x
P
P’
x’
l’
C
O
Figure 9.1
Let Σ be the set of all projected points on the sphere. Since no point
in the plane will project to the two diameter endpoints, then arcs x′ and
l′ will not intersect in Σ. Arcs such as x′ and l′ will then serve as the lines
in the lower sphere model for Euclidean geometry. Projecting the sphere
orthographically into the x-y plane (drop the z coordinate) yields a unit
disk model for Euclidean geometry. Suitable deﬁnitions for distance and
angle can be provided that make this model metrically equivalent to the
standard Euclidean plane. (For details see [15], pp.212-ﬀ).
In Figure 9.2 we see a circle, a line, and a triangle in this circle model
of Euclidean geometry. Note that the circle looks like a distorted ellipse.
This is due to the fact that central projection maps circles into ellipses
and orthographic projection into the x-y plane distorts those elliptical
shapes.

362
■Exploring Geometry
Figure 9.2
9.1.2
Ideal Points at Inﬁnity
We have seen that all three of our geometries —Euclidean, Hyperbolic,
and Elliptic —share incidence properties for lines and points and all have
unit disk models. In Euclidean and Hyperbolic geometry, the points on
the boundary of the disk are excluded from the geometry. However,
in Hyperbolic geometry we introduced ideal or omega points as being
where two parallels meet at inﬁnity. In the central projection model of
Euclidean geometry, we see clearly that two Euclidean parallel lines meet
at similar ideal points on the boundary. If we expand our geometry to
include these boundary points, we could say that in Euclidean geometry
two lines always meet at a point or an ideal point.
From our discussion so far, it would seem reasonable, then, for a uni-
versal geometry to have axioms that guarantee that two points deter-
mine a unique line and that two lines always meet. This geometry would
encompass both Euclidean (with ideal points) and Elliptic geometries.
Since Hyperbolic geometry can be built inside Euclidean geometry, it
would also encompass Hyperbolic geometry.
Before we set down the axiomatic basis for this universal geometry
(Projective geometry) we will look at the historical impetus for the devel-
opment of Projective geometry. We will also explore several of the main
ideas of Projective geometry in an intuitive setting, to give context and
motivation for the more abstract axiomatic development coming later in
the chapter.

Projective Geometry
■363
9.2
PROJECT 14 - PERSPECTIVE AND PROJECTION
In the preceding section, we saw that a unifying theme of the three
geometries we have studied so far is that all have unit disk models.
Another unifying theme is that of ideal points, or points at inﬁnity.
These two ideas, central projection and points at inﬁnity, did not
originate in the study of abstract mathematics, but came from the quest
for realism in the visual arts. An artist, when viewing a scene in the
three-dimensional world, has the problem of depicting that scene on a
ﬂat two-dimensional canvas. To create more realistic depictions of three
dimensional ﬁgures, painters begin experimenting with the notion of
linear perspective to give their artwork a feeling of depth.
The development of linear perspective is most often credited to Fil-
ippo Brunelleschi (1337–1446). He realized that there was a vanishing
point, a point at inﬁnity, to which parallel lines in a picture would con-
verge.
Imagine you are looking at a long, straight railroad track that goes
oﬀto distant mountains. There are trees and a small building along the
side of the tracks. A parallel projection of all the objects in this scene
into a ﬂat viewing plane would give a picture like the one at the left.
But, in fact, our eyes perceive an image like the one at the right, where
the parallel tracks appear to converge at the distant mountain range.
The introduction of vanishing points in perspective drawing gave
artists a precise way to ﬁnd the angle of projection for lines in a scene
and also provided a way to calculate the length of projected lines and
shapes in the ﬂat canvas of a painting. Brunelleschi used all of these

364
■Exploring Geometry
ideas to create lifelike renderings of scenes, but he did not write down
the relationships he discovered. One of his pupils, Leon Battista Alberti
did record Brunelleschi’s ideas in the book Della Pittura (On Painting),
ﬁrst published in 1435 [1].
In this book Alberti describes the procedure one should use to cor-
rectly draw a ﬁgure using linear perspective. He deﬁnes a painting as an
object that uses this perspective system:
A painting is the intersection of a visual pyramid at a given
distance, with a ﬁxed centre and a deﬁned position of light,
represented by art with lines and colours on a given surface.
( [1] pp.32–33)
To illustrate Alberti’s deﬁnition, imagine the artist’s eye is at posi-
tion O in Figure 9.3 and the artist is looking at triangle ∆ABC on a
horizontal surface, say the ﬂoor of the artist’s studio. This is plane Π in
the ﬁgure. If we connect the vertices of the triangle to the eye position
O, we generate a visual pyramid as Alberti described. The intersection
of this pyramid with a vertical planar surface Π′ (e.g. the canvas of a
painting) yields triangle ∆A′B′C′.
Π’
B’
A’
C’
O
Π
B
C
A
Figure 9.3
Exercise 9.2.1. Construct a ﬁgure like that shown in Figure 9.3 with a
square in the horizontal plane. Show by your drawing that lengths and right

Projective Geometry
■365
angles will not be preserved under the perspective projection onto a vertical
plane. This is a general property of projective geometry, as we will see later.
While Brunelleschi and Alberti are rightfully credited with the cre-
ation of the rules for linear perspective, their work is more algorithmic
than mathematical. The ﬁrst thoroughly mathematical development of
perspective came with the work of Girard Desargues (1591–1661).
Desargues was a contemporary of Descartes and worked as an archi-
tect, engineer, and mathematician. He is credited as being the “founder
of projective geometry” [40]. Desargues was the ﬁrst mathematician to
stipulate that projection could produce points at inﬁnity, and that the
set of all points at inﬁnity creates a line at inﬁnity.
We can visualize a point at inﬁnity by considering points O, B, and
B′ in Figure 9.3. In perspective drawing, we start with B and draw a line
to O to get the perspective point B′. But, we could also imagine that
there is a light source at O and this light is projecting B′ onto point B
in the horizontal plane. In this projective view of the scene, if we move O
so that it is at the same height as B′ (relative to plane Π), the projected
point B would move inﬁnitely far away —it would become a point at
inﬁnity.
Desargues was the ﬁrst person to rigorously explore this projective
view of perspective drawing. Unfortunately, his writings on the subject
used rather obscure terms, such as “bough” and “trunk” to refer to
mathematical quantities and he did not provide proofs of many of his
results. Also, the analytic geometry of Descartes was considered more
accessible and applicable to everyday problems. Desargues’ work was
largely ignored during his lifetime. It wasn’t until the 19th century, when
projective geometry was reinvented by Gaspard Monge (1746–1818) and
his pupil Victor Poncelet (1788–1867), that Desargues’ work was fully
recognized.
One of Desargues’ most important results has become known as “De-
sargues’ Theorem.” This is one of the fundamental ideas in projective
geometry. To get some intuition about Desargues’ Theorem, we will ex-
plore how perspective projection works in more detail.
In Figure 9.4 we have two triangles ABC and A′B′C′ that are seen
in perspective from point O.

366
■Exploring Geometry
Π’
B’
A’
C’
O
Π
B
C
A
D
F
E
Figure 9.4
The dotted lines in the ﬁgure are extensions of corresponding pairs
of sides from these two triangles. For example, one pair of sides (AB and
A′B′), when extended will intersect at a point E. Likewise, the other two
pairs of sides intersect at points D and F.
Exercise 9.2.2. Explain why the three intersection points D, E, and F must
be collinear.
Now, imagine that we rotate plane Π′ and point O toward plane Π
as in Figure 9.5. Clearly, the collinearity property for D, E, and F will
persist as long as the two planes are diﬀerent.
Π’
B’
A’
C’
O
Π
B
A
C
D
E
F
Figure 9.5

Projective Geometry
■367
But, what happens in the “limit” as the planes become identical and
point O lies in the plane of both triangles? Does the collinearity property
still hold true? What happens in this case is the crux of Desargues’
Theorem.
To investigate this “limit” case, we will use dynamic geometry soft-
ware. Notes on how to use software for this project can be found at
http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text.
Start up your geometry software
and construct a point O that will
serve as the perspective point.
Then, construct three rays ema-
nating from O as shown.
O
B
A
C
Now, construct ∆ABC and
attach three new points A′, B′,
and C′ somewhere along −→
OA, −−→
OB,
and −→
OC . Construct ∆A′B′C′.
O
B
A
C
A’
B’
C’
We have constructed two tri-
angles that are perspective from
O. Next, construct the lines for
each pair of corresponding sides,
as shown, and ﬁnd the inter-
section points for each pair of
sides. These are points D, E, and
F. Note: the intersection points
might lie outside of the window.
You can zoom out to see more of
the diagram.
O
B
A
C
A’
B’
C’
D
F
E

368
■Exploring Geometry
Now, the big question: will D,
E, and F be collinear? Construct
line ←→
DE. Move point O and the
triangle vertices around. It ap-
pears that the three points are
collinear – most of the time!
O
B
A
C
A’
B’
C’
D
F
E
Exercise 9.2.3. What happens when two pairs of sides, for example BC
and B′C′, are parallel? Are the three points still collinear? Do they still exist?
Why does it seem reasonable to talk about points at inﬁnity in this case?
Exercise 9.2.4. Suppose sides BC and B′C′ are parallel and sides AC
and A′C′ are parallel. Show that sides AB and A′B′ must be parallel (using
theorems from Euclidean geometry). Explain why it makes sense to say that
the three pairs of sides are collinear along the line at inﬁnity.
In Projective geometry we expand the set of allowable points to in-
clude the points at inﬁnity, with the set of all such points comprising
the line at inﬁnity. From the discussion so far, the following result that
Desargues discovered in the 17th century seems entirely reasonable and
natural.
Theorem 9.1. (Desargues’ Theorem) Given two triangles ∆ABC
and ∆A′B′C′, if the two triangles are perspective from a point O,
then corresponding sides, when extended, intersect at three points
which are collinear.
For your report give a careful and complete summary of your work
on this project.
9.3
FOUNDATIONS OF PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY
Now that we have gained some historical perspective on the development
of Projective geometry, and have explored how a mathematical analysis
of perspective projection naturally leads to the notion of points and lines

Projective Geometry
■369
at inﬁnity, we are ready to formally deﬁne the axiomatic basis of this
new geometry.
As we saw in Chapter 1, axiom systems do not arise from thin air, but
are abstractions of intuitive notions of space that are developed by our
experience with the world. As mentioned in the beginning of this chap-
ter, the goal of Projective geometry is to provide a unifying framework
for studying commonalities between the three main geometries we have
covered in this text: Euclidean, Hyperbolic, and Elliptic. Such a unifying
framework must focus primarily on properties of incidence, whether that
be two points being incident on (deﬁning) a line or two lines incident
(meeting) at a point. Metric notions such as distance and angle must be
avoided.
To understand the basic axioms of Projective geometry, it will be
useful to consider the axioms for an abstraction of Euclidean geometry
that avoids metric properties. This geometry is called Aﬃne geometry.
9.3.1
Aﬃne Geometry
If we remove all notions of metric properties from Euclidean geometry,
we are left with just two basic properties: the incidence property that
two points determine a unique line and the Euclidean parallel property.
We also need to guarantee that the geometry is truly two-dimensional.
Thus, the following three axioms are natural for Aﬃne geometry.
A1 Given two distinct points P and Q, there is a unique line l inci-
dent on these points.
A2 Given a line l and a point P not on l, there is a unique line m
parallel to l through P.
A3 There exist three non-collinear points.
In this axiomatic framework, which follows the development pre-
sented by Hartshorne in [20], point, line, and incident are undeﬁned
terms, while parallel, collinear, and concurrent have their standard mean-
ings. We call a set of points and lines that satisﬁes these three axioms
an Aﬃne Plane.
Clearly, planar Euclidean geometry satisﬁes the three axioms of
Aﬃne geometry, as it is our intuitive basis for this axiomatic system.
In designing an axiomatic basis for Projective geometry, let’s consider
what happens to the Aﬃne geometry axioms when we extend the Eu-
clidean plane by adding points at inﬁnity. First of all, two lines will

370
■Exploring Geometry
always have at least one intersection point. Thus, the parallel axiom of
Aﬃne geometry must be replaced by a new incidence axiom. Also, the
addition of points at inﬁnity will mean that lines, which are typically
deﬁned by two non-inﬁnite points, will necessarily have a third point– a
point at inﬁnity.
9.3.2
Axioms of Projective Geometry
The axioms for Projective geometry are as follows:
P1 Given two distinct points there is a unique line incident on these
points.
P2 Given two distinct lines, there is at least one point incident on
these lines.
P3 There exist three non-collinear points.
P4 Every line has at least three distinct points incident on it.
We call any set of points and lines that satisfy these four axioms a
Projective Plane.
Axioms P1 and P2 have a remarkable similarity. By switching the
terms “point” and “line,” the two statements are nearly interchangeable.
In fact, we can prove that they are exactly interchangeable.
Theorem 9.2. Given two distinct lines l and m, there is a unique
point P incident on these lines.
Proof: Suppose P and Q were distinct points incident on lines l and m.
Axiom P1 then implies that l and m have to be the same line, which
contradicts the assumption that they are distinct. 2
9.3.3
Duality
Deﬁnition 9.1. The dual of an axiom or theorem is created by
switching all occurrences of the term “point” with the term “line”
and all occurrences of the term “line” with the term “point.” An
axiom system satisﬁes the principle of duality if all duals of axioms
or theorems are again axioms or theorems.

Projective Geometry
■371
The dual of axioms P3 and P4 also hold true. The proofs will be left
as exercises. Thus, Projective geometry satisﬁes the principle of duality.
This is very handy when investigating properties of the geometry —if
you can prove one result, you get the dual result for free!
Let’s consider what the minimum number of points could be for a
projective plane (assuming that the plane could have a ﬁnite number of
points).
By axiom P3 we know we have at
least three points, call them P, Q,
and R. These three points deﬁne
three non-concurrent lines. There
must be at least three points on
each line, so we get three new
points S, T, and U.
P
Q
R
S
T
U
We then must have lines ←→
PT,
←→
RS, and ←→
QU. By Theorem 9.2
we know that these lines cannot
match any of the three already
deﬁned. Each of these new lines
must have at least three points,
so we need to add at least one
more point, but this point can
also serve as the intersection of
the three lines.
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
From this analysis, it would appear that the minimum number of
points for a projective plane is 7. If we look at the ﬁgure carefully, we
see that we have only 6 lines. The principle of duality requires that the
number of lines matches the number of points. Where is the missing line?
If we consider all pairs of points, it seems that we are missing a line for
(S, T), (T, U), and (S, U).

372
■Exploring Geometry
If we allow circles to be lines (an
idea we have seen before in this
text!), we can add one more “line”
to completely satisfy the require-
ments for a projective plane.
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
9.3.4
Triangles and Quadrangles
In the example given in the last section with 7 points and 7 lines, we note
that there are many three-vertex shapes (QSV , RTP, etc) and many
four-vertex shapes (QSV T, SV UT, etc). Such shapes were important
ﬁgures of study in Euclidean and other geometries and they are equally
as important in Projective geometry.
In deﬁning a shape like a triangle, we have to be careful, however,
as there is no notion of “betweenness” in Projective geometry. Thus,
segments cannot be deﬁned based solely on the four projective axioms.
A triangle can only be deﬁned by using points and lines.
Deﬁnition 9.2. A triangle consists of three non-collinear points
(or vertices) and the three lines (or sides) that are deﬁned by these
points.
In the example above, there are triangles such as ∆PQR that look
to us like triangles, and others like ∆SV T that look a bit strange.
There is another strange property of this ﬁnite projective plane that
has to do with four-sided shapes. Consider the shape with points S, V ,
T, and Q, and the six lines that are determined by pairs of these points.
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
Figure 9.6

Projective Geometry
■373
Opposite sides ←→
QS and ←→
TV intersect at P, sides ←→
SV and ←→
QT in-
tersect at R and the two “diagonals” ←→
QV and ←→
ST intersect at U. The
three intersection points P, U, and R are collinear. In the Projective
geometry model that is based on Euclidean geometry, these three points
are never collinear. (This will be proved later in this chapter when we
consider models of Projective geometry.) If we want to ensure that Pro-
jective geometry axiomatically has the property that P, U, and R are
not collinear, we would have to add another axiom that addresses these
four-sided shapes. To state this axiom precisely, we need the following
deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 9.3. A complete quadrangle consists of four distinct
points (or vertices), no three of which are collinear, and the six lines
(or sides) deﬁned by these four points. If A, B, C, and D are the
vertices of the quadrangle, then sides ←→
AB and ←→
CD , ←→
AC and ←→
BD,
and ←→
AD and ←→
BC are called opposite sides of the quadrangle. The
points at which opposite sides intersect are called diagonal points of
the quadrangle.
For example, in Figure 9.7 we have the complete quadrangle ABCD,
as depicted in Euclidean Geometry. The diagonal points are E, F, and
G.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Figure 9.7
Let’s consider again the 7 point ﬁgure from the discussion above
(Figure 9.8). Quadrangle QSV T has diagonal points P, U, and R which
are collinear.

374
■Exploring Geometry
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
Figure 9.8
To create a Projective geometry where the diagonal points are not
collinear, we would need a new axiom:
Axiom P5: (Fano’s Axiom) The three diagonal points of a complete
quadrangle are not collinear.
This axiom is named for the Italian mathematician Gino Fano (1871–
1952). Fano discovered the 7 point ﬁgure above, which is now called the
Fano plane. The Fano plane is the simplest ﬁgure which satisﬁes Axioms
P1–P4, but which has a quadrangle with collinear diagonal points.
What about the dual to Fano’s axiom? First, we need a dual deﬁni-
tion to the deﬁnition for a complete quadrangle. For this deﬁnition, it
will be useful to have a shorthand notation for the intersection point of
two lines or the line deﬁned by two points.
Deﬁnition 9.4. Given two distinct lines a and b, a·b is the unique
point of intersection of these lines. Given two distinct points A and
B, AB is the unique line deﬁned by these two points.
Deﬁnition 9.5. A complete quadrilateral consist of four distinct
lines (or sides), no three of which are concurrent, and the six points
(or vertices) deﬁned by these four lines (intersections). If a, b, c,
and d are the sides of the quadrilateral, then the pairs of vertices
E = a · b and F = c · d , G = a · c and H = b · d, and I = a · d
and J = b · c are called opposite vertices of the quadrilateral. The
sides deﬁned by opposite vertices are called diagonal sides of the
quadrilateral.

Projective Geometry
■375
For example, in Figure 9.9 we have the complete quadrilateral abcd,
as depicted in Euclidean Geometry. The diagonal sides are e, f, and g.
E
I
a
J
b
F
c
d
G
H
e
f
g
Figure 9.9
The dual to axiom P5 would then read:
Theorem 9.3. The three diagonal sides of a complete quadrilateral
are not concurrent.
Proof: Exercise 2
9.3.5
Desargues’ Theorem
Let’s recall Desargues’ Theorem from Project 9.1.2.
Theorem 9.4. (Desargues’ Theorem) Given two triangles ∆ABC
and ∆A′B′C′, if the two triangles are perspective from a point O,
then corresponding sides, when extended, intersect at three points
which are collinear.
In Project 9.1.2 we saw that Desargues’ Theorem was a natural result
in the Projective geometry developed by extending the Euclidean plane
with points at inﬁnity. A natural question to ask would be whether
Desargues’ Theorem is true for any Projective geometry with axioms P1-
P4 as its basis. It turns out that Desargues’ Theorem is true for projective
planes that can be embedded in three-dimensional projective spaces, but
is not true for every projective plane. One example of a projective plane
that does not satisfy Desargues’ Theorem is the Moulton Plane, which
is explored in the exercises at the end of this section. Other examples

376
■Exploring Geometry
can be found in Hartshorne [20, pages 16–18]. If we want to guarantee
that Desargues’ Theorem holds, we need a new axiom:
Axiom P6: Given two triangles ∆ABC and ∆A′B′C′, if the two
triangles are perspective from a point O, then corresponding sides, when
extended, intersect at three points which are collinear.
Let’s investigate the dual to this axiom. As was the case when we
investigated the dual to Axiom P5 above, it will be useful to have some
shorthand notation to discuss the conﬁgurations of triangles, lines, and
points in Desargues’ Theorem.
Deﬁnition 9.6. Triangles ∆ABC and ∆A′B′C′ are perspective
from point O if the lines joining corresponding vertices (lines AA′,
BB′, and CC′) are concurrent at O. The triangles are perspective
from line l if corresponding pairs of sides of the triangles (AB and
A′B′, BC and B′C′, AC and A′C′) intersect at three points on l.
With this deﬁnition, we can restate Axiom P6 as:
Axiom P6: If two triangles ∆ABC and ∆A′B′C′ are perspective
from a point, then they are perspective from a line.
The dual to Axiom P6 would then be:
Theorem 9.5. If two triangles ∆ABC and ∆A′B′C′ are perspec-
tive from a line, then they are perspective from a point.
Proof:
Let P = AB · A′B′ (i.e., P is the
intersection of line ←→
AB and line
←−→
A′B′) and let Q = BC · B′C′ and
R = AC ·A′C′. Since the triangles
are perspective from a line l, then
P, Q, and R are three points on l.
We need to prove that lines AA′,
BB′, and CC′ are concurrent.
B
A
C
A’
B’
C’
P
Q
R
l

Projective Geometry
■377
Let O be the intersection of
AA′ and BB′. Consider shapes
RAA′ and QBB′. If these are
both triangles, then these two tri-
angles are perspective from P. By
Axiom P6 we have that corre-
sponding sides are collinear. That
is, BQ · AR = C, B′Q · A′R = C′,
and BB′ · AA′ = O are collinear.
Thus, CC′ passes through O and
the two triangles are perspective
from O.
O
B
A
C
A’
B’
C’
P
Q
R
l
If one of RAA′ and QBB′ is
not a triangle, say R,A, and A′
are collinear, then R,A,C, and C′
are all collinear, which means that
CC′ passes through O and the
two triangles are perspective from
O. A similar argument can be
used if QBB′ is not a triangle. 2
O
B
A
C
A’
B’
C’
P
Q
R
l
Exercise 9.3.1. In Aﬃne geometry, show that two distinct lines have at
most one point in common.
Exercise 9.3.2. Show that an aﬃne plane must contain at least four distinct
points. (Hint: By A3 there are three non-collinear points, say P, Q, and R.
By A2 there is a line l through P parallel to ←→
QR and another line m through
R parallel to ←→
PQ. Show that l cannot be parallel to m and that the point of
intersection of these two lines cannot be one of P, Q, or R.)
Exercise 9.3.3. Show that there is an aﬃne plane with exactly four distinct
points and exactly six distinct lines. (Hint: Start from the results of the last
exercise)
Exercise 9.3.4. Show that the dual to axiom P3 is true. That is, in Projec-
tive geometry, show that there exist three non-concurrent lines, where we say
that two lines are concurrent if they have a point in common.

378
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 9.3.5. Show that the dual to axiom P4 is true. That is, in Projec-
tive geometry, show that every point has at least three distinct lines incident
on it.
Exercise 9.3.6. Given a projective plane, let u be a line in the plane. Let
A be the set of all points and lines from the projective plane minus the line
u and all points incident on u. Show that A is an aﬃne plane. (This implies
that the “line at inﬁnity” is not a special line in the projective plane. Any line
could serve that role.)
Exercise 9.3.7. Verify that the example of a ﬁnite projective plane of 7 lines
and 7 points satisﬁes all of the axioms for projective geometry.
Exercise 9.3.8. Prove Theorem 9.3 (Hint: Let abcd be a complete quadrilat-
eral. Show that EFGH is a complete quadrangle. Assuming the three diagonal
sides of abcd are concurrent, show that the diagonal points of EFGH are
collinear.)
In the exercises at the end of section 1.5 we deﬁned a Projective
Plane of Order n. The axioms for this geometry are as follows:
P(n)1 Given two distinct points, there is exactly one line incident
with them both.
P(n)2 Given two distinct lines, there is at least one point that is
incident with both lines.
P(n)3 There are at least four points, no three of which are collinear.
P(n)4 There exists at least one line with exactly n+1(n > 1) distinct
points incident with it.
Exercise 9.3.9. Show that a Projective Plane of Order n satisﬁes axioms
P1-P4 for a (general) Projective plane.
Exercise 9.3.10. Show that our example of a ﬁnite projective plane of 7
lines and 7 points is a Projective Plane of Order 2.
In the Moulton Plane, the points are the standard points of the Eu-
clidean plane, plus all of the extended points at inﬁnity. The lines will
consist of all standard lines in the Euclidean plane that have zero, inﬁ-
nite, or negative slope, together with a set of broken lines that consist
of two half-lines of positive slope deﬁned as follows:
y = 1
2mx + b
x ≤0
y = mx + b
x > 0

Projective Geometry
■379
The points at inﬁnity for these broken lines will be the extended points
at inﬁnity for the part of the line deﬁned by y = mx + b.
Here are some examples of lines in
the Moulton Plane:
x-axis
y-axis
Exercise 9.3.11. Prove that the Moulton Plane is a Projective Plane.
[Hint: The tricky Axiom will be P1.
Let A and B be distinct points. The
only case to prove is where A is
to the left and below B. Consider
slope(←→
BY )
slope(←→
AY )
as Y ranges from Y0 to
Y1.]
x-axis
y-axis
Y
A
B
Y0
Y1
Exercise 9.3.12. In the ﬁgure below, triangles ABC and A′B′C′ are per-
spective from point O in the Moulton Plane. Explain why Desargues’ Theorem
does not hold for this conﬁguration.
B
C
A
O
B’
A’
C’
D
E

380
■Exploring Geometry
9.4
TRANSFORMATIONS AND PAPPUS’S THEOREM
In our analysis of Euclidean, Hyperbolic, and Elliptic Geometries, we
utilized the notion of transformations extensively. In particular, we fo-
cused on isometries, transformations that preserved length. In Projective
Geometry metric properties such as length are not deﬁned, so there is no
natural analog to isometries. However, in our development of properties
of isometries, we proved that they had two important properties that do
translate to Projective geometry —they mapped lines to lines and they
preserved incidence (intersections of lines).
We have already considered a type of projective transformation that
has these two properties —the perspective transformation based on artis-
tic renderings of three-dimensional scenes from Project 9.1.2.
In Figure 9.10 we have two triangles ABC and A′B′C′ that are seen
in perspective from point O. It is clear that this type of perspective
transformation from three dimensions to two-dimensions maps lines to
lines and intersections of lines to intersections of lines.
Π’
B’
A’
C’
O
Π
B
C
A
Figure 9.10
Now, consider rotating the verti-
cal plane (and point O) toward
the horizontal plane until the two
planes coincide and point O is in-
cident with the planes. The two
triangles are now perspective from
point O.
O
C’
B’
A’
C
A
B

Projective Geometry
■381
If we consider the eﬀect of this
transformation on the points on a
single line l, we see that this trans-
formation maps the points on l in
a 1–1 and onto fashion onto the
points of another line l′.
O
C
A
C’
A’
B
B’
l
l’
This perspective transformation maps sets of points on a line to sets
of points on another line. For ease of description, we create a name for
these sets of points.
Deﬁnition 9.7. The pencil of points with axis l is the set of all
points on l. In a dual sense, the pencil of lines with center O is the
set of all lines through point O. (Figure 9.11)
O
l
pencil of points
pencil of lines
Figure 9.11
9.4.1
Perspectivities and Projectivities
We now carefully deﬁne what we mean by being perspective from O in
terms of pencils of points. We also note the dual deﬁnition for pencils of
lines.

382
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 9.8. A perspectivity with center O is a 1–1 mapping of
a pencil of points with axis l to a pencil of points with axis l′ such
that if A on l is mapped to A′ on l′, then line AA′ passes through
O. In a dual sense, the perspectivity with axis l is a 1–1 mapping
of a pencil of lines with center O to a pencil of lines with center O′
such that if line a through O is mapped to line a′ through O′, then
the intersection of a and a′ lies on l.
O
l
l’
A
B
C
A’
B’ C’
O
O’
l
a
b
c
a’
b’
c’
Perspectivity for
   pencils of points
Perspectivity for
   pencils of lines
Figure 9.12
A perspectivity with center O is denoted by the symbol
O
⊼. A per-
spectivity with axis l is denoted by the symbol
l
⊼. Thus, in Figure 9.12
we have ABC
O
⊼A′B′C′ and abc
l
⊼a′b′c′.
It should be noted that our deﬁnition of a perspectivity with center
O is only deﬁned for pairs of lines —it is a transformation between two
one-dimensional geometries. Later in this chapter we will expand our
notion of projective transformations to include functions that map the
entire Projective plane to itself.
The deﬁnition of perspectivity given above (hopefully) seems natural,
given its intuitive roots in the artistic projection of three dimensions
into a plane. It is interesting to compare the set of perspectivities in
Projective geometry to the set of isometries in Euclidean geometry. One
fundamental property of the set of Euclidean isometries is that it forms
a group. In particular, if one composes two isometries, one gets another
isometry. Interestingly, this is not the case in general for perspectivities.

Projective Geometry
■383
In Figure 9.13 we have that ABC
O
⊼A′B′C′ and A′B′C′ O′
⊼A′′B′′C′′.
Y
B
l
l’’
O
O’
l’
A
C
C’
B’
A’
C’’
B’’
A’’
Y’
Y’’
Figure 9.13
The composition of these two perspectivities maps line l to line l′′.
If this composition is again a perspectivity, then the intersection point,
Y , of lines l and line l′′ would be ﬁxed under the perspectivity. But, this
is clearly not the case, as Y is mapped to point Y ′′.
So, the composition of two perspectivities need not be a perspectivity,
but it certainly is still a composition. Also, compositions of compositions
of perspectivities will again be a composition of perspectivities. Thus, it
is these compositions that seem the likely candidates to form the group
of transformations in Projective geometry. This suggests the following
deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 9.9. A mapping of one pencil into another is a pro-
jectivity if the mapping can be expressed as a ﬁnite composition of
perspectivities.
A projectivity is denoted by the symbol ⊼. Thus, if ABC ⊼A′B′C′
then there is a ﬁnite sequence of perspectivities that maps the collinear
points ABC to the collinear points A′B′C′.
It will be left as an exercise to verify that the set of projectivities of
a line into itself does indeed form a group.

384
■Exploring Geometry
9.4.2
Projectivity Constructions and Pappus’s Theorem
We will now consider some basic results on projectivities.
Theorem 9.6. Let A,B,C be three distinct points on line l and A′,
B′, and C′ be three distinct points on line l′, with l ̸= l′. Then, there
is a projectivity taking A,B,C to A′,B′,C′.
Proof: In the proof of this result we will be careful to use just the axioms
P1–P4 in the preceding section, plus any dual results based on those
axioms.
Since l and l′ are distinct, we can assume that one of the pairs of
mapped points (AA′, BB′, CC′), consists of two diﬀerent points. We
assume that A is not on l′ and A′ is not on l.
By axiom P1, lines AB′, A′B,
AC′, and A′C exist. By Theorem
9.2 the points B′′ = AB′·A′B and
C′′ = AC′·A′C exist. (AB′·A′B is
the intersection of the two lines)
At least one of these two points
must be non-collinear with l and
l′, as A and A′ cannot both be on
l and l′.
l
l’
A
A’
B
C
C’
B’
B’’
C’’
l’’
A’’
The line B′′C′′ will intersect AA′ at a point A′′ by axiom P2. Also,
A′′ ̸= A, for if A′′ = A, then points A, B′′, and C′′ must be collinear and
thus points A, B′, and C′ must be collinear, which is impossible as A is
not on l′. Similarly, we have that A′′ ̸= A′. Thus, ABC
A′
⊼A′′B′′C′′ and
A′′B′′C′′ A
⊼A′B′C′ 2
Using this result, we can show the following:
Theorem 9.7. Let A,B,C and A′, B′, and C′ be two sets of dis-
tinct points on line l. Then, there is a projectivity taking A,B,C to
A′,B′,C′.
The proof of this result is left as an exercise.
One interesting result of this theorem is that there exist non-identity

Projective Geometry
■385
projectivities that map two points of a line back to themselves, i.e., that
leave two points of a line invariant. This is quite diﬀerent than what
we observed with isometries in Euclidean and Hyperbolic geometry. If
an isometry ﬁxed two points, then it was a reﬂection across the line
through those two points, and it left every point on the line invariant.
The isometry acted as the identity transformation on the line.
A natural question to ask, then, is whether a projectivity that ﬁxes
three points on a line must be the identity on that line. We will see
in the next section that this is true for the Real Projective Plane, the
Projective plane that is derived from adding points at inﬁnity to the
Euclidean plane. However, it is not provable by using just axioms P1–
P4, or even if we add P5 and P6 from the last section (Fano’s axiom
and Desargues’ Theorem). If we want this property of projectivities to
be true in Projective geometry, we would have to add this property as
an additional axiom.
Axiom P7: If a projectivity leaves three distinct points on a line
invariant, then the projectivity must be the identity on the pencil of
points on that line.
It turns out that this axiom is logically equivalent to a classical result
in Geometry that was ﬁrst discovered by Pappus of Alexandria (c. 290–
350 AD).
Theorem 9.8. Theorem of Pappus Let A,B,C be three distinct
points on line l and A′, B′, and C′ be three distinct points on line
l′, with l ̸= l′. Then, the intersection points X = AB′ · A′B, Y =
AC′ · A′C, and Z = BC′ · B′C are collinear.
An alternate statement of this theorem involves pencils of points and
cross joins.
Deﬁnition 9.10. Given two pencils of points with axes p and p′,
suppose there is a projectivity mapping the pencil at p to the pencil
at p′. Let A and B be points on p and A′, B′ the corresponding
points on p′ under the projectivity. Then, the cross joins of these
pairs of points are the lines AB′ and BA′.
Since a projectivity is uniquely deﬁned by three pairs of points from
one line to another (Exercise), we get the following equivalent statement
for Pappus’s Theorem.

386
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 9.9. Theorem of Pappus A projectivity between two
diﬀerent pencils of points determines a unique line called the axis
of homology, which contains the intersections of the cross joins of
all pairs of corresponding points.
We illustrate here two possible conﬁgurations of points in Pappus’s
theorem. In the one at the left, none of the points on the two lines are
the point of intersection of the lines. In the ﬁgure on the right, one of
the points, A, is the intersection point of the lines. Pappus’s Theorem
can be proven in this case, using results solely based on axioms P1–P4
(Exercise).
A
C
A’
C’
B
B’
X
Y
Z
A
C’
B
B’
A’=X=Y
Z
C
There are many applications of Pappus’s Theorem. Here is a result
that will be useful when we discuss conic sections:
Lemma 9.10. Let l, m, and n be three lines with l ̸= n. Suppose
there is a projectivity π given by l
O
⊼m
P
⊼n. If X = l · n is invariant
under the projectivity, then l is perspective to n. That is, there is
a point R such that l
R
⊼n and the projectivity is equivalent to this
perspectivity.
Proof: We ﬁrst note that if m = n or l = m then one of the perspectivities
in the projectivity is the identity and the result is true. Thus, we only
need to consider the case where all three lines are distinct.
We can also assume the three lines are non-concurrent, for if they
were concurrent at X, then for points A ̸= B ̸= X on l, and C = π(A)
and D = π(b) on l′, we could form the perspectivity with center AC·BD.
Since a perspectivity is uniquely deﬁned by three distinct points on a
line, this perspectivity must be equivalent to π.

Projective Geometry
■387
Let X = l · n, Y = l · m, and
Z = m · n. Also, let Q = m · OX
and R = PY ·OZ. Under the per-
spectivity from O, X goes to Q.
Since X must be invariant, then
Q
P
⊼X, which implies that O,P,
and X must be collinear.
Y
X
l
Z
m
n
P
O
Q
R
Let A be any point on l and
let A
O
⊼A′, A′ P
⊼A′′. Then, Y , A′,
and Z are three distinct points on
m, while O, X, and P are three
distinct points on XP. Applying
Pappus’s Theorem to these two
triples, we get that A = Y X·OA′,
R = Y P ·OZ, and A′′ = A′P ·XZ
are collinear.
Y
X
l
Z
m
n
P
O
Q
R
A
A’
A’’
Now, R is deﬁned independent of the point A. So, for any A on l we
get that the line through R and A will yield the point A′′, which is the
result of the projectivity applied to A. Thus, the projectivity is the same
as the perspectivity from R. 2
In the next section, we will see that Pappus’s Theorem can be proven
if we are using the Real Projective Plane model for Projective geometry.
In the more abstract setting of this section, what we can say is that
Pappus’s Theorem and axiom P7 are logically equivalent.
Theorem 9.11. If one assumes axioms P1–P4 and axiom P7, then
Pappus’s Theorem is true. Conversely, if one assumes axioms P1–
P4 and Pappus’s Theorem, then axiom P7 can be proven as a the-
orem.
We will not take the time at this point in the text to go through the
proof of this equivalence. The proof can be found in the web resources
for this text, which are located at http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-
text. A complete discussion of the axiomatic intricacies for Projective
geometry can be found in Hartshorne [20, Chapter 5].

388
■Exploring Geometry
We point out that in the course of the proof of Theorem 9.11, it is
necessary to use the following result which says that a projectivity is
essentially two perspectivities.
Theorem 9.12. If we assume Axioms P1–P4 and Pappus’s Theo-
rem, then a projectivity between two distinct lines can be written as
the composition of at most two perspectivities.
The proof can be found on the web resource page.
Before we end our discussion of projective transformations, we need
to make sure that we have covered all possible duality considerations.
Here is the dual to Axiom P7.
Theorem 9.13. Assume axioms P1–P4 and Pappus’s Theorem.
Then, if a projectivity leaves three distinct lines through a point
invariant, then the projectivity must be the identity on the pencil of
lines through that point.
The dual to Pappus’s Theorem involves a second type of cross-join.
Deﬁnition 9.11. Given two pencils of lines with centers P and P ′,
suppose there is a projectivity mapping the pencil at P to the pencil
at P ′. Let a and b be lines incident on P and a′, b′ the corresponding
lines incident on P ′ under the projectivity. Then, the cross joins of
these pairs of lines are the points a · b′ and b · a′.
Theorem 9.14. Dual to Theorem of Pappus Assume Axioms
P1–P4 and Pappus’s Theorem. Then, a projectivity between two
pencils of lines determines a unique point called the center of ho-
mology, which is incident on the lines containing all cross joins of
pairs of corresponding lines.
The proofs of the preceding theorems can be found on the web resource
page.
Exercise 9.4.1. Show that the set of projectivities of a line l into itself forms
a group. Refer to Exercise 5.6.5 for the deﬁnition of a group.

Projective Geometry
■389
Exercise 9.4.2. Prove Theorem 9.7. [Hint: Use a result from the preceding
section of this chapter to show there must be a line l′ ̸= l. Then use Theorem
9.6.]
Exercise 9.4.3. The duals to Theorem 9.6 and Theorem 9.7 must be auto-
matically true by the principle of duality. Write down the duals to these two
results.
Exercise 9.4.4. Prove that Pappus’s theorem is true in the case where one
of the points, say A, is the intersection point of the two lines l and l′. Your
proof should only use results based on axioms P1–P4.
Exercise 9.4.5. Assume axioms P1–P4, and axiom P7 are true. Prove that
if two projectivities between pencils of points with axes l and l′ both have the
same values on three distinct points A, B, and C on l, then the projectivities
must be the same on l. Note: This result is often called the Fundamental
Theorem of Projective Geometry.
Exercise 9.4.6. Assume axioms P1–P4, and axiom P7 are true. Prove that
if two projectivities between pencils of lines with centers O and O′ both have the
same values on three distinct lines a, b, and c through O, then the projectivities
must be the same on the pencil of lines at O. [Hint: Use the dual to axiom P7
(Theorem 9.13).]
Exercise 9.4.7. Using just Axioms P1–P4, prove that every projectivity can
be written as the composition of at most three perspectivities. [Hint: there are
two cases —either the projectivity maps a line to a diﬀerent line or it maps a
line to itself. Use the construction from the proof of Theorem 9.6.]
In the next three exercises we will show that axioms P1–P4 and
Pappus’s Theorem imply axiom P6 – Desargues’ Theorem.
We start by assuming axioms P1–
P4 and Pappus’s Theorem. Then,
we assume the hypotheses of De-
sargues’ Theorem, that triangles
ABC and A′B′C′ are perspec-
tive from O, as shown, with cor-
responding sides intersecting at
points P, Q, and R.
A
B
C
O
B’
A’
C’
P
R
Q

390
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 9.4.8. Let S = A′B′·BC. Note that S cannot be B, B′, or C′ (No
two points on a side of a triangle are collinear with the center of perspective).
Assume S is not equal to C. Also, assume that A ̸= A′, B ̸= B′, and C ̸= C′.
Fill in the Why? parts of the argument below:
Consider OAA′ and CSB (Figure 9.14). We have the points
T = OS · AC
U = OB · A′C
P = AB · A′S
Then, points T, U, and P are collinear (Why?).
For OCC′ and A′B′S, we have U = OB′ · A′C, V = OS · A′C′, and
Q = CS · B′C′. Then, points U, V , and Q are collinear (Why?)
A
B
C
O
B’
A’
C’
P
R
Q
S
T
U
V
Figure 9.14
Consider the two triples of points CA′U and V TS. Then, R = CT · A′V ,
Q = CS · UV and P = A′S · TU (Why?) Thus, R, P, and Q are collinear.
(Why?)
Exercise 9.4.9. Assume axioms P1–P4 and Pappus’s Theorem and assume
that triangles ABC and A′B′C′ are perspective from O. If A = A′ or B = B′
or C = C′ show that Desargues’ Theorem is true.
Exercise 9.4.10. The only case left to consider to ﬁnish the proof that
axioms P1–P4 and Pappus’s Theorem imply axiom P6 – Desargues’ Theorem
is the case where we have the same assumptions as in Exercise 9.4.8, but we
suppose that the point S = A′B′·BC is equal to point C. Let SA′C′ = A′C′·AB,
SB′C′ = B′C′·AC, SAB = AB·B′C′, SAC = AC·A′B′, and SBC = BC·A′C′.
Show that SA′,C′ = B, SB′,C′ = A, SA,B = C′, SA,C = B′, and SB,C = A′.
Then, show that this produces an impossible case for Desargues’ Theorem.

Projective Geometry
■391
9.5
MODELS OF PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY
Recall that a model for an axiomatic system was an interpretation of the
undeﬁned terms of the system such that the axioms held true. In this
section we consider several models for Projective geometry. We start
with the model alluded to at the end of the ﬁrst section of this chapter.
This model is based on the standard Euclidean plane.
9.5.1
The Real Projective Plane
We start by deﬁning points at inﬁnity.
Deﬁnition 9.12. Let l be a Euclidean line and let [l] represent the
set of all Euclidean lines that are parallel to l. Then, we deﬁne [l]
to be an ideal point or a point at inﬁnity. The set of all ideal points
is called the line at inﬁnity. Given a Euclidean line l, we deﬁne the
extended line through l to be the set consisting of the points of l
plus [l].
Deﬁnition 9.13. The points of the Real Projective Plane consist of
all ordinary Euclidean points plus all ideal points. The lines consist
of all extended Euclidean lines plus the line at inﬁnity.
For this interpretation of points and lines to be a model for Projective
geometry, we must show that it satisﬁes all of the axioms for Projective
geometry.
Theorem 9.15. The Real Projective Plane satisﬁes axioms P1–P4
of Projective geometry.
Proof: Axiom P1: Let P and Q be two points in the Real Projective
Plane. If the two points are Euclidean points, then from Euclidean ge-
ometry we know there is a unique line incident on them.
Suppose P is Euclidean and Q is an ideal point. Then, Q = [l] from
some Euclidean line l. Any line incident on P and Q must be parallel
to l and pass through P. We know there is a unique Euclidean line m
through P that is parallel to l (Playfair’s Postulate), and thus is incident
on P and Q.

392
■Exploring Geometry
Suppose P and Q are both ideal points. Then, they belong to the
line at inﬁnity and no other line.
Axiom P2: Let l and m be lines in the Real Projective Plane with
l ̸= m. If they are both Euclidean lines, then there are two cases to
consider. If they are not parallel, then they intersect. If they are parallel,
then the point [l] = [m] is on both.
Suppose l is Euclidean and m is the line at inﬁnity. Then, the point
[l] is on m and on l.
Axiom P3: The Real Projective Plane has an inﬁnite number of
Euclidean points.
Axiom P4: Every Euclidean line clearly has at least three points on
it. Also, there are at least three distinct Euclidean lines that are pair-wise
non-parallel (take the lines extending the three sides of an equilateral
triangle). These three lines deﬁne three distinct points on the line at
inﬁnity. 2
From the work we did in the last section, we know that we can now
deﬁne perspectivities and projectivities, that is, projective transforma-
tions. There is an alternate, but equivalent, model for the Real Projective
Plane that will allow us to easily analyze such projective transformations.
The 3D Model of the Real Projective Plane
In the three dimensional model of the Real Projective Plane, we interpret
the two dimensional points of the Euclidean plane as three dimensional
points with z-coordinate equal to 1, much as we did in section 5.7.1,
where we discussed the matrix form of Euclidean isometries.
Given a Euclidean point (x, y) we
identify this point with the point
(x, y, 1). An ordinary Euclidean
line will then be identiﬁed with
the corresponding line at height 1.
z
x
y
z=1
(x,y)
(x,y,1)
l
l’

Projective Geometry
■393
We note that there is a 1–
1 relationship between the points
(x, y, 1) and the lines through
the origin and these points. Also,
there is a similar relationship be-
tween lines l′ in the z
=
1
plane (labeled π in the ﬁgure) and
planes through the origin and l′.
z
x
y
(x,y)
(x,y,1)
l
l’
π
Thus, we can identify the ordinary points of the Real Projective
Plane with points (x, y, 1), or equivalently with any point along the line
k(x, y, 1). What about ideal points? Clearly, as a point moves farther and
farther from the z-axis, the slope of the line through the origin and that
point will decrease. In the “limit,” this line will approach a line in the
x-y plane. Thus, points at inﬁnity can be identiﬁed with lines through
the origin with z-coordinate equal to zero.
We summarize this discussion by introducing the notion of homoge-
neous coordinates .
Deﬁnition 9.14. Homogeneous coordinates (x1, x2, x3) for an or-
dinary Euclidean point P = (x, y) are a choice of x1, x2, x3 such
that x1
x3
= x and x2
x3
= y. One such representation is (x, y, 1). Ho-
mogeneous coordinates of the form (x1, x2, 0) represent points at
inﬁnity.
LetP be the Euclidean point (x, y) and v the Euclidean 3-D line
through (x, y, 1) and the origin. Homogeneous coordinates give us a way
to represent P (equivalently v) as a single analytical quantity, and they
also give a simple analytical description of points at inﬁnity. Points at
inﬁnity, with coordinates (x1, x2, 0), represent the set of lines parallel to
a given line having slope x2
x1
. Homogeneous coordinates thus give us a
natural way to “coordinatize” the Real Projective Plane.
A natural question to ask is whether there is a simple way to describe
lines in the Real Projective Plane. From the discussion above, a line
can be considered equivalent to a plane through the origin. The line at
inﬁnity includes all ideal points, thus all points of the form (x, y, 0). The
line at inﬁnity is then the x-y plane. Now, any plane through the origin
must satisfy an equation of the form ax+by +cz = 0. The point (x, y, z)

394
■Exploring Geometry
is on the plane and (a, b, c) is the normal vector, which uniquely deﬁnes
the plane. We see that vectors can deﬁne both points and lines in the
Real Projective Plane. To distinguish the two uses for vectors, we will
use square brackets “[ ]” to denote planar coordinates (those that deﬁne
lines).
We can now deﬁne the 3-D model of the Real Projective Plane.
Deﬁnition 9.15. The points of the 3-D model include all non-zero
homogeneous coordinate vectors v = (x, y, z). The lines of the 3-D
model include all non-zero homogeneous planar vectors [a, b, c]. A
point v = (x, y, z) is on a line u = [a, b, c] iﬀax+by +cz = 0. That
is, if the dot product u · v = 0.
For the 3-D model we will think of vectors for lines [a, b, c] as row
vectors and vectors for points (x, y, z) as column vectors. Then, u·v can
be thought of as a matrix multiplication.
It will be left as an exercise to verify that Axioms P1–P4 hold in
this new model. The points and lines in the original Real Projective
Plane can be identiﬁed in a 1–1 and onto fashion with the points and
lines of the 3-D model. In fact, the 3-D model is essentially just a re-
interpretation of the points and lines of the original model —the two
models are essentially the same model. Thus, any statement about lines,
points, and incidence that is proven in one of the models is automatically
true in the other.
Here are a couple of useful results in homogeneous coordinates.
Theorem 9.16. Three points X = (x1, x2, x3), Y = (y1, y2, y3)
and Z = (z1, z1, z3) are collinear if and only if the determinant

x1
y1
z1
x2
y2
z2
x3
y3
z3

is equal to 0.
Proof: From linear algebra, we know that the determinant of the square
matrix is 0 if and only if one of the columns (points) is a linear combi-
nation of the other two. This is equivalent to one of the points being on
the same line as the other two. 2

Projective Geometry
■395
Theorem 9.17. Three lines u = (u1, u2, u3), v = (v1, v2, v3) and
w = (w1, w2, w3) are concurrent (meet at a single point) if and only
if the determinant

u1
u2
u3
v1
v2
v3
w1
w2
w3

is equal to 0.
Proof: From linear algebra, we know that the determinant of a square
matrix is 0 if and only if one of the rows (lines) is a linear combination
of the other two. This is equivalent to one of the lines having a normal
vector which is in the same plane as the other two normals. This means
the three planes intersect along a common line, i.e., a common projective
point. 2
9.5.2
Transformations in the Real Projective Plane
In section 9.4 we considered perspectivities and projectivities of one line
to another. In this section we show that we can create coordinate rep-
resentations of projectivities by the use of matrix transformations. We
start by developing a coordinate parametrization for points on a line.
Theorem 9.18. Let P = (p1, p2, p3) and Q = (q1, q2, q3) be distinct
points. Let X = (x1, x2, x3) be a point on the line P · Q. Then,
X = αP + βQ = (αp1 + βq1, αp2 + βq2, αp3 + βq3), with α and
β real constants with at least one being non-zero. Conversely, if
X = αP + βQ, with at least one of α and β not zero, then X is on
the line through P and Q.
Proof: We start by assuming that X is on the line through P and Q.
By Theorem 9.16 the vectors representing P, Q, and X are linearly
dependent. That is, there are constants a, b, and c such that aP + bQ +
cX = (0, 0, 0). Since P and Q are distinct homogeneous points, then
aP + bQ ̸= (0, 0, 0). Thus, at least one of a and b is non-zero. Also,
c ̸= 0. Thus, X =
a
−cP +
b
−cQ = αP + βQ.
Conversely, suppose we have a point X = αP + βQ. Then, clearly
X is a linear combination of P and Q and Theorem 9.16 can be used to
show that X is on the line through P and Q. 2

396
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 9.16. The coordinates (α, β) are called homogeneous
parameters or parametric homogeneous coordinates of the point X
with respect to the base points P and Q.
Homogeneous parameters of a point are not unique. From the proof
of the preceding theorem, any multiple of a given homogeneous repre-
sentation, (α, β) is equivalent to any (λα, λβ), for λ ̸= 0. What is unique
is the ratio of the two parameters α
β .
Deﬁnition 9.17. Given homogeneous parameters (α, β) of the
point X with respect to the base points P and Q, the ratio α
β is
called the parameter of the point.
We automatically have the following dual theorem to Theorem
9.18:
Theorem 9.19. Let u = [u1, u2, u3] and v = [v1, v2, v3] be two
distinct lines with homogeneous coordinates in the Real Projective
Plane. Let w = [w1, w2, w3] be any line concurrent with u · v. Then,
w can be represented as w = Au+Bv, with A and B real constants,
with at least one being non-zero. Conversely, if w = Au + Bv, with
at least one of A and B not zero,then w is concurrent with u · v.
We now can provide a coordinate description of a perspectivity.
Theorem 9.20. Let l and l′ be distinct lines perspective from point
O. Let P ̸= Q be on l with PQ
O
⊼P ′Q′. Let X be on l with parametric
homogeneous coordinates (α, β). Let X′ be on l′ with PQX
O
⊼P ′Q′X′
and parametric homogeneous coordinates (α′, β′) (with respect to
points P ′ and Q′). Then, the perspectivity mapping X to X′ can be
represented in parametric coordinates as:
λ
"
α′
β′
#
=
"
a
b
c
d
# "
α
β
#
with ad −bc ̸= 0, λ ̸= 0

Projective Geometry
■397
Proof: Let u = P · P ′, v = Q · Q′, and w = X · X′ (Figure 9.15). By
Theorem 9.19 we know that w has parametric homogeneous coordinates
w = A u + B v.
O
l
l’
P
X
Q
u
w
v
P’
X’
Q’
Figure 9.15
X is on the line w if the dot product of w and X is zero, or [A u +
B v] · (αP + βQ) = 0. Expanding this out we get:
[Au1 + Bv1, Au2 + Bv2, Au3 + Bv3] · (αp1 + βq1, αp2 + βq2, αp3 + βq3) = 0
Re-arranging, we get
(u1p1 + u2p2 + u3p3)Aα + (u1q1 + u2q2 + u3q3)Aβ+
(v1p1 + v2p2 + v3p3)Bα + (v1q1 + v2q2 + v3q3)Bβ = 0
Let a21, a22, −a11, and −a12 be the multipliers of Aα, Aβ, Bα and Bβ
respectively. Then,
a21Aα + a22Aβ = a11Bα + a12Bβ
A
B = a11α + a12β
a21α + a22β
In matrix form this can be written as
λ1
"
A
B
#
=
"
a11
a12
a21
a22
# "
α
β
#
(9.1)
for some λ1 ̸= 0. We note that the matrix
"
a11
a12
a21
a22
#
is non-singular.
If it were singular, then there would be a set of parameters (α, β) such
that Equation 9.1 has A and B both equal to zero. But, we know that

398
■Exploring Geometry
one of A or B must always be non-zero, which means that the matrix
must be non-singular, and thus invertible.
We could carry out a similar argument for the point X′ to be on line
w and get
λ2
"
A
B
#
=
"
b11
b12
b21
b22
# "
α′
β′
#
for some λ2 ̸= 0, with
"
b11
b12
b21
b22
#
again non-singular. Let
"
c11
c12
c21
c22
#
be the inverse matrix to
"
b11
b12
b21
b22
#
. Then,
1
λ2
"
α′
β′
#
=
"
c11
c12
c21
c22
# "
A
B
#
(9.2)
Combining equations 9.1 and 9.2 we get
λ1
λ2
"
α′
β′
#
=
"
c11
c12
c21
c22
# "
a11
a12
a21
a22
# "
α
β
#
The result stated in the theorem follows by letting λ = λ1
λ2 and letting
"
a
b
c
d
#
=
"
c11
c12
c21
c22
# "
a11
a12
a21
a22
#
2
Since a projectivity is a ﬁnite sequence of perspectivities, we have:
Corollary 9.21. Given a projectivity l ⊼l′, with l and l′ distinct.
Let P ̸= Q be on l with PQ ⊼P ′Q′. Let X be on l with parametric
homogeneous coordinates (α, β). Let X′ be on l′ with PQX⊼P ′Q′X′,
and parametric homogeneous coordinates (α′, β′) (with respect to P ′
and Q′). Then, the projectivity, as a mapping of points on l, can be
represented by a matrix equation of the form:
λ
"
α′
β′
#
=
"
a
b
c
d
# "
α
β
#
with ad −bc ̸= 0, λ ̸= 0
The converse to the above result also holds —every non-singular
2×2 matrix generates a projectivity with respect to local homogeneous
coordinates.

Projective Geometry
■399
Theorem 9.22. Let P ̸= Q be on l. Let X be a point on l with
parametric homogeneous coordinates (α, β) with respect to P and Q.
Let
"
a
b
c
d
#
be a matrix with ad−bc ̸= 0. Then, the transformation
of l into l′ deﬁned by the matrix equation:
"
α′
β′
#
=
"
a
b
c
d
# "
α
β
#
deﬁnes a projectivity from l to l′.
Proof: Consider the three points P, Q, and R on l, where R has homo-
geneous coordinates (1, 1). Since P = (1, 0) and Q = (0, 1), then the
matrix transformation maps P, Q, R to S, T, U on l′ with homogeneous
coordinates (a, c), (b, d) and (a + b, c + d).
Now, we know that there is a projectivity that takes P, Q, and R on
l to S, T, and U on l′. By the preceding corollary, this projectivity can
be represented as a matrix by
λ
"
α′
β′
#
=
"
a11
a12
a21
a22
# "
α
β
#
where the determinant ad −bc ̸= 0 and λ ̸= 0. Thus,
λ1
"
a
c
#
=
"
a11
a12
a21
a22
# "
1
0
#
λ2
"
b
d
#
=
"
a11
a12
a21
a22
# "
0
1
#
λ3
"
a + b
c + d
#
=
"
a11
a12
a21
a22
# "
1
1
#
We can assume that one of the three scalar multiples, say λ3 is 1. Then,
λ1a = a11
λ2b = a12
a + b = a11 + a12
λ1c = a21
λ2d = a22
c + d = a21 + a22

400
■Exploring Geometry
Then,
a + b = λ1a + λ2b
c + d = λ1c + λ2d
Or,
a(1 −λ1) + b(1 −λ2) = 0
c(1 −λ1) + d(1 −λ2) = 0
This can be written as
"
a
b
c
d
#  
(1 −λ1)
(1 −λ2)
!
= 0. Since ad −bc ̸= 0
the only solution to this equation is λ1 = 1, λ2 = 1.
Thus,
"
a
b
c
d
#
=
"
a11
a12
a21
a22
#
2
We note that the duals to the above theorems are automatically true.
Recall our discussion in section 9.4.2 concerning projectivities. In
that section we realized that we needed an axiom (P7) to ensure the
uniqueness of projectivities for a projective geometry satisfying axioms
P1–P4. Axiom P7 stated that if a projectivity leaves three distinct points
on a line invariant, then the projectivity must be the identity. It will be
left as an exercise to prove that projectivities in the 3-D model of the
Real Projective Plane satisfy Axiom P7.
Since the Real Projective Plane model satisﬁes P7, then all of the
results from 9.4.2 hold. In particular, we know that Pappus’s Theorem
and Desargues’ Theorem are true in this model.
The only remaining axiom that we have yet to prove in the Real Pro-
jective Plane is Axiom P5 (Fano’s Axiom) on complete quadrangles. To
consider this axiom, we will have to expand our notion of transformations
from that of projectivities (from lines to lines) to general transformations
of the entire projective plane.
9.5.3
Collineations
We know that a projectivity maps a line to another line in a 1–1 fash-
ion. If we want to extend the one-dimensional notion of projectivities to
mappings of the entire projective plane to itself, it makes sense to look
at transformations that are 1–1 and onto, that map lines to lines, and
that preserve incidence.

Projective Geometry
■401
Deﬁnition 9.18. A collineation is a 1–1 and onto transformation
of the Real Projective Plane to itself that maps lines to lines and
preserves intersections of lines.
We know from linear algebra that the requirement for a collineation
to take lines to lines means that the analytic (coordinate) form of
the mapping will be a matrix transformation from Euclidean three-
dimensional space (R3) to itself. That is,
Theorem 9.23. A collineation can be represented by a matrix equa-
tion of the form λX′ = AX where A is a 3×3 matrix with non-zero
determinant and λ ̸= 0.
Collineations have an interesting connection with complete quadran-
gles. Recall that a complete quadrangle consist of four distinct points, no
three of which are collinear. Perhaps the easiest quadrangle to deﬁne is
the set X1 = (1, 0, 0), X2 = (0, 1, 0), X3 = (0, 0, 1), and X4 = (1, 1, 1). It
will be left as an exercise to show that these four points form a complete
quadrangle.
Theorem 9.24. Given a complete quadrangle consisting of points
P,Q,R, and S, there is a unique collineation that takes P to X1, Q
to X2, R to X3, and S to X4.
Proof: Let b11x1 + b12x2 + b13x3 = 0 be the equation of the line Q · R,
b21x1 + b22x2 + b23x3 = 0 be the equation of the line P · R, and b31x1 +
b32x2 + b33x3 = 0 be the equation of the line P · Q, Consider the matrix
B =


b11
b12
b13
b21
b22
b23
b31
b32
b33


Then, BP = (α, 0, 0) = (1, 0, 0) = X1, BQ = (0, β, 0) = X2, and
BR = (0, 0, γ) = X3. (two points are equivalent if their homogeneous
coordinates are non-zero multiples of one another.)
Let
A =


k1b11
k1b12
k1b13
k2b21
k2b22
k2b23
k3b31
k3b32
k3b33



402
■Exploring Geometry
for non-zero constants k1, k2, and k3. Then, AP = (k1α, 0, 0) = X1,
AQ = (0, k2β, 0) = X2, and AR = (0, 0, k3γ) = X3. So, A and B have
the same eﬀect on P, Q, and R.
Consider the eﬀect of B on the fourth point in the quadrangle. BS =
(s1, s2, s3) = s1(1, 0, 0) + s2(0, 1, 0) + s3(0, 0, 1). Since S is not collinear
with any pair from P, Q, and R, then BS is not collinear with any pair
from (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), and (0, 0, 1). This means that s1, s2, and s3 are
all non-zero. Let k1 =
1
s1 , k2 =
1
s2 , and k3 =
1
s3 . Then, AS = (1, 1, 1).
Also, if we use any other homogeneous coordinates for BS, say BS =
(λs1, λs2, λs3), λ ̸= 0, then AS = (λ, λ, λ) = (1, 1, 1) = X4. Thus, A
maps P, Q, R, and S to X1, X2, X3, and X4.
To show that A is unique, suppose that there is another collineation
given by a matrix A′ that takes P to X1, Q to X2, R to X3, and S
to X4. Let the homogeneous coordinates for points P, Q, R, and S be
ﬁxed. Let
h
P
Q
R
i
be the matrix with column vectors being the
homogeneous coordinates for P, Q, and R. From our work above we have
that
A
h
P
Q
R
i
=


k1α
0
0
0
k2β
0
0
0
k3γ


Or,
A =


k1α
0
0
0
k2β
0
0
0
k3γ


h
P
Q
R
i−1
For this last equation, we use the fact that P, Q, and R are non-collinear,
which means that the three homogeneous column vectors for these points
are linearly independent. Thus the matrix formed from these three vec-
tors is invertible.
For A′, we have that
A′ h
P
Q
R
i
=


λ1
0
0
0
λ2
0
0
0
λ3


Or,
A′ =


λ1
0
0
0
λ2
0
0
0
λ3


h
P
Q
R
i−1

Projective Geometry
■403
Let (σ1, σ2, σ3) =
h
P
Q
R
i−1 (S). Then, AS = (k1ασ1, k2βσ2, k3γσ3)
and A′S = (λ1σ1, λ2σ2, λ3σ3). Since AS = cA′S, then
k1ασ1 = cλ1σ1
k2ασ2 = cλ2σ2
k3ασ3 = cλ3σ3
Or,



k1α
k2α
k3α


= c



λ1
λ2
λ3



Thus,
A =


k1α
0
0
0
k2β
0
0
0
k3γ


h
P
Q
R
i−1
=


cλ1
0
0
0
cλ2
0
0
0
cλ3


h
P
Q
R
i−1 = cA′
We conclude that, in homogeneous coordinates, A and A′ are the same
transformation. It is also clear that A is invertible. Thus, A is the unique
collineation as described in the theorem. 2
The next theorem is often called the Fundamental Theorem of Projec-
tive Geometry. We have already discussed another result (Exercise 9.4.5)
which also had this moniker. The previous fundamental result dealt with
triples of points on a single line, while the following fundamental result
deals with non-collinear sets of points. This second Fundamental Theo-
rem follows almost immediately from the preceding result.
Theorem 9.25. There exists a unique collineation that takes the
four points of a complete quadrangle to any other four points of
another complete quadrangle.
The proof will be left as an exercise.
While the proof of the Fundamental Theorem of Projective Geometry
presented here is based on using homogeneous coordinates in the Real
Projective Plane, the result actually holds for any abstract Projective
geometry that satisﬁes Fano’s axiom and Pappus’s Theorem. A proof of
this result can be found in [19][Chapter 8].

404
■Exploring Geometry
9.5.4
Homogeneous Coordinates and Perspectivities
So far we have considered perspectivities of two types —those from a
pencil of points on one line to a pencil of points on another, or from a
pencil of lines on one point to a pencil of lines on another. (Figure 9.16)
O
l
l’
A
B
C
A’
B’ C’
O
O’
l
a
b
c
a’
b’
c’
Perspectivity for
   pencils of points
Perspectivity for
   pencils of lines
Figure 9.16
We have seen that in both cases, the perspectivity can be represented
in homogeneous coordinates by a 2×2 matrix. There is a third type of
perspectivity that will come in handy later in this chapter —that of a
pencil of points to a pencil of lines, or vice-versa.
Deﬁnition 9.19. A perspectivity with center O and axis l is a 1–1
mapping of a pencil of points with axis l to a pencil of lines with
center O such that if P on l is mapped to p through O, then p passes
through P.
Here we have an illustration of a
perspectivity of this third type.
Lines p, q, and r are mapped to
points P, Q, and R.
O
P
p
q
R
r
Q
O
P
R
Q
If we are careful with the choice of homogeneous coordinates for lines
and points, we can synchronize the coordinates for a perspectivity from

Projective Geometry
■405
a pencil of points to a pencil of lines. The proof of the next result can
be found on the web resource page.
Theorem 9.26. Given a perspectivity with center O and axis l, we
can choose homogeneous coordinates for the pencil of points on l
and the pencil of lines through O so that the same coordinates can
represent both sets.
9.5.5
Elliptic Model
Before we leave the subject of models for Projective geometry, we will
note the connection between the 3-D Real Projective Plane model and
the model for Elliptic geometry developed in section 8.3.3. In the Real
Projective Plane, points are represented as lines through the origin. Each
such line will intersect the unit sphere in a pair of antipodal points. Since
a line represents a single point in the Projective plane, we can identify
a pair of antipodal spherical points as representing a single projective
point. Also, a projective line is deﬁned as a plane through the origin.
This intersects the sphere in a great circle. We can identify great circles
as representing projective lines.
This representation of projective point and line was precisely the
deﬁnition we used in section 8.3.3 to deﬁne elliptic points and lines in
the Single Elliptic model of Elliptic Geometry. Thus, we immediately
see that Single Elliptic geometry, or Elliptic geometry in general, is a
model for Projective geometry. Elliptic geometry is distinguished from
Projective geometry only in that it adds the metric notions of distance
and angle measure.
Exercise 9.5.1. Show that the 3-D model of the Real Projective Plane, as
deﬁned in 9.15 satisﬁes axioms P1–P4 for a Projective Plane.
Exercise 9.5.2. Use the matrix form of a projectivity to prove that the 3-D
model of the Real Projective Plane satisﬁes Axiom P7: If a projectivity leaves
three diﬀerent points —P, Q, and R —on a line invariant, then the projectivity
is the identity. [Hint: Use Corollary 9.21 and facts about eigenvectors.]
Exercise 9.5.3. What are the homogeneous coordinates of the line at inﬁn-
ity?
Exercise 9.5.4. Let P and Q be distinct points on a projective line l and
let X be a point on l with parametric homogeneous coordinates (α, β) with
respect to P and Q. Suppose R and S are also distinct points on l. Then, R =

406
■Exploring Geometry
λ1P + λ2Q and S = µ1P + µ2Q. Let (α′, β′) be the homogeneous coordinates
for X with respect to R and S. Show that
 α
β

=
 λ1
µ1
λ2
µ2
  α′
β′

Exercise 9.5.5. Let u = [u1, u2, u3] be a line in the Real Projective Plane
that is not the line at inﬁnity. Let P and Q be any two non-ideal points
(points not at inﬁnity). Find the parametric homogeneous coordinates of the
ideal point X of u.
Exercise 9.5.6. Prove that the four points A = (0, 0, 1), B = (1, 0, 0), C =
(0, 0, 1), and D = (1, 1, 1) form a complete quadrangle. [Hint: use Theorem
9.16]
Exercise 9.5.7. Prove Theorem 9.25
Exercise 9.5.8. Suppose a collineation ﬁxes the four points of a complete
quadrangle. Prove that the collineation is the identity.
Exercise 9.5.9. Show that a collineation, when restricted to the points on
a line l, is actually a projectivity on the points of l. [Hint: Let l be a line
and l′ = Al. Let P and Q be base points for homogeneous coordinates for l
and P ′, Q′ homogeneous coordinates on l′. Given X on l, use homogeneous
coordinates to show that AX can be written as a 2×2 matrix equation.]
Deﬁne a collineation to be an aﬃne collineation if the collineation
maps parallel lines to parallel lines. That is, the transformation preserves
the property of parallelism. Two lines are parallel if they intersect at an
ideal point.
Exercise 9.5.10. Prove that a collineation is aﬃne if and only if the
collineation maps ideal points to other ideal points. Thus, the collineation
maps the line at inﬁnity to itself.
Exercise 9.5.11. Show that if a collineation is aﬃne then the matrix for
the collineation has its third row equivalent to [0 0 1]. [Hint: use homogeneous
coordinates for ideal points. ]
9.6
PROJECT 15 - RATIOS AND HARMONICS
We saw in section 1.2.2 that ratios of distances were of particular
importance to early Euclidean Geometry. The golden ratio was deﬁned

Projective Geometry
■407
to be a splitting of a segment into two parts so that the ratio of the
whole to the larger part was equal to the ratio of the larger part to the
smaller. Such a splitting was called a golden section. It is clear that any
Euclidean isometry will preserve a golden section, as isometries preserve
Euclidean distance and length.
In this project we will explore whether we can extend this notion of
invariant ratios to Projective geometry. It is not obvious that this would
even be possible, as Projective geometry has no axioms that deﬁne metric
properties such as distance. However, we can discuss distance in the 3-
D model of Projective geometry. We will see that there is a ratio of
distances that is preserved under projective collineations.
In 9.3.2 we discussed how a projective geometry could be built from
an aﬃne geometry by adding points at inﬁnity. Before we look at ratios
in Projective geometry, we will take a slight side trip to look at ratios in
Aﬃne geometry.
9.6.1
Ratios in Aﬃne Geometry
Aﬃne geometry is an abstraction of Euclidean geometry where we are
concerned only with the incidence of lines and points and with the paral-
lel properties of lines. Parallelism has the same meaning and properties
in Aﬃne geometry as it has in Euclidean geometry.
In Exercises 9.5.10 and 9.5.11 we studied the nature of aﬃne
collineations in the 3-D model of the Real Projective Plane. Aﬃne
collineations preserve the Euclidean notion of parallelism.
In Exercise 9.5.10 we showed that
an aﬃne collineation maps the
line at inﬁnity to itself. This
means that an aﬃne collineation,
when restricted to ordinary Eu-
clidean points, maps these points
to other Euclidean points. Thus,
we can think of an aﬃne collineation
as a map on points whose ho-
mogeneous representation has the
form (x, y, 1).
z
x
y
z=1
(x,y)
(x,y,1)
l
l’
In Exercise 9.5.11 we showed that the matrix for an aﬃne collineation

408
■Exploring Geometry
has its third row equivalent to [0 0 1]. An aﬃne collineation has the form


a
b
e
c
d
f
0
0
1


In the ﬁrst part of this project, we will discover a ratio that
is preserved under transformation by aﬃne collineations. We will
use
dynamic
geometry
software
to
carry
out
our
investigation.
Notes on how to use software for this project can be found at
http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text.
Start up your geometry software
and construct a line ←→
AB. Attach
a point C to this line and measure
the distance from A to B and the
distance from A to C. Then, com-
pute the ratio of these two dis-
tances.
A
B
C
A
B
C
Next, create an aﬃne collineation. A suggestion might be:


1
−1
1
1.5
0.5
1
0
0
1


Transform the line and the three
points using this collineation. The
transformed line and transformed
points (D, E, and F) will appear
in the window. You may need to
zoom out to ensure that all of the
new points are visible in the win-
dow.
A
B
C
D
E
F
A
B
C
D
E
F

Projective Geometry
■409
As we did before measure the
distance from D to E and the dis-
tance from D to F and calculate
the ratio as shown. We note that
the two ratios are the same, even
though the distances are certainly
not the same. If we move points
A, B and C around the distances
might change, but the ratio de-
ﬁned by A, B, and C is always
equal to the ratio deﬁned by D,
E, and F.
A
B
C
D
E
F
A
B
C
D
E
F
Our exploration suggests a Theorem!
Theorem 9.27. Let A, B, and C be three distinct points in the
Real Projective Plane and let M be an aﬃne collineation. Let D =
M(A), E = M(B), and F = M(C). Then,
dist(A, C)
dist(A, B) = dist(D, F)
dist(D, E)
The proof will be carried out in the following exercises:
Exercise 9.6.1. The line ←→
AB can be parameterized as P + tv, where P is a
point on the line and v is the direction vector. Then, A = P +t1v, B = P +t2v,
and C = P + t3v. Show that
dist(A, C)
dist(A, B) = |t3 −t1|
|t2 −t1|
Exercise 9.6.2. Use the preceding exercise, and the fact that dist(D, F) =
||F −D|| = ||MC −MA|| = ||M(C −A)|| to ﬁnish the proof.
9.6.2
Cross-Ratio
Now, we will consider what ratios are invariant in the Real Projective
Plane. As background, we note that in Euclidean geometry, the distance
between two points is always invariant under a Euclidean isometry. We
might call this the trivial ratio (denominator is 1).
For a general aﬃne collineation, the distance between two points

410
■Exploring Geometry
is not necessarily invariant. For example, the aﬃne collineation


2
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
1

will clearly double the distance between two points. In our
exploration above, we have seen that three collinear points suﬃce to de-
ﬁne a ratio of distances that is invariant under an aﬃne collineation. A
logical conjecture would be that 4 points might suﬃce for an invariant
ratio in Projective geometry that is invariant under a perspectivity.
Axiomatic Projective geometry does not have a deﬁned distance func-
tion. However, in our 3-D model of the Real Projective Plane, we do
have a notion of distance for points of the form (x, y, 1). We have the
usual Euclidean distance function. Let’s explore ratios of distances for
perspectivities of four points.
Clear
your
geometry
software
window, construct a line ←→
AB and
attach two points C and D to the
line. Construct another line ←→
EF.
Construct a point O oﬀof both of
these lines. Then draw lines from
O to each of A, B, C, and D. Cre-
ate the intersections A′, B′, C′,
and D′ as shown from point O.
We have created a perspectivity
from O.
O
A
D
A’
D’
B’
C’
B
C
F
E
O
A
D
A’
D’
B’
C’
B
C
F
E
We now look for a ratio deﬁned on four points that is invariant
under the perspectivity. Let’s see if there is a pattern in the ratios we
have considered so far. In Euclidean geometry, the distance between two
points was invariant. In Aﬃne geometry, the ratio that was invariant
was the ratio of two distances from point A, that is the ratio of two
Euclidean ratios. If we consider points A and B as base points for the
triples {A, C, D} and {B, C, D} we would have “aﬃne” ratios dist(A, C)
dist(A, D)
and dist(B, C)
dist(B, D). Perhaps the ratio of these “aﬃne” ratios is invariant?

Projective Geometry
■411
Find the four distance measurements and calculate the two ratios
dist(A, C)
dist(A, D) and dist(B, C)
dist(B, D). Then, ﬁnd the ratio of these two ratios (Fig-
ure 9.17).
O
A
D
A’
D’
B’
C’
B
C
F
E
O
A
D
A’
B’
C’
B
C
F
E
Figure 9.17
Hide some of the measurements to unclutter the screen and then do
the same sequence of measurements and calculations to ﬁnd dist(A′, C′)
dist(A′, D′)
and dist(B′, C′)
dist(B′, D′). Calculate the ratio of these two ratios (Figure 9.18).
O
A
D
A’
B’
B
C
F
E
O
A
D
A’
D’
B’
C’
B
C
F
E
Figure 9.18
It looks like our guess was pretty good! Move points A, B, C , and
D around and also move the perspective point O. The “double” ratio
stays preserved. Our evidence suggests that this new ratio is invariant
under perspectivities, at least perspectivities from points that are not at
inﬁnity.

412
■Exploring Geometry
For many applications of this new ratio, it will be useful to compute
the ratio in terms of directed distances.
Deﬁnition 9.20. Let l be a Euclidean line l deﬁned by points A
and B. Given two points C and D on l, let d be the Euclidean
distance between C and D. Then, the directed distance from C to
D, symbolized by dd(C, D), will be equal to d if the vector D −C
is in the same direction as B −A. Otherwise, the directed distance
will be equal to −d.
The double ratio deﬁned by directed distances with points A, B, C,
and D on line l will be called the cross-ratio of these four points.
Deﬁnition 9.21. Given four points A, B, C, and D on a line l,
the cross-ratio of these four points is deﬁned as
R(A, B; C, D) =
dd(A,C)
dd(A,D)
dd(B,C)
dd(B,D)
= dd(A, C) dd(B, D)
dd(A, D) dd(B, C)
The cross-ratio is also denoted by some authors as R(A, B, C, D). We
use the semi-colon notation to designate that A and B are base points
for the distance measurements in the calculation of this ratio.
One natural question to ask is what happens when you move A, B,
C, and D around in the cross-ratio formula.
Theorem 9.28. Suppose r = R(A, B; C, D). Then,
R(A, C; B, D) = R(D, B; C, A) = 1 −r
Proof: For shorthand notation, let dd(X, Y ) = XY . Then,
R(A, C; B, D) = AB CD
AD CB .

Projective Geometry
■413
Now,
1 −r = 1 −AC BD
AD BC
= (AD BC) −(AC BD)
AD BC
= [(AD BC) −(BD BC)] + [(BD BC) −(AC BD)]
AD BC
= (AD −BD)BC + BD(BC −AC)
AD BC
Using directed distances, we have (AD −BD) = AB and (BC −
AC) = BA = −AB. (Verify this on a separate piece of paper). Thus,
1 −r = (AD −BD)BC + BD(BC −AC)
AD BC
= AB BC −BD AB
AD BC
= AB(BC −BD)
AD BC
= AB CD
AD BC
= R(A, C; B, D)
The proof for R(D, B; C, A) follows from an analogous argument. 2
Exercise 9.6.3. Show, by algebraic manipulation, that the cross-ratio
R(A,B;C,D) is unchanged if any two pairs of points are interchanged. That
is, R(A, B; C, D) = R(B, A; D, C) = R(C, D; A, B) = R(D, C; B, A)
Exercise 9.6.4. Suppose r = R(A, B; C, D). Show that R(B, A; C, D) =
R(A, B; D, C) = 1
r. Also, show that R(A, D; C, B) =
r
1−r.
9.6.3
Harmonious Ratios
We now look at a fascinating connection between the cross-ratio and
musical harmony. We will ﬁrst review the connection between musical
tones and mathematical ratios.
The Pythagoreans were the ﬁrst to systematically analyze the math-
ematical properties of musical pitches. They discovered that we perceive
two pitches as sounding the same if one pitch is doubled in frequency
from the other. In musical terminology, the higher pitch is an octave
above the lower. The frequency of a pitch, say 440 herz (cycles per sec-
ond), is thus in a 2:1 ratio with the pitch an octave below (220 herz).

414
■Exploring Geometry
The Pythagoreans thought the most harmonious pitches were those
with ratios consisting of small integer values. The simplest such ratio is
the octave at 2:1. The next simplest would be a ratio of 3:2. This is the
perfect ﬁfth. For a base pitch of 220 herz, the perfect ﬁfth above would
be 330 herz. Or, in our modern labeling of notes, for a base pitch equal
to a middle C, the perfect ﬁfth would be G.
The Pythagoreans tuned their instruments based on this notion of
perfect ﬁfths, and then went on to build a musical scale of 12 notes. They
did this by successively moving up by perfect ﬁfths six times to get six
main notes. Then, from the new top note, they moved down six times to
get a scale of 12 notes. Unfortunately, there is no way to preserve the 2:1
ratio of an octave by moving by perfect ﬁfths. Also, in this system, if the
C to G is a perfect ﬁfth, then, it is impossible to have other inter-scale
ﬁfths (e.g. D to A) be perfect. For a nice treatment of this mathematical
dilemma, look at Chapters 2 and 3 of [18].
Just Tuning was created as an attempt to solve this problem of trying
to merge a perfect ﬁfth system with an octave system. It was widely used
in the Renaissance period. In Just tuning, the intervals between notes
of the 12 tone scale are chosen to have ratios as small as possible, with
the goal of making as many inter-scale ﬁfths be as perfect as possible.
The notes of the C major scale in Just tuning are:
base - C
1:1
second - D
9:8
third - E
5:4
fourth - F
4:3
ﬁfth - G
3:2
sixth - A
5:3
seventh - B
15:8
octave - C
2:1
The ﬁfth, fourth, and third form a nice progression of 3:2, 4:3, 5:4.
The major triad C-E-G incorporates the ratios 3:2 and 5:4. Given a
base pitch of frequency f, the major triad has frequencies of 3
2f and 5
4f
respectively.
It is interesting to compare the pitch of a note to the length of a string
that produces that pitch. Mersenne’s Law (Marin Mersenne 1588–1648)

Projective Geometry
■415
states that the frequency of a pitch is inversely proportional to the length
of the string producing the pitch.
For a major triad, assume that L is the length of the string producing
the base tone. Then, the lengths for the other strings will be 2
3L and 4
5L.
We will now explore the relationship between these length ratios and the
cross-ratio.
Clear
your
geometry
software
window and create C1 C2. This
segment will represent the length
of a string vibrating at a base
pitch.
C1
C2
Dilate point C2 by a ratio of 2
3
towards C1. Point G will be cre-
ated as the dilated point with the
deﬁned ratio.
C1
C2
G
Similarly, deﬁne a dilation of
4
5 and dilate point C2 toward C1
to get new point E as shown.
C1
C2
G
E
Now, use the distance measuring property of your software to cal-
culate the cross-ratio R(C1, E; G, C2). If your software does not have
directed distances, the cross-ratio will turn out to equal 1. A quick cal-
culation shows that it must actually be −1, if we use directed distances.
Exercise 9.6.5. Use the ratios deﬁned above, and the properties of directed
distances, to prove that the cross-ratio R(C1, E; G, C2) is equal to −1.
We have seen that a harmonious set of intervals (the ﬁfth and third)
turns out to have cross-ratio of −1 when considering string lengths. The
following deﬁnition is not that surprising.
Deﬁnition 9.22. Let A, B, C, and D be collinear points. We say
that (A, B, C, D) forms a harmonic set if R(A, B; C, D) = −1. We
call points C and D harmonic conjugates of each other. We write
H(A, B; C, D) if A, B, C, and D form a harmonic set.
For your report give a careful and complete summary of your work
on this project.

416
■Exploring Geometry
9.7
HARMONIC SETS
9.7.1
Harmonic Sets of Points
Recall from earlier in this chapter that a complete quadrangle consisted
of four distinct points (vertices), no three of which are collinear, and the
six lines (sides) deﬁned by the four points.
If A, B, C, and D are the points
of the quadrangle, then sides AB
and CD, AC and BD, and AD
and BC are called opposite sides
of the quadrangle. The points at
which opposite sides intersect are
called diagonal points of the quad-
rangle. Here the diagonal points
are E, F, and G.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Now, given any pair of diago-
nal points there are two sides of
the quadrangle that do not pass
through these points. For exam-
ple, AD and BC do not pass
through E or F. It will be left
as an exercise to show that the
line through any pair of diagonal
points will not pass through a ver-
tex. For example EF will inter-
sect sides AD and BC at points
H and I which are diﬀerent than
the vertices of the quadrangle.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
Deﬁnition 9.23. Let ABCD be a complete quadrangle and let E
and F be diagonal points. Let AD be a side of the quadrangle such
that E and F do not lie on AD. Let H be the intersection point of
EF with AD. Then, H is called a harmonic point with respect to
E and F.
Since we can form three pairs of points from the three diagonal points

Projective Geometry
■417
of a complete quadrangle, then there are six harmonic points deﬁned for
any complete quadrangle. Taking these in pairs, we get the following
deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 9.24. Let ABCD be a complete quadrangle and let E
and F be diagonal points. Let H and I be the harmonic points on
EF. Then, (E, F, H, I) are said to form a harmonic set (or har-
monic tetrad). We denote a harmonic set by H(E, F; H, I). Points
H and I are called harmonic conjugates of each other.
We note here that at the end of Project 9.5.5, we had a very diﬀerent
deﬁnition of harmonic sets and conjugates. We will see later that these
two seemingly diﬀerent deﬁnitions of harmonic sets are equivalent. Before
we get to that result, we will explore more fully the present deﬁnition of
harmonic sets.
Theorem 9.29. Given any three distinct, collinear points E, F,
and H on a line l, there is a unique point I ̸= H on l such that
H(E, F; H, I).
Proof: We start by constructing a complete quadrangle ABCD that has
the points E and F as diagonal points.
Let A be some point that is not
on EF. We can construct a line
m ̸= l through F that does not
pass through A.
E
F
A
H
m
Let B = m · AE, C = m · AH,
and D = CE · AF. Then, I =
l · BD is the harmonic conjugate
of H.
E
F
l
A
H
C
B
m
D
I

418
■Exploring Geometry
Now, suppose that we start
with a diﬀerent point A′ not on
EF and diﬀerent line m′
̸= l
through F that does not pass
through A′. We do the same con-
struction as above to get point I′.
We will show that I = I′.
E
F
A
H
B
C
D
I
A’
C’
B’
D’
I’
For the rest of the proof, we will use the results on Desargues Theorem
and its dual as discussed in 9.3.5.
In the ﬁnal ﬁgure above, we see that triangles ABC and A′B′C′ are
both perspective from line EF. Thus, lines AA′, BB′, and CC′ are con-
current. Likewise, triangles ACD and A′C′D′ are perspective from EF,
so lines AA′, CC′, and DD′ are concurrent. Thus, all four lines AA′,
BB′, CC′, and DD′ are concurrent at one point. This means that tri-
angles ABD and A′B′D′ are perspective from this point of concurrency.
This means that points E = AB · A′B′, F = AD · A′D′ and BD · B′D′
are collinear. This can only happen if I = I′ 2
9.7.2
Harmonic Sets of Lines
We will now consider the dual results to those discussed above. Note that
the duality principle guarantees that dual results will hold true without
the need for proof. We begin with the dual to the complete quadrangle.
A complete quadrilateral consists of four distinct lines (sides), no
three of which are concurrent, and the six points (vertices) deﬁned by
these four lines (as intersections). If a, b, c, and d are the sides of the
quadrilateral, then the pairs of vertices A1 = a·b and A3 = c·d, A2 = b·c
and A4 = a · d, and A5 = b · d and A6 = a · c are opposite vertices of the
quadrilateral. The sides deﬁned by opposite vertices are called diagonal
sides of the quadrilateral.
In Figure 9.19 we have the complete quadrilateral abcd. The diagonal
sides are e, f, and g.

Projective Geometry
■419
A4
A1
a
A2
b
A3
c
d
A5
A6
e
f
g
Figure 9.19
Given any pair of diagonal sides there are two points of the quadrilat-
eral that do not lie on these lines. For example, A5 and A6 do not lie on
e or f. It will be left as an exercise to show that the point of intersection
of any pair of diagonal sides will not lie on any side of the quadrilateral.
Thus, the line h through e · f and A5 will be diﬀerent from any side of
the quadrilateral, as will the line i through e · f and A6 (Figure 9.20).
A4
A1
a
A2
b
A3
c
d
A5
A6
e
f
g
i
h
Figure 9.20
Deﬁnition 9.25. Let abcd be a complete quadrilateral and let e and
f be diagonal lines. Let A be a vertex of the quadrilateral such that
e and f do not contain A. Let h be the line through e · f and A.
Then, h is called a harmonic line with respect to e and f.

420
■Exploring Geometry
Since we can form three pairs of lines from the three diagonal lines
of a complete quadrilateral, then there are six harmonic lines deﬁned for
any complete quadrilateral. Taking these in pairs, we get the following
deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 9.26. Let abcd be a complete quadrilateral and let e and
f be diagonal lines. Let h and i be the harmonic lines on e·f. Then,
(e, f, h, i) are said to form a harmonic set (or harmonic tetrad).
We denote a harmonic set by H(e, f; h, i). Lines h and i are called
harmonic conjugates of each other.
There is a fundamental connection between harmonic sets of lines
and harmonic sets of points. In Figure 9.21 points H and I are the
intersections of diagonal lines e and f with g. From the construction, we
can see that A1A2A3A4 will be a complete quadrangle and points A5,
A6, H, and I will form a harmonic set of points.
Conversely, if we had started with harmonic points A5, A6, H, and I
we could choose a point G not on A5A6 and construct four lines through
G and each of these four points. We could create a complete quadrilateral
by choosing an arbitrary point for A1 and then computing intersections
to get abcd. Then, the four lines through G would form a harmonic set.
A4
A1
a
A2
b
A3
c
d
A5
A6
e
f
g
G
i
h
H
I
Figure 9.21
We will use this observation to prove the following result:

Projective Geometry
■421
Theorem 9.30. Let E, F, H, and I be a harmonic set on a line
l. That is, H(E, F; H, I). Suppose that l′ is perspective to l through
G and let EFHI
G
⊼E′F ′H′I′. Then, H(E′, F ′; H′, I′). That is, the
image of a harmonic set under a perspectivity is again a harmonic
set.
Proof: From our discussion above, we know that if we construct EG,
FG, HG, and IG, then this will form a harmonic set of lines, and these
lines will intersect l′ at E′, F ′, H′, and I′. Now, we can construct the
points A1, etc, for these points on l′, as we did above, and get a complete
quadrangle, guaranteeing that H(E′, F ′; H′, I′). 2
We immediately get the following result on projectivities:
Corollary 9.31. Suppose that H(E, F; H, I) for points on a line
l and there is a projectivity taking l to l′. Let EFHI⊼E′F ′H′I′.
Then, H(E′, F ′; H′, I′).
The next theorem says that harmonic sets are always related by a
projective transformation.
Theorem 9.32. Let E,F,H, and I be distinct collinear points such
that H(E, F; H, I). Let E′,F ′,H′, and I′ be distinct collinear points
such that H(E′, F ′; H′, I′). Then, there exists a projectivity mapping
E,F,H, and I to E′,F ′,H′, and I′.
Proof: By Theorem 9.7 we know there is a projectivity taking E,F and
H to E′,F ′ and H′. Let I′′ be the image of I under this projectivity. By
the previous Corollary, we know that H(E′, F ′; H′, I′′). But, by Theo-
rem 9.29 we know that the fourth point in a harmonic set is uniquely
deﬁned, based on the ﬁrst three points. Thus, I′ = I′′. 2
9.7.3
Harmonic Sets and the Cross-Ratio
We will now consider the relationship between harmonic sets and the
cross-ratio in the Real Projective Plane model of Projective geometry.
At the end of Project 9.5.5, we deﬁned harmonic sets in terms of the
cross-ratio. Given collinear points A, B, C, and D, we called (A, B, C, D)
a harmonic set if the cross-ratio R(A, B; C, D) was equal to −1. In this

422
■Exploring Geometry
section we will show that this is equivalent to the deﬁnition of harmonic
sets in terms of complete quadrangles. Before we do that, we need to
analyze the cross-ratio in more detail.
Let A,B,C, and D be distinct collinear points on a line l and let
P and Q be points distinct from these four on l. Then, A,B,C, and
D have parametric homogeneous coordinates (α1, α2), (β1, β2), (γ1, γ2)
and (δ1, δ2). (Deﬁnition 9.16) We have A = α1P + α2Q, B = β1P +
β2Q, etc. Since P and Q are diﬀerent than A,B,C, and D, then none
of the parameters are zero and we can assume that the homogeneous
parameters for the four points are (α, 1), (β, 1), (γ, 1) and (δ, 1), where
α = α1
α2 , β = β1
β2 , γ = γ1
γ2 , and δ = δ1
δ2 . In this parametrization the cross-
ratio has a very simple form:
Theorem 9.33. If A,B,C, and D are distinct collinear points with
parametric homogeneous coordinates (α, 1), (β, 1), (γ, 1) and (δ, 1)
with respect to points P and Q. Then
R(A, B; C, D) = dd(A, C) dd(B, D)
dd(B, C) dd(A, D)
= (γ −α)(δ −β)
(γ −β)(δ −α)
The notation dd(A, C) stands for the directed distance between A
and C. The proof of this theorem is left as an exercise.
Corollary 9.34. Let A,B,C, and D be distinct collinear points on
a line l and let P and Q be points distinct from these four on l. Let
A,B,C, and D have parametric homogeneous coordinates (α1, α2),
(β1, β2), (γ1, γ2) and (δ1, δ2) with respect to points P and Q. Then,
R(A, B; C, D) =
det(
"
γ1
α1
γ2
α2
#
)det(
"
δ1
β1
δ2
β2
#
)
det(
"
γ1
β1
γ2
β2
#
)det(
"
δ1
α1
δ2
α2
#
)
The proof is left as an exercise. We note here that this representa-
tion of the cross-ratio would be well-deﬁned even if one or more of the

Projective Geometry
■423
base points for the homogeneous parametric coordinates was one of the
four points A,B,C, or D. In fact, this determinant expression for the
cross-ratio is how many authors deﬁne the cross-ratio. We started with
the directed distance deﬁnition to be better understand its geometric
signiﬁcance.
For future reference, we note that the determinant method for deﬁn-
ing the cross-ratio can be easily extended, in a dual fashion, to a cross-
ratio for lines through a common point.
Deﬁnition 9.27. Let a, b, c, and d be be distinct lines through
a point P and let l and m be lines distinct from these four that
pass through P. Let a, b, c, and d have parametric homogeneous
coordinates (α1, α2), (β1, β2), (γ1, γ2) and (δ1, δ2) with respect to
lines l and m. Then, the cross-ratio of a, b, c, and d is deﬁned as
R(a, b; c, d) =
det(
"
γ1
α1
γ2
α2
#
)det(
"
δ1
β1
δ2
β2
#
)
det(
"
γ1
β1
γ2
β2
#
)det(
"
δ1
α1
δ2
α2
#
)
Using the results from Theorem 9.26 one can prove the following
result. The proof is left as an exercise.
Corollary 9.35. Given a perspectivity with center O and axis l,
with l not passing through O, let a, b, c, and d be lines in the pencil
of lines at O, and A, B, C, and D the corresponding points on l
deﬁned by the perspectivity. Then, R(a, b; c, d) = R(A, B; C, D)
The most important corollary to Theorem 9.33 is the following:
Corollary 9.36. The cross-ratio is invariant under projectivities.
Proof: Let A,B,C, and D be distinct collinear points on a line l with
parametric homogeneous coordinates (with respect to points P and Q)
(α1, α2), (β1, β2), (γ1, γ2) and (δ1, δ2). Let T be a projectivity from l to
l′ and let A′,B′,C′, and D′ be the images of A,B,C, and D under T.
These four image points have parametric homogeneous coordinates with

424
■Exploring Geometry
respect to P ′ = T(P) and Q′ = T(Q). Let these parametric coordinates
be (α′
1, α′
2), (β′
1, β′
2), (γ′
1, γ′
2) and (δ′
1, δ′
2).
Then,
R(A′, B′; C′, D′) =
det(
"
γ′
1
α′
1
γ′
2
α′
2
#
)det(
"
δ′
1
β′
1
δ′
2
β′
2
#
)
det(
"
γ′
1
β′
1
γ′
2
β′
2
#
)det(
"
δ′
1
α′
1
δ′
2
α′
2
#
)
By Corollary 9.21 we know that the projectivity T can be represented
by a matrix equation. For example, for points A and A′ we have
λA
"
α′
1
α′
2
#
=
"
a
b
c
d
# "
α1
α2
#
where the determinant ad −bc ̸= 0 and λ ̸= 0.
Thus, we can write R(A′, B′; C′, D′) as
λCλAdet(
"
a
b
c
d
# "
γ1
α1
γ2
α2
#
)λDλBdet(
"
a
b
c
d
# "
δ1
β1
δ2
β2
#
)
λCλBdet(
"
a
b
c
d
# "
γ1
β1
γ2
β2
#
)λDλAdet(
"
a
b
c
d
# "
δ1
α1
δ2
α2
#
)
Now we use the fact that det(MN) = det(M)det(N) for square ma-
trices M and N, and the fact that ad −bc ̸= 0, to cancel the terms
involving det(
"
a
b
c
d
#
. Also, since all of the λ terms are non-zero, we
can cancel them as well, and the result holds. 2
Now we can show that the deﬁnition for harmonic sets given at the
end of Project 9.5.5 is equivalent to the deﬁnition of harmonic sets in
terms of complete quadrangles.
Theorem 9.37. If A,B,C, and D are distinct collinear points, then
the four points form a harmonic set (H(A, B; C, D), based on the
complete quadrangle deﬁnition) if and only if R(A, B; C, D) = −1.
Proof: If H(A, B; C, D) then, clearly H(A, B; D, C), as the order of C
and D is independent of the deﬁnition of a harmonic set. By Theorem
9.32 there is a projectivity taking A, B, C, and D to A, B, D, and
C. By Corollary 9.36 we know that R(A, B; C, D) = R(A, B; D, C). Let

Projective Geometry
■425
R(A, B; C, D) = r. By exercise 9.6.4 we know that R(A, B; D, C) = 1
r.
Thus, r =
1
r or r2 = 1. Since r ̸= 1 (Exercise) we have that r =
R(A, B; C, D) = −1.
Now, assume that R(A, B; C, D) = −1. We know that given points
A, B, and C there is a unique point D′ for which A, B, C and D′
form a harmonic set. By the ﬁrst part of this theorem we know that
R(A, B; C, D′) = −1. Thus, R(A, B; C, D) = R(A, B; C, D′). But, there
is a unique point D for which R(A, B; C, D) = −1. (Exercise). So, D =
D′ and A, B, C and D form a harmonic set. 2
Exercise 9.7.1. Let ABCD be a complete quadrangle and let E, F, and G
be its diagonal points. Show that any line through two of the diagonal points
will not pass through one of the vertices of the quadrangle.
Exercise 9.7.2. Let abcd be a complete quadrilateral and let e, f, and g
be its diagonal lines. Show that a point of intersection of two of the diagonal
lines will not lie on one of the sides of the quadrangle.
Exercise 9.7.3. Suppose H(E, F; H, I) for points on a line l and that
H(E, F ′; H′, I′) for points on a line l′. (So, E is on both lines) Show that
there is a perspectivity that takes {E, F, H, I} to {E, F ′, H′, I′}.
Exercise 9.7.4. Prove Theorem 9.33 . (Hint: The proof is quite similar to
the work for exercise 9.6.1).
Exercise 9.7.5. Prove Corollary 9.34.
Exercise 9.7.6. Prove Corollary 9.35.
Exercise 9.7.7. Let A, B, and C be three distinct collinear points in the Real
Projective Plane. Show that if R(A, B; C, D) = R(A, B; C, D′), then D = D′.
(Hint: Use the parametric form of the cross-ratio from Theorem 9.33.)
Exercise 9.7.8. Show that the cross-ratio of four distinct collinear points
A,B,C, and D in the Real Projective Plane cannot equal 0, 1, or inﬁnity.
(Hint: Use the parametric form of the cross-ratio from Theorem 9.33. You
may also want to use Exercise 9.6.4)
Exercise 9.7.9. Suppose A, B, C, D, and E are ﬁve distinct collinear
points in the Real Projective Plane. Show that R(A, B; C, D)R(A, B; D, E) =
R(A, B; C, E)
Exercise 9.7.10. Suppose that distinct collinear points A, B, C, and D in
the Real Projective Plane form a harmonic set (based on the complete quad-
rangle deﬁnition). That is H(A, B; C, D). Show that H(C, D; A, B). (Hint:
Use Theorem 9.37)

426
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 9.7.11. Let A, B, and C be distinct collinear points on a line
l in the Real Projective Plane with B the midpoint of segment AC. Explain
why it makes sense to describe the harmonic conjugate of B to be the point at
inﬁnity of the line l. [Hint: Let D be the point at inﬁnity on l. Consider the
coordinate forms of the points A, B, C, and D and show that the cross ratio
of these four points will be equal to −1.]
9.8
CONICS AND COORDINATES
To this point in our review of Projective geometry we have been exclu-
sively concerned with points, lines, and linear ﬁgures such as triangles
and quadrangles. Noticeably missing from our discussion has been any
mention of circles, which were a fundamental (axiomatic!) topic in our
study of Euclidean, Hyperbolic, and Elliptic geometries. This is not that
surprising given that circles are deﬁned in terms of metric properties -
as the set of points equally distant from a center point.
The analog of circles in Projective geometry is the idea of conic
sections. These include all of the traditional sections of the cone —the
circle, ellipse, hyperbola, and parabola. In Projective geometry, these are
all equivalent ﬁgures under the appropriate projective transformation.
Conic sections in projective geometry will be deﬁned using properties of
projective transformations. This might seem a bit strange at ﬁrst, but
there is a nice analog in Euclidean geometry where we can construct
conic sections via Euclidean transformations.
9.8.1
Conic Sections Generated by Euclidean Transformations
Recall that the pencil of points with axis l is the set of all points on l.
The pencil of lines with center O is the set of all lines through point O.
(Figure 9.22)
O
l
pencil of points
pencil of lines
Figure 9.22

Projective Geometry
■427
We have used this terminology frequently in our study of Projective
geometry, but in this section we will assume that pencils of points and
lines consist solely of Euclidean points and lines.
We will be concerned with how pencils of points and lines are trans-
formed under Euclidean transformations, i.e., isometries. Consider how
the pencil of lines with center O is transformed under the composition
of two Euclidean isometries. We know from our work in Chapter 5 that
the composition of two isometries is always another isometry —either a
reﬂection, a translation, a rotation, or a glide reﬂection.
For example, let r be the re-
ﬂection isometry across line ←→
AB
as shown. Consider the pencil of
lines with center O. Under the
isometry r, one of these lines, say
←→
OP, will map to ←−→
O′P, where P is
the intersection point of the lines
on ←→
AB and r(O) = O′. We say
that ←→
OP and ←−→
O′P are correspond-
ing lines under the reﬂection r.
A
B
O
P
Q
R
O’
S
Now, consider the set of all intersection points of corresponding lines.
These would include points P, Q, and R as shown above. This set of
points is the locus of the points of intersection of corresponding lines of
two pencils (the one at O and the one at O′) that are related by the
reﬂection r.
Deﬁnition 9.28. A set of points is called a locus of points if each
point in the set satisﬁes some geometric condition. A point is a
member of the locus of points if and only if it satisﬁes the condition.
In the previous example, a point is in the locus of points if it satisﬁes
the condition that it is a point of intersection of corresponding lines of
the two pencils. Clearly, this set of points is the line ←→
AB. There is one
unique line which does not generate an element in this locus —the line
←→
OS which is parallel to ←→
AB at O. However, if we consider this example
in the extended Euclidean plane, with points at inﬁnity attached, then
←→
OS and r(←→
OS) will intersect at a point at inﬁnity, which we would then
have to add to the locus of points.

428
■Exploring Geometry
Now, let’s consider the locus of points that are generated from two
pencils that are related by the composition of two reﬂections.
Let ←→
AB and ←→
CD serve as two
lines of reﬂection for reﬂections
rAB and rCD. Let O be a cen-
ter for a pencil of lines and let
O′ = rAB(O) and O′′ = rCD(O′).
For a given line l = ←→
OP in the
pencil at O, let m = rAB(l) and
n = rCD(m).
O
A
B
C
D
O’
O’’
P
l
m
n
X
O
A
B
C
D
O’
O’’
P
X
The intersection point, X, of l and n will be a point on the locus of
points that are generated from the two pencils of lines at O and O′′ that
are related by the composition of rAB and rCD.
The next theorem is a non-obvious result about the set of all locus
points X constructed as above.
Theorem 9.38. Let ←→
AB and ←→
CD be intersecting lines in the
plane. Let rAB and rCD be reﬂections across these lines. Let O′′ =
rCD(rAD(O)). Then, the locus of points of intersection of corre-
sponding lines of the two pencils at O and O′′ forms a circle.
Proof: Let E be the intersection of ←→
AB and ←→
CD. This point is on the
locus, as it is ﬁxed by both reﬂections. We will show that the locus of
points generated by the reﬂections is the circle through E, O, and O′′.
The circle through E, O, and
O′′ is the circumscribed circle
through these points, as we saw
in Project 2.2. This center of this
circle is constructed by ﬁnding the
intersection point H of the per-
pendicular bisectors of EO and
EO′′. (Midpoints F and G)
O
A
B
C
D
O’
P
l
m
n
X
E
F
G
H
O
A
B
C
D
O’
O’’
P
X
E
F
G
H

Projective Geometry
■429
We know from Chapter 5 that if the two lines of reﬂection in the con-
struction above are not parallel, then the composition f of the two re-
ﬂections across these lines will be a rotation about the point where the
lines intersect —in our case, a rotation about point E. Also, we know
the angle of rotation is twice the angle made by the two lines. Thus, the
measure of ∠OEO′′ is twice the measure of ∠AEC. From our work on
circles in 2.6 we know that inscribed angle ∠OEO′′ has a measure that
is one-half the measure of central angle ∠OHO′′.
From Exercise 5.4.7 in Chapter 5 we know that the measure of the
vertical angle at X made by ←→
OP and n must equal the angle of rota-
tion. Thus, the measure of ∠OXO′′ equals the measure of ∠OEO′′, and
thus the measure of ∠OXO′′ is one-half of the measure of central angle
∠OHO′′. By Theorem 2.42 the point X must be on the circle. 2
9.8.2
Point Conics in Projective Geometry
As mentioned earlier, conics deﬁned by metric properties are not feasible
in Projective geometry. However, the methods used in the last section
to construct a Euclidean circle is generalizeable to Projective geometry.
Instead of constructing a locus of points by using Euclidean isometries,
we will instead use Projective transformations, i.e., projectivities. Our
development follows closely the work of W. T. Fishback in [13].
Deﬁnition 9.29. A point conic is the locus of points of intersection
of corresponding lines of two pencils of lines, where the ﬁrst pencil
is transformed to the second by a projectivity. If the projectivity is
equivalent to a single perspectivity, or if the centers of the pencils are
the same point, the point conic will be called singular. Otherwise,
the point conic is called non-singular.
Here we illustrate a non-degenerate
point conic that is generated by
some projectivity between pencils
of lines at O and O′′. A point X on
the conic is deﬁned as the inter-
section of two lines l and l′′ that
are projectively related.
O
O’’
l
l’’
X
From the ﬁgure, it appears that the centers of the two pencils lie on the
point conic. This is always the case.

430
■Exploring Geometry
Theorem 9.39. The centers of the pencils that deﬁne a point conic
always lie on the point conic.
Proof: We know that the line n = OO′′ is a member of the pencil of lines
at O and also the pencil of lines at O′′ (Figure 9.23). The projectivity
deﬁning the point conic will map n to some other line n′′ through O′′.
Clearly, n and n′′ intersect at O′′. Consider m′′ = n as a line through
O′′. The inverse of the projectivity will map m′′ to a line m through O.
Then, m and m′′ intersect at O.
O
O’’
m’’=n
l
l’’
’’
n
m
X
Figure 9.23
2
Our deﬁnition of point conics splits the family of possible conics into
two groups, the singular point conics and the non-singular point conics.
We begin our analysis with the singular point conics.
Theorem 9.40. The possible singular point conics include the fol-
lowing: the entire Projective plane, the set of points on two distinct
lines, the set of points on a single line, and a single point.
Proof: A singular point conic is deﬁned by two cases: either its deﬁning
projectivity is equivalent to a single perspectivity or the centers of the
pencils of lines of the point conic are the same point.
Suppose the point conic’s deﬁning projectivity is equivalent to a sin-
gle perspectivity with axis l, with two distinct centers O ̸= O′ of pencils
of lines. Clearly, the corresponding lines of the pencils will meet on the
axis l and so the point conic consists of the points on l.
Now, suppose the centers of the pencils are the same point O = O′.
We have to consider all possible types of projectivities. One possible

Projective Geometry
■431
projectivity would be the identity. In this case, every line corresponds to
itself, and all points on all lines would be on the point conic. The point
conic is thus the entire projective plane.
If the projectivity is not the identity, then the projectivity maps all
lines through O back to lines through O. So, corresponding lines would
either be the same line (a ﬁxed line under the projectivity) or diﬀerent
lines. If they were the same line, the entire line would form part of the
point conic. If they were diﬀerent, only the point O would be common.
Consider the set of ﬁxed lines under the projectivity. By Theorem
9.13 the projectivity has at most two ﬁxed lines, because if it had three,
it would be the identity. If the projectivity has two ﬁxed lines, then these
together form the conic. If there is just one ﬁxed line, that will be the
point conic. If there are no ﬁxed lines, only the point O will be on the
conic. 2
By the preceding theorem, singular point conics can consist of subsets
that are lines. This is not the case for non-singular point conics.
Theorem 9.41. There are at most two distinct points of a non-
singular point conic that lie on a given line.
Proof: Suppose line l has three distinct points A, B, and C that are on
the conic. These three points are the intersections of corresponding lines
from the pencils of lines at points O and O′′. Let a, b, and c be the lines
through O and a′′, b′′, and c′′ the corresponding lines through O′′.
The three pairs of lines {a, a′′},
{b, b′′}, and {c, c′′} will deﬁne a
perspectivity with axis l. By Ex-
ercise 9.4.6 we know that the pro-
jectivity deﬁning the conic must
be the same as the perspectivity.
But, this contradicts the fact that
the conic is non-singular.
O
A
a
l
B
C
c
b
O’
a’
b’
c’
2

432
■Exploring Geometry
9.8.3
Non-singular Conics and Pascal’s Theorem
We now investigate the structure of non-singular conics. The next theo-
rem tells us how to recognize when a set of points lies on a non-singular
point conic.
Theorem 9.42. Let A, B, C, D, E, and F be distinct points such
that no subset of three of the six points is collinear. Let P be the
intersection of AE with CF, Q the intersection of AD with CB,
and R the intersection of BE with DF. Then C, D, E, and F
are on a non-singular point conic determined by projectively related
pencils of lines at A and B if and only if P, Q, and R are collinear.
Proof: For the ﬁrst half of the proof, assume that C, D, E, and F are
on a non-singular point conic determined by pencils of lines at A and
B. We need to show that P, Q, and R are collinear. For this proof,
we will use the cross-ratio from the Real Projective model of Projective
geometry. We do this for clarity of exposition. The result does hold in
abstract, axiomatic Projective geometry as well. For a proof see Section
6.5 of [42].
Let L, M, and N be the in-
tersections of BC, AC, and AE
with DF. Since there is a pro-
jectivity that takes the pencil of
lines at A to the pencil of lines
at B, and since the cross-ratio is
invariant under projectivities, we
have that R(AC, AD; AE, AF) =
R(BC, BD; BE, BF).
B
C
A
D
E
F
P
Q
R
L
M
N
K
By Corollary 9.35 we have that R(AC, AD; AE, AF) = R(M, D, N, F)
and R(BC, BD; BE, BF) = R(L, D, R, F). Thus, R(M, D, N, F) =
R(L, D, R, F).
By Theorem 9.7 there is a projectivity π that takes M, D, and F
to L, D, and F. Since R(M, D, N, F) = R(π(M), π(D), π(N), π(F)) =
R(L, D, π(N), F) and R(M, D, N, F) = R(L, D, R, F), then we have
R(L, D, π(N), F) = R(L, D, R, F). By Exercise 9.7.7 we have that
π(N) = R.
Since C, F, and D are not collinear, there is a perspectivity π1 taking

Projective Geometry
■433
DF to CF with center A. Under this perspectivity M, D, and F map to
C, K, and F, where K is the intersection of AD with CF. Since no subset
of three of A, B, C, D, E, or F is collinear, then Q is not on CF or DF.
Thus, the perspectivity π2 from CF to DF with center Q will map C, K,
and F to L, D, and F. The combination of these two perspectivities then
maps M, D, and F to L, D, and F. By Exercise 9.4.5, the projectivity
π must equal the composition of the two perspectivities.
Let’s consider what happens to point N under the two perspectivities
π1 and π2. π1 will map N to P and then π2, the perspectivity with center
Q, will map P to R, as π(N) = R. This is only possible if R is on QP.
This ﬁnishes the ﬁrst half of the proof.
For the second part of the proof, assume P, Q and R are collinear.
We can use the perspectivities π1 and π2 deﬁned above to create a pro-
jectivity π that maps points M, D, N, and F to points L, D, R, and
F. The cross-ratio results from above will still hold and thus we get
R(AC, AD; AE, AF) = R(BC, BD; BE, BF).
For the pencil of lines at A there is a projectivity S that will take the
three lines AC, AD, AE to lines BC, BD, BE in the pencil at B. The
cross-ratio equality then implies that S(AF) = BF. Thus, C, D, E, and
F are on the point conic deﬁned by the pencils at A and B. Since A ̸= B
and the projectivity S is not a simple perspectivity, we know the conic
is non-singular. 2
This theorem is a re-statement of one of the most famous theorems
in geometry, Pascal’s Theorem.
In the statement of Theorem 9.42
we looked at intersections of cer-
tain lines. If we take these lines
and list them in the order where
the vertices match we have a
six-sided ﬁgure, a hexagon. The
hexagon is deﬁned by AE, EB,
BC, CF, FD, and DA.
B
C
A
D
E
F
P
Q
R
L
M
N
K

434
■Exploring Geometry
Of course, this hexagon is not
made up of segments, but lines.
How are the intersections cho-
sen? Here we have “unwrapped”
the hexagon into a more stan-
dard conﬁguration. A quick check
of the intersections from Theorem
9.42 shows that we are choosing
opposite sides of the hexagon for
intersections.
A
E
B
C
F
D
Pascal’s Theorem in its classical form is as follows:
Theorem 9.43. (Pascal’s Theorem) If a hexagon is inscribed in a
non-singular conic, then points of intersection of opposite sides are
collinear.
Blaise Pascal (1623–1662) proved this theorem when he was just 16
years old!
It is interesting to note that are exactly 60 diﬀerent hexagons possible
by connecting the six points A, B, C, D, E, and F. To see why, consider
that any hexagon must pass through point A, so we could consider the
hexagon as a path through the points, starting at A. From A there are 5
other points to choose as the next hexagon vertex. Once we have chosen
the second vertex, there are four points to choose as the third vertex, and
so on until we reach the last vertex. Thus, one would think that there
are 5! = 120 diﬀerent hexagons. However, a path such as ABCDEF and
AFEDBC represent the same hexagon, but reversing the path. Thus,
we need to divide by two to get the non-directed paths that form the
possible hexagons.
Pascal’s Theorem leads directly to one of the key results in the the-
ory of conics, ﬁrst discovered by Jakob Steiner (1796–1963), who did
pioneering work in the foundations of projective geometry. The proof
will be left as an exercise.
Theorem 9.44. (Steiner’s Theorem) A non-singular point conic
can be deﬁned as the locus of points of intersection of two projec-
tively related pencils of lines with centers at two arbitrarily chosen
(distinct) points on the conic.

Projective Geometry
■435
Steiner’s Theorem leads to the following existence result for point
conics.
Theorem 9.45. Let A, B, C, D, and E be distinct points, no
three of which are collinear. Then, there exists a unique non-singular
point conic passing through these ﬁve points.
Proof: Since no subset of three points is collinear, then the lines
AC, AD, AE are distinct and the lines BC, BD, BE are distinct. Consid-
ering the pencil of lines at A there is a unique projectivity S that maps
AC, AD, AE to BC, BD, BE in the pencil of lines at B. By Steiner’s
theorem, any conic through the ﬁve points can be determined by pro-
jectively related pencils at A and B. Thus, there can be only one such
point conic. 2
9.8.4
Line Conics
Before we continue in our investigation of point conics, we should take
a break and consider the dual results to what we have shown. The dual
to a point conic is a line conic.
Deﬁnition 9.30. A line conic is the envelope of lines deﬁned by
corresponding points of two pencils of points, where the ﬁrst pencil
is transformed to the second by a projectivity. If the projectivity is
equivalent to a single perspectivity, or if the axes of the pencils are
the same line, the line conic will be called singular. Otherwise, the
line conic is called non-singular.
Here we have a non-degenerate
line conic deﬁned by a projectiv-
ity between pencils of points on l
and l′. For example, points P and
P ′ are projectively related, so the
line PP ′ is on the line conic. Note
that for some point M on l, there
will be a corresponding point M′
on l′ such that M′ is on l. Like-
wise, there is some point N′ on l′
that corresponds to point N = M′
on l.
M
l
N
l’
P
P’
M’=N
Q
Q’

436
■Exploring Geometry
In the example above, we have shaded in an ellipse for reference
purposes to help visualize the line conic. Here are a few duals to the
Theorems we have already proven for point conics.
Theorem 9.46. (Dual to Theorem 9.39) The axes of the pencils
that deﬁne a line conic always lie on the line conic.
Theorem 9.47. (Dual to Theorem 9.40) The possible singular line
conics include the following: the entire Projective plane, the set of
lines on two distinct points, the set of lines on a single point, and
a single line.
Theorem 9.48. (Dual to Theorem 9.41) There are at most two
distinct lines of a non-singular line conic that pass through a given
point.
Theorem 9.49. (Dual to Pascal’s Theorem) If a, b, c, d, e, and
f are six distinct lines in a non-singular line conic, then the lines
deﬁned by joining opposite vertices are concurrent.
A vertex is the intersection point of adjacent lines. For example,
one vertex would be the intersection of a and b. The dual to Pascal’s
Theorem is known as Brianchon’s Theorem, in honor of J. C. Brianchon
(1785–1864).
9.8.5
Tangents
In Theorem 9.41 we proved that there are at most two distinct points of
a non-singular point conic that lie on a given line. The case where a line
intersects a non-singular point conic at a single point will be important
enough to have its own deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 9.31. A line is a tangent line to a non-singular point
conic if it intersects the conic in exactly one point.
The next theorem guarantees that tangent lines exist.

Projective Geometry
■437
Theorem 9.50. At each point on a non-singular point conic there
is a unique tangent line.
Proof: Let P be a point on the point conic. Let Q be another point.
By Steiner’s Theorem the point
conic can be generated by pencils
of lines at P and Q, under a pro-
jectivity mapping one pencil to
the other. Now, the line m = PQ
is in the pencil at Q. Thus, there
must be a line l at P that corre-
sponds to m.
P
Q
m
l
We claim that l can intersect the conic only once. For suppose l in-
tersected the conic at another point R. Since the conic is non-singular,
R ̸= Q (this is proved in the exercises). Then, l = PR would correspond
to QR. Since P, Q, and R cannot be collinear, we would have l corre-
sponding to two diﬀerent lines in the pencil at Q. This contradicts the
deﬁnition of a projectivity.
Suppose another line l′ ̸= l was tangent at P. This line has to cor-
respond to a line m′ ̸= m at Q. But m′ and l′ deﬁne a point X on the
conic diﬀerent than P. Then, l′ intersects the conic in two places, which
contradicts the assumption that it was tangent at P. 2
An interesting fact about tangents and Pascal’s Theorem, is that we
can replace pairs of edges with tangents and still have the conclusion of
that theorem.
In the statement of Pascal’s The-
orem (or Theorem 9.42), we have
hexagon AEBCFD inscribed in
a point conic. Consider what hap-
pens to the lines of this hexagon
as we move point A to E and
point B to C. The edges rotate
into what seems to be the tangent
lines at A = E and B = C.
A
B
C
D
E
F
P
Q
N
M
R
L

438
■Exploring Geometry
Here is a picture of what the
lines and intersections look like af-
ter we replace the edges with tan-
gent lines. That is, in the state-
ment of the Theorem we replace
AE with the tangent at A and
BC with the tangent at B. If
we carry this replacement of edge
with tangent line throughout the
proof of Theorem 9.42 we see that
the proof is still correct!
A=E
F
C=B
D
R=M
L
N
P
Q
Theorem 9.51. If ABFD is a quadrangle inscribed in a non-
singular point conic, let P be the intersection of the tangent at A
with BF, Q the intersection of the tangent at B and AD, and R
the intersection of AB with DF. Then, P, Q, and R are collinear.
If we have a hexagon AEBCFD inscribed in a conic, and let A move
to D and B move to C, we get the following result:
Theorem 9.52. If AFBE is a quadrangle inscribed in a non-
singular point conic, let P be the intersection of AE with BF, Q
the intersection of the tangent at B with the tangent at A, and R
the intersection of the tangent at E and the tangent at F. Then, P,
Q, and R are collinear.
Proof:
Let S be the intersection of AF
with BE. If we replace AD with
the tangent at A and BC with
the tangent at B, then points P,
Q, and S match points P, Q,
and R in Theorem 9.42. Also, the
proof will still hold for this con-
ﬁguration. Thus, P, Q, and S are
collinear.
A
B
E
F
Q
R
P
S
If, in this last argument, we interchange A with F and B with E, we

Projective Geometry
■439
get a conﬁguration that will again satisfy Theorem 9.42. But now the
points P, R, and S will match P, Q, and R in Theorem 9.42. Thus, P,
R, and S are collinear. Since P, Q, and S are collinear we conclude that
P, Q, and R are collinear. 2
With what we have proven so far the following connection between
line and point conics is hopefully intuitive. The proof can be found on
the web resource page.
Theorem 9.53. The set of tangents to a non-singular point conic
forms a line conic.
9.8.6
Conics in Real Projective Plane
In this section, we consider conics in the Real Projective Plane model of
Projective geometry. Recall that in this model a point (not at inﬁnity) is
represented by a vector (x, y, 1), or equivalently any vector of the form
(x, y, z) with z ̸= 0. A point at inﬁnity is represented by (x, y, 0).
Lines are also represented as vectors of the form u = [a, b, c]. A point
(x, y, z) is on line [a, b, c] if ax + by + cz = 0.
Consider the pencil of lines on a point O. Let u and v be two lines
in the pencil at O. Let w be another line in the pencil at O. By The-
orem 9.19, we can parametrize w by w = αu + βv, with α and β real
constants, with at least one being non-zero.
Now, suppose we have a point conic deﬁned by the pencils of lines
on two points O and O′. Let u and v be two lines in the pencil at O and
u′ and v′ be the projectively related lines in the pencil at O′. Then, for
any line w in the pencil at O we have that w = αu + βv, and for any
line w′ in the pencil at O′ we have w′ = α′u′ + β′v′. If u = [u1, u2, u3]
and v = [v1, v2, v3] are the vectors for u and v, and u′ = [u′
1, u′
2, u′
3] and
v′ = [v′
1, v′
2, v′
3] are the vectors for u′ and v′, then w = [αu1 + βv1, αu2 +
βv2, αu3 + βv3] and w′ = [α′u′
1 + β′v′
1, α′u′
2 + β′v′
2, α′u′
3 + β′v′
3].
If a point (x, y, z) is on the point conic, then it must be on both lines.
Thus,
(αu1 + βv1)x + (αu2 + βv2)y + (αu3 + βv3)z = 0
(α′u′
1 + β′v′
1)x + (α′u′
2 + β′v′
2)y + (α′u′
3 + β′v′
3)z = 0

440
■Exploring Geometry
We can re-write these equations as follows:
Aα + Bβ = 0
Cα′ + Dβ′ = 0
where A = u1x + u2y + u3z, B = v1x + v2y + v3z, C = u′
1x + u′
2y + u′
3z,
and D = v′
1x + v′
2y + v′
3z.
By Corollary 9.21 we have that
λ
"
α′
β′
#
=
"
a
b
c
d
# "
α
β
#
where the determinant ad −bc ̸= 0 and λ ̸= 0.
Solving for α′ and β′ and substituting into the previous equations,
we get
Aα + Bβ = 0
1
λ(C(aα + bβ) + D(cα + dβ)) = 0
Or,
Aα + Bβ = 0
(Ca + Dc)α + (Cb + Dd)β = 0
Writing this as a matrix equation, we get
"
A
B
Ca + Dc
Cb + Dd
# "
α
β
#
=
"
0
0
#
For this equation to have nonzero solutions, the determinant of the
multiplying 2×2 matrix must be zero. That is, A(Cb + Dd) −B(Ca +
Dc) = 0. Recall that A = u1x + u2y + u3z, B = v1x + v2y + v3z,
C = u′
1x + u′
2y + u′
3z, and D = v′
1x + v′
2y + v′
3z. If we substitute these
terms into the determinant equation, we get an equation in x, y, z of the
form b11x2+b12xy+b13xz+b21yx+b22y2+b23yz+b31zx+b32zy+b33z2 = 0.
For example, we could have 4x2 + 8xy −4xz + 12yx −3y2 + 2yz +
2zx + 6zy + z2 = 0. To make this equation symmetric let aij = bij+bji
2
.
Then, for our example we would have 4x2 + 10xy −xz + 10yx −3y2 +
4yz −zx + 4zy + z2 = 0. An equivalent form for this equation would be

Projective Geometry
■441
h
x
y
z
i


4
10
−1
10
−3
4
−1
4
1




x
y
z

=


0
0
0


Let x1 = x, x2 = y, and x3 = z. Summarizing our work above we
have the following:
Theorem 9.54. A point conic in the Real Projective plane has an
equation of the form
3
X
i,j=1
aijxixj = 0
where aij = aji. In matrix form, XtAX = [0] where X =
 x1
x2
x3

.
There is an even simpler way to represent a conic in the Real Pro-
jective Plane. Since the equation for a conic is a quadratic in x, y, and
z, by completing the square on each of these variables we can change
coordinates and eliminate all terms such as xy, or xz. Examples of how
to do this are described in the exercises. We get the following:
Theorem 9.55. With an appropriately chosen change of coordi-
nates, a point conic in the Real Projective plane has an equation of
the form
c1x2 + c2y2 + c3z2 = 0
With this result we can classify conics in terms of the ci’s of the
preceding theorem:
1. All ci ̸= 0 and all c1 > 0. There is clearly no solution for this
equation, so the point conic is the empty set.
2. All ci ̸= 0 and not all with the same sign. We can assume one
is positive and the others negative. For example, z2 = x2 + y2.
Dividing by z, we get x′2 + y′2 = 1, where x′ = x
z and y′ = y
z. This
is the familiar equation of an ellipse from Euclidean geometry.
3. One ci = 0, others non-zero, but of same sign. For example, x2 +
y2 = 0. This has solution (0, 0, 1). This case yields a singular conic
of a single point.

442
■Exploring Geometry
4. One ci = 0, others non-zero, but of diﬀering sign. For example,
x2 −y2 = 0. This has solution x = ±y. This case yields a singular
conic of two lines.
5. Exactly two ci’s being zero. For example, x2 = 0. This case yields
a singular conic of one line.
6. All ci = 0. All points in the plane would satisfy this case.
We conclude that a point conic is non-singular if and only if ci ̸= 0
for i = 1, 2, 3 and not all ci have the same sign. We also observe that
all non-singular point conics are essentially equivalent in the projective
plane. We do not have the separate cases of ellipses, hyperbolas, and
parabolas, as we do in Euclidean geometry.
Exercise 9.8.1. Prove that if a point conic is non-singular and is deﬁned by
pencils at points A and B, then the line AB cannot correspond to itself under
the projectivity taking the pencil at A to the pencil at B. [Hint: According to
Theorem 9.12 the projectivity deﬁning the conic is equivalent to the compo-
sition of two perspectivities. Suppose that the line corresponded to itself. Use
the dual to Lemma 9.10 to show the projectivity would be a perspectivity.]
Exercise 9.8.2. Prove that if ﬁve distinct points on a point conic have the
property that no subset of three points is collinear, and the projectivity deﬁning
the conic is not the identity, then the point conic is non-singular.
Exercise 9.8.3. Prove Steiner’s Theorem. [Hint: Use Theorem 9.42. What
happens if we switch A with C, B with D, and E with F?]
Exercise 9.8.4. State and illustrate (provide a ﬁgure to help explain) the
dual to Theorem 9.42.
Exercise 9.8.5. Show that two diﬀerent non-singular conics can intersect
in at most four points.
Exercise 9.8.6. Suppose the equation of a non-singular point conic in the
Real Projective plane is given by 2x2 + 8xy + 12y2 −4xz + 2yz + 12z2 = 0.
Show that by completing the square on the x −y terms, and using the change
of coordinates x′ = x + 2y, that the equation in the new coordinates becomes
2x′2 + 4y2 −4x′z + 10yz + 12z2 = 0.
Exercise 9.8.7. Suppose the equation of a non-singular point conic in the
Real Projective plane is given by 2x2 + 4y2 −4xz + 10yz + 12z2 = 0. Show
that by completing the square on the x −z terms, and using the change of
coordinates x′ = x −z, that the equation in the new coordinates becomes
2x′2 + 4y2 + 10yz + 10z2 = 0.

Projective Geometry
■443
Exercise 9.8.8. Suppose the equation of a non-singular point conic in the
Real Projective plane is given by 2x2 + 4y2 + 10yz + 10z2 = 0. Refer to the
method of the previous two exercises to show that the change of coordinates
z′ = z + 1
2y will transform the equation to 2x2 + 3
2y2 + 10z′2 = 0.


C H A P T E R 10
Fractal Geometry
Why is geometry often described as “cold” and “dry”? One
reason lies in its inability to describe the shape of a cloud,
a mountain, a coastline, or a tree. Clouds are not spheres,
mountains are not cones, coastlines are not circles, and bark
is not smooth, nor does lightning travel in a straight line.
– Benoit Mandelbrot in The Fractal Geometry of Nature [30]
10.1
THE SEARCH FOR A “NATURAL” GEOMETRY
Classical geometry had its roots in ancient Babylonian and Egyptian
calculations of land areas and architectural designs. The word geometry
means “earth measurement.” It is said that Aristotle came to believe
that the earth was a sphere by watching ships disappear over the ocean’s
horizon.
Intuitively, we like to think our notions of geometry are the result of
our interactions with nature, but is that really the case?
As mentioned in the quote above, most objects in nature are not
really regular in form. A cloud may look like a lumpy ball from far
away, but as we get closer, we notice little wisps of vapor jutting out
in every direction. As we move even closer, we notice that the cloud
has no real boundary. The solidness of the form dissolves into countless
ﬁlaments of vapor. We may be tempted to replace our former notion of
the cloud being three-dimensional with a new notion of the cloud being
a collection of one-dimensional curves. But, if we look closer, these white
curves dissolve into tiny water droplets. The cloud now appears to be
a collection of tiny three-dimensional balls. As we move even closer, to
445

446
■Exploring Geometry
the molecular level, these droplets dissolve into tiny whirling masses of
hydrogen and oxygen, shapes akin to the original cloud itself.
So, a cloud in the sky cannot really be described as a classical ge-
ometric ﬁgure. This seems to contradict the commonly held intuition
about Euclidean geometry being a product of our natural environment.
How can we make geometric sense of objects like clouds, mountains,
trees, atoms, planets, and so on?
We saw in Chapters 5 and 6 that there is one geometric idea that does
seem to resonate with our experience of the natural world—the idea of
symmetry. Symmetry is the idea that an object is invariant under some
transformation of that object. In Chapter 5 we looked at the notion of
symmetry as invariance under Euclidean isometries. Such symmetries
include bilateral symmetry, rotational symmetry, translation symmetry,
and glide symmetry.
In the discussion of the cloud as a geometric object, we noticed that
when we viewed a section of the cloud at the molecular level, we saw a
shape similar to the original cloud itself. That is, the molecular “cloud”
appeared to be the same shape as the original cloud, when scaled up by
an appropriate scale factor.
Similarly, consider the fern in Figure 10.1. Each leaf is made up of
sub-leaves that look similar to the original leaf, and each sub-leaf has
sub-sub-leaves similar to the sub-leaves, and so on.
Figure 10.1 Fern leaf
Thus, many natural objects are similar to parts of themselves, once
you scale up the part to the size of the whole. That is, they are symmetric
under a change of scale. We call such objects self-similar objects. Such
objects will be our ﬁrst example of fractals, a geometric class of objects
that we will leave undeﬁned for the time being.

Fractal Geometry
■447
10.2
SELF-SIMILARITY
An object will be called self-similar if a part of the object, when scaled
by a factor c > 0, is equivalent to the object itself.
We can be more precise in this deﬁnition by making use of similarity
transformations.
Deﬁnition 10.1. A similarity transformation S, with ratio c > 0,
is a transformation (i.e., one-to-one and onto map) from Euclidean
n-dimensional space (Rn) to itself such that
|S(x) −S(y)| = c |x −y|
(10.1)
A self-similar set will be a set that is invariant under one or more
similarity transformations.
Deﬁnition 10.2. A self-similar set F in Rn is a set that is invariant
under a ﬁnite number of non-identity similarity transformations.
Which classical Euclidean objects are self-similar? Consider a circle
C. We know that the closer we “look” at the circle, the ﬂatter the curve
of the circle becomes. Thus, a circle cannot be self-similar. Similarly,
any diﬀerentiable curve in the plane will not be self-similar, with one
exception—a line. Lines are perhaps the simplest self-similar ﬁgure.
Self-similarity is a concept foreign to most of the 2-dimensional ge-
ometry covered in calculus and Euclidean geometry. To develop some
intuition for self-similarity, we need some examples.
10.2.1
Sierpinski’s Triangle
Our ﬁrst example is generated
from a simple ﬁlled-in triangle,
△ABC.
A
B
C

448
■Exploring Geometry
Let L, M, and N be the mid-
points of the sides and remove the
middle third triangle, △LMN.
A
B
C
L
N
M
Now, each of the three smaller
triangles is almost the same ﬁg-
ure as the original triangle, when
scaled up by a factor of three, ex-
cept for the “hole” in the middle
of the big triangle, which is miss-
ing in the smaller triangles. To
make the smaller triangles simi-
lar to the original, let’s remove the
middle third of each triangle.
A
B
C
L
N
M
Now, we have ﬁxed our prob-
lem, and each of the three sub-
triangles has a hole in the mid-
dle. But, now the big triangle has
sub-triangles with holes, and so
the three sub-triangles are, again,
not similar to the big triangle. So,
we will remove the middle third of
each of the sub-sub-triangles.
A
B
C
L
N
M

Fractal Geometry
■449
Again, we have almost self-
similarity. To create a truly self-
similar ﬁgure, we need to con-
tinue this middle third removal
process to inﬁnity! Then each
sub-triangle will be exactly simi-
lar to the original triangle, each
sub-sub-triangle will be similar to
each sub-triangle, and so on, with
the scale factor being 3 at each
stage.
The ﬁgure that is left after carrying on the middle third removal pro-
cess inﬁnitely often is called the Sierpinski Triangle, or Sierpinski Gasket,
in honor of Waclaw Sierpinski (1882–1969), a Polish mathematician who
is known for his work in set theory, topology, and analysis.
Note that Sierpinski’s Triangle is invariant under three basic similar-
ities, scaling transformations by a factor of 1
2 toward points A, B, and
C.
Since the process of creating Sierpinski’s Triangle starts with a simple
2-dimensional ﬁlled-in triangle, it is natural to try to calculate the area
of the ﬁnal ﬁgure.
Let’s denote by stages the successive process of removing middle
thirds from sub-triangles. At stage 0 we have the original ﬁlled-in tri-
angle, △ABC. At stage 1 we have removed the middle third. At stage
2 we have removed the middle third of each of the remaining triangles,
and so on.
We can assume the area of the ﬁrst triangle to be anything we like,
so we will assume it equal to 1. At stage 1 the area remaining in the
ﬁgure will be
Area(stage 1) = 1 −1
4
since all of the four sub-triangles are congruent (proved as an exercise),
and thus have an area 1
4 the area of the original triangle.
At stage 2 we remove three small triangles from each of the remaining
sub-triangles, each of area
1
16. The area left is
Area(stage 2) = 1 −1
4 −3
16
At stage 3 we remove nine areas, each of area
1
64. Thus,

450
■Exploring Geometry
Area(stage 2) = 1 −1
4 −3
16 −9
64
Seeing the pattern developing here, we conclude that the area left
for Sierpinski’s Triangle at stage n is
Area(stage n)
=
1 −1
4
n
X
k=0
3
4
k
lim
n→∞Area
=
1 −1
4
1
(1 −3
4)
=
0
This is truly an amazing result! The Sierpinski Triangle has had all
of its area removed, but still exists as an inﬁnite number of points. Also,
it has all of the boundary segments of the original triangle remaining,
plus all the segments of the sub-triangles. So, it must be at “least” a 1-
dimensional object. We will make this idea of an “in-between” dimension
more concrete in the next section.
10.2.2
Cantor Set
What kind of shape would we get if we applied the middle-third removal
process to a simple line segment?
Here we have a segment AB.
A
B
Remove the middle third to
get two segments AC and DB.
A
B
C
D
Perform this process again
and again as we did for the Sier-
pinski Triangle. Here is a collec-
tion of the stages of the process,
where we have hidden some of the
points for clarity.
A
B Stage 0
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
The limiting ﬁgure, which has an inﬁnite number of middle thirds
removed, is called the Cantor Set, in honor of Georg Cantor (1845–
1918). Cantor is known for his work in set theory and in particular for

Fractal Geometry
■451
his investigation of orders of inﬁnity and denumerable sets. It is left as
an exercise to show that the Cantor Set has length 0, although it is made
up of an inﬁnite number of points.
Both of our examples so far, Sierpinski’s Triangle and the Cantor
Set, do not seem to ﬁt into our classical notion of 1- and 2- dimensional
objects.
Sierpinski’s Triangle is more than a 1-dimensional curve, yet cer-
tainly less than an area, which is 2-dimensional, while the Cantor Set
lies somewhere between dimensions 0 and 1. How can this be? How can
an object have fractional dimension? This idea of fractional dimension
was the critical organizing principle for Mandelbrot in his study of nat-
ural phenomena and is why he coined the term fractal for objects with
non-integer dimension.
10.3
SIMILARITY DIMENSION
The dimension of a fractal object turns out to be quite diﬃcult to de-
ﬁne precisely. This is because there are several diﬀerent deﬁnitions of
dimension used by mathematicians, all having their positive as well as
negative aspects. In this section we will look at a fairly simple deﬁnition
of dimension for self-similar sets, the similarity dimension.
To motivate this deﬁnition, let’s look at some easy examples.
Consider our simplest self-similar
object, a line segment AB.
A
B
It takes two segments of size
AB
2
to cover this segment.
A
B
C
AB/2
AB/2
In general, it takes N sub-segments of the original segment of size
AB
N to cover the original segment. Or, if we think of the sub-segments as
being similar to the original, it takes N sub-segments of similarity ratio
1
N to cover AB.
We will deﬁne the function r(N) to be the similarity ratio between
a ﬁgure and its parts.

452
■Exploring Geometry
Suppose
we
have
a
rectangle
ABCD of side lengths AB = a
and BC = b. If we subdivide this
region into N parts that are simi-
lar to the original region, then the
area of each sub-part will be ab
N ,
and the length of each side will
be scaled by the similarity ratio
r(N) =
1
√
N =
1
N
1
2 . In the ﬁgure
at right, we have N = 9.
A
B
a
D
C
b
a/3
b/3
For a rectangular solid in three dimensions, the similarity ratio would
be r(N) =
1
N
1
3 .
Note that these three similarity ratios hold no matter the size of
the segment, rectangle, or solid under consideration. In higher dimen-
sions, the similarity ratio for a d-dimensional rectangular object would
be r(N) =
1
N
1
d .
Equivalently, if we let r = r(N), we have
Nrd = 1
log(N) + d log(r) = 0
d = log(N)
−log(r) = log(N)
log( 1
r)
(10.2)
Since the value of d matches our Euclidean notion of dimension for
simple self-similar objects, like segments and rectangles, we will deﬁne
the similarity dimension to be the value of d given by equation 10.2.
Deﬁnition 10.3. The similarity dimension d of a self-similar object
is given by
d = log(N)
log( 1
r)
(10.3)
where the value of r = r(N) is the ratio by which a ruler measuring
a side of the object will change under the assumption that each of
the N sub-objects can be scaled to form the original object. The ratio
r is called the similarity ratio of the object.
For example, consider the Cantor Set. Each sub-object is 1
3 the scale
of the original segment, and it takes two sub-objects to make up the

Fractal Geometry
■453
whole (after stage 0). Thus, the similarity dimension of the Cantor Set
is
log(2)
log

1
1
3
 = log(2)
log(3) ≈.6309
This result agrees with our earlier intuition about the dimension of the
Cantor Set being somewhere between 0 and 1.
As another example, it takes three sub-triangle shapes to scale up
and cover the bigger triangle in Sierpinski’s Triangle (again, ignoring
stage 0). Each sub-triangle has side-length scaled by 1
2 of the original
side-length, thus the similarity ratio is 1
2, and the similarity dimension
is
log(3)
log

1
1
2
 = log(3)
log(2) ≈1.58496
Exercise 10.3.1. Show that all sub-triangles at stage 1 of the Sierpinski
Triangle process are congruent.
Exercise 10.3.2. Show that the length left after all of the stages of con-
struction of Cantor’s Set is 0.
Exercise 10.3.3. Sierpinski’s Carpet is deﬁned by starting with a square
and removing the middle third sub-square, each side of which is 1
3 the size of
the original square.
Here is stage 1 for Sierpinski’s Car-
pet.
The Carpet is deﬁned as the limiting process of successively removing middle-
third squares. Does Sierpinski’s Carpet have non-zero area? Sketch the next
iteration of this ﬁgure.
Exercise 10.3.4. Show that the similarity dimension of Sierpinski’s Carpet
is log(8)
log(3). Thus, Sierpinski’s Carpet is much more “area-like” than Sierpinski’s
Triangle.

454
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 10.3.5. In the construction of the Sierpinski Carpet, instead of
removing just the middle-third square, remove this square and all four squares
with which it shares an edge. What is the similarity dimension of the limiting
ﬁgure?
Exercise 10.3.6. The Menger Sponge is deﬁned by starting with a cube and
sub-dividing it into 27 sub-cubes. Then, we remove the center cube and all six
cubes with which the central cube shares a face. Continue this process repeat-
edly, each time sub-dividing the remaining cubes and removing pieces. The
Menger Sponge is the limiting ﬁgure of this process. Show that the dimension
of the Menger Sponge is log(20)
log(3) . Is the sponge more of a solid or more of a
surface? Devise a cube removal process that would produce a limiting ﬁgure
with fractal dimension closer to a surface than a cube. The Menger Sponge is
named for Karl Menger (1902–1985). He is known for his work in geometry
and on the deﬁnition of dimension.
Exercise 10.3.7. Starting with a cube, is there a removal process that leads
to a fractal dimension of 2, yet with a limiting ﬁgure that is fractal in nature?
10.4
PROJECT 16 - AN ENDLESSLY BEAUTIFUL SNOWFLAKE
In this project we will use dynamic geometry software to create a self-
similar fractal. Self-similar fractals are ideal for study using computa-
tional techniques, as their construction is basically a recursive process—
one that loops back upon itself.
The self-similar fractal we will construct is “Koch’s snowﬂake curve,”
named in honor of Helge von Koch (1870–1924), a Swedish mathemati-
cian who is most famous for the curve that bears his name. It is an
example of a continuous curve that is not diﬀerentiable at any of its
points. In the next few paragraphs we will discuss how to use a “tem-
plate” curve to recursively build the Koch self-similar snowﬂake curve.
Please read this discussion carefully (you do not need to construct any-
thing yet).
To construct the template curve for the Koch snowﬂake, we start
with a segment AB. Just as we removed the middle third for the Cantor
Set construction, we remove the middle third of AB, but replace it with
the two upper segments of an equilateral triangle of side length equal to
the middle third we removed (Figure 10.2).

Fractal Geometry
■455
A
B
Figure 10.2
Now think of the process just described as a replacement process,
where we take a segment and replace it with a new curve, the template
curve. Each segment of the new template curve can then be replaced
with a copy of the template that is scaled by a factor of 1
3. If we carry
out this replacement process for each of the four small segments in the
template, we get the curve shown in Figure 10.3.
A
B
Figure 10.3
The process just outlined can be made recursive. We could take each
of the new segments in the curve just described and replace them with
a scaled-down copy of the template. We could then repeatedly take each
new set of segments at stage n and replace them with copies of the
template to get a curve at stage n + 1. Thus, the replacing of segments
by copies of the template loops back on itself indeﬁnitely.
At the point where we stopped the replacement process, the curve
had 16 small segments, each of length 1
9 of the original segment AB.
Replacing each of these segments with a
1
27 scale copy of our template,
we get a new curve with 64 segments, each a length
1
27 of the original.
The new curve is shown in Figure 10.4 where we have hidden all points
except A and B for clarity.
A
B
Figure 10.4
The Koch curve is the curve that results from applying this template

456
■Exploring Geometry
replacement process an inﬁnite number of times. The curve is self-similar
in the sense that if you took a piece of the curve and magniﬁed it by a
factor of 3, you would see the same curve again.
Start up your geometry software
and create a segment AB on the
screen.
Next, we will divide segment
AB into three equal parts. Set
point A as a center of dilation and
then dilate point B by a factor of
1
3 towards A.
Similarly, carry out the steps
to dilate point B by a ratio of 2
3
towards point A. Then hide seg-
ment AB. We have now split AB
into equal thirds.
Next we create the “bump” in
the middle of the template. Set C
as a center of rotation and rotate
point D by 60 degrees.
Finally,
construct
segments
between A, C, E, D, and B (in
that order). At this point our tem-
plate curve is complete.
At this point in the Koch curve construction, the template can be
used to replace each of the four segments that are in the template it-
self. Most dynamic geometry software has the capability to do this re-
placement process. Go to http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text for
instructions on how to carry out this replacement process for your par-
ticular software.

Fractal Geometry
■457
Once you have deﬁned the replacement process, carry out this process
several times.
Here we have carried out the
replacement process three times,
each time replacing all segments
with smaller copies of the tem-
plate.
Exercise 10.4.1. Find a formula for the length of the Koch curve at stage
n of its construction, with stage 0 being the initial segment AB, which you
can assume has length 1. Is the Koch curve of ﬁnite or inﬁnite length?
The Koch Snowﬂake curve is the result of applying this recursive
process to each of three segments of a triangle.
Create a triangle, △ABC and
carry out the replacement pro-
cess twice on each side. We can
see why this curve is called the
“snowﬂake” curve.
A
B
C
The Koch snowﬂake curve is the result of applying the template
replacement process an inﬁnite number of times to each of the three
edges of △ABC.
Exercise 10.4.2. Suppose the area of △ABC is equal to 1. Show that the
area enclosed inside the Koch snowﬂake curve is given by the inﬁnite series
Area = 1 + 3
9 + 4 · 3
92 + 42 · 3
93 + · · ·

458
■Exploring Geometry
Find the sum of this series.
Exercise 10.4.3. Find the similarity dimension of the Koch snowﬂake
curve.
Let the “Koch hat curve” be the curve obtained by running the
recursive process described, but replacing segments at each stage with a
diﬀerent template.
Instead of the triangle template,
use the square template at right,
where each side of the square is 1
3
the length of the original segment.
A
B
Exercise 10.4.4. Find the next stage of this fractal curve and show that the
curve intersects itself. Find the dimension of the Koch hat curve.
Exercise 10.4.5. Design a template diﬀerent from the two used above, and
use it to create a fractal curve. Find the dimension of this new curve.
10.5
CONTRACTION MAPPINGS AND THE SPACE OF
FRACTALS
In the last few sections we focused our attention on the simplest kinds
of self-similar sets, those that are invariant under similarities Sn, all of
which share the same scaling ratio c.
For example, the Cantor Set, deﬁned using the interval [0, 1] as the
initial ﬁgure, will be invariant under the similarities S1 and S2, deﬁned
by
S1(x)
=
x
3
S2(x)
=
x
3 + 2
3
Both S1 and S2 are special cases of more general functions called
contraction mappings.

Fractal Geometry
■459
Deﬁnition 10.4. A contraction mapping S is a function deﬁned
on a set D of (Rn) such that there is a number 0 ≤c < 1 with
|S(x) −S(y)| ≤c |x −y|
for all x, y in D.
One of the great insights in the subject of fractal geometry is the fact
that not only are many fractals invariant under contraction mappings,
but the fractal itself can be generated from iterating the contraction
mappings on an initial shape.
Let’s consider again the Cantor Set on the interval [0, 1], with the
contraction mappings S1 and S2 as just deﬁned. Let Bn be the result of
applying these contractions repeatedly n times. That is,
B0
=
[0, 1]
B1
=
S1(B0) ∪S2(B0) = [0, 1
3] ∪[2
3, 1]
B2
=
S1(B1) ∪S2(B1)
=
S1([0, 1
3]) ∪S1([2
3, 1]) ∪S2([0, 1
3]) ∪S2([2
3, 1])
=
[0, 1
9] ∪[2
9, 1
3] ∪[2
3, 7
9] ∪[8
9, 1]
·
·
·
Bn
=
S1(Bn−1) ∪S2(Bn−1)
Note that B0 is the ﬁgure from the Cantor Set construction at stage
0; B1 is the ﬁgure at stage 1 (the middle third is gone); B2 is the ﬁg-
ure at stage 3; and so on. Why is this the case? Think of what the two
contraction mappings are doing geometrically. The eﬀect of S1 is to con-
tract everything in the interval [0, 1] into the ﬁrst third of that interval,
while S2 also contracts by 1
3, but then shifts by a distance of 2
3. Thus,
the eﬀect of iterating these two maps on stage k −1 of the Cantor Set
construction is to shrink the previous set of constructed segments by
1
3 and then copying them to the intervals [0, 1
3] and [ 2
3, 1]. This has an
eﬀect equivalent to the removal of all middle-thirds from the previous
segments at stage k −1.

460
■Exploring Geometry
Suppose we started our construction with the interval [2, 4] instead
of [0, 1]. Then
B0
=
[2, 4]
B1
=
S1(B0) ∪S2(B0) = [2
3, 4
3] ∪[4
3, 2] = [2
3, 2]
B2
=
S1(B1) ∪S2(B1) = [2
9, 2
3] ∪[8
9, 4
3]
B3
=
[ 2
27, 2
9] ∪[ 8
27, 4
9] ∪[20
27, 8
9] ∪[26
27, 10
9 ]
B4
=
[ 2
81, 2
27] ∪· · · [80
81, 28
27]
and so on.
Note what is happening to the initial and ﬁnal intervals at each stage
of iteration. For example, at stage 3 we have points ranging from
2
27 to
10
9 , and at stage 4 we have points ranging from
2
81 to 28
27. It looks like
repeatedly applying S1 and S2 to the interval [2, 4] is closing in on the
interval [0, 1]. This should not be surprising, as 0 and 1 are ﬁxed points
of S1 and S2. In fact, for any x we have
|S2(x) −S2(1)| = |S2(x) −1| = 1
3|x −1|
Thus,
|Sn
2 (x) −1|
=
|Sn
2 (x) −Sn
2 (1)| = 1
3|Sn−1
2
(x) −Sn−1
2
(1)|
=
1
3
2
|Sn−2
2
(x) −Sn−2
2
(1)|
·
·
·
=
1
3
n
|x −1|
Clearly, as n grows without bound, Sn
2 (x) must approach 1. By a
similar argument, we can show Sn
1 (x) approaches 0. On the other hand,
points inside [0, 1] can “survive” forever by the combined action of S1
and S2. For example, the points 1
3 and 2
3 are pulled back and forth by S1
and S2, but always by the same amount toward each of the ﬁxed points,

Fractal Geometry
■461
and thus they survive all stages of the construction process. No point
outside [0, 1] will have this prospect of surviving.
Thus, it appears that the points in the Cantor Set are not uniquely
tied to the starting interval [0, 1]. We would get the same set of limiting
points if we started with any interval. The Cantor Set is thus attracting
the iterates of the two contraction mappings S1 and S2.
From this brief example one might conjecture that something like
this attracting process is ubiquitous to fractals, and such a result is, in
fact, the case.
To prove this, we need to develop some tools for handling the itera-
tion of sets of functions on subsets of Euclidean space. We will ﬁrst need
a few deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 10.5. The distance function in Rn will be denoted by
d. Thus, d(x, y) measures the Euclidean distance from x to y.
Deﬁnition 10.6. A set D in Rn is bounded if it is contained in
some suﬃciently large ball. That is, there is a point a and radius R
such that for all x ∈D, we have d(x, a) < R.
Deﬁnition 10.7. A sequence {xn} of points in Rn converges to a
point x as n goes to inﬁnity, if d(xn, x) goes to zero. The point x is
called the limit point of the sequence.
Deﬁnition 10.8. A set D in Rn is closed if it contains all of its
limit points, that is, if every convergent sequence of points from D
converges to a point inside D.
Deﬁnition 10.9. An open ball centered at a, of radius ϵ, is the set
of points x in Rn such that d(x, a) < ϵ.

462
■Exploring Geometry
Deﬁnition 10.10. A set D in Rn is open if for every x in D, there
is an open ball of non-zero radius that is entirely contained in D.
The unit disk x2 +y2 ≤1 is closed. The interval (0, 1) is not. The set
x2 + y2 < 1 is open, as is the interval (0, 1). The interval [0, 1) is neither
open nor closed.
Deﬁnition 10.11. A set D in Rn is compact if any collection
of open sets that covers D (i.e., with the union of the open sets
containing D) has a ﬁnite sub-collection of open sets that still covers
D.
It can be shown that if D is compact, then it is also closed and
bounded [4, pages 20–25].
We will be working primarily with compact sets and so will deﬁne a
structure to contain all such sets.
Deﬁnition 10.12. The space H is deﬁned as the set of all compact
subsets of Rn.
The “points” of H will be compact subsets. In the preceding example
of the Cantor Set, we can consider the stages B0, B1, and so forth, of
the construction as a sequence Bn of compact sets, that is, a sequence of
“points” in H. It appeared that this sequence converged to the Cantor
Set. However, to speak of a sequence converging, we need a way of mea-
suring the distance between points in the sequence. That is, we need a
way of measuring the distance between compact sets.
Deﬁnition 10.13. Let B ∈H and x ∈Rn. Then
d(x, B) = min{d(x, y)|y ∈B}
Lemma 10.1. The function d(x, B) is well deﬁned. That is, there
always exists a minimum value for d(x, y) where y is any point in
B.

Fractal Geometry
■463
Proof: Let f(y) = d(x, y). Since the distance function is continuous
(by deﬁnition!), we have that f is a continuous function on a compact
set and thus must achieve a minimum and maximum value. (For the
proof of this extremal property of continuous function on a compact set,
see [4, page 31].) 2
Deﬁnition 10.14. Let A, B ∈H. Then
d(A, B) = max{d(x, B)|x ∈A}
The value of d(A, B) will be well deﬁned by a similar continuity
argument to the one given in the proof of the last lemma.
As an example, let A be a square
and B a triangle as shown at the
right. Given x ∈A, it is clear
that d(x, B) = d(x, y1), where y1
is on the left edge of triangle B.
Then d(A, B) = d(x1, y1), where
x1 is on the left edge of the square.
On the other hand, d(B, A) =
d(y2, x2) ̸= d(A, B).
A
B
x
y
y2
y1
x2
x1
Thus, in general d(A, B) need not equal d(B, A). Since one of the
deﬁning conditions for a distance function (or metric) is that it be sym-
metric, we need to modify the deﬁnition a bit.
Deﬁnition 10.15. The Hausdorﬀdistance between A and B in H
is given by
dH(A, B) = max{d(A, B), d(B, A)}
The Hausdorﬀdistance function satisﬁes all of the requirements for
a metric. That is,
1. dH(A, B) = dH(B, A)
2. dH(A, A) = 0
3. dH(A, B) > 0 if A ̸= B

464
■Exploring Geometry
4. dH(A, B) ≤dH(A, C) + dH(C, B) for A, B, C in H. This is called
the Triangle Inequality.
Condition 1 is true by the way we deﬁned the Hausdorﬀdistance.
Conditions 2 and 3 are left as exercises.
Lemma 10.2. The Hausdorﬀdistance function satisﬁes the Trian-
gle Inequality.
Proof: Let a, b, and c be points in A, B, and C, respectively. Using
the Triangle Inequality for Euclidean distance, we have that d(a, b) ≤
d(a, c) + d(c, b). Thus,
d(a, B)
=
min{d(a, b)|b ∈B}
≤
min{d(a, c) + d(c, b)|b ∈B} for all c ∈C
≤
d(a, c) + min{d(c, b)|b ∈B} for all c ∈C
≤
min{d(a, c)|c ∈C} + min{min{d(c, b)|b ∈B}|c ∈C}
≤
d(a, C) + max{min{d(c, b)|b ∈B}|c ∈C}
≤
d(a, C) + d(C, B)
And so,
d(A, B)
=
max{d(a, B)|a ∈A}
≤
max{d(a, C) + d(C, B)|a ∈A}
≤
d(A, C) + d(C, B)
Likewise, d(B, A) ≤d(B, C) + d(C, A). So,
dH(A, B)
=
max{d(A, B), d(B, A)}
≤
max{d(A, C) + d(C, B), d(B, C) + d(C, A)}
≤
max{d(A, C), d(C, A)} + max{d(B, C), d(C, B)}
≤
dH(A, C) + dH(C, B)
2
We are now in a position to prove that contraction mappings on Rn
generate contraction mappings on H.

Fractal Geometry
■465
Theorem 10.3. Let S be a contraction mapping on Rn, with ratio
c < 1. Then S is a contraction mapping on compact sets in H.
Proof: First, since a contraction map is continuous (proved as an
exercise), then if D is a non-empty compact set, S(D) must also be a
non-empty compact set. So, S is a well-deﬁned mapping from H to itself.
Now, for A and B in H:
d(S(A), S(B))
=
max{min{d(S(x), S(y))|y ∈B}|x ∈A}
≤
max{min{c d(x, y)|y ∈B}|x ∈A}
≤
c max{min{d(x, y)|y ∈B}|x ∈A}
≤
c d(A, B)
Likewise, d(S(B), S(A)) ≤c d(B, A), and so
dH(S(A), S(B))
=
max{d(S(A), S(B)), d(S(B), S(A))}
≤
max{c d(A, B), c d(B, A)}
≤
c dH(A, B)
2
Theorem 10.4. Let S1, S2, . . . , Sn be contraction mappings in Rn
with ratios c1, c2, . . . , cn. Deﬁne a transformation S on H by
S(D) =
n
[
i=1
Si(D)
Then, S is a contraction mapping on H, with contraction ratio
c = max{ci|i = 1, . . . , n}, and S has a unique ﬁxed set F ∈H
given by
F = lim
k→∞Sk(E)
for any non-empty E ∈H.
To prove this theorem, we will use the following lemma.

466
■Exploring Geometry
Lemma 10.5. Let A, B, C, and D be elements of H. Then
dH(A ∪B, C ∪D) ≤max{dH(A, C), dH(B, D)}
Proof: First, d(A ∪B, C) = max{d(A, C), d(B, C) (proved as an
exercise). Second, d(A, C ∪D) ≤d(A, C) and d(A, C ∪D) ≤d(A, D)
(proved as an exercise). Thus,
dH(A ∪B, C ∪D) = max{d(A ∪B, C ∪D), d(C ∪D, A ∪B)}
= max{max{d(A, C ∪D), d(B, C ∪D)},
max{d(C, A ∪B), d(D, A ∪B)}}
≤max{max{d(A, C), d(B, D)},
max{d(C, A), d(D, B)}}
≤max{max{d(A, C), d(C, A)},
max{d(B, D), d(D, B)}}
≤max{dH(A, C), dH(B, D)}
2
Now for the proof of Theorem 10.4. We will prove the result in the
case where n = 2. Let A and B be in H. Then, by the previous lemma,
we have
dH(S(A), S(B))
=
dH(S1(A) ∪S2(A), S1(B) ∪S2(B))
≤
max{dH(S1(A), S1(B)), dH(S2(A), S2(B))}
≤
max{c1 dH(A, B), c2 dH(A, B)}
≤
c dH(A, B)
Now let E be a non-empty set in H. Then assuming m ≤n, we have
dH(Sm(E), Sn(E))
≤
cdH(Sm−1(E), Sn−1(E))
·
·
·
≤
cn−mdH(E, Sn−m(E))

Fractal Geometry
■467
Also, by the Triangle Inequality, we have
dH(E, Sk(E))
≤
dH(E, S(E)) + dH(S(E), S2(E)) + · · ·
+ dH(Sk−1(E), Sk(E))
≤
(1 + c + c2 + · · · + ck−1) dH(E, S(E))
≤
 
ck
1 −c
!
dH(E, S(E))
≤

1
1 −c

dH(E, S(E))
Thus,
dH(Sm(E), Sn(E)) ≤
 
cn−m
1 −c
!
dH(E, S(E))
Since dH(E, S(E)) is ﬁxed and 0 ≤c < 1, we can make the term
dH(Sm(E), Sn(E)) as small as we want. A sequence having this property
is called a Cauchy sequence. It is a fact from real analysis that Cauchy
sequences converge in Rn. Thus, this sequence must converge to some
set F in H.
If F ′ were another compact ﬁxed set of S, then the sequence {Sk(F ′)}
must converge to F, which means the distance from F to F ′ goes to zero,
and so F = F ′. 2
Deﬁnition 10.16. The set F that is the limit set of a system of
contraction mappings Sk on Rn is called the attractor of the system.
A system of contraction mappings that is iterated on a compact set
is called an iterated function system or IFS.
Note how Theorem 10.4 conﬁrms our conjecture arising from the
Cantor Set construction. This theorem guarantees that the Cantor Set
is actually the attractor for the IFS consisting of the two contractions
S1 and S2 that were used in the set’s construction.
For another example, let’s return to the Sierpinski Triangle, deﬁned
on an initial triangle ∆ABC. This ﬁgure is ﬁxed under three contrac-
tions: scaling by 1
2 toward A, scaling by 1
2 toward B, and scaling by 1
2
toward C.
Suppose that points A, B, and C are at positions (0, 0), (0, 1), and
(1, 1). Then the three contractions are deﬁned as S1(x, y) =
1
2(x, y),
S2(x, y) = 1
2(x, y) + (0, 1
2), and S3(x, y) = 1
2(x, y) + ( 1
2, 1
2).

468
■Exploring Geometry
Suppose we iterate these three
contractions on the unit square
shown at the right.
A
B
C
After one iteration of the three
contractions, we would have three
sub-squares as shown.
A
B
C
After two iterations, we would
have nine sub-squares.
A
B
C

Fractal Geometry
■469
After one more iteration, we
begin to see the Sierpinski Trian-
gle take shape, as this is the at-
tractor of the set of three contrac-
tions.
A
B
C
10.6
FRACTAL DIMENSION
Recall our deﬁnition of the similarity dimension of a self-similar fractal
as the value of
d = log(N)
log( 1
r)
where r = r(N) was the similarity ratio, the ratio by which a ruler
measuring a side of an object at stage i of the construction would change
under the assumption that N sub-objects can be scaled to exactly cover
the object at stage i.
This deﬁnition assumes that the scaling of sub-parts of the fractal
exactly matches the form of the fractal itself, the scaling factor is uniform
throughout the fractal, and there is only one such scaling factor.
It would be nice to have a deﬁnition of fractal dimension that does
not suﬀer from all of these constraints. In this section we will expand the
similarity dimension concept to a more general covering-scaling concept
of dimension.
First, we need to explicitly deﬁne the notion of a covering
set.
Deﬁnition 10.17. Let A be a compact set. Let B(x, ϵ) = {y ∈
A|d(x, y) ≤ϵ}. That is, B(x, ϵ) is a closed ball centered at x of
radius ϵ. Then SM
n=1 B(xn, ϵ), with xn ∈A, is an ϵ-covering of A if
for every x ∈A, we have x ∈B(xn, ϵ) for some n.

470
■Exploring Geometry
Here we have a
1
2 covering of
the unit square. Note that this
covering
uses
eight
disks
(2-
dimensional balls) to cover the
square.
A
B
C
D
Clearly, there must be some minimal number of circles of radius 1
2
that will cover the unit square. This minimal covering number will be
used in our deﬁnition of fractal dimension.
Deﬁnition 10.18. Let A be a compact set. Then the minimal ϵ
covering number for A is
N(A, ϵ) = min{M|A ⊂
M
[
n=1
B(xn, ϵ)}
for some set of points {xn}.
We note that the value of N(A, ϵ) is well deﬁned, as every set can
be covered by some collection of open ϵ-balls. Since A is compact, then
there is a ﬁnite sub-collection that still covers A, and the closure of this
collection of open balls will also cover A. Thus, A has at least one ﬁnite
ϵ-covering and, thus, must have one with the fewest number of elements.
Intuitively, as ϵ changes, the minimum number of balls needed to
cover A should also change. For a line segment, the two should be directly
related: if we decrease ϵ by a factor of 1
2, the number of segments (1-
dimensional balls) should go up by 2 = 21. If A is a rectangle and we
decrease ϵ by a factor of 1
2, the number of disks should go up by 4 = 22.
For a cube, the increase in the number of balls should be 8 = 23.
This was precisely the relationship we noticed when deﬁning the
similarity dimension, so it makes sense to deﬁne the fractal dimension
to mirror the deﬁnition of similarity dimension.

Fractal Geometry
■471
Deﬁnition 10.19. Let A be a compact set. Then if
DF = lim
ϵ→0
log(N(A, ϵ))
log( 1
ϵ)
exists, we call DF the fractal dimension of A.
Using this deﬁnition, it is not hard to prove the following result.
Theorem 10.6. (Box-Counting Theorem) Let A be compact. Cover
Rn by just-touching square boxes of side-length
1
2n . Let Nn(A) be the
number of boxes that intersect A. Then
DF(A) = limn→∞
log(Nn(A))
log(2n)
The proof amounts to showing that the boxes in a covering of A can
be trapped between two sequences of ϵ balls that both converge to the
fractal dimension. The proof can be found in [4].
Finally, we have the following simpliﬁcation of the calculation of
fractal dimension in the case of an iterated function system (IFS).
Theorem 10.7. (IFS Fractal Dimension Theorem) Let {Sn}M
n=1
be an IFS and let A be its attractor. Assume that each Sn is a
transformation with scale ratio 0 < cn < 1, and assume that, at
each stage of its construction, portions of the fractal meet only at
boundary points. Then the fractal dimension is the unique number
D = DF(A) such that
M
X
n=1
cD
n = 1
Again, the proof can be found in [4]. For example, for the Cantor
Set, at each stage, the fractal consists of completely distinct segments,
which do not intersect at all. Thus, we have that
  1
3
D +
  1
3
D = 1, and
so D = log(2)
log(3).
This theorem would also apply to Sierpinski’s Triangle, as portions
of the fractal at each stage in the construction are triangles that meet
each other only at boundary segments.

472
■Exploring Geometry
Exercise 10.6.1. Show that a contraction mapping must be a continuous
function on its domain.
Exercise 10.6.2. Give an example of two compact subsets, A and B of R2,
with d(A, B) = d(B, A).
Exercise 10.6.3. Prove that conditions 2 and 3 in the list of properties for
a metric hold for the Hausdorﬀdistance function.
Exercise 10.6.4. Prove the ﬁrst statement in the proof of Lemma 10.5.
That is, show that d(A ∪B, C) = max{d(A, C), d(B, C)}.
Exercise 10.6.5. Prove the second statement in the proof of Lemma 10.5.
That is, show that d(A, C ∪D) ≤d(A, C) and d(A, C ∪D) ≤d(A, D).
Exercise 10.6.6. Use the construction for Sierpinski’s Triangle based on
the points A = (0, 0), B = (0, 1), and C = (1, 1) to show that N1(S) = 3,
N2(S) = 32, N3(S) = 33, and so on, where S is Sierpinski’s Triangle. Use
this to ﬁnd the fractal dimension. How does the fractal dimension compare to
the similarity dimension?
Exercise 10.6.7. Use the IFS Fractal Dimension Theorem to compute the
fractal dimension of Sierpinski’s Triangle.
Exercise 10.6.8. Show that the IFS consisting of S1(x) = 1
2x and S2(x) =
2
3x+ 1
3 does not meet the overlapping criterion of Theorem 10.7. Nevertheless,
by identifying the attractor for this IFS, show that its fractal dimension can
be calculated and is equal to 1.
10.7
PROJECT 17 - IFS FERNS
We saw in the last few sections that a compact set A can be real-
ized as the attractor of an iterated function system (IFS), a system of
contraction mappings whose ﬁxed set is A.
It should not be too surprising, then, that natural shapes can arise as
the attractors of IFS systems. In this project we will look at an especially
pretty attractor—the 2-dimensional outline of a fern.

Fractal Geometry
■473
Figure 10.5 Fern leaf
Consider the fern shown in Figure 10.5. Each leaf is made up of sub-
leaves similar to the original leaf, and each sub-leaf has sub-sub-leaves
similar to the sub-leaves, and so on.
How can we ﬁnd the contraction mappings that lead to the fern?
Michael Barnsley in [4] proved that to ﬁnd an IFS whose attractor ap-
proximates a given shape F, one only needs to ﬁnd aﬃne mappings that
when applied to F yield a union, or collage of shapes that approximate
F. Barnsley called this the Collage Theorem.
Deﬁnition 10.20. An aﬃne mapping S on the plane is a function
of the form
S(x, y) = (ax + by + e, cx + dy + f)
(10.4)
where a, b, c, d, e, and f are real constants.
Aﬃne mappings are generalizations of the planar isometries we stud-
ied in Chapter 5. For example, if a = cos(θ), b = −sin(θ), c = sin(θ),
d = cos(θ), and e = f = 0, then S will be a rotation of angle θ about the
origin. Note that aﬃne mappings are not necessarily invertible. If they
are invertible, we will call them aﬃne transformations.

474
■Exploring Geometry
In this project we will discover a set of aﬃne mappings that will
split the fern into a collage of sub-ferns that can be reassembled into
the original shape of the fern. We will use dynamic geometry software
to deﬁne this set of aﬃne mapppings. In order to accurately deﬁne the
aﬃne maps, we will need to use an electronic version of the fern image.
Go to http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text and click on the link
labeled “Projects.” Then, click on “IFS Ferns.” On this page, you can
download the ﬁle “fern.jpg.”
Start up your geometry software
and paste the fern image into the
main window. Create point A at
the very tip of the fern, C at the
second branch point, and B at the
base, as shown at right.
A
B
C
To split the fern into a col-
lage of similar pieces, we will start
with the set of branches totally
enclosed in the polygon ADECF.
Clearly, this sub-fern of branches
is similar to the entire fern, if we
scale the sub-fern by an appropri-
ate scaling factor.
A
B
C
D
E
F
To calculate the scaling factor, we will measure the ratio of AC to
AB. This should match the scaling factor of the sub-fern to the original
fern. Measure the distance from A to C and the distance from A to B.

Fractal Geometry
■475
Then, compute the ratio of these two distances (Figure 10.6). Note that
your distances may vary from the ones shown. This is okay —we are
interested only in the ratio of these distances.
A
B
C
D
E
F
Dist(A,C) = 3.82
Dist(A,B) = 4.71
Dist(A,C)/Dist(A,B)  = 0.81
Figure 10.6
It appears that the ratio of the sub-fern to the entire fern is about
0.8. This is the scaling factor we sought. However, the sub-fern is not just
a scaled-down version of the bigger fern. After scaling the big fern by a
scale factor of 0.8, we need to turn it slightly, about 5 degrees clockwise,
and translate it upward by the length of BC to exactly match the outline
of the big fern. Measure the length of BC. (Again, your measurement
may vary from the value shown.)
The aﬃne mapping that will take the bigger fern to the smaller fern
is then the composition of a rotation by 5 degrees, a scaling by 0.8, and a
translation by the length of BC, which we will denote by h. All of these
functions are invertible, so the composition will be a transformation of
the plane.
Exercise 10.7.1. Let T1 be the transformation taking the entire fern to the
sub-fern enclosed by ADECF. Show that
T1(x, y) ≈

0.8
0.07
−0.07
0.8
 x
y

+
0.0
h

We now have an aﬃne transformation, T1, that when applied to the

476
■Exploring Geometry
fern will cover a major portion of the fern itself. But, we are still missing
the lower two branches and the trunk.
Consider the lower branches and
in particular the one enclosed by
the polygon CHGJ. Measure ap-
propriate distances to verify that
the scaling factor for this sub-fern
is about 0.3.
A
B
C
H
G
J
h
i
Exercise 10.7.2. Let T2 be the transformation taking the entire fern to the
sub-fern enclosed by CHGJ. The angle of rotation for T2 appears to be about
50 degrees. Show that
T2(x, y) ≈
 0.19
−0.23
0.23
0.19
 x
y

+
0.0
h

Exercise 10.7.3. Let T3 be the transformation taking the entire fern to the
bottom right sub-fern. Show that the scaling factor for T3 is about 0.3, the
angle of rotation for T3 is about −60 degrees, and T3 includes a reﬂection
about the y-axis. Use this information to show that
T3(x, y) ≈
 −0.15
0.26
0.26
0.15
 x
y

+
0.0
h
2

Using the aﬃne transformations T1, T2, and T3, we can almost cover
the original fern with copies of itself. The only piece of the fern missing
from this collage is the small piece of trunk between B and C. Since this
is about 1
5 of the height of the fern, we can just squash the fern down
into a vertical line of length 0.2. The aﬃne mapping that will accomplish
this is
T4(x, y) ≈
"
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
# x
y

+
0.0
0.0

We note here that T4, while a valid aﬃne mapping, is not a trans-
formation. It is not one-to-one and, thus, not invertible.
We have now completed our splitting of the fern into a collage of four

Fractal Geometry
■477
sub-pieces. According to the Collage Theorem, an IFS consisting of T1,
T2, T3, and T4 should have as its attractor a shape that approximates
the original fern. Let’s see if that is true.
Close the window containing the fern. We will use a pre-built ﬁle to
do the rest of this project. Go to http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-
text and click on the link labeled “Projects.” Then, click on “IFS Ferns”
to get to the website for this project. Download the ﬁle labeled “IFS”
for your particular geometry software. Open this ﬁle in your geometry
program to continue this project.
The aﬃne mappings we will use in creating our fern have already
been deﬁned in this ﬁle. Each aﬃne mapping has the general form
T(x, y) =
"
a
b
c
d
# x
y

+
 e
f

For example, the transformation T1 deﬁned earlier has a = 0.8, b =
0.07, c = −0.07, d = 0.8, e = 0.0, and f = 1.0. (We are using f = h = 1.0
from the earlier measurements.)
At this point we have four aﬃne mappings that we can apply to
arbitrary geometric objects. We will apply these mappings to the point
A that is in the center of your window.
Click the “Iterate” button in your
window. A series of points will be
created by successfully iterating
each of the four aﬃne mappings
on point A, yielding a new set of
points. On each of these points, all
four mappings will again be car-
ried out, and so on. The iteration
is successively done four times.

478
■Exploring Geometry
The shape that appears is
something like the fern. One prob-
lem you might have is that your
points may be too large. Reduc-
ing the point size can give a more
pleasing picture.
This type of iteration can cre-
ate a lot of points. We started
with one point A, the ﬁrst iter-
ation produced four new points.
The second produced 16 points,
the
third
64,
and
the
fourth
256. This exponential growth can
quickly exhaust most geometry
programs, so we will stop with the
computer simulation at this point.
If we did continue the iteration
process, we would start to see the
fern take shape.
Exercise 10.7.4. The aﬃne maps T1, T2, and T3 are valid transformations
(i.e., are invertible), and thus the IFS Fractal Dimension Theorem (Theorem
10.7) applies to the shape of the fern minus its trunk. Use the contraction scale
factors for T1, T2, and T3 to estimate the fractal dimension of the portion of
the fern that does not include the main trunk.

Fractal Geometry
■479
Exercise 10.7.5. Find
the
four
aﬃne maps that will create the shape
at right. You may assume that shape
is bounded by the unit square (0 ≤
x ≤1 and 0 ≤y ≤1).
In this project we have seen how a small number of aﬃne maps can
represent or encode the shape of a complex natural object. In theory, any
complex object can be similarly encoded once the aﬃne maps for that
object are discovered. This has important implications for the transmis-
sion of complex data, such as images over a computer network. If we
can encode each image with just a small number of aﬃne maps, we can
greatly reduce the transmission time for images and video. The Collage
Theorem guarantees that we can get arbitrarily close to the original im-
age by a good choice of aﬃne maps. Once we have these aﬃne maps, the
reproduction of the original image is completely straightforward and fast,
using modern computers. The major draw-back to an encoding scheme
using IFS systems is the discovery of which aﬃne maps will produce a
good approximation to an image.
10.8
ALGORITHMIC GEOMETRY
In our discussion of self-similar fractals, we saw that their construction
required a looping process, whereby each level of the construction was
built from speciﬁc rules using the results of previous levels. This created
a recursive sequence of constructions and transformations to produce the
fractal.
In the last section we saw how we could use a system of aﬃne maps,
an IFS system, to generate a fractal. Transformations are applied recur-
sively to an initial object, with the fractal appearing as the attracting
set of the IFS system.
In both cases, fractals are created using a set of instructions which
generate a recursive procedure. Such a set of instructions is called an
algorithm. Since the construction of many fractals requires hundreds or

480
■Exploring Geometry
even thousands of calculations, fractal algorithms are most often carried
out by computers.
In the construction of self-similar fractals, we used the computer as
a powerful bookkeeping device to record the steps whereby edges were
replaced by template curves. For IFS systems, the computer carried out
the numerous iterations of a set of aﬃne maps, leading to a fractal
attractor appearing as out of a mist. In both of these fractal construction
algorithms, we use the computer to make the abstract ideas of self-
similarity or attracting sets a concrete reality.
10.8.1
Turtle Geometry
The notion of utilizing computing technology to make abstract math-
ematical ideas more “real” was the guiding principle of Seymour Pa-
pert’s work on turtle geometry and the programming language LOGO.
In his book Mindstorms, Papert describes turtle geometry as the “trac-
ings made on a display screen by a computer-controlled turtle whose
movements can be described by suitable computer programs” [34, page
xiv].
Papert’s work has inspired thousands of teachers and children to use
turtle geometry in the classroom as a means of exploring geometry (and
computer programming) in a way that is very accessible to young (and
old) students.
Turtle geometry has also proved to be an ideal way in which to
explore fractal shapes. To see how fractals can be constructed using
turtle geometry, we ﬁrst have to create a scheme for controlling the
turtle on screen.
We will direct the behavior of the turtle with the following set of
commands.
1. f Forward: The turtle moves forward a speciﬁed distance without
drawing.
2. |
Back: The turtle moves backward a speciﬁed distance without
drawing.
3. F Draw Forward: The turtle moves forward and draws as it moves.
4. + Turn Left: The turtle rotates counterclockwise through a spec-
iﬁed angle.

Fractal Geometry
■481
5. −
Turn Right: The turtle rotates clockwise through a speciﬁed
angle.
6. [
Push: The current state of the turtle is pushed onto a state
stack.
7. ] Pop: The state of the turtle is set to the state on top of a state
stack.
As an example, suppose we have speciﬁed that the turtle move 1 unit
and turn at an angle of 90 degrees. Also, suppose the initial heading of
the turtle is vertical. Then the set of symbols
F + F + F + F
can be considered a program that will generate a square of side-length 1
when interpreted, or carried out, by the turtle.
Here we have labeled the edges
drawn by the turtle as a, b, c, and
d, in the order that the turtle cre-
ated them.
a
b
c
d
In Figure 10.7 we have an example illustrating the use of the turtle-
state stack. The turtle was given the program F[+FF + FF + FF]+.
After the ﬁrst edge is drawn (edge a), the position and heading of the
turtle (direction it is pointing) are stored as a turtle-state. This turtle-
state is placed on the top of a virtual stack of possible turtle-states. Then
the turtle interprets the symbols +FF + FF + FF, ending with edge
g. At the symbol ] the turtle “pops” the stored turtle-state oﬀthe stack
and the turtle resets itself to that position and heading.
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
Figure 10.7

482
■Exploring Geometry
Let’s see how we can use this set of symbols to represent the stages
of construction of the Koch snowﬂake curve.
Recall that the Koch snowﬂake curve is a fractal that is constructed
by beginning with an initial segment. This segment is then replaced by
a template curve made up of four segments as shown at the right. The
angles inside the peak are 60 degrees, making the triangle formed by the
peak an equilateral triangle (Figure 10.8).
Level 2
Template
(level 1)
  Initial
(level 0)
Figure 10.8
The initial segment is the Koch curve at level 0. The template is the
Koch curve at level 1. If we replace each of the segments in the template
with a copy of the template at a reduced scale, we get the Koch curve
at level 2, and so on.
To model the Koch snowﬂake curve using our set of symbols, we could
say that the initial segment is a Draw Forward, or the symbol F. The
template is (forgetting for now the problem of scaling) a Draw Forward
followed by a Turn Left of 60 degrees, then a Draw Forward followed by
two Turn Rights of 60 degrees, then a Draw Forward followed by a Turn
Left of 60 degrees, and ﬁnally another Draw Forward. The symbol set
that describes the template is thus F +F −−F +F (assuming our turns
are always 60 degrees).
Thus, the Koch curve is deﬁned by an initial symbol F and a template
symbol set F + F −−F + F that governs how the initial segment is
replaced. At level 0 the Koch curve is F. At level 1 we replace F by
F + F −−F + F. At level 2 we replace all segments of level 1 by the
template. This is equivalent to replacing all occurrences of the symbol
F in the level 1 symbol set by the template set F + F −−F + F. The
level 2 symbol set is then F + F −−F + F + F + F −−F + F −−F +
F −−F + F + F + F −−F + F.

Fractal Geometry
■483
10.9
GRAMMARS AND PRODUCTIONS
The set of turtle symbols described in the last section was used in the
classic work by Prusinkiewicz and Lindenmayer, titled The Algorithmic
Beauty of Plants [29]. This beautiful book describes how one can use
turtle geometry to model plants and plant growth. Their method of
describing natural fractal shapes has been called Lindenmayer Systems,
or L-systems, in honor of Astrid Lindenmayer, who ﬁrst pioneered the
notion of using symbols to model plant growth.
Lindemayer’s novel idea was to model plant structures through a
grammar rewriting system. We can think of a set of symbols as a word
in a grammar built from those symbols. The symbol set F + F + F + F
is a word in the grammar built on turtle command symbols.
In the Koch curve example, the curve is grammatically deﬁned by an
initial word F and a template word F + F −−F + F. At each level we
rewrite the previous level’s word by substituting in for each occurrence
of the symbol F.
The Koch curve can be completely described by two words: the
starter word F and template word F + F −−F + F. The Koch curve
is then the limiting curve one gets by successively rewriting an inﬁnite
number of times, having the turtle interpret the ﬁnal word, which is
theoretically possible but physically impossible.
The formal deﬁnition of an L-system is as follows.
Deﬁnition 10.21. A Lindenmayer system or L-system consists of
• a ﬁnite set Σ of symbols
• a set Ωof words over Σ
• a ﬁnite set P of production rules or rewrite rules, of the form
σ−> ω, where σ ∈Σ and ω ∈Ω
• a symbol S in Σ that is called the start symbol or the axiom
of the system
Lindenmayer Systems are special types of formal grammars. A formal
grammar is used in computer science to describe a formal language, a set
of strings made up of symbols from an alphabet. Formal grammars are
used to express the syntax of programming languages such as Pascal or

484
■Exploring Geometry
Java. These languages can be completely expressed as a set of production
rules over a set of symbols and words.
For example, suppose Σ = {a, b, S}, and P = {S−> aSb, S−> ba}.
That is, there are two production rules:
1. S−> aSb
2. S−> ba
Beginning with the start symbol S, we can rewrite using production
rule 1 to get the new word aSb. Then using rule 2 on this word, we can
rewrite to get abab. At this point, we can no longer rewrite, as there is
no longer a start symbol in our word. We have reached a terminal word
in the grammar. In fact, it is not hard to see that the set of all producible
words (i.e., words that are the result of repeatedly rewriting the start
symbol) consists of a subset of all strings containing an equal number of
a’s and b’s. We only get a subset of such strings because the string bbaa,
for example, is not producible. We will call the set of producible strings
the language of the grammar.
10.9.1
Space-Filling Curves
As another example, let’s consider a grammar that classiﬁes the Draw
Forward segments of a turtle into two groups: left edges, which we will
denote by Fl, and right edges, which we will denote by Fr.
By artiﬁcially creating such a classiﬁcation, we can control which
instances of the symbol F in a word will be replaced under a production.
Those edges labeled Fl will be replaced by a production rule for Fl, and
those labeled Fr will be replaced by a production rule for Fr. When the
turtle interprets a word that uses these two symbols, it will interpret
both as a simple Draw Forward.
To see how this works, let’s consider the problem of ﬁlling up a unit
square by a path passing through the points in the square.

Fractal Geometry
■485
Here we have subdivided a square
into 25 sub-squares. Look care-
fully at the path weaving through
the square. It touches each of
the corners of the internal sub-
squares, will hit one or the other
of the corners of the squares on
the left or right sides, and will also
do this on the top and bottom
sides. Note that this path starts at
the lower left corner of the square
(P) and ends at the lower right
corner (Q).
P
Q
A
B
C
Consider the edge of this path
in the sub-square labeled A. If
we scaled down the path in the
previous ﬁgure by a factor of 1
5,
we could replace this edge with
the scaled-down copy of the orig-
inal path. The original path can
be considered a template, similar
to the strategy we used for the
Koch snowﬂake. Suppose we try
to replace each edge of the original
path with the template. In the ﬁg-
ure at right, we have replaced the
edges in sub-squares A and B.
P
Q
A
B
C
When we try to replace the edge in sub-square C, we have a problem.
If we substitute our template on the left side of the edge in C, we will
collide with the path we already have in B. Thus, we need to substitute to
the right of this edge. However, our template is not oriented correctly to
do this. We need to substitute a new path, one that ﬁrst passes directly
into square C, so that it does not “double-up” on any of the points
already covered on the edge between B and C. Also, it must not “double-
up” on any of the other edges it might possibly share with the previous
template curve, if it is in another orientation.

486
■Exploring Geometry
Here is a picture of what the
“right”
template
curve
should
be. Note that it is shown in
relation
to
the
original
tem-
plate
curve.
To
see
how
it
would appear in sub-square C,
rotate
the
curve
90
degrees
counter-clockwise. This template
will not “double-up” with our
old template, which we will call
the “left” template. Also, if this
template adjoins a left template,
then all corner points on the edge
where the two squares meet will
be covered by one path or the
other.
P
Q
Now all we have to do to create the template replacement process is
to label all edges in each of the two templates with “l” or “r” to designate
which of the scaled-down templates will replace that edge. We start with
the left template and label the ﬁrst edge “l.” Then the next edge is also
“l,” but the edge at C must be “r,” as must be the next edge.
Continuing in this way, we get the
following set of edge labels for the
left template.
A
B
C
r
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
r
r
r
r
r
r
l
l
l
l
r
r
r
l
l
r
r
Note that every sub-square has a label in it. Thus, every sub-square
will have a scaled-down template passing through it. Also, by the way
we constructed the two templates, we are guaranteed that along an edge
where two sub-squares meet, the new paths will not cross each other
or intersect. A simple way to keep track of the orientations of the sub-
squares is that an edge labeled “l” will have the left template constructed
to the left of the edge, and vice versa for an edge labeled “r.”

Fractal Geometry
■487
The two production rules for the left and right templates are, thus,
Fl−> FlFl + Fr + Fr −Fl −Fl + Fr + FrFl −Fr −FlFlFr +
Fl −Fr −FlFl −Fr + FlFr + Fr + Fl −Fl −FrFr +
Fr−> −FlFl + Fr + Fr −Fl −FlFr −Fl + FrFr + Fl + Fr −
FlFrFr + Fl + FrFl −Fl −Fr + Fr + Fl −Fl −FrFr
Note that for the left template, we need to add a ﬁnal turn (+) to
ensure that any new path starts in the same direction as the original.
Now all we need is an initial starting path. Since it is customary to
have the turtle heading vertically at the start, we will turn the turtle
so that it heads to the right initially. Thus, the path −Fl will be our
starting path.
If we don’t want to use subscripts for the two types of F symbols,
we can instead use the following production rules with the starter word
−Fl.
l−> lFl + rF + rF −Fl −Fl + rF + rFFl −rF −FlFlrF +
Fl −rF −FlFl −rF + FlrF + rF + Fl −Fl −rFrF +
r−> −FlFl + rF + rF −Fl −FlrF −Fl + rFrF + Fl + rF −
FlrFrF + Fl + rFFl −Fl −rF + rF + Fl −Fl −rFr
Note that we give productions only for how the symbols l and r are
replaced. Thus, the initial F for the left production and the ﬁnal F for
the right production must be omitted from the replacement.
This set of productions will generate an equivalent rewriting system,
if we interpret Fl as Fl and rF as Fr. The turtle, when interpreting a
level 2 rewrite of this system, will generate the image in Figure 10.9. We
can start to see how this curve will ﬁll up the space in the square, as the
rewriting level increases without bound.

488
■Exploring Geometry
Figure 10.9 Space-ﬁlling curve
Exercise 10.9.1. Let an L-system be deﬁned by Σ = {a, b, 1, S}, and P =
{S−> aSb, S−> 1}, with start symbol S. Prove that this grammar generates
the language {anbn|n ≥0}.
Exercise 10.9.2. Let an L-system be deﬁned by Σ = {F, +, −, S}, and
P = {S−> F −F −F −F, F−> F −F + F + FF −F −F + F}, with
start symbol S. This system, when interpreted by a turtle, will generate a
self-similar fractal called the Quadratic Koch Island, as ﬁrst described in [30,
page 50]. Sketch levels 1 (rewrite S once) and 2 (rewrite twice) of this curve
(assume the turn angle is 90 degrees), and sketch the template for the fractal.
Find the similarity dimension using the template.
Exercise 10.9.3. Let an L-system be deﬁned by Σ = {F, +, −, L, R}, and
P = {L−> +RF −LFL −FR+, R−> −LF + RFR + FL−}, with start
symbol L. This curve is called the Hilbert curve. Find the level 1 and 2 rewrite
words for this system and sketch them on a piece of paper using turtle geom-
etry. Do you think this system will generate a space-ﬁlling curve?
Exercise 10.9.4. In our space-ﬁlling curve example, show that the right
template is a simple rotation of the left template. On a 7×7 grid ﬁnd a left
template curve with edges labeled r and l, as we did earlier, such that all
squares are visited by some edge of the curve. Also, create the curve so that a
180 degree rotation about the center of the grid will produce a right template
curve with the same “doubling-up” properties as we had for the pair of curves
in our example. That is, if the right and left templates would meet at an edge,
then no edge of the left would intersect an edge of the right, except at the start
and end of the paths.

Fractal Geometry
■489
10.10
PROJECT 18 - WORDS INTO PLANTS
What makes many plants fractal-like is their branching structure. A
branch of a tree often looks somewhat like the tree itself, and a branch’s
sub-branch system looks like the branch, and so forth. To model the
development of branching structures, we will use the grammar rewriting
ideas of the last section, plus the push and pop features of turtle geom-
etry. This will be necessary to eﬃciently carry out the instructions for
building a branch and then returning to the point where the branch is
attached.
The grammar we will use consists of the turtle symbols described in
the last section plus one new symbol “X.” We can think of X as being a
virtual node of the plant that we are creating. Initially, the start symbol
for our grammar will be just the symbol X, signifying the potential
growth of the plant.
For example, here is a very simpli-
ﬁed branching system for a plant.
X
How can we represent this branching structure using our grammar
rewriting system? It is clear that the plant grew in such a way that
three new branch nodes were created from the original potential node
X, which we represent here as a point. Thus, the start symbol X must
be replaced with three new X’s. Also, the branches were created at an
angle to the main branch, so there needs to be some turning by the
turtle. Finally, each new branch has length of two Draw Forward’s, if we
consider one Draw Forward to be the distance between the points on a

490
■Exploring Geometry
branch. Which production rules will represent this plant? Consider the
following set of productions:
X
−>
F[+X]F[−X] + X
F
−>
FF
The ﬁrst production replaces a node X by the word F[+X]F[−X]+
X. Thus, the replacement will produce a “stalk” of length 1, a new
branch node turned to the left that is independent of the previous symbol
F, due to the push and pop symbols, a second length of main stalk, a
second independent branch node coming oﬀthe stalk at an angle to the
right, and ﬁnally a third branch coming oﬀthe top at an angle to the
left.
The second production says that a length of stalk will grow twice as
long in the next generation. Putting this all together, we have in these
two productions a blueprint for the growth of the plant.
Exercise 10.10.1. How many times was the start symbol X rewritten, using
the production rules, to generate the preceding plant image?
To
generate
this
branching
structure,
we
will
make
use
of
the turtle geometry capabilities of the software program Geome-
try Explorer. If you are not already using this program, go to
http://www.gac.edu/~hvidsten/geom-text for instructions on how to
download and use this software.
To begin, we need to deﬁne a turn
angle and a heading vector for our
turtle. Start Geometry Explorer
and create segments AB, BC, and
DE as shown.
A
B
C
D
E
Select A, B, and C (in that order) and choose Turtle Turn Angle
(Turtle menu) to deﬁne the turn angle for our turtle. Then, multi-select
D and E and choose Turtle Heading Vector (Turtle menu) to deﬁne
the turtle’s initial direction of motion.
Now, create a point X on the
screen. Select X and choose Cre-
ate Turtle at Point (Turtle
menu) to create a turtle based at
X.
A
B
C
D
E
X

Fractal Geometry
■491
A dialog box will pop up
to control the movement of the
turtle. Click on the tab labeled
“Grammar Turtle.” In this win-
dow we can type in the start sym-
bol (axiom) and a list of produc-
tions. Type in “X” for the ax-
iom and then type in the two
productions as shown, using “=”
to designate the left and right
sides of the rule. Type in “1” in
the Rewrite Level box and hit
the Rewrite button. The com-
puter will rewrite the axiom, us-
ing the two production (replace-
ment) rules.
Now, click on the “Turtle In-
terpret” button. The turtle will
carry out the commands in the
rewritten word.
X
We do not see any actual
branches yet, as the three new X’s
in the rewritten word are potential
branches. Undo the turtle back to
its start position by typing “Ctrl-
U” repeatedly. Then, in the gram-
mar window type in “2” for the
rewrite level and hit “Rewrite.”
Click on “Turtle Interpret” again
to see the plant starting to take
shape.
X
The ﬁgure drawn by the turtle is clearly a branched structure, but
is not really much like a plant. To more fully develop the branching
pattern, we need to rewrite the axiom to a higher level.

492
■Exploring Geometry
Undo the turtle back to its start position and move E close to D, so
that the turtle moves only a short distance each time it changes position.
Change the rewrite level to 4 in the Turtle Controller and hit Return.
Note how the new sentence has expanded.
X
B
A
C
D
E
Figure 10.10
Click on “Turtle Interpret” and watch the turtle interpret the rewrit-
ten sentence (Figure 10.10). This may take awhile—anywhere from a few
seconds to several minutes, depending on the speed of your computer.
There are a tremendous number of actions that the turtle needs to carry
out as it interprets the sentence.
You will be able to tell when the turtle is done by the state of the
“Stop Turtle” button. If the turtle is still drawing, the button will be
active. Once the turtle completes drawing, the button will become inac-
tive.
The image is very “blotchy” with
all of the points visible that were
drawn by the turtle. Let’s hide all
of these points by choosing Hide
All (View menu) and then choos-
ing the Points submenu. Now the
ﬁgure looks like the bushy branch
structure of a plant (minus the
leaves).

Fractal Geometry
■493
Exercise 10.10.2. Find a set of
two productions that will generate
the branching pattern shown here,
from an initial start symbol of X.
Exercise 10.10.3. Design an L-system that will have a thick, bushy branch-
ing system.
The analysis of complex branching patterns is quite an interesting
subject, one for which we have only scratched the surface. For more
information on this subject, consult the Prusinkiewicz and Lindenmayer
text [29].
It is interesting to note how the use of grammar rewriting systems
mirrors our discussion of axiomatic systems from Chapter 1. The start
symbol and production rules can be thought of as abstract axioms or
postulates. The words of the language produced by the grammar are
akin to theorems in the axiomatic system, as they are generated using
the axioms of the system. It seems that our investigation of geometry
has returned full circle to where it began with the Greeks and their
axiomatic system of reasoning.


A P P E N D I X A
A Primer on Proofs
A mathematical proof of a theorem is a logical series of statements that
begin with the hypotheses of the theorem and ﬁnish with the conclusion.
There is no simple recipe for writing a good mathematical proof. If there
were, mathematics would be a very constrained and machine-like subject.
In this appendix we will review a few ideas to help make the mysterious
art of writing proofs less mysterious.
A.1
AXIOMATIC SYSTEMS AND PROOFS
All of the statements of a proof must be based within an axiomatic
system. Statements used within a proof can consist of axioms, deﬁnitions,
previously proven theorems, and general rules of logic.
The fundamental characteristics of an axiomatic system were cov-
ered in detail in Chapter 1. An axiomatic system is built from a base
of concepts and statements that are used without proof. These are the
undeﬁned terms and postulates/axioms of the system.
Starting from a base of undeﬁned terms and agreed upon axioms, we
deﬁne other terms and use our axioms to argue the truth of other state-
ments. These other statements are called the theorems of the system. An
axiomatic system consists of four components:
1. Undeﬁned Terms
2. Axioms (or Postulates)
3. Deﬁned Terms
4. Theorems
We gave several examples of simple axiomatic systems in Chapter 1.
495

496
■Exploring Geometry
Proving theorems in these simple systems is good practice in that there
are only a few axioms upon which to base a proof. The diﬃculty in de-
veloping a proof comes when we are working in more complex axiomatic
systems. The variety and complexity of statements, and the numerous
possible ways that one can combine previous results, can make the writ-
ing of a good mathematical proof seem like a mysterious and daunting
task.
A primary diﬃculty students face when constructing proofs is the
question of what can be assumed. There are two general ways that math-
ematicians approach this question.
In the ﬁrst case, a complete and rigorous axiomatic foundation is
laid down, with no gaps, to develop a body of theorems that can lead to
a given proof. In the case of Euclidean geometry, Euclid’s original ﬁve
axioms were not suﬃcient to this task. As mentioned in the chapter on
Euclidean Geometry, David Hilbert was able to devise a more rigorous
set of axioms for which one can do a careful development of classical
Euclidean geometry. If you wish to follow this development, consult the
on-line chapter on Hilbert’s geometry which can be found on the au-
thor’s website. Proofs of theorems, based on ﬁrst principles of Hilbert’s
axioms, rely on the proofs of many other theorems. Texts that follow
this approach invariably take several chapters to prove rather elemen-
tary results.
The second approach is to brieﬂy summarize the axiomatic basis for
the system in which you are working, and then review the fundamental
theorems in that system without proving the theorems. For example, in
Chapter 2 we quickly reviewed the basic results of Euclidean geometry,
without proof, and then went on to prove more complex theorems. In this
approach, we treated standard theorems (such as the theorem that the
base angles of an isosceles triangle are congruent) as fundamental results
without supplying rigorous proofs. You might say that we treated these
theorems like axioms. This malleability in the foundations of mathemat-
ics is an aspect of most mathematics textbooks that is very confusing to
students. The complaint is that it is not clear what can be assumed and
what needs to be proven. This is a very valid complaint!
In this text, the author has tried to make it clear when he is taking
foundational “short-cuts” and has provided on-line resources for those
students (and instructors) who wish to see all the ﬁne details of the
complete axiomatic basis for a proof. The trade-oﬀis foundational detail
versus broad coverage.
The ﬁrst rule of developing a proof is to determine what can be used

A Primer on Proofs
■497
(assumed to be true) when constructing a proof. The second rule is to
determine the type (or structure) of proof that is called for in a given
setting.
A.2
DIRECT PROOFS
Most (not all) theorems are statements of the form “If .... then ....” That
is, they are conditional statements. The part of the statement between
the “if” and the “then” is called the hypothesis. The part after the “then”
is called the conclusion.
Sometimes, it is not obvious that a theorem statement has a hypoth-
esis and a conclusion. Consider the statement “The sum of the interior
angles of a triangle is 180 degrees.” This is not a statement of the form
“If .... then ....” However, the statement does imply the existence of a
triangle for which we consider an angle sum. The hypothesis is that a
triangle exists. The conclusion is that the sum of its angles is 180 de-
grees. So, we could write the theorem statement as “If we are given a
triangle, then the sum of its interior angles is 180 degrees.”
Once we have identiﬁed the hypothesis and conclusion of a theorem
statement, we then develop the proof of the theorem. For example, con-
sider the statement “If two lines intersect at a point, the vertical angles
created are congruent.” This is Euclid’s Proposition 15 of Book I of El-
ements. The hypothesis of the statement is that two lines intersect at
a point. The hypothesis of a theorem statement is assumed to be true.
To prove a theorem, one has to show that the conclusion is true. In our
example, one would have to prove that the angles made by the two lines
are congruent.
A direct proof is a proof that starts with the hypothesis as a given
statement (no need to prove) and proceeds by a series of statements
(axioms, deﬁnitions, or previously proved theorems), and general rules
of logic, until one reaches the conclusion.
To illustrate how one can construct a direct proof under the foun-
dational approach used in this text, let’s consider one of the homework
problems from Chapter 2. We will restate this exercise as a theorem:
Theorem A.1. If a triangle has two angles congruent, then it must
be isosceles.
Before we start to write down any steps in the proof, we must ﬁrst
make sure we understand all of the terms in the statement. This is a

498
■Exploring Geometry
critical step that is sometimes overlooked. The terms in the theorem
statement are “triangle,” “angle,” “congruent,” and “isosceles.” Under-
standing these terms will help us understand how to organize our proof.
The conclusion of the theorem statement is that the triangle is isosceles.
What does this mean? By deﬁnition, an isosceles triangle is one where
two sides are congruent. Thus, we need to show that the triangle has
two sides that are congruent.
The hypothesis of the theorem is that the triangle has two angles
congruent. As mentioned above, this can be assumed to be true when
we write our proof. So, let’s consider what we are given in relation to
what we are to prove.
1. Given: A triangle with two angles congruent.
2. To Prove: The triangle has two congruent sides
Now that we clearly understand the hypothesis and conclusion, we
consider what prior results we can use to prove the theorem. As men-
tioned in the previous section, this depends on the context in which
we are working. In the context of exercise 2.2.7, we can use any re-
sult that comes in the preceding two sections of Chapter 2. The section
in which this exercise is located is the section on Congruent Triangles
and Pasch’s Axiom. The hypothesis and conclusion deal with congruent
sides and angles of a triangle. This would suggest that one of the triangle
congruence theorems would be useful. However, the triangle congruence
theorems deal with pairs of triangles. So, we have to think about how
we can modify the given triangle so we can work with two triangles.
Up to this point, our discussion on how to think about proving a
theorem has been fairly algorithmic. We ﬁrst made sure we understood
all the terms in the given theorem statement. Then, we identiﬁed the
hypothesis and conclusion, and considered the possible prior results we
could utilize.
The next step in the development of a proof is more creative. We
have to play with possibilities and “massage” what we are given so that
we can reach the conclusion. In our example, we need to modify a single
triangle so that we can make two triangles. But, when we create the two
triangles, we need to make sure that some triangle congruence theorem
can apply to the new triangles.
When exploring ideas to use in a proof, it is important to label sig-
niﬁcant parts of ﬁgures so that we can refer to them without ambiguity.
In our case, we have a triangle. Let’s say its vertices are the points A,

A Primer on Proofs
■499
B, and C. It is given that two angles are congruent, so we assume that
∠BAC ∼= ∠BCA. Why can we just assume this? The fact that two an-
gles are congruent does not impose restrictions on which of our labeled
angles are congruent. So, we just pick two to be the congruent ones.
One way to create two triangles from a single triangle would be to
construct some interior point to a side.
If we construct point D on AB,
then we have two triangles ADC
and BDC. The problem with con-
structing such a point is that it
messes up the given angle congru-
ence, as we no longer have any
idea about the congruence of the
angles created from ∠BCA.
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
To preserve the given angle
congruence, we have to construct
a point on AC. To be able to use
triangle congruence theorems, the
new point should be a midpoint.
A
B
C
D
Now, we have two triangles ADB and CDB with two angles congru-
ent and two pairs of sides congruent (AD ∼= CD and BD to itself). But,
there is no triangle congruence of the form SSA, so this line of reasoning
will not result in a valid proof.
However, this ﬁgure suggests a
diﬀerent way to split the triangle
in two. Let −−→
BE be the angle bisec-
tor of the angle at B. By Pasch’s
axiom, this will intersect side AC
at some point D. Then, we will
have AAS congruence for the two
triangles!
A
B
C
D
E
A
B
C
D
E
The discussion above is an illustration of the experimentation that
needs to be done when working on a proof. We started with a general

500
■Exploring Geometry
idea: take the given triangle and create two sub-triangles so that a trian-
gle congruence theorem could be used. We then explored diﬀerent ways
to accomplish this goal.
Once we are assured that our proof plan will work, we then can write
up a careful description of the proof as follows:
Proof: Let triangle ∆ABC have angles ∠BAC and ∠BCA congru-
ent. Let −−→
BE be the bisector of ∠ABC. By Pasch’s axiom, this ray will
intersect AC at some point D. Then, by AAS we have that triangles
∆ABD and ∆CBD are congruent. Thus AB ∼= CB. 2
We summarize the important factors in writing a direct proof as
follows:
1. Understood all of the terms in the given theorem statement. Check
deﬁnitions.
2. Identify the hypothesis and conclusion of the theorem statement.
3. Identify the axiomatic context in which the theorem occurs. Iden-
tify valid prior results that can be used without proof.
4. Label signiﬁcant parts of geometric ﬁgures. Draw some ﬁgures to
aid in proof, but be careful not to reason from your ﬁgures!
5. Make a plan on how to move from hypothesis to conclusion. Use
prior results to ﬁll in the transition from hypothesis to conclusion.
6. After carefully going through above steps, write down the proof in
correct logical order, using complete sentences and correct termi-
nology.
A.3
PROOFS BY CONTRADICTION
While direct proofs make up the bulk of the proofs in this text, the second
most widely used proof technique is that of proof by contradiction.
Suppose the statement of a theorem is of the form “If .... then ....”. As
mentioned earlier, the part of the theorem statement between the “if”
and the “then” is called the hypothesis and the part after the “then” is
called the conclusion. Let us symbolize the hypothesis statement by the
symbol “p” and the conclusion by “q.” A theorem statement can then be
represented as “If p then q.”
A basic logical assumption that we make when proving any theorem

A Primer on Proofs
■501
is that the statement we are trying to prove is either true or false, but not
both. If q is the statement we are trying to prove, we assume that q and
its logical negation (which we symbolize by ∼q) cannot simultaneously
be true.
In a proof by contradiction, we start by assuming the logical negation
of the conclusion we are trying to prove. That is, we assume ∼q is true.
Then, suppose we can develop a series of statements that follow from this
assumption, ultimately resulting in a statement s that is the opposite of
a statement r that we know to be true. That is, we are able to show that
r and ∼r are simultaneously true. Since this is logically impossible (a
statement cannot be both true and false) then the assumption that ∼q
is true must be incorrect. That is, q must be true.
As an example, let’s consider exercise 2.2.9 from Chapter 2. Let’s
state the ﬁrst part of the exercise as a theorem.
Theorem A.2. If two sides of a triangle are not congruent, then
the angles opposite those sides are not congruent
Let’s consider how we would prove this result by the method of con-
tradiction. The conclusion of the theorem statement is that two angles
are not congruent. The logical negation of the conclusion is that the
two angles are congruent. So, a proof by contradiction would start with
this assumption, that the angles opposite the non-congruent sides of a
triangle are congruent. Starting from this assumption we see what other
statements this assumption would imply, with the idea in the back of
our minds that we want to reach a contradictory statement to something
we know is true.
Recall
that
in
the
previous
section,
we
proved
the
follow-
ing:
Theorem A.3. If a triangle has two angles congruent, then it must
be isosceles.
We can use this in our current proof. The assumption that we have
two angles in a triangle being congruent then implies that the triangle
is isosceles. But, then the sides are congruent. This directly contradicts
the hypothesis we were given in the theorem: that the two sides are not
congruent. This contradiction then implies that our assumption about
congruent angles was incorrect and thus the angles are not congruent.

502
■Exploring Geometry
We summarize the important factors in writing a proof using con-
tradiction as follows:
1. All of the important factors used in a direct proof apply (see the
previous section).
2. Identify the hypothesis (p) and conclusion (q) of the theorem state-
ment.
3. We suppose that the logical negation of the conclusion (∼q) is
true.
4. We derive a statement that contradicts the hypothesis (p) or some
other theorem or axiom.
5. The contradiction then implies that the conclusion (q) is true.
A.4
CONVERSE STATEMENTS
When we discussed direct proofs, we used as an example the statement
found in exercise 2.2.7. This statement is the converse statement to The-
orem 2.14:
Theorem A.4. (Theorem 2.14) In an isosceles triangle, the two
base angles are congruent.
We restated exercise 2.2.7 as a theorem:
Theorem A.5. If a triangle has two angles congruent, then it must
be isosceles.
Note that these two theorem statements are closely related. In fact
the second statement switches the role of hypothesis and conclusion from
the ﬁrst.
Deﬁnition A.1. Given a theorem statement “If p then q,” where p
is the hypothesis and q is the conclusion, the converse statement is
the statement “If q then p.” That is, the converse reverses the roles
of hypothesis and conclusion.

A Primer on Proofs
■503
The hypothesis of Theorem 2.14 is that we have an isosceles triangle
and the conclusion is that the base angles are congruent. The hypothesis
of the converse statement is that we have a triangle with two angles con-
gruent. Note that we do not use the term “base angles.” This is because
this term is deﬁned for an isosceles triangle and we cannot assume the
triangle in the hypothesis of the converse statement is isosceles. (That
would be assuming the conclusion!)
The steps used in proving the converse of a statement are as follows:
1. Identify the hypothesis p and q of the original statement.
2. Write the converse statement with hypothesis (q) and conclusion
(p), taking care to not assume anything from p when writing the
converse hypothesis q.
3. Use the techniques of direct proof or proof by contradiction to ﬁnd
the proof of the converse statement.
A.5
IF AND ONLY IF STATEMENTS
Consider the statement of Theorem 2.36 in Chapter 2:
Theorem A.6. (Theorem 2.36) Given a circle c with center O
and radius OT, a line l is tangent to c at T if and only if l is
perpendicular to ←→
OT at T.
Deﬁnition A.2. The truth of a statement of the form “p if and
only if q” is equivalent to the simultaneous truth of “If p then q”
and the converse “If q then p.”
If a theorem statement is of the form “p if and only if q,” then the
hypothesis and conclusion follow from each other —they are essentially
equivalent statements.
How does one prove an if and only if statement? The proof is es-
sentially two diﬀerent proofs. One starts by proving the statement “If p
then q” followed by a proof of the statement “If q then p.”
In the example of Theorem 2.36, we see that the ﬁrst part of the
theorem statement “Given a circle c with center O and radius OT” can
be assumed for either proof, as nothing is asserted in the statement other

504
■Exploring Geometry
than there exists a circle. Thus, the “If p then q” statement can be stated
as “If a line l is tangent to c at T then l is perpendicular to ←→
OT at T,” and
the converse as “If line l is perpendicular to ←→
OT at T then l is tangent
to c at T.”
If one checks the proof of Theorem 2.36, one can see that there are
two sub-proofs clearly laid out, one for the statement “If a line l is
tangent to c at T then l is perpendicular to ←→
OT at T” and the other for
the statement “If line l is perpendicular to ←→
OT at T then l is tangent to
c at T.” The ﬁrst sub-proof is a proof by contradiction and the second
is a direct proof.
The steps used in proving an “if and only if” statement are as follows:
1. Identify the two statements p and q of the theorem statement.
2. Prove “If p then q”.
3. Prove “If q then p”.
A.6
PROOFS AND WRITING
One can think of a good proof as providing a solid logical argument,
but there is also an aesthetic quality to a well-written proof. Proofs can
be perfectly correct in their logical details, but till seem ugly or boring.
A good proof is like telling a story —there is a beginning, middle, and
end, and the writer needs to hold the reader’s interest through all three
parts. The following are a few hints at writing a “pretty” proof:
1. A proof should have a clearly deﬁned beginning, middle, and end.
There should be a direct line that logically moves from the hy-
pothesis to the conclusion, without sidetracks.
2. A proof should be organized into coherent sentences and para-
graphs. Each paragraph should relate to one main idea.
3. Figures and equations should relate to the proof and should ﬂow
with the text of the proof.
4. Notation and vocabulary must be used correctly.
5. A proof should be written in the ﬁrst person plural. For exam-
ple, “We assume that triangle ABC is isosceles.” This may seem
strange, but it is convention for mathematical proofs.
6. A proof should use correct English grammar and punctuation.

A P P E N D I X B
Book I of Euclid’s
Elements
B.1
DEFINITIONS
1. A point is that which has no part.
2. A line is breadthless length.
3. The extremities of a line are points.
4. A straight line is a line that lies evenly with the points on itself.
5. A surface is that which has length and breadth only.
6. The extremities of a surface are lines.
7. A plane surface is a surface that lies evenly with the straight lines
on itself.
8. A plane angle is the inclination to one another of two lines in a
plane that meet one another and do not lie in a straight line;
9. And when the lines containing the angle are straight, the angle is
called rectilinear.
10. When a straight line set up on a straight line makes the adjacent
angles equal to one another, each of the equal angles is right, and
the straight standing on the other is called a perpendicular to that
on which it stands.
11. An obtuse angle is an angle greater than a right angle.
505

506
■Exploring Geometry
12. An acute angle is an angle less than a right angle.
13. A boundary is that which is an extremity of anything.
14. A ﬁgure is that which is contained by any boundary or boundaries.
15. A circle is a plane ﬁgure contained by one line such that all the
straight lines falling upon it from one point among those lying
within the ﬁgure are equal to one another;
16. And the point is called the center of the circle.
17. A diameter of the circle is any straight line drawn through the
center and terminated in both directions by the circumference of
the circle, and such a straight line also bisects the circle.
18. A semicircle is the ﬁgure contained by the diameter and the cir-
cumference cut oﬀby it. And the center of the semicircle is the
same as that of the circle.
19. Rectilinear ﬁgures are those that are contained by straight lines,
trilateral ﬁgures being those contained by three, quadrilateral those
contained by four, and multilateral those contained by more than
four straight lines.
20. Of trilateral ﬁgures, an equilateral triangle is that which has its
three sides equal, an isosceles triangle that which has two of its
sides equal, and a scalene triangle that which has its three sides
unequal.
21. Further, of trilateral ﬁgures, a right-angled triangle is that which
has a right angle, an obtuse-angled triangle that which has an ob-
tuse angle, and an acute-angled triangle that which has its three
angles acute.
22. Of quadrilateral ﬁgures, a square is that which is both equilateral
and right-angled; an oblong that which is right-angled but not equi-
lateral; a rhombus that which is equilateral but not right-angled;
and a rhomboid that which has its opposite sides and angles equal
to one another but is neither equilateral nor right-angled. And let
quadrilaterals other than these be called trapezia.
23. Parallel straight lines are straight lines that, being in the same
plane and being produced indeﬁnitely in both directions, do not
meet one another in either direction.

Book I of Euclid’s Elements
■507
B.2
THE POSTULATES (AXIOMS)
1. To draw a straight line from any point to any point.
2. To produce a ﬁnite straight line continuously in a straight line.
3. To describe a circle with any center and distance.
4. That all right angles are equal to one another.
5. That, if a straight line falling on two straight lines make the interior
angles on the same side less than two right angles, the two straight
lines, if produced indeﬁnitely, meet on that side on which are the
angles less than two right angles.
B.3
COMMON NOTIONS
1. Things that are equal to the same thing are also equal to one
another.
2. If equals be added to equals, the wholes are equal.
3. If equals be subtracted from equals, the remainders are equal.
4. Things that coincide with one another are equal to one another.
5. The whole is greater than the part.
B.4
PROPOSITIONS (THEOREMS)
I-1 On a given straight line to construct an equilateral triangle.
I-2 To place at a given point (as an extremity) a straight line equal to
a given straight line. [Given a length and a point, we can construct
a segment of that length from the point.]
I-3 Given two unequal straight lines, to cut oﬀfrom the greater a
straight line equal to the less. [Given two segments of diﬀerent
lengths, we can cut oﬀfrom the larger a segment equal to the
smaller.]
I-4 If two triangles have the two sides equal to two sides, respectively,
and have the angles contained by the equal straight lines equal,
they will also have the base equal to the base, the triangle will be
equal to the triangle, and the remaining angles will be equal to the

508
■Exploring Geometry
remaining angles, respectively, namely those that the equal sides
subtend. [SAS Congruence]
I-5 In isosceles triangles the angles at the base are equal to one an-
other, and if the equal straight lines be produced further, the angles
under the base will be equal to one another.
I-6 If in a triangle two angles be equal to one another, the sides that
subtend the equal angles will also be equal to one another.
I-7 Given two straight lines constructed on a straight line (from its
extremities) and meeting in a point, there cannot be constructed
on the same straight line (from its extremities) and on the side
of it, two other straight lines meeting in another point and equal
to the former two, respectively, namely each to that which has
the extremity with it. [Given a base length and two other lengths,
there is only one triangle possible on a particular side of the base.]
I-8 If two triangles have the sides equal to two sides, respectively,
and have also the base equal to the base, they will also have the
angles equal that are contained by the equal straight lines. [SSS
Congruence]
I-9 To bisect a given rectilinear angle.
I-10 To bisect a given ﬁnite straight line.
I-11 To draw a straight line at right angles to a given straight line from
a given point on it. [Given a line and a point on the line, we can
construct a perpendicular to the line at the point.]
I-12 To a given inﬁnite straight line, from a given point that is not
on it, to draw a perpendicular straight line. [Given a line and a
point not on the line, we can construct a perpendicular to the line
through the point.]
I-13 If a straight line set up on a straight line makes angles, it will
make either two right angles or angles equal to two right angles.
[Supplementary angles add to 180.]
I-14 If with any straight line, and at a point on it, two straight lines not
lying on the same side make the adjacent angles equal to two right
angles, the two straight lines will be in a straight line with one

Book I of Euclid’s Elements
■509
another. [Given two angles that share a line as a common side, if
the angles add to 180, then the non-shared sides of the two angles
must be coincident on a line.]
I-15 If two straight lines cut one another, they make the vertical angles
equal to one another. [Vertical Angle Theorem]
I-16 In any triangle, if one of the sides be produced, the exterior angle
is greater than either of the interior and opposite angles. [Exterior
Angle Theorem]
I-17 In any triangle two angles taken together in any manner are less
than two right angles.
I-18 In any triangle the greater side subtends the greater angle. [In a
triangle the larger side is opposite the larger angle.]
I-19 In any triangle the greater angle is subtended by the greater side.
[In a triangle the larger angle is opposite the larger side.]
I-20 In any triangle two sides taken together in any manner are greater
than the remaining one. [Triangle Inequality]
I-21 If on one of the sides of a triangle, from its extremities, there
be constructed two straight lines meeting within the triangle, the
straight lines so constructed will be less than the remaining two
sides of the triangle, but will contain a greater angle. [Given trian-
gle ABC, if we construct triangle DBC with D inside ABC, then
DB + DC < AB + AC, and the angle at D will be greater than
the angle at A.]
I-22 Out of three straight lines, which are equal to three given straight
lines, to construct a triangle: thus it is necessary that two of the
straight lines taken together in any manner should be greater than
the remaining one. [To construct a triangle from three lengths, it
is necessary that when you add any pair of lengths, the sum is
greater than the other length.]
I-23 On a given straight line and at a point on it, to construct a rec-
tilinear angle equal to a given rectilinear angle. [Angles can be
copied.]
I-24 If two triangles have the two sides equal to two sides, respectively,

510
■Exploring Geometry
but have one of the angles contained by the equal sides greater
than the other, they will also have the base greater than the base.
I-25 If two triangles have the two sides equal to two sides, respectively,
but have the base greater than the base, they will also have one of
the angles contained by the equal straight lines greater than the
other.
I-26 If two triangles have the two angles equal to two angles, respec-
tively, and one side equal to one side, namely, either the side ad-
joining the equal angles, or that subtending one of the equal angles,
they will also have the remaining sides equal to the remaining sides
and the remaining angle to the remaining angle. [AAS and ASA
Congruence]
I-27 If a straight line falling on two straight lines makes the alternate
angles equal to one another, the straight lines will be parallel to one
another. [Given two lines cut by a third, if the alternate interior
angles are congruent then the lines are parallel.]
I-28 If a straight line falling on two straight lines makes the exterior
angle equal to the interior and opposite angle on the same side,
or the interior angles on the same side equal to two right angles,
the straight lines will be parallel to one another. [Given two lines
cut by a third, if the exterior and opposite interior angles on the
same side of the cutting line are congruent, the lines are parallel.
Or, if the interior angles on the same side add to 180, the lines are
parallel.]
The ﬁrst 28 propositions listed are indepen-
dent of Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate. They are called
neutral propositions. Proposition 29 is the ﬁrst
proposition where Euclid explicitly requires the
ﬁfth postulate to carry out the proof.
I-29 A straight line falling on parallel lines makes the alternate angles
equal to one another, the exterior angle equal to the interior and
opposite angle, and the interior angles on the same side equal to
two right angles.
I-30 Straight lines parallel to the same straight line are parallel to one
another.

Book I of Euclid’s Elements
■511
I-31 Through a given point, to draw a straight line parallel to a given
straight line. [Given a line and a point not on the line, we can
construct a parallel to the line through the point.]
I-32 In any triangle, if one of the sides be produced, the exterior angle is
equal to the two opposite and interior angles, and the three interior
angles of the triangle are equal to two right angles. [The sum of
the angles of a triangle is 180 degrees. The exterior angle is equal
to the sum of the opposite interior angles.]
I-33 The straight lines joining equal and parallel straight lines (at
the extremities that are) in the same directions (respectively) are
themselves equal and parallel. [Given a quadrilateral ABCD with
AB congruent and parallel to CD, then AD must be congruent
and parallel to BC.]
I-34 In parallelogrammic areas the opposite sides and angles are equal
to one another, and the diameter bisects the areas. [Given paral-
lelogram ABCD, both pairs of opposite sides are congruent, and
both pairs of opposite angles are congruent. Also, the diagonals
split the parallelogram into two equal parts.]
I-35 Parallelograms that are on the same base and in the same parallels
are equal to one another. [Given two parallelograms ABCD and
ABEF with C, D, E, F collinear, then the parallelograms have the
same area.]
I-36 Parallelograms that are on equal bases and in the same paral-
lels are equal to one another. [Given two parallelograms ABCD
and EFGH, with AB congruent to EF, A, B, E, F collinear, and
C, D, G, H collinear, then the parallelograms have the same area.]
I-37 Triangles that are on the same base and in the same parallels are
equal to one another. [Given two triangles ABC and ABD, with
CD parallel to AB, then the triangles have the same area.]
I-38 Triangles that are on equal bases and in the same parallels are
equal to one another. [Given two triangles ABC and DEF, with
AB congruent to DE, A, B, D, E collinear, and CF parallel to
AB, then the triangles have the same area.]
I-39 Equal triangles that are on the same base and on the same side
are also in the same parallels. [Given two triangles ABC and ABD

512
■Exploring Geometry
having the same area and on the same side of AB, then CD must
be parallel to AB.]
I-40 Equal triangles that are on equal bases and on the same side are
also in the same parallels. [Given two triangles ABC and DEF
having the same area, with AB congruent to DE, A, B, D, E
collinear, and the two triangles being on the same side of AB,
then CF must be parallel to AB.]
I-41 If a parallelogram has the same base with a triangle and is in the
same parallels, the parallelogram is double that of the triangle.
[The area of a triangle is half that of a parallelogram with the
same base and height.]
I-42 To construct, in a given rectilinear angle, a parallelogram equal to
a given triangle. [It is possible to construct a parallelogram with a
given angle having the same area as a given triangle.]
I-43 In any parallelogram the complements of the parallelograms about
the diameter are equal to one another.
[Given parallelogram ABCD and
its diameter AC, let K be a point
on the diameter. Draw parallels
EF to BC and GH to AB, both
through K. Then, complements
EKBG and HKFD have the
same area.]
B
C
A
D
K
E
F
H
G
I-44 To a given straight line, to apply in a given rectilinear angle a
parallelogram equal to a given triangle. [It is possible to construct
a parallelogram on a given segment with a given angle having the
same area as a given triangle.]
I-45 To construct in a given rectilinear angle a parallelogram equal to a
given rectilinear ﬁgure. [It is possible to construct a parallelogram
with a given angle having the same area as a given polygon.]
I-46 On a given straight line to describe a square. [It is possible to
construct a square on a given segment.]

Book I of Euclid’s Elements
■513
I-47 In right-angled triangles the square on the side subtending the
right angle is equal to the squares on the sides containing the right
angle. [Pythagorean Theorem]
I-48 If in a triangle the square on one of the sides be equal to the squares
on the remaining two sides of the triangle, the angle contained by
the remaining two sides of the triangle is right. [Converse to the
Pythagorean Theorem]


A P P E N D I X C
Birkhoff’s Axioms for
Euclidean Geometry
Undeﬁned terms are point and line, as well as two real-valued functions—
a distance function, d(A, B), which takes two points and returns a non-
negative real number, and an angle function, m(∠A, O, B), which takes
an ordered triple of points ({A, O, B} with A ̸= O and B ̸= O) and
returns a number between 0 and 2π. The point O is called the vertex of
the angle.
C.1
AXIOMS
The Ruler Postulate
The points of any line can be put into one-
to-one correspondence with the real numbers x so that if xA
corresponds to A and xB corresponds to B, then |xA −xB| =
d(A, B) for all points A, B on the line.
The Euclidean Postulate
One and only one line contains any
two distinct points.
The Protractor Postulate
Given any point O, the rays emanat-
ing from O can be put into one-to-one correspondence with the
set of real numbers (mod 2π) so that if am corresponds to ray m
and an corresponds to ray n, and if A, B are points (other than
O) on m, n, respectively, then m(∠NOM) = am −an (mod
2π). Furthermore, if the point B varies continuously along a
line not containing O, then an varies continuously also.
515

516
■Exploring Geometry
The SAS
Similarity
Postulate
If in two triangles ABC
and A′B′C′ and for some real number k
> 0, we have
d(A′, B′) = k d(A, B), d(A′, C′) = k d(A, C), and m(∠BAC) =
m(∠B′A′C′), then the remaining angles are pair-wise equal and
d(B′, C′) = k d(B, C).
Other deﬁnitions:
A point B is said to be between points A and C (A ̸= C) if d(A, B)+
d(B, C) = d(A, C). A segment AB consists of the points A and B along
with all points between A and B. The ray with endpoint O, deﬁned by
two points O and A in line l, is the set of all points B on l such that O
is not between A and B. Two distinct lines having no point in common
are called parallel.
Two rays m, n through O form a straight angle if m(∠MON) = π,
where M and N are points on m, n, respectively. The rays form a right
angle if m(∠MON) = ± π
2. If the rays form a right angle, we say the
lines deﬁning the rays are perpendicular.

A P P E N D I X D
Hilbert’s Axioms for
Euclidean Geometry
Undeﬁned terms are point, line, between, on (or incident), and congruent.
D.1
INCIDENCE AXIOMS
I-1 Through any two distinct points A and B there is always a line
m.
I-2 Through any two distinct points A and B, there is not more
than one line m.
I-3 On every line there exist at least two distinct points. There exist
at least three points not all on the same line.
I-4 Through any three points not on the same line, there is one and
only one plane.
D.2
BETWEENESS AXIOMS
II-1 If B is a point between A and C (denoted A ∗B ∗C) then A,
B, and C are distinct points on the same line and C ∗B ∗A.
II-2 For any distinct points A and C, there is at least one point B
on the line through A and C such that A ∗C ∗B.
II-3 If A, B, and C are three points on the same line, then exactly
one is between the other two.
517

518
■Exploring Geometry
II-4 (Pasch’s Axiom) Let A, B, and C be three non-collinear points
and let m be a line in the plane that does not contain any of these
points. If m contains a point of segment AB, then it must also
contain a point of either AC or BC.
D.3
CONGRUENCE AXIOMS
III-1 If A and B are distinct points and A′ is any other point, then
for each ray r from A′ there is a unique point B′ on r such that
B′ ̸= A′ and AB ∼= A′B′.
III-2 If AB ∼= CD and AB ∼= EF then CD ∼= EF. Also, every
segment is congruent to itself.
III-3 If A ∗B ∗C, A′ ∗B′ ∗C′, AB ∼= A′B′, and BC ∼= B′C′, then
AC ∼= A′C′.
III-4 Given ∠ABC and given any ray −−→
A′B′, there is a unique ray
−−→
A′C′ on a given side of ←−→
A′B′ such that ∠ABC ∼= ∠A′B′C′.
III-5 If ∠ABC
∼=
∠A′B′C′ and ∠ABC
∼=
∠A′′B′′C′′ then
∠A′B′C′ ∼= ∠A′′B′′C′′. Also, every angle is congruent to itself.
III-6 Given two triangles ABC and A′B′C′, if AB ∼= A′B′, AC ∼=
A′C′, and ∠BAC ∼= ∠B′A′C′, then the two triangles are congruent.
D.4
PARALLELISM AXIOM
IV-1 Given a line l and a point P not on l, it is possible to construct
one and only one line through P parallel to l.
D.5
CONTINUITY AXIOM
V-1 (Dedekind’s Axiom) If the points on a line l are partitioned
into two nonempty subsets Σ1 and Σ2 (i.e., l = Σ1 ∪Σ2) such that
no point of Σ1 is between two points of Σ2 and vice versa, then
there is a unique point O lying on l such that P1 ∗O ∗P2 if and only
if one of P1 or P2 is in Σ1, the other is in Σ2, and O ̸= P1 or P2.
Note: The Continuity Axiom may be logically replaced by the fol-
lowing two axioms:

Hilbert’s Axioms
■519
V-1a (Archimedean Axiom) Given AB and CD, there exists a num-
ber n such that if the segment CD is laid oﬀn times on the ray
−→
AB, starting from A, then a point E is reached, where A ∗B ∗E.
V-2b (Axiom of Completeness) The system of points on a line,
with its betweeness and congruence relations, cannot be extended
in such a way that the relations holding among its elements as well
as the basic properties arising from axiom groups I - III and V-1a
remain valid.


A P P E N D I X E
The 17 Wallpaper Groups
E.1
PATTERNS
Here is a listing of the wallpaper patterns for the Euclidean plane. The
seventeen groups have traditionally been listed with a special notation
consisting of the symbols p, c, m, g, and the integers 1, 2, 3, 4, 6. This
is the crystallographic notation adopted by the International Union of
Crystallography (IUC) in 1952.
In the IUC system the letter “p” stands for primitive. A lattice is
generated from a cell that is translated to form the complete lattice. In
the case of oblique, rectangular, square, and hexagonal lattices, the cell
is precisely the original parallelogram formed by the lattice vectors v
and w and, thus, is primitive.
In the case of the centered-rectangle lattice, the cell is a rectangle,
together with an interior point that is on the lattice. The rectangular
cell is larger than the original parallelogram and not primitive. Thus,
lattice types can be divided into two classes: primitive ones designated
by the letter “p,” and non-primitive ones designated by the letter “c.”
A reﬂection is symbolized by the letter “m” and a glide reﬂection by
the letter “g.”
The numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 are used to represent rotations of those
orders. For example, 1 would represent a rotation of 0 degrees, while 3
would represent a rotation of 120 degrees.
The symmetries of the wallpaper group are illustrated in the sec-
ond and third columns by lines and polygons. Rotations are symbolized
by diamonds (3) for 180-degree rotations, triangles (△) for 120-degree
rotations, squares (2) for 90-degree rotations, and hexagons (7) for 60-
degree rotations. Double lines show lines of reﬂection and dashed lines
show the lines for glide reﬂections.
521

522
■Exploring Geometry
The symbolization used here was developed by Xah Lee. The images
below are from his web page [28] and are used with permission.
Pattern and
Symmetries
Basic Cell
Symmetries
Generating Region
and Symmetries
(Non-Translates)
p1
v
w
v
w
p2
v
w
v
w
pm
v
w
v
w

Wallpaper Groups
■523
pg
v
w
v
w
pmm
v
w
v
w
pmg
v
w
v
w
pgg
v
w
v
w

524
■Exploring Geometry
cm
v
w
v
w
cmm
v
w
v
w
p4
v
w
v
w
p4m
v
w
v
w

Wallpaper Groups
■525
p4g
v
w
v
w
p3
v
w
v
w
p3m1
v
w
v
w
p31m
v
w
v
w

526
■Exploring Geometry
p6
v
w
v
w
p6m
v
w
v
w

References
[1] Leon Baptista Alberti. On Painting (Della Pittura). Penguin Clas-
sics, New York, New York, 1991.
[2] Roger C. Alperin. A mathematical theory of origami constructions
and numbers. The New York Journal of Mathematics, 6:119–133,
2000.
[3] M. A. Armstrong. Groups and Symmetry. Springer-Verlag, New
York, 1988.
[4] Michael Barnsley. Fractals Everywhere. Academic Press, San Diego,
1988.
[5] Tom Bassarear. Mathematics for Elementary School Teachers: Ex-
plorations.
Houghton Miﬄin Company, Boston, second edition,
2001.
[6] G. D. Birkhoﬀ. A set of postulates for plane geometry, based on
scale and protractor. The Annals of Mathematics, 33:329–345, April
1932.
[7] Carl B. Boyer and Uta C. Merzbach. A History of Mathematics.
John Wiley and Sons, New York, second edition, 1968.
[8] Arthur Cayley. A sixth memoir on quantics. Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society of London, 149:61–90, 1859.
[9] H. S. M. Coxeter. Introduction to Geometry. John Wiley and Sons,
New York, second edition, 1961.
[10] H. S. M. Coxeter and S. L. Greitzer.
Geometry Revisited.
The
Mathematical Association of America, Washington, D. C., 1967.
[11] Robert Dixon. Mathographics. Dover, New York, 1987.
527

528
■REFERENCES
[12] Howard Eves. Great Moments in Mathematics (Before 1650). Math-
ematical Association of America, Washington, D. C., 1980.
[13] W. T. Fishback. Projective and Euclidean Geometry. John Wiley
and Sons, Inc., New York, 1969.
[14] J. D. Foley, A. Van Dam, S. K. Feiner, and J. F. Hughes. Com-
puter Graphics, Principles and Practice. Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Massachusetts, 1990.
[15] David Gans. Transformations and Geometries. Appleton-Century-
Crofts, New York, New York, 1969.
[16] Marvin Jay Greenberg. Euclidean and Non-Euclidean Geometries.
W. H. Freeman and Co., New York, second edition, 1980.
[17] Ernst Haeckel. Art Forms in Nature. Prestel-Verlag, Munich, Ger-
many, 1998.
[18] Leon Harkleroad. The Math Behind the Music. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, New York, New York, 2006.
[19] Robin Hartshorne. Geometry: Euclid and Beyond. Springer-Verlag,
New York, 2000.
[20] Robin Hartshorne. Foundations of Projective Geometry. Ishi Press
International, Bronx, NY, 2009.
[21] J. L. Heilbron. Geometry Civilized. Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK,
1998.
[22] David Hilbert.
Foundations of Geometry.
Open Court Press,
LaSalle, Illinois, 1971.
[23] David Hilbert and S. Cohn-Vossen. Geometry and the Imagination.
Chelsea Publishing Co., New York, 1952.
[24] F. S. Hill. Computer Graphics Using OpenGL. Prentice-Hall, Upper
Saddle River, New Jersey, second edition, 1990.
[25] H. E. Huntley. The Divine Proportion: A Study in Mathematical
Beauty. Dover Books, New York, 1970.

REFERENCES
■529
[26] Humiaki Huzita. Understanding Geometry through Origami Ax-
ioms. In J. Smith, editor, Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Origami in Education and Therapy (COET91),
pages 37–70. British Origami Society, 1992.
[27] Felix Klein. Über die sogenannte nicht-euklidische geometrie. Math-
ematische Annalen, 43:63–100, 1893.
[28] Xah Lee. The discontinuous groups of rotation and translation in
the plane. Web page, 1997. http://www.xahlee.org/Wallpaper_
dir/c5_17WallpaperGroups.html.
[29] Astrid Lindenmayer and Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz. The Algorith-
mic Beauty of Plants. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1990.
[30] Benoit Mandelbrot. The Fractal Geometry of Nature. W. H. Free-
man and Co., New York, 1977.
[31] George E. Martin.
The Foundations of Geometry and the Non-
Euclidean Plane. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1975.
[32] Edwin E. Moise. Elementary Geometry from an Advanced Stand-
point.
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, second edition,
1974.
[33] Jackie Nieder, Tom Davis, and Mason Woo. OpenGL Programming
Guide. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 1993.
[34] Seymour Papert. Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful
Ideas. Basic Books Inc., New York, 1980.
[35] G. Polya. How to Solve It: A New Aspect of Mathematical Method.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, second edition,
1957.
[36] Helen Whitson Rose. Quick-and-Easy Strip Quilting. Dover Publi-
cations, Inc., New York, 1989.
[37] Doris Schattschneider. M. C. Escher, Visions of Symmetry. W. H.
Freeman and Co., New York, 1990.
[38] Thomas Q. Sibley.
The Geometric Viewpoint.
Addison-Wesley,
Reading, Massachusetts, 1998.

530
■REFERENCES
[39] University of St. Andrews School of Mathematics.
The MacTu-
tor History of Mathematics Archive.
Web page, 2002.
http:
//www-gap.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/.
[40] Eric W. Weisstein.
Desargues, Girard (1593–1662).
Web
page, 2007.
http://scienceworld.wolfram.com/biography/
Desargues.html.
[41] Hermann Weyl. Symmetry. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
New Jersey, 1952.
[42] C. R. Wiley. Introduction to Projective Geometry. Dover Publica-
tions, Inc., Mineola, New York, 1970.
[43] Harold E. Wolfe. Non-Euclidean Geometry. Henry Holt and Co.,
New York, 1945.

Index
AAA
similarity, 88
AAS
congruence, 63
Abel, Niels Henrik, 168
Absolute Geometry, 58
aﬃne collineation, 406
Aﬃne Geometry, 369, 407
aﬃne mapping, 473
Aﬃne plane, 369
aﬃne transformation, 473
Alberti, 364
algorithm, 479
alternate interior angles, 56
altitude, 72
Analytic Geometry, 117
angle
bisector, 53
central, 96
congruence, 52
corresponding, 56
deﬁnition, 51
exterior, 56
inequality, 56
inscribed, 96
interior, 56
measure, 52
orientation, 53, 136
radian measure, 136
right, 53
supplementary, 52
trisection, 182
vertical, 52
angle of parallelism, 285, 295
arc
major, 96
minor, 96
Archimedean axiom, 80, 518
area
deﬁnition for ﬁgures, 80
deﬁnition for rectangle, 80
Euclidean, 76
area in Euclidean Geometry, 77
argument, 143
ASA
congruence, 63
asymptotic parallel, 285
attracting set, 467
attractor, 467
axiom, 18
Euclidean, 35
Pasch’s, 517
Axiomatic Method, 17
axis of homology, 385
Bézier Curve, 128
Bézier, Pierre, 128
Biangle, 327
Birkhoﬀ’s Axioms, 50
bisector
deﬁnition, 53
Blaise Pascal, 434
Bolyai, János, 273
Bolyai–Lobachevskian Postulate, 273
531

532
■INDEX
bounded set, 461
Brianchon’s Theorem, 436
Brunelleschi, 363
Cantor Set, 450
Cartesian Geometry, 119
categorical system, 30
Cayley, Arthur, 123
center of homology, 388
central angle, 96
Central projection model of Eu-
clidean geometry, 361
centroid, 85
Ceva, Giovanni, 83
Ceva’s Theorem, 83
cevian, 82
chord, 95
pole, 282
circle
circumscribed, 71
geometry, 94
hyperbolic, 277
inscribed, 76
orthogonal, 110
secant, 101
tangent, 99
three-point, 94
circumcenter, 70
circumscribed circle, 71, 98
closed set, 461
collapsing compass, 152, 162
collinear, 34
collineation, 400
compact sets, 462
complete quadrangle, 373, 416
complete quadrilateral, 374, 418
completeness, 29
Completeness axiom, 519
complex
argument, 143
number, 141
plane, 141
concurrent, 34
congruence, 52
triangles, 62
congruent by addition, 78
congruent by subtraction, 80
conic
line conic, 435
non-singular, 429, 435
point conic, 429
singular, 429, 435
tangent line, 436
conic sections
Euclidean, 426
conjugation, 232
consistency, 28
constructibility, 167
constructible number, 168
construction
angle bisector, 153
angle copy, 152
centroid, 158
circle inversion, 160
circle tangent, 158, 159
circle through three points, 160
circumcenter, 156
division, 176
equilateral triangle, 156
incenter, 157
isosceles triangle, 163
orthocenter, 156
orthogonal circles, 161
parallel, 163
perpendicular to line through
point not on line, 155
point on line, 154
product, 171
segment perpendicular bisec-
tor, 153

INDEX
■533
constructions, 54, 151
contraction mapping, 458
coordinate axes, 119
coordinates, 119
corresponding angles, 56
cross joins, 385, 388
cross-ratio, 409, 412, 421
curve
parametric, 129
smooth, 129
cyclic groups, 244
de Casteljau, Paul, 128
de Casteljau’s algorithm, 128
Dedekind’s axiom, 518
line, 518
defect, 305
Desargues, 365
Desargues’ Theorem, 368
Descartes, Réne, 117
diameter, 95
dihedral group, 245
direct isometry, 223, 232
directed distance, 412
discrete symmetry group, 254
distance
hyperbolic, 276, 277
distance formula, 120
divergent parallel, 285
dot product, 140
Double Elliptic geometry, 326
dual, 35
Duality, 370
elliptic
line, 331
point, 331
Elliptic geometry, 317
models, 325
parallel postulate, 319
polar, 341
polar distance, 322
pole, 322
segment deﬁnition, 339
Elliptic Model, 405
equal content, 80
equidecomposable, 78
Escher, M. C., 263
Euclid, 35
Euclidean geometry
central projection model, 361
Euclid’s postulates, 271, 359
Euler, Leonhard, 141
even isometry, 224
excess, 345
exterior angle, 56
Exterior Angle Theorem, 57
externally tangent circles, 107
Fano Plane, 374
Fano’s Axiom, 374
Fermat, Pierre de, 118
ﬁnite order, 241
ﬁnite symmetry group, 241
fractal dimension, 451, 469
Fractal Geometry, 445
frieze group, 246
midline, 250
Fundamental Theorem of Projec-
tive Geometry, 389, 403
fundamental translation, 246
Galois, Evariste, 168
Gauss, Carl Friedrich, 273
generating area, 262
generators for group, 260
glide reﬂection, 218
Gödel, Kurt, 31
Golden Ratio, 9, 406
Golden Rectangle, 14

534
■INDEX
Golden Section, 9, 406
grammar rewriting, 483
Grassman, Hermann, 123
group
generators, 260
half-turn, 209
Hamilton, William Rowan, 123
harmonic conjugate, 415
harmonic line, 419
harmonic point, 416
harmonic set, 415, 417, 420
harmonic tetrad, 417, 420
HausdorﬀDistance, 463
Hilbert Curve, 488
Hilbert, David, 23
Hilbert’s Axioms, 49
homogeneous coordinates, 393
homogeneous parameters, 395
hyperbolic
axiom, 273
circle, 277
distance, 277
line, 274
postulate, 273
Hyperbolic geometry, 271
distance, 276
Klein model, 279
models, 274
Poincaré model, 274
hyperbolic geometry, 47
ideal point
projective geometry, 391
IFS, 467
imaginary part, 142
incenter, 75
Incompleteness Theorem, 31
independence, 28
indirect isometry, 232
inscribed angle, 96
inscribed circle, 76
inscribed polygon, 98
interior angle, 56
internally tangent circles, 107
invariant lines, 198
isometry, 186
composition table, 232
direct, 223, 232
even, 224
indirect, 232
matrix form, 225
odd, 224
opposite, 223
iterated function system, 467
Jakob Steiner, 434
Klein, Felix, 185
Klein Model, 279
Koch Curve, 454
L-systems, 483
Lambert Quadrilateral, 300, 325
lattice, 255
Law of Sines, 138
length
vector, 125
limit point, 461
limiting parallel, 285
Lindemann, Carl L. F. von, 176
Lindenmayer systems, 483
line
deﬁnition of sides, 67
elliptic, 331
hyperbolic, 274
parallel, 53
perpendicular, 53
line at inﬁnity, 391
line conic, 435
line of reﬂection, 193

INDEX
■535
line of symmetry, 197
linear interpolation, 129
Linear Perspective, 363
Lobachevsky, Nikolai, 273
locus, 427
Lune, 327
major arc, 96
Mandelbrot, Benoit, 445
median, 85
Menelaus, 91
Menelaus’s Theorem, 91
Menger, Karl, 454
Menger Sponge, 454
minor arc, 96
model, 27
Monge, 365
Moulton Plane, 378
mutually tangent circles, 106
Neutral Geometry, 58
non-singular conic, 429, 435
non-Euclidean geometry, 43, 271
norm
vector, 125
odd isometry, 224
omega points, 290
omega triangle, 290
open set, 462
opposite isometry, 223
orientation-preserving, 223
origami, 177
orthocenter, 72
orthogonal
circles, 110
orthographic projection, 361
Pappus’s Theorem, 385
parallel, 53
asymptotic, 285
deﬁnition, 53
divergent, 285
limiting, 285
sensed, 285
theorems, 58
parallelogram, 78
height, 81
parallelogram
base side, 81
parametric curve, 129
parametric homogeneous coordi-
nates, 395
Pascal, Blaise, 92
Pascal’s Theorem, 92, 433
Pasch’s Axiom, 66, 517
pencil of lines, 381, 426
pencil of points, 381, 426
perpendicular
deﬁnition, 53
perspectivity, 382
Platonic Solids, 357
Playfair’s Postulate, 59
Poincaré Model, 274
point
elliptic, 331
point at inﬁnity, 391
point conic, 429
polar, 341
polar distance, 322
pole, 282
Poncelet, 365
postulate, 18
power of a point, 109
project report, 17
Projective geometry
axioms, 370
conics, 426
duality, 370
elliptic model, 405
line conic, 435

536
■INDEX
models, 391
point conic, 429
triangle, 372
Projective geometry, 359
Projective plane, 370
Projective Plane of order n, 34
Projective Transformations, 380
projectivity, 383
proportion, 9
Pythagoras, 7
Pythagorean Theorem, 90
quadrant, 122
quadrilateral, 78
quaternions, 123
quilts, 213
radian measure, 136
ray
deﬁnition, 51
real part, 142
Real Projective Plane, 391
rectangle, 80
recursive process, 454
reﬂection, 192
line of, 193
regular polygon, 265
regular tiling, 266
rhombus, 199
right angle, 53
rotation, 205
Saccheri Quadrilateral, 296, 317
SAS
axiom, 518
congruence, 62
similarity, 89
secant circle, 101
segment
bisector, 53
congruence, 52
deﬁnition, 51
measure, 52
self-similarity, 447
sensed parallel, 285
Sierpinski’s Carpet, 453
similar triangles, 85
similarity dimension, 451
similarity ratio, 452
similarity transformation, 447
Single Elliptic geometry, 331
singular conic, 429, 435
smooth curve, 129
Spherical Geometry, 326
Spherical geometry
Lune, 327
SSS
congruence, 64
similarity, 90
Steiner’s Theorem, 434
straightedge and compass, 151
subgroup, 252
supplementary angles, 52
symmetry, 239
bilateral, 197
ﬁnite group, 241
glide reﬂection, 221
line, 197
reﬂection, 196
rotation, 210
translation, 203
tangent circle, 99
tangent line, 436
tessellations, 263
elliptic, 351
hyperbolic, 312
regular, 265
Thales, 6
theorem
biconditional, 503

INDEX
■537
converse, 502
direct proof, 497
if and only if, 503
proofs, 495
tiling, 263
elliptic, 351
hyperbolic, 312
regular, 266
transformation, 185
aﬃne, 473
Euclidean deﬁnition, 188
Euclidean isometry, 186
ﬁxed point, 189
glide reﬂection, 218
identity, 189
inverse, 189
projective, 380
reﬂection, 192
rotation, 205
translation, 200
translation, 200
displacement vector, 201
triangle
cevian, 82
congruent, 62
isosceles, 64
similar, 85
trigonometry, 90
trisecting an angle, 182
Turtle Geometry, 480
ultraparallel, 285
vector, 123
dot product, 140
length, 125
norm, 125
vertical angles, 52
wallpaper groups, 253, 521
wallpaper pattern
generating area, 262

